LIFE AND HUMAN NATURE 


LIFE AND HUMAN 
NATURE 


By SIR BAMPFYLDE FULLER, 

K.C.S.I., CLE. 

AUTHOR OF "STUDIES OF INDIAN LIFE AND SENTIMENT" 


LONDON : 

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W. 
191+ 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


TABLE OF CONTEt^ 


PART I: THE ATTRIBUTES OF LIFE 
CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTORY --------- 

The study of human nature — its attractiveness — the sur- 
prising anomalies and inconsistencies of man's disposition — 
if man has risen by evolution up the ranks of the animal king- 
dom the roots of his behaviour must stretch down the animal 
kingdom, and must, indeed, lie as deep as life itself — the 
essential nature of Life cannot be discerned by our senses, may 
only be inferred from its manifestations — what are these mani- 
festations ? — the marvellous energy of Life — instincts, im- 
pulsive and directive — consciousness and volition — memory, 
habit and imitation — sensitiveness and responsiveness — 
changefulness — Life not the result but the cause of the sub- 
stances and organs with which it is associated — the proofs of 
this contention — Life's disregard of such natural laws as 
express the workings of lifeless matter — functions without 
organs — anomalies of development and reproduction — its 
invasion of new environments — the repetition of its schemes 
with altered material. 

CHAPTER II 

CHANGE 

Man's inherent desire for Change — the ceaseless round of 
change in the substance of our bodies — also, by death and 
reproduction, in the constitution of a species — the changes 
that have resulted in the evolution of species — Darwinism — 
Mendelism — the former cannot, the latter can explain the 
occurrence of useless features or qualities — illustrations of 
such useless developments — has evolution resulted from 
capricious changefulness or has it been guided by design, or 
by environment, imitation or habit ? — the difficulties involved 
in the spread of new characters from the individual to the 
species — possible influences of environment of imitation — 
man's changefulness of disposition illustrated by his migra- 
tions, and by his pleasure in the ludicrous, in gambling and 
in drink. 


vi 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER III 

SENSATION AND REACTION 

Sensations are produced in the brain, not received by the 
sensory organs, and, so far, resemble memories and hallucina- 
tions — the typical sensory organ — sensation without sensory 
organs — our sensations are not descriptive but symbolic, and 
give us no true ideas of the things that excite them — moreover, 
they need to be constantly corrected by memories and 
inferences — the nature of memories — they may be mistaken 
for sensations — sensations of ourselves — the connection 
between sensation and reaction is primarily automatic and 
inevitable — -its control by other sensations and by memories, 
impulses and habits — reflex and ideo-motor actions — the 
mysterious workings of directive instinct in the lower animals 
— the origin of consciousness in sensation, in the feeling which 
accompanies an impression — pleasure and pain, derived from 
sensation — their ambiguity as guides to behaviour — erroneous 
conceptions of their utility — their influence in the formation 
of habits. 

CHAPTER IV 

INSTINCT 

Man's behaviour is actuated not by nerve ganglia but by 
instinctive impulses of which the nerve ganglia are the instru- 
ments — impulses aroused by memories as well as by sensory 
impressions — resulting complications of behaviour — distinction 
between impulsive and directive instincts — the liberation of 
impulses into action by sensory impressions and memories, 
by imitation and the passage of time — impulses consciously 
liberated are accompanied by emotions — these follow and do 
not precede the promptings of impulse to action — happiness and 
unhappiness are the consequences of satisfied or unsatisfied 
impulses — their distinctiveness from pleasure and pain — these 
emotions and feelings cannot be original guides to behaviour, 
but they assist in the formation of habits — and they act like 
impulses in expressing themselves by muscular reactions — 
laughter, tears, facial expressions — classification of impulsive 
instincts — Individual, Social, Reproductive, Provident. 

i 

CHAPTER V 

INSTINCT (continued) - 

The impulses of Kindness and Cruelty — the ^Esthetic im- 
pulses of self-abandonment — the Ethical impulses of self- 
restraint — the distribution of these eight classes of impulses 
along the ranks of the animal kingdom — mankind possesses 
all of them — but they vary greatly in strength between indi- 
viduals and races — and in the same individual they may 


CONTENTS 


vii 


actuate different behaviour upon different occasions — they are page 
liberated in varying assortments and are affected in varying 
degrees by reason, will and habit — their multiplicity reflected 
in the numerous schools of philosophy — Directive Instinct, its 
independence of experience — illustrations — its inability to 
infer — its command of the internal functioning of the body 
throughout the animal kingdom — the weakening of its 
authority over external behaviour as we ascend the scale — 
its survival in human aptitudes or talents — Reason — its 
processes described, and compared with those of directive 
instinct — its possession by the lower animals, and indeed by 
all animals — its development in man assisted by consciousness 
and by language. 

CHAPTER VI 

MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 104 

Classed together as representing repetitive influences — the 
Memory stream — our personality depends upon its continuity 
— peculiarities of its course — the effect upon it of emotional 
impulses — influenced by the will it becomes imagination — the 
statics of memory — direct and symbolic recollections — vis- 
ualization — correlation of symbols and objects — recollections 
that adjust our sensations — Habit — its effect in regulating the 
power of instinctive impulses — its immense importance in 
directing behaviour — the influence of mental habits or fixed 
ideas — comparison between habit and directive instinct — 
how far may habit innately alter behaviour or character — 
Imitation — is the impulse which underlies education — its 
conflict with habit — the conditions which enable it to over- 
come habit — its possible effects in stimulating mimicry and 
in the spread of evolutionary changes from the individual to 
the species. 

CHAPTER VII 

CONSCIOUSNESS 128 

Its origin in the cell as a feeling that accompanies sensation 
— its development through diffused (sometimes apparently 
localized) subconsciousness into the flower of self conscious- 
ness — the sympathetic awareness of the brain cells a possible 
explanation of our capacity of observing our recollections and 
ideas, and of such phenomena as thought-reading — the bear- 
ing upon selfconsciousness of the phenomena of hypnotism — 
the effect of selfconsciousness upon outlook and behaviour — 
the idea of personality — its growth within recent times — the 
effect of consciousness in widening the scope and intensifying 
the power of reason, and in affording opportunities to the will 
— also in leading mankind into errors and unhappiness — 
errors of apprehension, confusion of the visioned with the 
observed — errors of inference, mistaken linkings of happenings 


CONTENTS 


as cause and effect — the unhappiness caused by conscience — tagf. 
the misery resulting from conflict between will and instinct 
— the appreciation of injustice. 

CHAPTER VIII 

VOLITION 150 

The distinction between suggested and original resolutions 
-—only the latter manifest spontaneity or free-will — the 
detenninist denial of the existence of free-will — the arguments 
which appear to show that man possesses it — its unusual 
strength in eccentric or original men — its function concerned 
not with invention but with choice, whether between methods 
of satisfying an impulse, or between different impulses — the 
struggle of temptation — the connection between spontaneity 
and the separateness of living individuals — spontaneity 
appears to be a universal attribute of Life. 


CHAPTER IX 

RECAPITULATION- - - - - - - - - - 161 

Organs derived from impulses, not impulses from organs — 
evolution is the result of an impulse to change, guided, it may 
be, by environment, habit or imitation — individual develop- 
ment, activity and conduct are the products of a swarm of 
impulses, controlled by directive instinct, or by reason, will 
and habit — infinite possibilities of differences in innate strength, 
combination, or control, account for differences in the dis- 
position and behaviour of individuals, and for varying conduct 
of the same individual — deceptiveness of our senses — fallibility 
of our reason — apparent duality in Life and Nature — through 
much that seems confused, evolution has at least developed 
freedom, but at a heavy cost in degrading error — hopes for 
the future — the extraordinary antagonism of our impulses — 
they may be marshalled in two opposing ranks, representing, 
perhaps, the influence of Life and of Matter — correspondence 
between Christian precept and the impulses which may be 
attributed to the spirit of Life. 


PART II: CONSTRAINING INFLUENCES 

CHAPTER X 

RACE 

Difficulty of distinguishing between the effects of race, 
environment and culture — racial peculiarities of feature — 
racial peculiarities of character — illustrations of their dis- 
tinctiveness and persistence — typical characteristics of peoples 
— comparison of the Baltic and the Mediterranean peoples — 
the origin of racial peculiarities — their connection with en- 


CONTENTS 


vironment, which appears to stimulate the production of 
certain types and to spread them over a locality — the dis- 
turbing effect of changeful variations or " sports " — the 
levelling effect of marriage which tends to reduce a nation to 
the uniformity of a family — the disturbing effect of migrations 
— the levelling effect of infertility which eliminates alien 
traits that are unsuited to the environment, or out of accord 
with the genius of the native race — illustrations of migrations 
— from Northern Europe to India and the Mediterranean — their 
influence upon the history of India, Greece and Rome — the 
impermanence of northern characteristics compared with 
those of southern races. 

CHAPTER XI 

ENVIRONMENT 

Its effect upon the individual — in modifying features, dis- 
position and habits — its effects upon the race, that is to say, in 
producing peculiarities which are heritable — the possibility of 
this denied — facts which appear to prove its actuality — 
hereditary peculiarities of size, colour and degeneration which 
have proceeded from environment — the effect of environment 
in stimulating mutations, or " sports " — its influences may be 
unintelligible, but should not be denied on this account — 
illustrations of the association amongst mankind of distinctive 
features and complexion with particular environments — 
similar illustrations in respect to traits of racial character — 
the direct influence of environment in modifying character, 
its indirect influence in guiding habits — effects are hereditary 
in the former case, not in the latter — its influence upon human 
fertility — the effect of a changed environment upon migrants 
— less in the case of southern than in the case of northern 
peoples. 

CHAPTER XII 

CULTURE - 

Is the tradition passed on by each generation to its suc- 
cessor — its dependance upon language for its formation and 
upon writing for its continuity — owes to reason its elaboration 
and also its errors — confusion of visioned with observed causes, 
and the resulting conception of a double set of ideas, visionary 
and practical — illustrations — the inferences of reason may 
confirm the lead of unreasoning impulses — the genesis and 
spread of culture — the initiative genius of inventors — 
imitation by the crowd, formerly reluctant, latterly more 
eager under a growing desire for change — other impulses 
which conduce to imitation — reverence for authority — the 
prestige of a conqueror — sympathy — instinctive satisfactions 
— the pressure of circumstances — reason — the effect of imita- 
tion in producing new habits of mind — culture cannot alter 
racial disposition or change the innate impulses that form 
character — culture and population — its effects upon the 
birth-rate. 


X 


CONTENTS 


PART III: HUMAN ACHIEVEMENTS 


CHAPTER XIII page 

MATERIAL PROGRESS - 255 

The provident impulse — signs of it amongst the lower 
animals — its need of reinforcement by other impulses — the 
domestication of fire, of animals, of plants — the success of the 
ancients in agriculture — the beginnings of private property 
and of marriage— of the art of building— the invention oi 
tools, of dress, of writing — the development of trade — its 
civilizing effect — the rapid material progress of Northern 
Europe — assisted by the freedom of women — changes of ideal 
that have accompanied it — their comparison with the ideals 
of former times — the extension of the new ideals to other 
parts of the world. 

CHAPTER XIV 

SOCIAL PROGRESS - 274 

The growth of polyandry and the matriarchate out of the 
promiscuity of the herd— war introduced the patriarchate — the 
impulses which combine to support the institution of the 
family — the development of the social fabric — blood-brother- 
hood — propinquity the original stimulus, ideas of propinquity 
a later refinement — neighbourship — the esprit de corps of 
castes, guilds, and similar associations — patriotism and 
loyalty — the bonds of religion — nationality — social institu- 
tions — slavery — helotage — foreign dominion — the relation of 
employer and employed — influence of liberty as an ideal — its 
dangers and disappointments — the spirit of kindliness — its 
helpfulness to the poor— State education— riches and poverty 
— the causes of poverty — its extent and its compensations — 
review of the impulses which have contributed to social pro- 
gress. 

CHAPTER XV 

MODERN ECONOMICS --------- 293 

The term " wealth " limited with reason to material posses- 
sions — the peculiar value of things that can be pledged— the 
usefulness of money in stimulating industry by enlisting the 
co-operation of a number of impulses — modern industrial 
civilization — likened to a whirlpool which must be kept in- 
cessantly in motion — prosperity dependent upon the rapidity 
and volume of the current — circumstances which contribute to 
its rapidity, communications and enterprise in retailing — and 
to its volume, credit and low prices — the development of 
industrial civilization from earlier stages — the effect of 
advertisement — of good government — the swelling of the 
wealth-stream by foreign trade, borrowings, investments and 


CONTENTS 


subsidies — the appropriation of wealth by capitalist enter- 
prise, by trade, by the rendering of services — wealth attracts 
wealth — the influence of the spirit of kindliness — services 
rendered by the rich — the prospects of Socialism. 

CHAPTER XVI 

MODERN POLITICS 

The multiplicity of the interests that are aroused by 
modern politics — the simplicity of ancient political ideals — the 
head of the herd — the council of patriarchs — the warrior king — 
religious authority — the conflict between monarchy and 
aristocracy — the interference of the masses — how their intro- 
duction to politics came about — fundamental distinction 
between democracy and the political liberty of particular 
classes — although gratified by the possession of the franchise, 
the people are not generally anxious to exercise it — the 
stimulus of emulation or party feeling — the party system and 
the group system — efficiency and prospects of the latter — 
effect upon elections of jealousy and chauvinism — weakness of 
democracy in foreign affairs — the party pendulum — influence 
of an earnest desire for reform — so far has expressed itself 
generally in non-official propaganda — its prospects of increased 
authority — declining status of professional politicians — local 
government independent of party feeling — review of the 
various impulses or ideals which have operated at various 
times to bring about political reform — the fundamental 
influences of national character — political progress by 
imitation — the unrest occasioned by each change of ideal — 
conclusion. 


PREFATORY 


What, it may be asked, are the qualifications of 
the writer of this book for entering upon so 
difficult a subject ? I have travelled much, and 
have enjoyed favourable opportunities of observ- 
ing the behaviour and comparing the ideas of 
different races of mankind. And, during many 
years of my life, I have been occupied in the task 
of governing men — of inducing large numbers of 
both Europeans and Asiatics to carry out the 
desires of the State ; and it is probable that in 
this business one gets a closer insight into the 
complicated working of human nature than by 
any other course of experience or study. So much 
for what is empirical in these discussions. For 
my psychology and evolutionary biology I am, 
of course, immensely indebted to the many able 
and eminent men who have written on these 
subjects, and especially to Professors William 
James, E. D. Cope, E. B. Tylor, W. McDougall, 
C. Lloyd-Morgan, F. W. Gamble, W. A. Bateson, 
R. C. Punnett, William Ridgeway, Karl Pearson, 
Sir Francis Galton, Houston Stewart Chamberlain, 
and MM. Gabriel Tarde, J. H. Fabre, and Henri 
Bergson. 

February, 1914* 


PART I 
THE ATTRIBUTES OF LIFE 


LIFE AND HUMAN NATURE 


CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTORY 

Human nature is a subject that is studied by 
everyone. It provides a philosopher with material 
for the curious speculations of psychology ; but 
it is not less interesting to the crossing-sweeper, 
whose livelihood depends upon the disposition of 
the passers-by. It may be vulgar to gossip : it 
may be wrong to talk scandal ; but they have 
charms that can hardly be resisted; and to 
many persons newspapers would be very dull 
reading were it not for their personal paragraphs. 
Human nature is the most attractive and the most 
exciting element in politics : it is the source from 
which dramatists, poets, and novelists draw nine- 
tenths of their inspiration : painting and sculp- 
ture are generally devoted to its illustration, and 
even so abstract an art as music is in great 
measure content to express the phases of human 
emotion. Nor need we marvel that human 
nature should be so engrossing a study. Our 
happiness is conditioned by the way in which 
others behave towards us. We win success in life 
by our ability to read and to influence the 
character of others. And, apart from these 
practical interests, human nature attracts our 
regard by a particular fascination. It is so extra- 
ordinarily variable, it abounds in such astonishing 

3 

B 


4 


INTRODUCTORY 


inconsistencies, that it offers to us, at any moment, 
the exciting surprises of a dramatic entertain- 
ment. It is not only that cruelty and kindness, 
selfishness and self-denial, strength and weakness, 
distinguish different members of the same com- 
munity : the same person may unaccountably 
display these opposite qualities at different 
moments of our acquaintanceship. For what 
diversity of purposes does man use his tongue ! 
" Therewith bless we God, even the Father ; and 
therewith curse we men, which are made after the 
similitude of God." 

§ 

By the variety as well as by the complexity of 
his nature man is separated from the brutes by a 
gulf that appears to be unbridgeable. Yet, if we 
accept the doctrine of evolution, we must believe 
that man has crossed this gulf to win the privileges 
of his position, and owes his form, his talents, and 
his aspirations to a gradual development out of 
brutish conditions. The roots of the excellencies 
upon which we pride ourselves must stretch dowrJ" 
the length of the animal kingdom, must, indeed/ 
be traceable — were we able to trace them — not 
merely in what are generally called the " lower. 
animals, 5 ' but in the minute animalcules which 
flit across the field of the microscope. For, unless 
the germs of our qualities exist in the lowest forms 
of life, we must have been endowed with them, 
at one stage or another, by acts of special creation, 
and for such interpositions of Providence the 
doctrine of evolution has no place. May we not, 
then, reject a theory which strains our powers of 
belief so harshly ? Only if we can close our ears 
against a cloud of witnesses. Geology testifies 
that the forms of animal and vegetable life change 
and become simpler and simpler with the increas- 


ARGUMENTS FOR EVOLUTION 


5 


ing age of the rocks that contain their fossils, 
and that during the remotest geological age 
from which relics of life have come down to us, 
no animal existed so highly developed as a fish. 
The growth of the embryos of the higher animals 
presents phases that appear to illustrate by. 
repetition the course of their progenitors' develop- . 
ment up the animal kingdom, exhibiting in transi- . 
tory stages the likenesses of adult forms that have 
become extinct. The human embryo, for instance, 
at one stage of its growth, is actually equipped withu 
gill-clefts, such as those through which fish pass the 
water that gives oxygen to their blood. Useless 
organs survive which can only be relics of an 
outgrown constitution. There are rudiments of 
hind legs in whales and boa-constrictors. Monkeys 
have pointed ears, and from time to time children 
are born possessing them. We all retain muscles 
for moving the ears, although very few can use 
them. And every baby confesses its kinship with 
the monkeys by the disproportionate strength 
of its arm muscles — a necessary endowment in the 
days when mothers sprang about the branches of 
an arboreal home. The peculiar character of the 
animals and plants of oceanic islands indicates 
very forcibly that species have originated by 
development, and that, remote from outside 
influences, they have undergone changes along 
special lines of their own. That differences, as 
marked as those which distinguish one species 
from another, can come about by development is 
proved by the varied forms of our domesticated 
animals : admitting that a Pekinese is akin to a 
bulldog, we cannot ^deny that there may be 
blood relationship between the horse and the 
donkey. We may be unwilling to believe that 
man is the last shoot of a genealogical tree that 
extends down the length of the animal kingdom. 


6 


INTRODUCTORY 


But the proofs are too strong for us. The straiter 
Darwinists would have us believe that the varia- 
tions which have brought about this marvellous 
development have been guided by no directing 
impulse, have not even been stimulated by 
environment or experience, but are spontaneous 
random fluctuations which, when useful, have been 
preserved by the struggle for life. This theory is 
non-proven, and we may disbelieve it if we please. 
But as a process, and without implication as to 
causes, evolution holds the ground as an explana- 
tion of the origin of man, and of the animals that 
are below him. We must remember that, from 
the physical point of view, the gulf between man 
and the monkey is after all not so wide as that 
between the monkey and the squirrel. 

Great as is the contrast between man and the 
brutes, more striking still is man's inconsistency 
with his natural surroundings. He has grown up 
in a world that is unmoral, wasteful, and cruel — a 
world in which life feeds upon life, in which myriads 
are born without chance of survival, in which 
justice and mercy are trampled down by the 
fierceness of the struggle for existence. He has 
taken some colour from his surroundings : he has 
learnt his lesson in cruelty and selfishness — nay, 
in some respects he seems more bloodthirsty than 
the brutes, for of them few kill their own kind 
except under the spur of hunger. But, in other 
moods, he exhibits the strangest paradoxes. He 
rises from the feet of Nature in protest against 
her teaching. In an arena of brutish struggling 
he holds up ideals of self-denial, kindliness, justice, 
and mercy : he gathers notions of Art from the 
world's kaleidoscopic exhibition of forms and 
colours ; against Nature herself he appeals to 
supernatural forces which he seems dimly to 
descry through the darkness of her forests, 


DISCORDANT IDEALS 


7 


building temples, not only to manifest his feelings 
of veneration, but to enshrine conceptions of 
immortality, asceticism and purity which con- 
demn what daily happens around him. Most 
strange of all is his respect for celibacy, which 
directly conflicts with the strongest of human 
instincts, and, if generally practised, would 
altogether extinguish human society. Yet down 
the vistas of history we see it enshrined by the 
admiration of mankind. Centuries before the time 
of Buddha it was the ideal of Indian sages. It is 
a vivid feature in the life history of Christ. It 
was commended by the earliest Christian teachers, 
and at one time afforded to vast numbers of their 
disciples a refuge from the pagan wickedness of 
the world. It has come down to us as an honoured 
institution of the Roman Church. Protestantism 
has rejected it : but not without some regret — 
some echoes of an admiration so finely expressed 
by a Protestant poet : — 

Thrice blessed whose lives are faithful prayers, 

Whose loves in higher love endure ; 

What souls possess themselves so pure, 
Or is there blessedness like theirs ? 

If man is an organism which owes its develop- 
ment to natural circumstances, whence come his 
ideas condemning these circumstances ? Whence 
does he derive this strange conflict of impulses, 
that urge him at one time to self-indulgence, and 
another to self-denial — this antagonism which has 
been figured as between the Spirit and the Flesh ? 

§ 

As to the nature of Life, philosophers have been 
theorizing for centuries. There are some who hold 
that it is the appendage of a particular chemical 
compound: this might be produced in a laboratory 


8 


INTRODUCTORY 


and Life would be found in the test tube with it. 
In fact Life is assumed to be an attribute of Matter. 
But this view seems to ignore altogether the 
peculiar character of the energies which it 
exhibits. Its essential nature is unknown to us, 
as is also the essential nature of electricity and 
gravity. And it seems likely to remain unknown, 
since it lies beyond the scope of our powers of 
perception. Science is reluctant to admit that 
the unknown is unknowable ; and the striking 
success which it has recently gained in the analysis 
of the constitution of the electric current, and of 
the emanations of radium, may suggest that no 
limits should be set to its powers of investigation. 
But these discoveries, great though they are, 
only prove that we can increase the acuteness of 
our senses, and perceive appearances which have 
hitherto lain beyond our ken. The fact remains 
that we are dependent upon our sensations for 
our knowledge ; and our sensations can resemble 
realities no more nearly than a catalogue resembles 
the furniture which it advertises. Conscious reason 
enables us to analyse our sensations, to classify 
them by their properties, and to deduce from their 
relations to one another the abstract conceptions 
that crown the edifice of science. But our sensa- 
tions are the ground work or this intellectual super- 
structure, and we can gain no clues to the nature 
of energies, which are not themselves perceivable, 
by the senses, except by the observation of the 
perceivable effects that they produce. Gravity is 
known to us merely by the movements which it 
causes in material objects. We can form any 
view of the nature of Life only by scrutinizing 
and classifying the manifestations of its activity. 
The appearances upon which we rely are as unlike 
realities as words are unlike the things that they 
represent. But they are the only material that 


LIFE'S MANIFESTATIONS g 


is available. And we may assume that they at 
least possess a symbolic value, and can tell us 
something, by their occurrence or non-occurrence, 
their similarities and differences, and the order in 
which they come to our observation. 

§ 

The enormous power of Life's energy is not 
generally realized. An animal or plant,if likened 
to a machine, must be likened to a machine of 
marvellous efficiency. Its strength must not be 
computed by the force which is developed by its 
external muscles : in the assimilation of its food, 
and in the secretion of waste, it forms chemical 
compounds which, if capable at all of being formed 
in a laboratory, can only be produced by the lavish 
expenditure of energy. A class of minute bacteria, 
living in the soil, are able to fix nitrogen from the 
air. For this same purpose factories have been 
established ; but the energy required for the 
process is so large, and, if obtained by burning 
fuel, would be so expensive, that they can only 
be maintained with hope of profit where their 
machinery can be driven by large waterfalls. It 
has been computed that an acre of wheat, in 
coming from germination to maturity, daily 
exerts the force of more than fifteen horses. The 
coal beds by which modern industry subsists are 
a store of energy that was accumulated by plant 
life in ages gone by : in fixing it the plants 
exerted as much power as we now obtain from the 
coal by burning it. Coal is popularly described 
as " stored sunlight, 55 and it is true that the 
plants needed light in order to produce it. But 
so does a steam engine need water for its function- 
ing. Yet we do not credit the water with the 
power that is developed. 

Moreover, not only is Life's force remark- 


10 


INTRODUCTORY 


able for its intensity : it acts very largely in 
a contrary direction to material forces. These 
tend to dissipate energy : the action of the 
sun, the working of our machines, alike result 
in the conversion of energy into heat, which, if 
not lost by radiation into space, diffuses itself 
about the earth, tending towards a condition 
of uniform temperature in which it is useless for 
human purposes. Coal contains energy because 
its carbon is held in a stressful disunion from 
oxygen : when the coal is burnt, these elements 
become united and the energy resulting from the 
separation is dissipated. The furnaces which turn 
the wheels of modern industry involve, then, a 
continuous loss of energy. Life, on the other 
hand, is always building up energy by uniting or 
disuniting substances which naturally tend to fly 
apart or come together. Conspicuous in this 
matter is the activity of plants : they form out 
of mineral substances organic tissues which, 
directly or indirectly, provide the whole of the 
animal world with its food. The most character- 
istic ingredient of these tissues is nitrogen. This 
abounds in the air ; but plants cannot directly 
annex it. A small amount, in combined form, is 
brought down by rain. But vegetation mainly 
depends for it upon the action of the minute 
bacteria that have been already mentioned. These 
have the power of absorbing it from the air, and 
they yield it up to the plant roots which ramify 
in the soil around them. The peculiar capacities 
of these minute embodiments of life ultimately 
provide the living world with the nitrogen that is 
essential for its subsistence. How they originated 
remains the greatest of problems. We may fancy, 
if we please, that Life pervades the Universe, 
and under certain conditions joins itself with 
Matter — and commences its earthly evolutionary 


INSTINCTS 


ii 


progress — in the form of these minute organisms ; 
we may go further, and imagine that, if these 
conditions exist, this incarnation may be in 
progress now around us. 

§ 

Let us now attempt to survey and catalogue 
the most prominent of the characteristics that 
mark the action of Life as manifested to our 
senses, limiting our view, in the first place, to 
characteristics which are noticeable throughout 
the whole of the animal kingdom, and, it may 
perhaps be held, throughout the whole of the 
vegetable kingdom also. 

Instincts. — All living things are actuated by 
impulses, and are guided by directions, which 
may be conveniently styled " instincts, '* if we use 
the term in a broader sense than is usually attached 
to it. Some of them may be classed as vaguely 
impulsive : these are illustrated by the instincts 
of self-preservation and of reproduction. Others 
give definite directions as to complicated methods 
of behaviour. Directive instincts of this class 
that particularly interest us are such skilful 
contrivings as those by which birds build their 
nests, bees work up their combs, or caterpillars 
encase themselves in their cocoons. But these 
illustrate only one of many kinds of instinctive 
action. A caterpillar is the young of a butterfly 
in its embryonic stage : it differs from the young 
of a mammal, growing within the womb of its 
mother, in that during its embryonic life it is cast 
adrift to fend for itself ; the construction of its 
cocoon is part and parcel of its embryonic growth, 
and, if we style this instinctive, we must also 
recognise as instinctive the power which enables 
it to develop from a germ into a caterpillar, and 


12 


INTRODUCTORY 


from a caterpillar into a butterfly. By instinct, 
animals and plants increase in size, and shape 
their organs, until they attain maturity. They are 
not conscious of the force within them : nor are 
we conscious of the vital processes upon which 
our lives, from hour to hour, depend. Directive 
instinct needs no assistance from experience or 
practice : the young chaffinch knows precisely the 
materials for its first nest, and the method of inter- 
weaving them : young birds generally know how 
to fly without the need of practice : the bee is an 
instinctive architect of hexagonal cells. By 
instinct our organs perform their functions — the 
heart beats, the lungs pulsate, the liver and 
kidneys distil their secretions. The direction of 
these complicated processes owes nothing to 
experience, and in this differs essentially from 
the working of reason. But reason itself is a 
development of processes that are fundamentally 
instinctive, and are shared by man with the 
animals below him. So also, we shall find, are 
impulses which we do not ordinarily think of as 
instinctive : such as the promptings of kindness, 
and even the vague feelings of ecstasy which we 
speak of as " aesthetic." Instinct underlies our 
emotions. We love, are enraged, are terrified, 
feel pity, as we are moved by impulses which lie 
as deep as life itself. Our instincts may be com- 
pared to a number of alarums, each of which is 
set for a special stimulus and runs down im- 
mediately upon being touched by it. The stimulus 
may be a sensation of something that occurs out- 
side us or inside us: it may be a recollection, or it 
may merely be the lapse of a period of time. Once 
stimulated, instinct acts forthwith, unless it is 
checked, or inhibited, by another instinct, by 
habit, or by an effort of will. 

The diversity which we perceive in the behaviour 


CONSCIOUSNESS AND VOLITION 13 


and manner of life of different kinds of living 
creatures manifests a corresponding diversity of 
instinctive promptings. The workings of directive 
instinct exhibit extreme variety, although they 
are generally uniform throughout the individuals 
of a species. The similarity of blackbirds', or of 
chaffinches', nests is a familiar illustration. But 
each of the principal impulsive instincts of man- 
kind can be followed down the animal kingdom 
by traces which, coming to the surface here and 
there, appear to witness to an underlying uni- 
formity — a continuity in germ if not in develop- 
ment — which acknowledges the fundamental 
relationship of all living creatures. 

Consciousness and Volition. — In the strongest 
contrast to instinct stand the faculties of con- 
sciousness and volition. To an organism whose 
behaviour is directed by instinct, it means nothing 
that an experience is new, or is familiar : it 
learns nothing, and has no need of learning. 
Consciousness and volition, on the contrary, are 
essentially means of drawing profit from experi- 
ence : they may mislead us, whereas instinct is 
inf allible within its own province ; but error is an 
incident of liberty, and these faculties, in their 
fullest development, open to man possibilities of 
freedom which the directing force of instinct 
would have kept closed against him. 

In the uniformity of instinct we may see a reflec- 
tion of the continuity ot Life. Consciousness and 
volition emphasize, on the other hand, Life's indi- 
viduality : they could scarcely have been developed 
had not Life been broken up into separate parcels 
— had it not been divided, that is to say, between 
a number of different individual beings. The 
forces of gravity, of electricity, are ubiquitous : 
there is no spot on the earth but is subject to 


14 


INTRODUCTORY 


them, or, so to speak, contains them. But Life 
is distributed amongst plants and animals that 
are separated from one another by lifeless space. 
Each individual experiences an environment of 
its own : lives its own life, which differs, if by 
ever so little, from that of other individuals of 
the same species. Connected with other indivi- 
duals by descent, it shares their instincts ; but it is 
itself a separate focus of life which is capable of 
evolving new developments. Its isolation enables 
it to concentrate the vague feeling of awareness 
which arises in sensitive cells that are touched 
by an impression. Consciousness springs from the 
convergence of these microscopic rootlets of 
sensation, and flowers in the marvel of self-con- 
scious personality. The independence which 
comes from separation fosters the development of 
a power of willing — primarily an indefinite capri- 
ciousness of choice; in man, however fettered by con- 
vention and habit, a faculty of judgment by which 
he may follow the good and eschew the evil. 

It may be hard to believe that the lowliest of 
living organisms possess the germs, however 
rudimentary, of consciousness, personality, and 
will. We can judge of the mind, so to speak, 
of these organisms only by observing their con- 
duct, and any conclusions must be in great 
degree speculative. But there is good reason to 
hold that sensation, in however humble a form, 
involves a feeling, as well as a recording, and 
differs in this respect from such chemical reactions 
as result, for instance, from the influence of light. 
And the directions of instinct, closely though they 
may govern, cannot provide for every possible 
contingency of experience ; they must leave some 
scope, however small, for choice — that is to say, 
for the exercise of judgment or of volition. The 
microscopic amoeba displays an activity which is 


SPONTANEITY 


15 


wholly different from that of lifeless objects- All 
living organisms seem to possess, in some degree, 
the faculty of selection, and are able to discover 
ways of circumventing difficulties. Air bubbles 
which are prevented from rising in water, simply 
press themselves against the obstacle ; animal- 
cules will find a path round its edge. 

According to one school — the " determinist " 
school — of thought, spontaneity, or free will, is 
non-existent, and our impression that we can 
direct our thoughts or our actions is entirely 
fallacious. We are automata, and every idea 
that enters our minds, every act of our behaviour, 
is imposed upon us by our instincts, or our 
habits, or is the inevitable consequence of our 
sensations or our memories. Determinist philoso- 
phers not only maintain that we are the result of 
forces which are in theory calculable, but that it 
is logically unthinkable that we should possess 
any initiative. Yet, if one who is intellectually 
convinced by these arguments will look into his 
own mind, he will find there an ineradicable idea 
that, as a matter of fact, he is endowed with a 
will and can exercise it freely. Introspective 
observation refuses to accept the conclusions of 
logic; but we need not conclude that introspection 
is misleading. Logic traces effects back to causes, 
and formulates, as a natural law, the invariable 
connection of a particular effect with a particular 
cause. But the effects of Life are so complicated 
and elusive that they cannot be reduced to rule 
with the precision that is attainable in dealing 
with inanimate matter; and, in classifying its 
manifestations the logician is apt to mistake 
conditioning circumstances for ultimate causes. 
He might, for instance, conclude that I had 
joined a golf club because the links were close at 
my door, whereas the real cause was that I had 


i6 


INTRODUCTORY 


resolved to take up golf instead of hunting. 
Spontaneity appears, indeed, to be the most 
distinctive of Life's attributes — the capacity 
which marks it off most clearly from lifeless 
matter* To deny its existence is, then, the natural 
inclination of those to whom Life appears to be 
the result of purely physical causes. 

Memory, Habit, and Imitation. — These faculties 
appear to arise from the tendency of living matter 
to repeat its reaction to a stimulus — to convert, 
so to speak, a shock into a vibration. Our heart 
and lungs, once started, maintain their rhythm : 
a line of conduct, a course of thought, tends to 
become habitual. This tendency appears also to 
affect inanimate matter : the physical world 
abounds with illustrations of it : such are the 
vibrations which we translate into light and 
sound. Memory is the faculty of repeating the 
impressions which the brain has received through 
the senses. Habit enables us to swell the influence 
of one instinct at the expense of others, and affords 
us an indirect means of controlling our passions ; 
by Imitation we repeat, in thought or in action, 
impressions that we have received by sight or 
hearing. Repetition is the antithesis of spon- 
taneity, and we may conjecture that these 
opposites represent respectively, the dominance 
of Matter over Life and of Life over Matter. But 
we owe to memory the whole of the material with 
which we build up our mental life : without it 
thought would be impossible. And by imitation 
and habit we appropriate the ideas or behaviour 
of others who are more intelligent or experienced 
than ourselves, so that the inventive originality 
of the few bears fruit for the many, and the trans- 
mission of human culture is assured. 


SENSATION 


*7 


Sensitiveness and Responsiveness. — Animals and 
plants do not live in self-contained independence : 
to exist they must draw food from their environ- 
ment and avoid being eaten by others. They 
must, then, possess some means of communica- 
tion with their surroundings, and this is provided 
by their senses. By sight, touch, smell, taste, and 
hearing, animals can discover their food material 
and perceive their enemies. Plants obviously 
possess some sensory powers : they are affected 
by light and colour : some of them are very 
sensitive to touch : in absorbing food material 
their roots appear to exercise some measure of 
selection. Our senses give us only symbolic im- 
pressions of the things around us, and leave us in 
ignorance of their real nature. We have, as it 
were, to imagine the machinery of a musical box 
from the tones and intervals of the music it plays 
to us. But our symbolic impressions suffice for 
our animal needs, although they fail altogether 
to satisfy our philosophic curiosity. 

To be of practical utility sensation must be 
followed by muscular reaction : the sight of food 
must involve its seizure. Experiment seems to 
have established that every sensation excites 
instinctive action, and is followed by some move- 
ment — too slight it may be to be noticed by 
consciousness, but capable of being detected by 
elaborate appliances for measurement. Where 
conduct is governed simply and uniformly by 
directive instinct, movements that respond to 
sensation ordinarily develop into definite action : 
the mouth secretes its saliva immediately it is 
touched by food; the behaviour of insects 
approaches the automatic. In the external 
conduct of the higher animals, as we ascend the 
scale of animal life, directive instinct gradually 
surrenders some of its authority to inference from 


18 


INTRODUCTORY 


experience : responses to sensation are compli- 
cated by the rivalry of conflicting feelings, and 
the primary reaction may be checked. A caged 
bird will not snatch food from the hand if it be 
afraid of the person who offers it. But, even in 
the lowest organisms, the sequence of action upon 
sensation does not appear to be as inevitable as, 
for instance, the response of iron filings to a 
magnet : the humblest of them show appearances 
of hesitation, of choice, which would be inexplic- 
able in simple automata. And in one essential 
particular the sensation and reaction of living 
things differs from the effect of light upon a 
photographic plate : it is attended by feeling — 
dim and vague no doubt in the lower ranks of the 
animal and in the vegetable kingdom, but still 
something which, higher up the scale, has been 
elaborated into consciousness. 

Change fulness. — Life, it would seem, can ally 
itself with Matter only by driving Matter into a 
state of continual change. The materials that 
compose the vital organs of plants and animals are 
never constant : elaborate compounds are built 
up from the food only to be disintegrated and 
expelled as waste. Individuals are, then, ever 
changing their composition ; and by birth and 
death the tribe is ever changing its individuals. 
Nor by this process is merely one individual sub- 
stituted for another : formed by contributions 
from two parents, each new individual differs 
from its predecessors. And as tribes change their 
individuals, so does the kingdom change its 
tribes. Of the species, animal and vegetable, 
that are alive at present, but very few existed in 
the days — geologically not very remote— when 
the earth was dominated by enormous lizards, or 
when it grew the dense forests of which coal-beds 


LIFE AND DEATH 


19 


were formed. The species which flourished at 
that time have changed, or have become extinct 
as the penalty for not changing. Life — or the 
matter with which Life is associated — turns and 
eddies in a state of never-ending flux. 

Death appears to be the inevitable result of 
stagnation — of a condition in which the impulses 
of Life can no longer keep the stream of Matter 
in motion. We live in danger of being choked by 
the wastage of our bodies : sleep enables secre- 
tion to overtake the process of wastage, and to 
rid us of accumulations that have collected during 
our active hours. But not entirely. Gradually 
the accumulations increase, clog our activities 
and finally strangle them. Apart from the effect 
of injury or disease, the duration of Life seems 
to depend upon the strength of a propulsive force 
which may be likened to the spin which keeps a 
top rotating. It is extraordinary that this force 
should be of such varying efficiency — sufficing, 
in some cases, to prolong life for a century, and 
in other cases failing after a few days or even hours. 
But, in the conceptions of science, time is of little 
account ; and, if we can forget it, birth and death 
will appear to resemble the vibrations which 
constitute light or sound — pulsations which main- 
tain a stream of continuity. 

§ 

This brief survey of Life appears to have 
disclosed six leading characteristics, which, in 
greater or less degree, are manifested throughout 
the animal and vegetable kingdoms: responsive 
sensation, changefulness, and the two pairs 
of opposites, — instinct and consciousness, spon- 
taneity and repetitiveness. Before proceeding 
to consider these attributes in more detail, we 
may pause for a moment to reflect again upon the 

c 


20 


INTRODUCTORY 


question whether Life should be considered as 
an impulse — a special energy — which acts upon 
Matter, or as the resultant of a particular com- 
pound of Matter — whether, in short, Life creates 
protoplasm or is created by it. Apart from this 
nitrogenous substance, Life does not occur ; but 
the composition of protoplasm is by no means 
uniform, and those who assert that it must be the 
origin of Life may be mistaking a necessary 
condition for an essential cause. We speak of 
a current of electricity as " generated " by 
chemical action; but we do not mean that, 
apart from this action, electricity is non-existent. 
To give a homely illustration of the difference 
between a condition and a cause : I cannot go 
out unless I find my boots, but I do not go out 
because I find them. We have, it may be repeated, 
no direct knowledge of Life : in itself it lies beyond 
the field of our sensations. The view that is taken 
of its nature may, then, depend very greatly upon 
the predilections of the philosopher : if he is 
inclined towards a mechanical theory of the 
Universe he may be discomposed by the eccentri- 
cities of Life, but will endeavour to explain them 
as the inevitable, although complicated, results 
of mechanical causes. 

There is, however, an argument, derived from 
our observations of the manifestations of Life, 
which appears to tell strongly against these materi- 
alistic conclusions. If Life is the result of Matter 
we should not expect it capriciously to disregard 
the tendency to uniformity which enables us to cal- 
culate the sequences of material phenomena, and 
even to make quantitative estimates of the things 
which underlie them. But Life seems to delight in 
displaying its indifference to rule. It provides 
animals with special organs for particular pur- 
poses — for instance, with eyes for seeing, with 


LIFE'S ANOMALIES 


21 


nerves and muscles for moving, with gills or lungs 
for breathing, with blood that contains a special 
substance (haematoglobin) for the attraction of 
oxygen from the air. Yet it reserves cases to 
show that functions can be performed without 
functional apparatus, and that complicated activi- 
ties may be developed by the simple texture of 
the body. Animalcules (protozoa), that are alto- 
gether devoid of sense organs or nerves, distinguish 
degrees of light, recognize their particular food, 
absorb and digest it, move with great rapidity 
and precision by the vibration of nerveless 
appendages. Creatures of the jelly-fish type 
(Coelenterata) fix oxygen from the air without 
either blood or breathing organs ; and earth- 
worms, belonging to an order much higher up the 
scale, have neither gills nor lungs, but breathe 
through the skin. The processes of reproduction, 
the growth of embryos, the course in which special 
organs have been evolved, abound with incon- 
sistencies and irregularities which tear holes in 
any unifying theories, and serve to show that Life 
is indifferent to rule. In plant-life the cross 
fertilization of flowers is general: it appears to 
strengthen vitality ; yet species are numerous 
whose flowers always fertilize themselves — are so 
formed, indeed, as to render cross-fertilization 
impossible. Amongst animals, sexual reproduc- 
tion is the rule ; but female plant lice (aphides) 
produce fully-developed young without the inter- 
vention of a male ; the oak apple gall-fly 
dispenses with males in producing every second 
generation; the eggs from which drone bees 
are hatched are developed by the queen with- 
out male assistance. The eye of the pecten 
(mollusc) is similar in construction and action to 
that of vertebrate animals : yet it is developed 
in a different manner and of different materials. 


22 


INTRODUCTORY 


Fishes and whales need fins for swimming : they 
develop them, but from different portions of their 
bodies. So also with the wings of insects, birds 
and bats : they are, in each case, grown by a 
different process. Life, when adopting the water, 
or the air, as its environment, appears to be 
wholly indifferent as to the method of adaptation. 
It concerns itself with results, not with pro- 
cesses — in fact, la fonction fait Vorgane. 

The evolution ot the myriad forms of animal and 
plant life does not appear to have resulted from 
the modification of living tissue under the pressure 
of surrounding forces, but from the action of two 
vital energies — multiplication and variation — 
which have been incessantly forcing living organ- 
isms into, as it were, a complicated and many- 
branched system of channels, or moulds (such as 
we may liken to the arteries of the human body), 
which represent the almost infinitely varied means 
of procuring subsistence. The multiplication of 
individuals supplies the pressure : their variation 
is the means by which they are able gradually to 
penetrate each channel of the system. There is 
enormous wastage : millions of organisms come 
into the world merely to increase the head of the 
pressure : millions of variations are useless, do not 
assist their possessors to find their way into a new 
channel, and are extinguished as soon as they 
arise. 

In the history of evolution there are two 
features which appear to confirm this hypothesis. 
Firstly, there is the gradual progress of life from 
the sea to the land, and from the land to the air. 
Of this, geology assures us. It can hardly be ex- 
plained by any materialistic theory of adaptation, 
since the progress must have come about, not by 
adaptation to environment, but by the extension of 
life to a new environment. Secondly, there is the 


LIFE'S ANOMALIES 


23 


curious circumstance that the drama of life should 
have followed the same course at different periods 
of geological time, although the personnel, so to 
speak, of the actors has been altogether different. 
During the Mesozoic epoch, for instance, mammals 
were few and of a backward or unspecialized kind, 
and the lead in the animal kingdom was taken by- 
enormous reptiles, of which our lizards and turtles 
are the degenerate survivors. Yet we find that 
to those reptiles parts were distributed which 
resembled very closely those now taken by mam- 
mals. Some were carnivorous, others were herbi- 
vorous : some, like bats, haunted the air ; and 
others, like whales, the sea. A similar generaliza- 
tion may be made of the plants which flourished 
at the time the coal measures were formed. 
Timber trees occurred rarely ; their places were 
taken by gigantic ferns and club -mosses, some of 
which stood 60 feet high. It is a striking tact that 
these plants grew, not by annual additions to 
their tips, like the existing degenerate ferns and 
club- mosses, but by the formation of annual rings 
round the stem — after the fashion, that is to say, 
of timber trees. Life has repeated its functions 
with organisms which have differed very widely in 
physical development, and we seem to be in the 
presence of an energy that can act independently 
of form. We have reason to conclude that a living 
creature is in fact constituted by the union of two 
very different elements, one of which — Matter — is 
subject to such natural laws as those of gravity 
and chemical reaction, whilst the other — Life — 
may entirely disregard them. 


CHAPTER II 


CHANGE 

There is no thinking man but has been impressed 
with the changefulness of life ; and in the 
literature of all races this has been a fruitful theme 
for lamentation, satire and cynicism. Not only- 
do birth and death ceaselessly change the com- 
position of our society — not only does each one 
of us pass from the cradle to the grave through 
the transforming corridors of the " Seven Ages " 
— but our minds, that claim to possess timeless 
excellencies, are as shifting and changeable as 
the wind. How long can a love keep its light 
burning, or a grief maintain the shadow that it 
has cast ? And, being by nature changeful, we 
take an instinctive pleasure in the changes of our 
thoughts. Any mood that is prolonged fatigues 
us : gaiety may become more tiresome than 
sadness, and it is not only kind-hearted sympathy 
that interests us in the sudden changes that 
are wrought by great calamities, or by the mis- 
fortunes of our friends. The essence of the 
ludicrous lies in contrast, in the sudden trans- 
formation that it occasions in our moods. And 
what charm does contrast lend to the drama ! 
How delightful the change from Hero's tragedy 
to the antics of the city watch — from the law- 
courts of Venice to the moonlit bank on which 
Lorenzo and Jessica sit and make love ! With 
what enchantment does Euripides suddenly veil 

24 


CHANGES IN THE INDIVIDUAL 25 


from us the death agonies of Phaedra by a vision 
of sea-birds flying along the cliffs of the Adriatic, 
distract our pity for the fate of Polyxena by a 
glimpse of sails rising and falling on a white- 
crested sea ! So it is with music. The idea upon 
which the sonata is constructed is the procession 
of a series of changing moods. 

§ 

There is little that is enduring in the constitu- 
tion of our bodies. They are material only in the 
sense that a waterfall is material — preserving their 
form, but ever changing their substance. We are 
ceaselessly absorbing substances from outside, 
ceaselessly building up from them compounds 
which, like explosives, contain potential energy, 
ceaselessly converting potential energy into actual 
energy by breaking up these compounds into 
material which is discharged as waste. Every 
movement of our bodies, every thought that flits 
through our brains, destroys something that has 
been created by our nutritive organs. In building 
up these, so to speak, explosive compounds, Life 
runs counter to the course of lifeless matter, 
which generally tends towards the degradation 
of energy, the breaking up of compounds that 
contain potential energy, and the dissipation of 
energy into the useless form of diffused heat. 
Life, on the other hand, constructs ; but it 
constructs only in order to destroy. It uses 
matter by changing it ; and the more complete 
is this change — the more unstable is the tissue of 
which an organ is composed — the greater is the 
vitality it exhibits. Animals which protect them- 
selves by solid secretions, which have encased 
themselves within shells or carapaces, have 
generally forfeited some liberty of action. Plants 
have lost almost all power of movement : they 


26 


CHANGE 


are largely composed of materials so stable as, 
in the form of coal, to have outlived many 
geological ages. But, in plants as in animals, the 
vital energy, which enables them to live and to 
grow, resides in delicate tissues which are in pro- 
cess of constant change. When change ceases, 
when the vital energy fails to preserve a whirl of 
metamorphosis, the organism becomes clogged 
and death ensues. This is the greatest change of 
all : one individual is obliterated in favour of 
another. Why, amongst the various kinds of 
plants and animals, should one find such extra- 
ordinary differences in the normal duration of 
life ? Why should some plants be annuals, whilst 
others can live through several centuries ? Why 
should a sea-anemone live for fifty years, whilst 
the vitality of a dog is almost exhausted in ten ? 
We do not know. We should expect to find some 
connection between the length of an organism's 
life and the period within which it attains sexual 
maturity. In some classes of plants and animals 
we can trace such a connection : the northern 
races of mankind appear to have gained in longe- 
vity by being late in reaching the age of puberty. 
But this theory is opposed by a host of contra- 
dictions, as are indeed almost all attempts to 
bring within the definition of a rule the multiform 
vagaries of Life's activity. 

§ . 

The life of an individual may thus be compared 
to the unrolling of a cinematograph film : so also 
may be the life of a community, but in this case 
the illumination flickers with the alternate flashes 
and darkness of birth and death. And, by a 
peculiar limitation of reproductive action, it is 
ensured that each runner in the race differs in 
constitution from those who give place to him. 


CHANGES IN THE COMMUNITY 27 


This limitation is imposed by the process of sexual 
generation, under which new individuals are 
created by the combination of two parents, and, 
owing their existence to two parents, are exact 
copies of neither of them. It is, of course, quite con- 
ceivable that a single individual should of itself 
have the power of producing offspring, and in the 
lowest classes of the animal and vegetable king- 
doms we find that single organisms produce new 
organisms simply by dividing themselves, or by 
throwing out buds. Here, then, we have reproduc- 
tion without sex, which may act, moreover, with 
most extraordinary rapidity, the descendants of a 
single cell multiplying themselves into several 
millions within a few hours. But this process 
will not generally continue indefinitely. After a 
time the swarm appears to lose vitality, and can 
no longer increase by the division of single cells. 
Strength is recovered by the process of " conjuga- 
tion " : two cells come together and blend their 
substance into a single mass, which subsequently 
breaks up into a fresh swarm of offspring. It is 
believed that the two conjugating cells have, 
before their union, developed the sexual characters 
which, in less primitive organisms, distinguish 
the " sperm-cell " of the male from the " germ- 
cell " of the female. 

In all but the very simplest organisms, 
throughout both the vegetable and the animal 
kingdoms, special organs of two kinds are 
developed for the production of these cells. 
Both kinds may be borne by the same individual, 
in which case, of course, no individual distinction 
of sex arises. Amongst plants, the sperm-cells 
are produced by the anthers of the stamens : the 
germ-cells by the ovary. These, again, are some- 
times borne by different flowers — sometimes on 
different plants — but they usually form parts 


28 


CHANGE 


of the same flower head. Generally, however, 
reproduction that results from the conjugation 
of the sperm-cells and germ-cells of the same 
flower — or of the same plant — is not as vigorous 
as if these cells are derived from different plants, 
and in many cases flowers are elaborately so con- 
trived as to prevent self-fertilization and to leave 
the germ-cells dependent upon sperm-cells (pollen) 
which are brought from other flowers by insects, 
or by the wind. But any general theory on this 
question is marred by the fact that there are 
tribes — and very important tribes — of plants 
which habitually fertilize themselves, or are, even, 
so shaped as to render cross-fertilization impos- 
sible, so that the germ-cells are entirely dependent 
upon the pollen of the flowers to which they 
belong, and reproduction is effected by the 
closest in-and-in breeding. This does not appear 
to have lessened vitality : amongst these self- 
fertilizing plants is the pea, which is exceedingly 
vigorous in growth and in seeding. 

Amongst the simpler forms of animal life it may 
also occur that the organs for the production 
of sperm-cells and germ-cells are borne by the 
same individual : this is even the case with earth 
worms. But, as a rule, they are appropriated by 
different individuals, and the distinction of sex comes 
into being, together with the numerous correlative 
developments of form, colour, and character that 
mark the male off from the female. It is believed by 
some biologists of the Mendelian school that a male 
is, in essence, a female x plus a special character. 
According to Mendel's law, the male would in this 

1 Amongst mammals the possession of teats by males appears to 
indicate an underlying femininity. But it should be remarked that 
from breeding experiments made with the Currant Moth (Abraxas 
grossulariata) it would appear that it is the female, not the male, 
which is the more complicated organism, and produces two sets of 
reproductive cells that are distinct in their sexual potentiality. 


ORIGIN OF SEX 


29 


case produce two kinds of sperm-cells, one possess- 
ing, the other lacking this special character. A germ- 
cell of the female, fertilized by a sperm-cell of the 
first kind would develop into a male, fertilized by a 
sperm-cell of the second kind, would develop into 
a female. If sperm-cells of both kinds were pro- 
duced in approximately equal numbers, a germ- 
cell would have an even chance of being fertilized 
by either one or the other ; and an explanation is 
forthcoming for the fact that, on an average, 
males and females are born in about equal 
numbers. It may be conjectured that sexual 
generation, by imparting a shock to the life sub- 
stance, maintains its essential instability and 
prevents it from settling down into such a state 
of equilibrium as would come about from undis- 
turbed habit. However this may be, one point 
is clear — that sexual generation modifies indivi- 
duality, and contributes very potently to the 
changefulness of Life. 

§ ' 

We pass, now, to the consideration of still 
greater changes— transformations so wonderful 
that until comparatively recent times their action 
was hardly suspected. Individuals may change 
and die ; but, so far as we can judge by ordinary 
observation, there is no alteration in the type of 
the species to which they belong. But, unless we 
reject the doctrine of evolution, we must believe 
that the type is subject to like changes with the 
individual, and that, just as individual plants and 
animals reach maturity through a number of em- 
bryonic stages of advancing complexity, so have all 
the species now existing worked their way up from 
the bottom of the animal and vegetable kingdoms 
by passing through metamorphoses, each of 
which at one time, in bygone ages, stood for a 


30 


CHANGE 


type, or species, of its day. The testimony of the 
rocks informs us, beyond the shadow of a doubt, 
that at different periods of geological history the 
fauna and flora of the earth were entirely different ; 
that very few of the species now existing were 
to be found during periods which, geologically 
speaking, are not very remote, and that with the 
progress of cycles the forms of animal and veget- 
able life have advanced from the very simplest 
to the complex developments of the present day. 
It is true that in only a few cases have fossils 
yielded us the actual links of a chain of evolution- 
ary changes, to show the steps by which a tribe of 
organisms has altered its form. The fossils of an 
epoch are a miserably incomplete record of its 
fauna : what, for instance, could we learn of the 
bird-life of present-day England by scouring the bed 
of the Thames ? But, in respect to a few animals, 
such links are forthcoming. One of the earliest 
forms of the horse whose fossil bones have been dis- 
covered (Orohippus), possessed four toes ; fossils 
that have been disinterred from later deposits 
show very completely the absorption of the first 
toe, and the gradual shortening of the second and 
fourth toes until they only remain as rudimentary 
" splint bones " in the horse of our time. 

Moreover, there has been a gradual change of 
habitat : Life, beginning in the sea, has passed on 
to the land and thence to the air, and animals 
which for the most part inhabit one of these ele- 
ments have shown a tendency to trespass upon the 
others. Thus amongst mammals — which are 
mainly terrestrial — whales and seals have taken 
to water, and bats to air ; amongst birds, ostriches 
have become purely terrestrial, penguins and 
divers almost aquatic ; whilst frogs, and other 
batrachians, pass a portion of their life in water 
and another portion on land. 


EVOLUTION OF SPECIES 31 


These immense changes are shadowed, though 
very faintly, by changes that we may see occurr- 
ing at the present day. The members of no family 
are exactly alike : they show variations, or 
" fluctuations," sufficiently pronounced to mark 
one individual off from another. These fluctua- 
tions result in some measure from the blending 
in various proportions of the traits of the father's 
and the mother's stock ; but there is reason to 
believe that they are also due to a spontaneous 
tendency to vary which is inherent in Life. 
Variations have been observed amongst uni- 
cellular organisms which have come into being by 
simple cell division. There occur, moreover, other 
more substantial variations to which the term 
" mutation 55 has been attached. These are very 
noticeable indeed. Such is a red blossom in a 
bed of white-flowered plants ; a chicken with 
reversed feathers. They are commonly known 
as " sports," and are of not infrequent occurrence 
amongst domesticated animals and plants. 

Darwin admitted these mutations into his 
scheme, but relied for the most part upon the 
fluctuations which, although far less momentous, 
are of universal occurrence. Both mutations and 
fluctuations might be useful or useless : one that 
was useful assisted the organisms which bore it 
in the struggle for life, enabled them to outvie 
their competitors and procreate young in which 
the fluctuation would be a settled hereditary trait. 
Amongst the fluctuations to which the offspring 
were subject would be one which advanced this 
trait towards greater completion ; this would in 
like manner become settled, and in this fashion, 
during the lapse of ages, a minute pigment spot 
might be developed into a complicated eye. 
Fluctuations, normally spontaneous and (so to 
speak) accidental, might in some cases be pur- 


32 


CHANGE 


poseful, arising from the effect upon the young 
of their parents' habits : so the giraffe might 
lengthen its neck by the striving of giraffes to 
reach higher foliage. Peculiarities which were 
of no direct advantage in the struggle for life 
might, nevertheless, be established through their 
influence in attracting the opposite sex. " Sexual 55 
contributed to " natural 55 selection in the develop- 
ment of characteristics. Some years ago this 
hypothesis was almost universally accepted by 
science. It has since lost ground ; but its 
straitest adherents have narrowed and hardened 
it by denying that either " mutations 55 or the 
inheritance of acquired, as opposed to in-born, 
aptitudes, have contributed at all to evolutionary 
progress. 

It is difficult to believe that the gradual 
accumulation of small random fluctuations could 
have evolved such a complicated structure as the 
human eye ; could have elaborated instincts which 
would be suicidal if not exercised from the first 
with the minutest accuracy, and instincts which 
co-ordinate the behaviour of two separate gen- 
erations ; or could have enabled animals not 
only to make better use of their environment but 
to migrate to another environment — as from the 
sea to the land. Nor is it evident how fluctuations 
incidental to individuals could have crystallized 
into the characters that mark a type — could have 
brought into existence a species, the members of 
which would not interbreed with their near 
relations. A still more serious objection is that 
fluctuations are swamped by sexual generation. 
It has been proved that any peculiarities of a 
father, which are inherited by his sons, are less 
fully developed in them — in fact that the effect of 
sexual generation is constantly to repress eccen- 
tricity, and draw peculiarities back to the 


MENDELISM 


33 


normal. Fluctuations are thus repressed as soon 
as they appear, and it is not easy to comprehend 
how they could be the foundation for settled 
changes. 

The Mendelian school of biologists pin their 
faith to " sports 55 or mutations. The researches 
of Mendel showed that these may represent new 
innate impulses which interbreeding may conceal, 
but cannot obliterate. Hybrids between the 
" sport " and a normal individual may not display 
the new character. But a proportion of the repro- 
ductive cells which they produce will contain it, 
and, if two of the hybrids interbreed (as may 
happen in the course of a few generations) some 
of their offspring will possess the new character 
purely, will display it in their form or colour, and, 
if they interbreed, will produce offspring in which 
the new character is fixed. Here, then, is a process 
by which a new variety of importance may be 
established, and by which it is established by 
breeders and nurserymen. Instances of per- 
sistent, or Mendelian, characters are tallness and 
dwarfness of habit in plants, the colours of certain 
flowers, the forms and markings of different 
breeds of rabbits, fowls and pigeons, the colour 
of the eyes in mankind. All characters do not, 
however, appear to be of this class. We know 
from experience that there are numerous, and 
very important, peculiarities that do not resist 
cross-breeding : the characters of both parents 
are blended in the hybrid offspring of finches and 
canaries, of dogs and jackals, and of white and 
coloured races of mankind. But Mendelist ex- 
perimenters have proved a fact which is of 
immense importance — that the reproductive cells 
which are produced in large numbers by male and 
female may differ among themselves, that they 
may possess different shares of ancestral charac- 


34 


CHANGE 


ters, so that the combination of any one male 
cell with any one female cell is one of many 
possible combinations, each of which might have 
produced an individual possessing some characters 
peculiar to itself. An element of chance is thus 
introduced into the formation of offspring which 
must contribute very greatly to the variety of life. 

The origin of the changes — whether fluctuations 
or mutations — that occur in individuals, and are 
the steps by which new species may arise, remain 
a mystery, unless we ascribe them to an inherent 
or " bathmic " changefulness of Life, assisted by 
the clash that results from the meeting of the 
male and female elements in sexual reproduction. 
Darwinists and Mendelists agree in holding that 
the changes are purposeless — that they maybe 
injurious or beneficial, and if beneficial are only 
so incidentally. If they are injurious they are 
eliminated by the struggle for life. If they are 
beneficial they are established, according to the 
Darwinian hypothesis, by the assistance they 
afford to their possessors ; according to the 
Mendelian belief they can become fixed by their 
own vitality, irrespective of environal influences. 
Mendelism can, therefore, explain the establish- 
ment of changes that are neutral — neither in- 
jurious nor beneficial — which, on the Darwinian 
theory, would have little chance of persistence. 
Darwinists are, accordingly, put to it to discover 
some positive utility in all peculiarities that have 
survived. Vast numbers of these are obviously 
useful, and, as knowledge extends, utility is 
discovered in characters the practical value of 
which was at first not apparent. But it is hardly 
possible to believe that utility underlies all that 
is curious and beautiful in the animal and 
vegetable worlds. It has been shown that, in 
some cases, colours may be protective ; but 


PURPOSELESS HERITAGES 35 


numbers of animals flaunt glaring hues in the 
face of danger. If the thrush is protected by its 
speckled plumage, how has the blackbird survived 
alongside it ? The brilliant colours, the singing 
capacities, of some cock birds are ascribed to 
sexual selection — to the advantages which these 
give the cocks in finding mates. They doubtless 
afford pleasure to the females ; but this does not 
prove that they owe their existence to their 
attractiveness. Is the taste of man responsible 
for the vagaries of female fashion ? Moreover, it 
is difficult to suppose that females are attracted 
by the small eccentricities in which, on the 
Darwinian hypothesis, these excellencies origin- 
ated. The colours of certain flowers may attract 
fertilizing insects ; but there are brilliant flowers 
that must fertilize themselves. Of what use are 
the flashing colours that embellish the chrysalides 
of many butterflies, the long beaks and tails of 
many tropical birds, the horns of female reindeer 
and cattle, the hair which some races of men grow 
on their faces ? In truth Life is not logical or 
frugal in its activities, and we owe to its unstinted 
prodigality of change much of that which is 
beautiful in the world. 

We must then admit that the varieties of form 
and colour which distinguish the species of plants 
and animals have proceeded in great measure 
from a capricious changefulness which is inherent 
in Life. But are we to believe that changes are 
in no case purposeful — that the influence of 
environment, habit or culture may not stimulate 
variation which is so far purposeful that it is 
directed to an end ? Beyond a doubt organisms 
are influenced in colour by their surroundings, 
and also in form, if only by such artificial mutila- 
tions as shorten the tails of puppies. But these 
changes would be of no progressive value unless 


36 


CHANGE 


they were inherited by the offspring. Can acquired 
peculiarities become innate, or do they differ from 
peculiarities which arise spontaneously in not 
being transmissible to the next generation ? This 
question introduces us to the most controversial 
of biological questions. It is very strongly 
maintained by an influential school of thought 
that acquired characters are not heritable, that 
offspring are not innately affected by the ex- 
periences of their parents (unless these have 
injured the reproductive organs), and have no 
inborn tendency to reproduce any change of 
colour, form, or habit which their parents may have 
contracted. This conclusion is certainly supported 
by a mass of negative evidence, showing that in 
particular cases peculiarities of form or habit con- 
tracted by parents are not passed on to their chil- 
dren. Circumcision has been practised by some 
races from remote antiquity without producing 
any hereditary results. It is indeed maintained by 
Dr. August Weismann, and other great authorities, 
that the reproductive organs are in origin and in 
functioning quite distinct from the body of sense 
and motion, and that bodily experiences can, 
therefore, have no effect upon the cells which these 
organs produce, v But this theory assumes that 
impulses arise from organs, instead of organs 
from impulses ; and it is based upon grounds 
which are in great measure conjectural. Its 
opponents have collected a large number of facts 
which indicate that in some cases acquired 
peculiarities have actually been inherited. In 
this uncertainty w r e may again remember that 
Life does not limit itself to a single line of action, 
and that it may in some cases permit what in 
other cases it refuses. It does not follow that 
acquired characters never become innate because 
it is proved that they very frequently do not 


ENVIRONMENT AND EVOLUTION 37 


become so. Peculiarities of form or colour 
are commonly associated with peculiarities of 
locality or climate. All men who inhabit the 
tropics are of dark complexion : brilliancy of 
colour prevails amongst tropical birds and in- 
sects : it is in temperate regions that birds 
develop most tunefully their powers of song. We 
can hardly believe that in these cases environ- 
ment has not influenced the course of evolution. 
Amongst those who deny that the influence of 
environment can originate variations there are 
some who admit that it may prepare for them — 
that the giraffe by striving to reach high branches 
may endow its progeny with a disposition to 
develop a longer neck. And it is indisputable 
that a change of environment may influence 
evolution by stimulating variation. It is under 
the artificial conditions of domestication or 
manuring that plants and animals " sport " most 
freely. During the cycles that are covered by 
the records of geology the surface of the earth 
has undergone strange transformations. Land 
has been submerged and re-elevated time after 
time ; an ice cap has advanced over countries 
that are now temperate, has retired, and has 
advanced again ; mountain ranges have risen 
and fallen like the waves of the sea. There have 
been no lack of changes to stimulate variation, 
and we may reasonably conclude that in former ages 
they occurred more frequently than the present 
condition of the earth might lead us to suppose. 

Granting, however, that we can in some 
measure explain the occurrence of variations, or 
mutations, we are still confronted with a most 
difficult problem — the spread of these variations 
from an individual to a race, the development of 
a new species from single specimens which emerged 
from their own kind bearing new peculiarities. 


38 


CHANGE 


If the variations were persistent " Mendelian " 
characters, and could not be obliterated in the 
course of breeding, they would still be limited for 
many generations to a very small circle ; and, in 
cases where they did not endow their possessors 
with a positive advantage in the struggle for 
life, it is difficult to conceive how the members of 
this circle could increase so greatly as to drive 
out of existence the original species. If they were 
merely small fluctuations, of the type contem- 
plated by Darwinists, they would be even less 
likely to spread, for reasons which have already 
been given. The chances of development would 
be greatly increased were the new characters 
associated with prepotency in reproductive power, 
and still more were individuals of the old type 
losing their fertility and tending towards ex- 
tinction. Of the inhabitants of England, at the 
time of the Norman Conquest, a single pair of 
individuals, endowed with sufficient reproductive 
prepotency to transmit to their descendants the 
capacity of doubling themselves in each genera- 
tion, could have been the ancestors of the whole 
of the present population — that is to say, could 
have spread any peculiarities which they possessed 
to the whole of the English people. But there is 
no evidence to show that " sports 55 are more 
fertile than normal individuals, or that their 
appearance marks a general decline of fertility 
in the species. Accepting evolution as the origin 
of species, but despairing of the discovery of the 
processes by which it has come about, we may 
be tempted to take refuge in the assumption that 
its course was preordained, and may be likened to 
the development oi an individual from its em- 
bryonic stage to maturity. Were we able to 
observe only one stage of this development — an 
egg, for instance, after so many days of incuba- 


THE SPREAD OF VARIATIONS 39 

tion — we should have no idea of the beginning or 
end of the process. So the evolution of species 
may be progressing by predetermined stages, 
which need more time for their detection than may 
be commanded by human observation. But 
amongst the considerations that may be opposed 
to this belief there stand the wastefulness of life — 
the creation of millions of living organisms which 
are born only to be destroyed in immaturity ; and 
the fact that evolution may be retrogressive — 
that species may descend the scale of life, as the 
tapeworm and the barnacle have undoubtedly 
degenerated. These considerations are hardly 
to be reconciled with the idea of a preordained 
scheme of evolutionary development, unless we 
concede that it may be wholly out of accord with 
our higher ethical ideas. 

We are, however, aware of two forces, very 
different in themselves, which may have contri- 
buted to the spread of variations — the influences 
of environment, and the imitative impulse. There 
appears to be an analogy between the evolution 
of species and the development of civilization: 
in both cases novelties arise in individuals and 
spread to masses. The novelties of civilization — 
new mechanical inventions or artistic ideas, for 
instance — disseminate themselves by their suit- 
ability to peculiarities of climate or locality (which 
occasion a desire for them), or by the action of the 
propensity to imitate, which is one of the strongest 
of human instincts. If we assume that a chance 
variation may be in accord with influences of 
environment — which we may not comprehend but 
should not on this account rule out of existence — 
these influences may very materially assist its 
possessors in outnumbering their fellows ; and if, 
in some cases, the occurrence of a variation is 
actually stimulated by these influences, their 


40 


CHANGE 


effects in spreading it would be still more power- 
ful — they might, indeed, cause it to arise inde- 
pendently in several individuals. This would 
explain the curious rigidity with which many 
species of plants and animals are localized within 
particular — sometimes quite small — areas. We 
may be unable to trace, or to imagine, a connection 
between the circumstances of a place and some 
spots on a bird's or a butterfly's wing. But our 
ignorance, or incapacity, does not entitle us to 
deny the possibility of its existence. Within recent 
times a dark variety of the peppered moth (Am- 
phydasis betularia), formerly very rare, has spread 
very greatly in the " black country " of the north 
of England. It seems probable that there are 
local conditions which favour it. 

To suppose that variations have been spread by 
imitation may appear to be altogether fantastic. It 
recalls the success of Jacob in breeding ring-straked 
sheep ; the story appears incredible, but not a few 
practical breeders believe that the colour of a 
calf may be affected by the colour of the cow's 
stall companion. Nature abounds with illustra- 
tions of mimicry, and we must not hastily con- 
clude that an impulse to imitate could not work 
subconsciously, or that it could not disturb the 
tendency of the reproductive cells simply to 
repeat the growth of the preceding generation. 
Butterflies mimic other butterflies, even dead 
leaves, and are themselves mimicked by moths ; 
caterpillars and other insects mimic twigs and 
foliage ; there is a greatj tendency for creatures 
to take the colour of their environment ; we 
subconsciously mimic peculiarities of manner in 
our 1 companions ; families that migrate to a new 

1 One of the most effectively deceptive mimicries is that of a 
humble-bee (Bombus agrorum) by a fly (Volucella bombylus). 
These insects inhabit the same nest. 


MIMICRY 


4* 


country appear gradually to modify their charac- 
ter, and even their features, so as to resemble 
their native associates. Mimicry, if protective, 
may, it is claimed, have originated in useful 
" sports." But it is not always protective ; and 
of the curious resemblances which we find amongst 
insects, few would deceive a sharp-sighted bird. 
Mimicry appears, then, to be caused by an im- 
pulse, not to be the result of chance resemblances 
that have been stereotyped by the struggle for 
life. Why should living creatures mimic some of 
the peculiarities which they see about them and 
not others ? We do not know. Children are 
exceedingly imitative, but they select for imita- 
tion sometimes one trait, at other times another. 
One or two new species of flowers have been 
known to arise and establish themselves, without 
man's active interference, since the time when 
botanical observation commenced. But their 
distinctive peculiarities are of trifling importance, 
and no evidence can be discovered of the move- 
ment of evolution — as an actually working pro- 
cess — unless we assume that the changes that have 
occurred within historical times in the character 
of some bacterial diseases, indicate that some new 
species have sprung into existence amongst 
microbes. The great development of the present 
era of geology has been in the civilization of 
mankind; and we may fancy that Nature has 
stood still in astonishment at this — the culmin- 
ating triumph of Life's activity. ./ 

§ 

The changefulness of Life is represented in 
mankind by a definite instinct — the desire of 
variety, which is severely repressed by the bonds 
of habit, but has powerfully contributed to human 


42 


CHANGE 


progress. Between it and habit there is constant 
antagonism, and a slight preponderance of one or 
the other marks the difference between the 
Liberal and the Conservative temperament. The 
manifestations of this instinct can be traced 
throughout the animal kingdom : it is the impulse 
which prompts so many creatures to change their 
homes — to migrate. The force of habit makes 
strongly for stay-at-home life ; yet at certain 
periods, or in certain circumstances, many kinds 
of animals are seized with a passion to adventure 
themselves in new surroundings. Swallows and 
snipe, for instance, are annually driven by this 
impulse enormous distances across ice-bound 
mountains and stormy seas. In most cases the 
impulse has results of advantage : stirred by it, 
birds avail themselves of food which abounds 
during summer in northern, and during winter 
in southern latitudes. Those which feed upon 
insects would perish during the lifelessness of a 
northern winter. But the instinct is sometimes a 
deadly possession. Swarms of locusts and butter- 
flies will fly out to certain death in the ocean. 
The lemmings 1 of Norway periodically assemble 
in vast multitudes and travel westwards with no 
apparent object, those that escape death on the 
mountains not fearing it when they reach the 
coast, but swimming boldly out to sea. In the 
history of mankind the migratory impulse has 
been of incalculable importance : it has provoked 
desolating wars ; but it has maintained a con- 
nection between different peoples, and has been a 
potent influence in spreading culture. Without 
it races would have lived, as it were, in closed 
compartments, and we should not find that the 
primary discoveries of civilization — the use of 
fire, of the plough, of the loom, as well as many 

1 A small field rat (Myodes lemmus). 


MIGRATION 


43 


ancient superstitions — have practically become 
established throughout the world. The impulse 
may be deadened by long-continued habit : 
peoples who have settled down to the routine of 
agriculture are usually much attached to their 
fields and homes. But those who subsist by 
pasturing cattle, or by cultivating the land after 
a shifting fashion, or become hard pressed for 
food, are liable to be strongly moved by it. For 
uncounted centuries it has impelled the peoples 
of Northern Europe towards the Mediterranean : 
more recently it has urged them to establish 
colonies of their own across the seas. Nor 
has it always led the wanderers towards the 
superior comfort of a promised land. The gipsies 
have roamed northwards into a more rigorous 
climate and harder conditions than they ex- 
perienced in their Eastern home. In the migratory 
instinct is seated the attractiveness of travel, and 
the impulse, hardly to be resisted by the most 
home-loving of English families, to go abroad, or 
to the seaside, once a year. 

§ 

We may perhaps find in this desire for change 
the origin of three very curious human pleasures — 
the pleasures of the ludicrous, of gambling, and 
of intoxication. In all of them an agreeable 
emotion is associated with sudden changes of 
mood. If instances of the ludicrous, in circum- 
stances or in words, are analysed, it will be found 
that the essence lies in an abrupt alteration of 
mental attitude, which must not, however, be 
attended with the excitement that would be 
caused by any personal interest, and must not 
arouse any so serious an emotion as pity, shame, 
or indignation. This condition is essential. A 
passer-by slips and falls on the pavement. Our 


44 


CHANGE 


amusement at the mishap depends upon the im- 
pression which his dignity and his humiliation 
successively make upon us : it would disappear 
altogether were he seriously hurt : it is not shared 
at all by the victim of the accident. " Her 
father was asleep in the library : her mother was 
dead, so she could count upon receiving the 
young man alone. 55 Here we are suddenly taken 
from the idea of a siesta to that of a funeral, and, 
again, to the contemplation of a young woman's 
love affairs. It is supposed by the eminent 
French psychologist, M. Henri Bergson, that 
laughter, provoked by the ludicrous, has a pur- 
poseful value, being a means by which society 
corrects the abnormalities or eccentricities of 
individuals. But this theory does not appear to 
cover the ground. The question is not one of 
laughter, but of amusement : our laughter is only 
the expression of our amusement, and it is quite 
possible to be amused in silence. 

The pleasure of gambling is no doubt associated 
in some degree with a desire for gain. But the 
typical gambler is rather prodigal than avaricious, 
and covetousness contributes but little to his 
excitement. The alternations of chance produce 
two strongly contrasted moods — that of winning 
and that of losing — and the prospects of the game 
arouse in imagination the changes in mood that 
would follow luck's vagaries. Change is thus of the 
essence of a gambler's pleasure : in this respect, 
chance resembles the ludicrous. For the gambler, 
however, the circumstances are too exciting to be 
funny : his personal interests are at stake. But 
you may often see bystanders smile when the 
changes of luck are particularly frequent. 

Here, also, may be classed the pleasure which 
Oriental peoples take in litigation. During the 
course of a suit the imagination of the litigants 


PLEASURES OF CHANGE 45 


presents them with changing pictures of triumph 
and defeat. Personal vanity, it is true, enhances 
this excitement. But this would also be concerned 
were the rivalry one of ostentatious expenditure, 
and this would not be nearly as pleasurable as a 
contest in the courts. Variety, or change of mood, 
generally enters into the pleasure which we derive 
from games. It is certainly one of the attractions 
of golf. Games in which chance is the principal 
element have, indeed, little but this to commend 
them. 

The pleasure of intoxication is of a more com- 
plicated nature. There enters into it the taste of 
the drug or liquor, the attraction of habit, and 
the relief of freeing oneself from the worries and 
mistrust that afflict introspective sobriety. But 
intoxication is above all things a change of mood 
— often, indeed, a series of changes which to 
onlookers may appear exceedingly ludicrous. 
The change is not always in the way of gaiety — 
not infrequently the reverse — and its attractive- 
ness lies in itself. Some of the lower animals can 
seemingly appreciate it ; and monkeys, and even 
birds, may contract a very strong liking for 
spirituous drinks. 


CHAPTER III 


SENSATION AND REACTION 

By our senses we maintain some connection with 
our surroundings- Of the real nature of our 
environment we are profoundly ignorant ; but it 
contains our food — the material upon which Life 
exercises its changefulness — and to secure this we 
require not only percipient senses but powers of 
movement. The necessities of plants are less com- 
plicated. They feed upon inorganic substances, 
occurring in the soil, or in the air, which are 
widely diffused by natural forces, and generally 
will come if they are waited for. Plants have 
accordingly cast anchor in the ground, and have 
lost all but the elements of sensation. Animals 
must ordinarily seek for their food, whether it 
consists of vegetable substances or of the bodies 
of other animals. They have also to avoid the 
appetites of others. In this matter plants are 
helpless ; but they have in compensation a power 
of recuperation which enables herbage, however 
closely grazed, to restore itself. Animals, further, 
need senses in order to discover their mates, save 
in the rare cases when individuals are hermaphro- 
dite. Moreover, without senses social life would 
be impossible ; and in the case of many animals, 
man included, a gregarious impulse has developed 
itself so strongly that death is hardly worse than 
to be ignored by others. 

46 


THE SENSES 


47 


Our senses are popularly numbered as five ; 
but the appreciation of temperature which the 
skin possesses should probably be reckoned 
separately from the sense of touch. In some of 
the lower animals certain senses are demonstrably 
stronger than our own : we have no reason to 
infer that our senses are the only ones that might 
exist, and it seems likely that insects are endowed 
with some peculiar detective powers. The males 
of certain moths (Bombyces) will become aware 
of a virgin female when at least a mile away, and 
probably at a much greater distance : insects 
whose larvae feed upon truffles will detect the pres- 
ence of these fungi when two feet below the surface. 
Amongst mankind, individuals probably differ 
very considerably in the delicacy of their senses. 
Some are colour-blind, others deaf to the charms 
of music ; and it may be that the " joy of life " 
which seems specially to exhilarate some indi- 
viduals and races, proceeds from a keener sensi- 
bility than is enjoyed by those who take a sober 
view of life's vicissitudes, or can discover in a 
fine morning only an opportunity of going out to 
kill something. But sense organs, however acute 
and however varied, are, it must be remembered, 
only receivers : they collect messages from out- 
side ; but it is in the principal nerve centre — the 
brain — that these messages are translated into 
sensations. We are popularly supposed to hear 
with our ears, but the ears receive only rhythmical 
pulsations of air. The brain converts these move- 
ments into the sensations which we appreciate as 
sounds, just as the needle and drum of a gramo- 
phone convert the surface irregularities of the 
record into a strain of music. It is difficult to real- 
ise that when we touch an object with the foot the 
feeling of touch arises not in the foot, but in the 
brain. But so it is. A man who has lost a leg 


4 8 


SENSATION AND REACTION 


may feel pain in the toes that he no longer posses- 
ses, if action in the brain should reproduce 
twinges that he associated with his toes before 
his leg was amputated. Our physical sufferings 
are then, so to speak, all mental, and we locate 
them in various parts of the body by inferences 
which are deceptive but are very useful. Pain 
that arises directly in the brain, in conditions of 
mental hallucination, may be as acute as when a 
bodily organ is physically affected. We should, 
then, think of sensations as created by the brain, 
not by the organs of sense ; in this respect they 
resemble memories or hallucinations. Sensations 
are generally more vivid than memories. But we 
may at times be at a loss to decide whether a 
brain picture comes from the outside, or arises, as 
a vision, within us. 

In the higher animals a sensory apparatus 
consists, in the first place, of some peculiarly 
modified tissue on the exterior surface of the 
body, specially adapted for the reception of 
outside impressions. Such are the rods and cones 
of the retina of the eye, the Cortian fibres which 
line the inner passages of the ear, and the nerve 
endings by which we gather the impressions of 
touch and taste. Secondly, it includes a nerve 
system by which the impression is transmitted 
to a point where it is converted into an impulse 
that flies outward to actuate a muscle. In its 
essential form this system consists of a sensory, 
or " afferent " nerve, a ganglion, in which this 
nerve ends, and a motor or " efferent " nerve 
proceeding from the ganglion to a muscle. By 
biologists of a materialistic way of thinking, the 
afferent nerve is pictured as causing a chemical 
reaction, or explosion, in the ganglion, and as in 
this manner setting free energy which is stored 
in the ganglion. But it may also be pictured as 


SENSATION A PROPERTY OF LIFE 49 

releasing a catch which permits the starting of 
machinery that is actuated by an instinctive 
impulse. In the higher animals the ganglia are 
collected into the spinal cord or the brain ; in 
the lower they form less complicated systems, 
sometimes very loosely connected. But we must 
remember that this elaboration of sense organ, 
nerve and ganglion is by no means essential. 
The microscopic protozoa, which are regarded 
by an evolutionist as his remotest ancestors, 
possess no organs whatever for sensation. They 
are simply small masses of nitrogenous jelly, so 
far as can be ascertained of like texture through- 
out, except for a small spot where there has been 
some sort of concentration into a nucleus. Yet 
all of them are sensitive to light and to touch : 
some of them can even distinguish blue light from 
light of other kinds. They can recognize their 
peculiar food, and certain of them construct the 
most beautiful little shells, the designing of which 
by a man would be taken to show much delicacy 
of conception. Plants are, of course, very sensi- 
tive to light ; some of them, such as the sensitive 
mimosa and a species of balsam, violently resent 
touch, and two species (Drosera and Dionaea), 
the leaves of which are able to digest captured 
insects, exhibit in divergent manners very delicate 
sensibilities that are of use to them in distinguish- 
ing flies from other objects. A study of natural 
history shows us, in fact, that sensation is a pro- 
perty of life, not a function of any description of 
organ. 

§ 

Did our sensory impressions originate on the 
exterior surface of our bodies there might be some 
prima facie ground for the idea that they repre- 
sent things as they are — that there exist, in fact, 


50 


SENSATION AND REACTION 


such things as a red colour, the twang of a zither, 
or the scent of honeysuckle. But generated as 
they are in the brain — within a portion of our 
body which is secluded from the outside world 
by a bony covering — there is no possibility of 
their being other than symbolic. And science 
assures us that this is the case. The results of 
its experiments, so far as they are discovered 
by sight, are indeed misrepresented ; but they 
exhibit certain relations in time and space, in 
the nature of similarities, dimensions and se- 
quences which conscious reason enables us to 
appreciate, to group under heads and rules, and 
to predict by calculation. Their occurrence in 
accord with our predictions endorses the rule to 
which calculation has led us. So it is demon- 
strated by science that what we term light and 
sound are merely vibrations of extreme rapidity ; 
that our environment is really dark and silent, 
does not give light to the eye or sound to the ear, 
but owes to the brain its illumination and its 
resonance. It seems, moreover, that the sub- 
stances which appear to resist our touch in solidity 
are also in energetic vibration, and that, in fact, 
our surroundings may be likened to the whorls 
and eddies which we see when we press hard upon 
our closed eyelids. Out of this confusion our 
brains conjure up for us shapes and colours, sounds 
and solidity ; but these impressions resemble 
actuality no more closely than the notes of a 
musical box resemble its machinery. We live in 
the midst of the Unknown. 

Moreover, our sensory impressions are in them- 
selves so irregular that they would be useless were 
they not corrected by a mental process of sensory 
adjustment. We see what we pronounce to be a 
circular table ; but we do not see it as circular 
unless we are immediately above it. From any 


IMPERFECTIONS OF SENSATIONS 51 


other point of view it appears to be more or less 
oval. We judge it to be circular, not from its 
actual appearance but from our memory of 
previous similar impressions of it, coupled with 
experiences of touch : we infer that it is circular, 
although to our sensation it may appear oval. So 
also with colours, the actual appearance of which 
varies very greatly according to the amount of 
light that falls upon them and the direction from 
which it falls. Our real guide is not sensation, but 
perception, which is sensation adjusted in the 
light of previous experiences. Not only, then, is 
the brain, as we have seen, the origin of sensation, 
but it needs processes of the brain to render 
sensory impressions useful to us. Practice enables 
us to adjust with instantaneous rapidity. But 
babies that reach for a bright object, regardless of 
its distance, prove that the faculty of adjustment 
rests upon experience. Having made these ad- 
justments habitually, we can hardly disembarrass 
ourselves of their guidance. It is quite difficult 
to draw things, not as we infer them to be, but 
as they actually appear : children's pictures, 
primitive art and oriental art all aim at truth by 
representing not the seen but the inferred. It 
requires, indeed, an artist to set down the simple 
impressions of the eyes. These are in perspective, 
and those who look at the pictures are convinced 
of solidity by their own powers of inference. 

Our sensory impressions need, then, to be 
adjusted before they will guide us trustworthily, 
and we correct each one of them, as it comes, by 
investing it with attributes, such as roundness or 
solidity, which it does not appear to possess, but 
which we infer from the memory of previous 
impressions and tactile experiences that it does 
possess. In other words, the key to our impres- 
sions is a stock of memories and ability to infer 

E 


5« 


SENSATION AND REACTION 


from them. This ability is instinctive, and is 
born with us. But we have to acquire our stock 
of memories for ourselves. Lower down the scale 
of animal life — amongst insects, for instance — 
sensations do not need to be adjusted by in- 
ferences from experience: the necessary connec- 
tions are made by instinct, and the young come 
into the world fully equipped to meet its dif- 
ficulties. 

§ 

Of what nature are the memories by which we 
adjust our sensory impressions, and how do we 
perceive them ? They are repetitions of former 
sensory impressions, called up by the brain, and 
are perceived by us by some faculty which may 
be likened to sensation that is independent of 
the special sensory apparatus of nerves and 
nerve-cells. We look inwards as well as outwards, 
or rather, we observe, as it were, a double 
cinematograph show, in which two sets of pictures 
are unrolled, the one resulting from sensory 
impressions, and derived from the outside, the 
other resulting from the repetitive faculty of the 
brain, and evolved by it in association with, and 
to correspond with, the sensory impressions. 
When, as in children and backward races, the 
memorial impressions of the brain are very vivid, 
they can hardly be distinguished from sensory 
impressions, and hallucinations result. We know 
on what little excitement children will see 
phantoms at night. Our grasp of what happens 
outside us depends upon our ability to distinguish 
the one set from the other. They are distinguished 
in science by the names of " objective " and 
" subjective," the former coming from sensation, 
the latter from memory. 

It may be observed here that the memory may 


SYMBOLIC SENSATIONS 


53 


be stimulated and directed by sensory impressions, 
not only of things, but of symbols of things. 
Such are words, whether spoken or written. The 
word " sea " is a symbol : to one who had never 
seen water it would mean and could mean nothing. 
But, associated in the memory with a large ex- 
panse of water, it calls up this idea, when seen 
or heard. 

§ 

By our sensory equipment of nerves and nerve- 
cells we receive impressions not only of things 
that are outside us but of the movements and 
condition of our own bodily organs. If we lift 
an arm we have an impression of its movement 
which is as clear as any impression that we derive 
from touch. We have, moreover, an impression of 
the amount of force exerted by us in, for instance, 
lifting a weight : we remember this impression, and 
associate it with objects of similar size. We are, 
accordingly, much surprised if an, object, which 
appears from its size to be heavy, proves to be 
light when we essay to move it. We also have 
some impressions of the condition of our internal 
organs ; they may be associated with very 
definite feelings of pleasure or pain, but are 
ordinarily vague and uninstructive. A man has 
but a very indistinct idea of the hidden processes 
upon which his life depends. 

In fine, by our nervous organisation we receive 
sensory impressions of things that are outside us, 
of symbols of these things (the most important of 
which are words, heard or read), and of the move- 
ments of our own bodies ; and, in some mysteri- 
ous fashion, we are also aware of mental occur- 
rences — of memories and thoughts — which have 
been generated by sensory impressions of the 
past. 


54 SENSATION AND REACTION 

§ 

From the character of the typical sensory- 
organ — a nerve ganglion to which two nerves are 
attached, one for bringing stimuli of sensa- 
tion, the other for carrying away impulses of 
motion — it would appear that the movement of 
a muscle is the necessary and inevitable conse- 
quence of the receipt of a sensory impression. 
And there is reason to believe that this is so, and 
that every impression is, so to speak, a starting 
lever which releases muscular action. Experi- 
ments with human subjects, in which the beating 
of the heart, or the expansion of the lungs, is 
carefully registered, indicate that sensory im- 
pressions which, so far as consciousness can detect, 
do not stimulate the least muscular reaction, 
are, as a matter of fact, accompanied by it. 
The sight of a red colour, for instance, is found 
to quicken the motion of the heart in some per- 
sons. We have then experimental warranty for 
the expression " seeing red." 

A sensory impression that affects the brain, 
and is not localized in the instinctive nerve sys- 
tem that directs our internal mechanism, is, 
however, rarely a single occurrence : it generally 
sets free several impulses — and a stream of memo- 
ries — that conflict with the impulse that is 
primarily aroused, and, it may be, with one 
another. A terrifying noise makes us start : 
it would make us run were hurrying not in- 
hibited by a feeling of shame, by a suspicion that 
we might be meeting the danger, or by knowledge 
that the noise as a matter ot fact meant no risk 
to us. Hence, in the majority of cases, our 
external behaviour is not guided by primary 
instinctive reactions, but is the product of a 
struggle between a number of impulses. Such 
an arrangement is obviously inconsistent with 


REFLEX AND IDEO-MOTOR REACTION 55 


high practical efficiency. It involves hesitation 
and the possibility of error. But it possesses the 
transcendent advantage of affording opportunities 
for the exercise of choice, that is to say, for the 
play of the will. It is, however, fortunate for our 
health that the action of the heart, the stomach, 
and other internal organs is governed by a separate 
nerve system that is directed by instinct in inde- 
pendence of the brain, and is not liable to these 
disturbing complications. With however great 
an effort we cannot help winking when the eye is 
suddenly threatened. Nervous impulses such as 
these (styled " reflex ") are practically mechani- 
cal : the ganglia which actuate them lie mostly 
in the spinal column, and operate without 
reference to the brain. We can, by practice, 
acquire artificial " reflex " (or, as they are termed, 
" ideo-motor ") capacities: the complicated move- 
ments required in talking, eating, or playing the 
piano can be effected subconsciously, at times 
when the brain is occupied with other matters. 
Skill was acquired by conscious effort in which 
the brain took place, but, with the attainment 
of dexterity, the nervous process has become, 
so to speak, short-circuited, and is not interfered 
with by impressions, or thoughts, which would 
distract a beginner. 

Ordinarily, however, so far as our conscious 
lives are concerned, our impulses are liable to 
inhibition : we may be distracted by a desire 
for drink, but we may resist the impulse if in 
habit, shame, sympathy for others, or solicitude 
for our own health, we can find over-balancing 
considerations. An outcry of " fire " — an im- 
pression caused by a symbol — will drive the 
audience in a theatre into a panic. But a speech 
by the manager may possibly control them. 


56 


SENSATION AND REACTION 


§ 

So far, we have been considering the mechanism 
by which man and the higher animals maintain 
a connection with their environment. It includes 
instinctive (reflex) and ideo-motor systems which, 
when started by the touch of an impression, act 
promptly and accurately, and are not interfered 
with by the functioning of the brain. It also 
includes a system which, connected with the brain, 
is swept by a number of conflicting influences. 
As we descend the scale. of animal life, the direct- 
ing authority of instinct spreads from the internal 
functioning of the body to its external behaviour : 
conduct is linked more closely to primary sensa- 
tions, and there is a narrower field for the exercise 
of choice. An impulse that is set free by a sensory 
impression is so directed by instinct as to energize 
a definite series of actions, often of a very elabor- 
ate character, which are accurately performed 
without previous experience. The marvellous 
regularity and complexity of this directive force 
is typically illustrated by the life history of insects. 
A worker bee, immediately it emerges from the 
pupal stage and sees its surroundings, sets itself 
to a complicated process of working in wax, with 
what seems to be practised dexterity and trained 
intelligence. It is born an efficient mechanic, 
just as our hearts and lungs are, from the moment 
of birth, capable of exercising their functions. 
Birds' nests illustrate very familiarly the posses- 
sion of similar inborn skill in higher orders of the 
animal kingdom. We are probably correct in 
assuming that the functioning of the internal 
organs of the body, the growth of the body and 
the development of the embryo are all guided by 
this process of instinctive direction. 

We are profoundly ignorant of the nature of this 
wonderful directive force. Its impulses do not 


DIRECTIVE INSTINCT 


57 


pass through the brain, and we are not conscious 
of them, and cannot perceive them. Its origin 
has been attributed to the faculty of memory ; 
it is supposed to represent a talent which has 
been won by the trials, failures, and successes 
of remote ancestors. But it displays a mys- 
terious complicated acuteness for which this 
hypothesis can in no way account. The female 
Scolia — a giant wasp of the Mediterranean — 
burrows underground, like a mole, until she 
comes across the fat white grub of a rose-beetle 
(Cetonia). By a sting accurately directed at the 
meeting-place of the nerve ganglia she completely 
paralyses it, leaving it alive but motionless. She 
lays her egg upon its abdomen, so placed that 
the young worm, on emerging, will find its mouth 
against tissues that may be eaten without killing 
the grub — will, in fact, discover nourishment 
which to a mammal is afforded by its mother's 
breast. A peculiarly long snout enables it 
searchingly to explore the body of its victim. So 
it feeds during the fortnight of its larval stage, 
but, guided by such discriminating skill as the 
most practised dissector could not command, it 
scrupulously avoids the nerves and vessels, 
so as to spare the grub's life while draining it of 
its substance. Did the grub die, the worm would 
die also, for experiment has shown that dead tissue 
poisons it. Here instinct displays not only its 
passionless cruelty, but its mysterious insight and 
its extraordinary skill. Could we bring ourselves 
to believe that an insect can pass on its recollec- 
tions of fortuitous successes as an inheritance to 
its descendants, we should be no nearer an 
explanation. It may possibly be contended that 
the wasp may have discovered by accident, or by 
trials, that the grub was useful, that it could 
be hunted by burrowing, and might be paralysed 


5§ 


SENSATION AND REACTION 


by an accurately directed sting. But it seems 
wholly unreasonable to pretend that by chance 
or experiment the worm could have acquired 
its marvellous skill in dissection, or that a 
complicated chain of events, affecting the 
behaviour of two generations, could have been 
elaborated by casual or tentative experience. 
The fascinating pages of M. Fabre support this 
illustration by hosts of others, which show 
that, even if habits may in some cases be in- 
herited, instinctive behaviour is too elaborate to 
have been derived from them. The various com- 
plexities of instinctive conduct must have origin- 
ated in such mutations, or " sports, 55 as have 
produced the different species of plants and ani- 
mals. And, after all, its manifestations are not 
more wonderful than the instinctive functioning 
of our vital organs. 

§ 

A nerve cell is sensitive to an impression and 
exhibits a reaction. The behaviour of a photo- 
graphic plate under the action of light is, so far, 
precisely similar. But in the cell these processes 
appear to be attended by something that is 
lacking in the plate — by a feeling of " awareness 55 
or " consciousness. 55 To some this will appear a 
monstrous hypothesis ; it invests a nerve cell 
with attributes that are peculiar to the brain. 
But the brain is but a mass of nerve cells, and 
must derive its power from its constituents. Dur- 
ing sleep the brain is quiescent : if the finger of 
a sleeping person is pinched, it is sharply with- 
drawn although he is not awakened. This, it 
may be urged, is a purely automatic action, and 
does not prove that any awareness arose. But 
the pinch may move the sleeper to dream that a 


ORIGIN OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


59 


snake has bitten him. It must then have awakened 
an under-eurrent of awareness, or consciousness. 
Again, if a patient sees the surgeon' s needle approach 
his eye, he cannot by any effort prevent himself 
from winking. Drop in the eye a little cocaine. 
This renders the touch of the needle painless, but 
produces no awareness of this in the brain. Yet 
the patient, before he has actually discovered 
that the needle will not hurt him, will, un- 
winkingly, permit it to come up to the eye's 
surface and touch it. He must, apparently, be 
influenced by some local feeling of consciousness 
in which the brain has no part. Minor derange- 
ments of the internal organs of the body which 
do not make themselves apparent to the conscious- 
ness of the brain, will, nevertheless, be felt, and 
will influence the mood in which, for instance, we 
come to the breakfast table. Our views of life, 
as we awake of mornings, depend very often upon 
happenings within us that have escaped con- 
scious detection. Hypnotic patients not infre- 
quently exhibit the most extraordinary shiftings 
and subdivisions of consciousness. Not only do 
they appear at times to change their personalities ; 
on some occasions their behaviour can only be 
explained on the supposition that two separate 
centres of consciousness are operating within them, 
one of which may be localized in some part of the 
body outside the brain. Thus, in one well-known 
case, Professor William James was persuaded that 
the patient had developed a separate conscious- 
ness in one arm. There are then good reasons for 
concluding that consciousness, or awareness, is 
not monopolized by the brain, but pervades our 
bodies and may very well be possessed in some 
degree by each nerve cell. In the brain there is a 
concentration of consciousness ; but there exists 
also a diffused consciousness which, under the 


6o 


SENSATION AND REACTION 


name of " sub-conscious self/' has of recent years 
been the subject of much discussion. 

If awareness, or consciousness, is possessed by 
each nerve cell we cannot deny it to those primi- 
tive creatures which are able without nerves to 
exercise nervous activities ; we must, in fact, 
admit that it is one of Life's characteristics. 
Where, as in plants, living activity has been 
cribbed by swathing upon swathing of lifeless 
matter we should expect to find it nearly atrophied. 
Yet we may believe, with some reason, that a 
flower feels being picked, although dimly and 
without touch of pain. 

§ 

The arousing of consciousness, or awareness, 
by a sensory impression, or by a recollection, is 
usually accompanied by the feeling of an emotion : 
the sight of blood disgusts us : we are ashamed 
at the recollection of a misbehaviour in society. 
The awareness that is aroused need not be the 
concentrated consciousness of the brain. It may 
be the diffused consciousness that is styled " sub- 
consciousness " by some writers ; we may feel 
terrified in our dreams at times when the conscious 
brain is dormant. These emotions may be 
pleasurable or painful. But they are not all of 
like origin. Pleasure and pain may be the direct 
and simple products of sensations, or of recollec- 
tion of sensations ; but they may also arise from 
satisfying or not satisfying the craving of an 
instinctive impulse. To the first class belong such 
feelings as are aroused by the tastes of turtle soup 
and of castor oil, by concords and by discords of 
sound and colour. In the second class fall such 
emotions as the pleasure of satisfying hunger and 
thirst, the pain of suffering them, the pleasure of 
success in social life, the pain of social failure* 


PLEASURE AND PAIN 


61 


Both sets of feelings have played a leading part in 
evolutionary and ethical theories : they have, it 
is said, served lis as guides for the avoidance of 
what is harmful and the embracing of what is 
useful, in the struggle for life, and in our conscious 
behaviour. These theories assume that the useful 
invariably excites pleasure and never pain, and 
that the harmful invariably excites pain and 
never pleasure. This assumption appears to 
outrun the facts. Generally, it is true, we eat 
wholesome food with pleasure, and dislike things 
which would disagree with us. But all human 
likings are certainly not to be classed as bene- 
ficial : some are indeed harmful beyond doubt, 
such as the passion for intoxicants or for gambling, 
and the depraved refinements of lustful desire. 
It is not only man's tastes that may be perverted. 
Sheep and partridges may become exceedingly 
filthy feeders : a New Zealand parrot has within 
recent years become carnivorous. There are 
plants, such as Venus's Fly-trap (Dioneea) and the 
Pitcher-plant (Nepenthes), which capture flies 
and feed upon them ; but they appear to flourish 
equally well when this diet is denied them. The 
smell of putrid fish is to most men disgusting : 
yet to millions of mankind fish in this condition 
is an enjoyable article of diet. Many of our likes 
and dislikes are unconnected with utility or 
harmfulness. Why, for instance, does the touch 
of slime repel us, the squeaking of a slate pencil 
set our teeth on edge ? Why are some persons 
uneasy if a cat is in the room ? Why are women 
so commonly frightened of a mouse ? An instinct 
or a feeling which interfered with the efficiency of 
an organism, would generally be eliminated in the 
course of evolution ; but should, in the exuber- 
ance of Life's activity, instincts or feelings arise 
which are neither useful nor harmful, which may 


62 


SENSATION AND REACTION 


be compared with the extraordinary plumage and 
colours of certain birds, the struggle for life would 
leave them unobliterated. We may, then, hardly 
affirm that pleasure or pain are evidences either of 
design in our creation, or of the practical efficiency 
of the evolutionary process. Pain leads us, in 
some cases, to avoid the harmful — to withdraw 
a foot when it is being crushed. In other cases 
it is merely an irremediable affliction : we cannot 
voluntarily dispel a headache. Pleasure and pain 
cannot logically be classed as impulses to action : 
for an action must be performed before we can 
become aware of the feeling which it will cause 
to us. And we have already seen that action, in 
its essence, precedes emotion. But they are of 
immense importance in the formation of habits, 
and in swaying the hesitating resolutions of the 
will. We must confess that their interference is 
often harmful. How many vicious habits does 
man not owe to the pleasure of vice ! 


CHAPTER IV 


INSTINCTS 

The body of an animal may be likened to an 
elaborate piece of clock-work which is driven by 
a number of powerful main-springs lying con- 
cealed within it. The surface of the machine 
bears a number of little starting levers, each 
adjusted to respond to the slightest touch and to 
start the machinery by releasing a main-spring 
that is connected with it. Some of the main- 
springs are always, so to speak, wound up : an 
unexpected crash will, for instance, make us start 
at any time. Others become tense only at intervals : 
if one is not hungry the sight of food is not attrac- 
tive. Subject to this qualification an impulse is 
directly and inevitably aroused by the sensation 
that is connected with it. So considered, a living 
creature closely resembles a machine ; and this is 
the condition of an animal, such as an insect, which 
is guided by directive instinct, when it is acting 
under the influence of its instinctive guide. It 
also represents the process by which our internal 
organs perform their functions. The stomach 
secretes its digestive fluids immediately it is 
touched by food. 

But in the case of animals that are endowed with 
memory we must expand our illustration. An 
impulse may be aroused by a recollection as well 
as by a sensory impression. The sight of a rat 

$3 


64 


INSTINCTS 


will set a terrier in pursuit : he will growl in his 
sleep if he dreams of the experience. Memory 
should, then, be represented in the machine by 
another set of starting levers, separate from but 
linked with those that represent sensation. In 
an animal that possesses memory, sensory im- 
pressions always arouse recollections, and have 
thus the effect of releasing not single impulses 
but assortments of impulses ; and its conduct is, 
accordingly, not the simple and direct result of 
sensation, but is determined by the predominance 
of one impulse, or of a certain mixture of impulses, 
over a number of competitors. The winning 
impulse, or assortment of impulses, gains the 
mastery on some occasions by its intrinsic force- 
fulness ; on other occasions because it is reinforced 
by an instinct which was in dominance at the 
time it was aroused, because its influence has been 
swollened by habit, 1 because it is endorsed by 
reason, or because it is selected by the will. 

This view will be rejected by many of the highest 
authorities. They maintain that each starting- 
lever — or nerve-cell — is supplied with a stock of 
energy of its own ; that it is equipped, so to 
speak, with a little charge of explosive which is 
fired when the nerve is touched, and propels the 
machinery. They maintain, in fact, that the 
nerves not only start the machinery, but drive it. 
Indisputably the nerves are furnished with sup- 
plies of explosives, the replenishment of which is 
one of the functions of the digestive, respiratory 
and circulatory systems of the body. The theory, 
accordingly, gains some corroboration from a 
scientific fact. And to minds of a materialistic 
tendency it is more attractive than a hypothesis 
which postulates the existence of a number of 

1 We shall see, later on, how potent is the effect of habit in con- 
trolling the conflict between antagonistic impulses. 


NERVES THE INSTRUMENTS OF IMPULSES 65 


intangible impulses : it reduces the actions of the 
body to a mechanical regularity, renders them, 
indeed, predictable* Yet, if we carefully examine 
so much of our behaviour as is capable of being 
examined by us, so much, that is to say, as is 
regulated by, or is connected with the action of 
the brain, we shall find much that it is impossible 
to reconcile with the notion that the driving force 
of the body is localized in the nerve-cells. Res- 
pecting the action of the " reflex " nerve system 
(which regulates the functioning of our internal 
organs) we cannot feel confident : it acts out of 
consultation with the brain and lies, therefore, 
beyond the range of our observation. But, this 
system apart, the behaviour of our bodies, if 
introspectively examined, is seen to be governed, 
fundamentally, not by sensory impressions or 
memories, but by the powerful impulses that 
have been compared to main-springs. A mother 
is not affected by the sight of another's child as 
by the sight of her own : she regards one with the 
maternal impulse, the other without it. The 
immediate cause of a visit to Switzerland may 
have been the chance perusal of a volume of 
Baedeker ; but its fundamental cause lay in 
curiosity or a desire of change — an impulse to 
travel. Lacking this impulse all the Baedekers 
in the world would not have tempted me. My 
efforts in writing this book are started by daily 
recollections of the undertaking ; but they have 
their origin in a wish to employ myself, in ambition, 
curiosity, or that strange desire to cause pain to 
others that manifests the instinct of cruelty. A 
pianist, who, relying upon her " ideo-motor " 
aptitude, executes a brilliant piece of music while 
thinking of a love affair, is subconsciously guided 
by her sensations or memories of the notes ; but 
the reason for her playing at all must be sought in 


66 


INSTINCTS 


some impulse — in a desire to please, or a propen- 
sity to obey. Her playing, in the automatic 
character of its execution, precisely resembles the 
movements that are guided by our " reflex " 
nervous system, or the instinctive behaviour of an 
insect, and we appear to be quite justified in 
assuming that in these cases also, behind the 
elaborate functioning of nerves and nerve-cells, 
there lies an impulse which dictates the general 
line of conduct. The action of the stomach that 
seems to be stimulated by the touch of food is 
driven by the impulse of self-preservation ; the 
bee, in fashioning its comb, is guided by a special 
directive instinct, but is impelled by its constructive, 
or reproductive instinct. This view is directly 
opposed to the very general hypothesis that life 
may be defined in terms of chemical com- 
pounds or of bodily organs. But it is very strongly 
borne out by the fact that the most elementary 
kinds of plants and animals lead a complicated 
life of sensation and reaction without the assis- 
tance of any organs whatever. 

§ 

It is desirable to insist again upon the distinc- 
tion that is drawn, in this analysis, between two 
very different kinds of instinct — the one a set of 
impulsive, the other a set of directive energies. It 
is unfortunate that the term " instinct " is associ- 
ated with both of them. Impulsive instinct 
urges us along certain general lines of action : 
thus the impulse of self-preservation prompts us 
to eat when hungry, to run away when in fear ; 
the impulse of reproduction prompts us to protect 
our young. Directive instinct is concerned with 
particular methods of action : thus the directive 
instinct of the horse limits its diet to herbage 
and graia ; that of the bee enables it to construct 


IMPULSIVE AND DIRECTIVE INSTINCTS 67 


hexagonal nurseries. The general, indefinite, 
character of impulsive instincts renders them 
ineffective unless they receive guidance in detail : 
they are aroused by memories as well as by 
sensory impressions : they present themselves 
in assortments : there arises accordingly, a period 
of hesitation ending in a choice. Directive 
instincts, on the other hand, act simply and 
inevitably. Their influence is hardly apparent 
in man, but it increases as we descend the animal 
kingdom, until, amongst the lowest organisms, 
it becomes nearly all-embracing. But in no living 
organism does its dominion appear to become 
quite absolute : we may notice signs of hesitation 
amongst the humblest of microscopic creatures. 

Instincts, whether impulsive or directive, are 
inborn, and are part and parcel of an organism's 
being. A living creature may, indeed, be defined 
as a bundle of innate impulses with machinery 
for putting them into action. This definition, it 
may be objected, ignores the influence of reason. 
But reason, as we shall see, is itself developed 
from an instinct. Obscured though it be by many 
anomalies, we may discern a tendency towards 
uniformity in the impulsive instincts of all living 
organisms, and in the directive instincts of each 
great class of the animal and vegetable kingdom. 
This illustrates the solidarity of Life — the fact 
that all living creatures are, in a degree, blood 
relations. 

§ 

We have seen that impulses are most commonly 
set free by sensory impressions or recollections A 
newly hatched chicken is stimulated to drink by 
the touch of water. Acquisitiveness is excited 
by the sight of money. The sound of music 
arouses, in many people, a desire to dance, or to 

F 


68 


INSTINCTS 


beat time. A lover's thoughts are moved by 
the sight of his mistress, or by the recollections 
that are awakened by a letter from her. In some 
cases an impression arouses a single appropriate 
impulse : a loud, unexpected sound will always 
make us start — the first step of a movement to 
escape. But, generally, sensory impressions or 
recollections have the effect, as it were, of starting 
a complicated arrangement of machinery, in 
which a number of impulses are set free to act in 
combination or in opposition. The result will 
depend very largely upon habit, or upon the mood 
we are in at the time, that is to say, upon the 
effect that has been produced by preceding im- 
pulses. The crying of an infant may at one time 
move us to pity, at another time to anger. So the 
sight of a friend may, on different occasions, evoke 
feelings of kindness or of impatience. 

Impulses are also released by the tendency to 
imitate. A chicken is led to peck by the sight of 
its mother pecking : it may be stimulated by 
tapping with the finger, or a pencil. Noise impels 
a canary to sing its loudest ; dogs bark when they 
hear other dogs. The cruel feelings which are 
gratified by a bull-fight may be evoked by the 
excitement of the surrounding spectators. We are 
stirred by fashion to change the manner of our dress. 
Self-control is most strongly inculcated by example 
— by a practical stimulus, that is to say, to our 
imitative faculty. 

We have compared instinctive impulses to 
main-springs that are released by the touching of 
a catch. In some cases they are set to a time, 
like an alarum-clock, and are released automati- 
cally on the expiry of the period. The growth of 
an individual, from its first embryonic 3tage to 
maturity, is controlled by a number Ox impulses 
that act at definite periods and in a definite order. 


EMOTIONS 


69 


A certain number of days determines the life of a 
caterpillar between its emergence from the egg 
and the spinning of its cocoon. Many migratory 
birds are extraordinarily punctual in the dates of 
their departure, and cannot be tempted to out- 
stay them by however genial weather. A newly 
hatched chicken will attach itself to the first 
creature that comes into its impressions, be it a 
hen, a dog, or a man ; but if it be kept isolated 
until some days have passed, it will fly in terror 
from its own mother. Certain sexual affections 
are periodic in their occurrence : the sexual 
instinct declines with advancing years. Life is 
itself an illustration of timing : however cherished, 
it can endure only for an appointed period. 

The liberation of an impulsive instinct is some- 
times accompanied by an emotion which brings 
its action before the observation of consciousness. 
We are impelled to run from a terrifying object : at 
the same time we experience an emotion of fear. 
But there may be impulses without emotion . We are 
quite unconscious of those which order the function- 
ing of our internal organs, and we are also uncon- 
scious of the impulses which underlie such ideo- 
motor actions as speaking, eating, or walking. These 
do not affect the brain. Impulses are emotional 
only when they touch the brain. We are con- 
sciously impelled to strike an aggressor : we have 
a feeling of anger which makes us aware of the 
impulse. This statement may appear to invert 
the order of events ; according to common judg- 
ment the feeling of anger develops before the 
impulse to strike — is, in fact, the cause of the 
latter. But this impression is incorrect. If 
suddenly attacked we strike out automatically, 
and the emotion of anger does not arise until we 


70 


INSTINCTS 


have had time to apprehend the situation. So 
fear is the accompaniment of a movement to run 
away; hatred, of a movement to kill. Fortunately 
for the regularity of our lives, the development of 
these instinctive movements beyond a rudiment- 
ary stage is liable to a triple check or inhibition. 
Reason may intervene to strengthen an opposing 
instinct: we may refrain from striking because 
we fear our antagonist as well as hate him. 
Habit may intervene : we do not run because we 
are disciplined to stand firm. And, thirdly, we 
may consciously control ourselves, or " pull our- 
selves together" : we do not run because we make 
up our minds not to do so. The conscious, or 
deliberate, control of an instinctive impulse takes 
time to develop itself, and is a strain upon our 
capacity. But by habit we may reinforce a 
virtuous instinct which will assist us in over- 
powering one that is vicious. It is habit that 
preserves our lives from the frivolity and in- 
decency of the brutes. 

It appears, then, that we should believe that 
action precedes emotion, that we feel because we 
are moved, and do not move because we feel. 
An instinctive impulse is an impulse to action 
and, however strictly inhibited, produces some 
movement, be it nothing more than a slight 
trembling of the muscles or a quickening of the 
motion of the heart or lungs. The movement 
is generally too slight to be apprehended, and 
hence we commonly style our impulses by the 
names of the emotions which accompany them : 
the impulse to fondle is called "kindness," the 
generative impulse " lust." The strength of an 
emotion may be increased by uninhibited move- 
ment : when a crowd begins to run fear grows 
into panic. It follows, then, that we can control 
our emotions by controlling our actions. Are 


PLEASURABLE AND PAINFUL EMOTIONS 71 


not respectful feelings stimulated by respectful 
manners ? Those who wish to stir the village 
labourer to independance bid him not to salute 
the parson and the squire. 

We class our emotions as pleasurable or pain- 
ful according as they proceed from satisfied or 
dissatisfied impulses. Pleasure and pain may also, 
as we have seen, result from sensations that are 
unconnected with impulses — as, for instance, from 
the taste of chocolate or the smell of sulphuretted 
hydrogen ; and we may more conveniently use 
the terms " happiness " and " unhappiness " 
when we are concerned with the agreeable or 
disagreeable feelings which accompany satisfied 
or dissatisfied impulses. Generally, the satisfac- 
tion of an instinct is exhilarating : its obstruction 
causes uneasiness or irritation. We subconsciously 
experience an agreeable sense of comfort when 
our internal organs are functioning properly ; 
irregularities produce a mood of depression. 
We give special names to feelings of happiness 
and unhappiness that proceed from particular im- 
pulses which are satisfied or baffled : posses- 
sion produces joy, bereavement, sorrow, failure 
regret. The happiness of gratified egotism is 
termed pride ; shame is its reverse. The ex- 
pected happiness of satisfying a particular 
instinct reinforces its control over our conscious 
life by influencing our choice when various 
instincts are competing for mastery. But it does 
not follow that it will influence us beneficially. 
Happiness may be obtained by the satisfaction of 
impulses that are exceedingly injurious to the 
individual and to society. 

§ 

Our behaviour is, then, influenced by pleasure 
and pain, happiness and unhappiness. Axe these 


72 


INSTINCTS 


emotions in themselves not sufficient to direct 
our actions ? If so, why should we complicate 
the study of man by supposing him to be actuated 
by cryptic impulses ? There is a fourfold reply to 
this objection. In the first place, pleasure and 
pain — unless the meaning of the terms is distorted 
— will not account for numberless peculiarities of 
behaviour. What pleasure, in the proper sense 
of the word, is there in self-sacrifice, cruelty, 
kindness, or asceticism ; in venerating a king, or 
in deferring to a majority ? The pleasure, it may 
be replied, of satisfying an impulse. But this con- 
ceeds the existence of impulses. Secondly, these 
feelings do not affect the current of our sub- 
conscious life, our reflex and ideo-motor actions 
and the all-important functioning of our vital 
organs. These must be guided by forces which 
arouse no emotions, and we can hardly suppose 
that these forces cease to act upon our conscious 
life. Thirdly, when opposed to a masterful 
impulse, pleasure and pain may not move us at 
all. Human behaviour abounds in instances of 
absolute disregard of physical pain. What will 
not be endured by a mother's love, a soldier's 
courage, the self -repression of an ascetic ! Finally, 
pleasure and pain cannot be original guides to 
behaviour, since until the consequences of an 
action have been learnt by experience or in- 
struction, we cannot know whether it will give 
one or the other. A child will heedlessly grasp 
at a wasp. Our feelings most certainly influence 
our conduct : memories of them persist, actual 
or symbolic, 1 and move us to repeat or avoid an 
experience. That is to say, pleasure and pain, 
while not original impulses, are powerful stimuli 
to the formation of habits. 

1 That is to say, memories of what we have been told about 
them. 


REFLECTED IMPULSES 


73 


§ 

We must, however, admit that the pleasure 
and pain that spring from our sensations, the 
emotions that accompany the liberation of im- 
pulses, and the happiness or unhappiness of 
satisfaction or the reverse, play the part of im- 
pulses in so far that they produce very decided 
muscular reactions — may, perhaps, be regarded 
as reflected impulses. These expressions of feeling 
most commonly show themselves in the muscles 
of the face, but they may stir certain glands, 
and not infrequently extend to the whole of the 
body. Si. <lles and laughter are evoked by pleasure 
of sight or hearing, by happiness of mind, and by 
the satisfying changes of mood which are brought 
about by the perception of the ludicrous. Little 
children roi^d a Christmas tree show their delight 
by ecstatic jumping. Some of the expressions of 
pleasure and pain are equivocal, and may arise 
from either of these feelings. Tears, trembling, 
and blushes are generally associated with pain: 
but they may also be caused by overpowering 
happiness. The emotions, on the other hand, 
provoke each a peculiar facial expression of its 
own. The gamut of emotions may accordingly 
be illustrated pictorially ; we easily identify 
facial expressions of greed and curiosity, vanity 
and shame, love and hatred, ecstasy and self- 
restraint. We may hardly believe that all expres- 
sions of feeling have been of practical usefulness 
in the evolution of man ; indeed, many of them 
appear more likely to have impeded than to have 
assisted him in the struggle for life. But we are 
by no means obliged to assume that they owe 
their existence to any utility. If they are neutral 
— neither advantageous nor injurious — they will 
resemble multitudes of other capacities which we 
may observe in the living creatures around us. 


74 


INSTINCTS 


So long as they were not positively harmful 
they would not be eliminated by the stress of 
competition. 

It is contended by some psychologists that 
expressions of feeling are actually the causes of 
the mental states which they manifest — that we 
are glad because we laugh, ashamed because we 
blush, envious because we sneer, and angry 
because we tremble. This theory is difficult to 
sustain, and is in conflict with the fact that the 
same reaction — a blush for instance — may arise 
from either of two different feelings. There are 
believers in the idea that a cheerful disposition 
may be maintained by keeping a smiling counten- 
ance. This may be true : memories of a feeling 
may no doubt be recalled by the muscular reaction 
which ordinarily expresses it. And we may 
unhesitatingly believe that emotions and feelings 
are enhanced in influence by being muscularly 
expressed, just as panic may be increased by 
running, and courage by the bracing of self- 
control. Expressions of emotion may reinforce 
emotion, although they are its accompaniment, 
not its cause ; enjoyment may be increased by 
laughter, although one may enjoy with an un- 
smiling face. 

The expression of feeling is common to all the 
higher animals, and generally follows the lines 
that are instinctive with mankind. Anger may 
be shown by the lips, affection by the eyes, 
pleasure and displeasure by the voice, joy by 
spasmodic movements of the body. Birds tremble 
in the ecstasy of song. Dogs, like children, jump 
for joy : there are those that can smile, or will, 
it is alleged, shed tears of grief. 

We must not confuse with these spontaneous 
reactions the behaviour which is accepted by our 
community as the proper means of expressing 


USELESS IMPULSES 


75 


approval or disapproval, respect or contempt. 
Clapping and hissing are purely conventional. We 
salute a friend by offering him vestiges of homage : 
the Tibetans salute him by protruding the tongue. 

§ 

Our instinctive impulses are so numerous and 
so varied that it is exceedingly difficult to group 
them into general classes. And the difficulty is 
increased by our desire to find a useful purpose in 
everything. Those who hold that evolution has 
been directed by the struggle for life are generally 
as persuaded that all things have evolved for 
good as the most convinced believer in Provi- 
dential intervention. Yet a dispassionate survey 
of Life's activities will hardly find justification for 
so comforting a belief. What, for instance, is 
the use of lust that is not limited by the require- 
ments of reproduction, of appetite that outruns 
digestion, of gratuitous cruelty, of kindness that 
disregards merit, of the impulses to dance, and 
to practise asceticism ? Many, perhaps most, 
of our instincts are of practical utility — more, no 
doubt, than may appear to possess it at first sight. 
But there are many that are out of all connection 
with the stern conditions of the struggle for life. 
From its point of view they are superfluities. If 
harmful to their possessors they will be eliminated ; 
but when we reflect upon the vast number of 
species that have become extinct in the past, a 
suspicion arises that injurious impulses may have 
survived until they brought a race to destruction. 
Did not the giant lizards of the Mesozoic age, the 
giant mammals of a period less remote, outgrow 
their food supply ? Does it not appear that there 
may be glands and outgrowths in the human 
body (such as the appendix) which are not merely 
useless but injurious ? If superfluous impulses 


7 6 


INSTINCTS 


are harmless, they remain as witnesses to the 
exuberance of Life's eccentricities. Amongst 
these unpractical impulses the aesthetic are con- 
spicuous. We are accustomed to regard them as 
man's peculiar endowment. Not so. Can we 
deny an appreciation of the aesthetic to a bower 
bird, or to a robin, singing, when love instincts 
are dormant, on a chilly November afternoon ? 

§ 

Let us now attempt to formulate the heads 
under which instincts may be classified. 

We may, in the first place, form four groups of 
impulses that are of essential practical value to 
organisms in their individual and social lives, in 
their function of reproducing their species and 
in their provisions for the future. Next come, 
in four more groups, impulses that from the 
utilitarian point of view are superfluous, and 
are, indeed, if classed in two pairs, antagonistic 
to one another — kindness (or an impulse to 
fondle), cruelty (or an impulse to hurt), cesthetic 
impulses which induce self-abandonment, and 
ethical impulses which induce self-control. There 
remain two compelling guides to behaviour, 
directive instinct, and the processes which con- 
stitute reason. 

Individualistic. — In this group fall the im- 
pulses that stimulate and direct the development 
and growth of the body and the functioning 
of its organs. These arouse no emotions, and are 
therefore not apprehended. Self-preservation — 
the primary and most imperious object of external 
behaviour — is, on the other hand, actuated by 
impulses that are generally emotional — hunger 
and thirst, chilliness (the impulse to maintain the 
temperature of the body), the hunting passion, 


INDIVIDUALISTIC IMPULSES 77 


pugnacity, ambition, or emulation (the impulse to 
excel), secretiveness, and flight (accompanied by 
the emotion of fear). Curiosity is necessary for 
the discovery of food, and also to protect oneself 
from enemies. It is strong in defenceless animals, 
such as deer and sheep, and is abnormally devel- 
oped in some birds and mammals. In man it 
may be allied with reason and the provident 
impulses, and in their company may guide him to 
the discoveries of science and mechanics, and to 
the speculations of philosophy. 

The essence of these individualistic impulses is 
selfishness, and they — together with the emotions 
that accompany them — are condemned by society, 
since they are not concerned with the welfare 
of the community. The selfishness of individu- 
ality is in itself rather a cold-blooded antagonism 
to others than active animosity. But when 
touched by another instinct — that of cruelty — it 
develops into such emotions as anger, hate, re- 
vengefulness, and that bitterest of all feelings — 
jealousy. When focussed in the mirror of self- 
consciousness, it becomes vanity and self-conceit. 

We may include in this group the subconscious 
impulse of young creatures to exercise their 
muscles in play. This subsists in the conscious 
life of maturer years, and underlies the attractive- 
ness of athleticism, and of the physical culture, 
which was so essential a feature of Greek civiliza- 
tion, and found its renaissance amongst young 
Englishmen. Like all instinctive impulses, it is 
strengthened by habit : lawn tennis and golf may 
now count their devotees in every country of 
Europe and America, and football is rapidly 
captivating the youth of India. 

Social. — Gregariousness or sociability is mani- 
fested by some plants as well as animals, and pines 


7 8 


INSTINCTS 


on a hillside, bees in a hive, and men in a social 
club all illustrate an identical tendency. Associa- 
tion would be impossible without sympathy, an 
impulse which may exercise irresistible sway over 
herds of cattle, or mobs of men. Deference 
may be allied with it : there is then engendered 
the respect for public opinion which is so marked 
a feature of human society, and, in remoter 
descent, the democratic acceptance of the will of 
the majority. If we incur the disapproval of our 
fellows — if we are " sent to Coventry " — our 
social life is blighted : the desire for approbation 
is accordingly one of our most imperious impulses, 
and there are few who are not rendered miserable 
by unpopularity. Of sympathy is born the desire 
for intercommunication, from which is derived 
the capacity for expression by gestures, sounds, 
or language. The regulation of society is based 
upon the feeling of reverence, or admiration, the 
bent of which is instinctively directed towards 
the aged : amongst dogs and horses, age demands 
and receives precedence ; children respect their 
parents and teachers : the titles which we give 
our leaders or advisers — " senators," " pres- 
byters," " aldermen " — imply that age is of 
itself a claim to respect. The traditions of the 
past, the culture of the race, are in the hands of 
the older generation and the prestige of age has 
assured that they are passed on. Respect is also 
given to the leader of the herd, be he — amongst 
men — the tribal chief or an alien conqueror. 
Undisciplined by a propensity towards obedience 
communities could not exist : obedient con- 
duct is (as we shall see) associated with the 
imitative impulse which will be separately con- 
sidered in Chapter VI. But the inclination to 
imitate is much stronger in gregarious animals 
than in those which live a solitary life. 


REPRODUCTIVE IMPULSES 


79 


These impulses are accompanied by a number 
of deferential emotions which are applauded 
by mankind as unselfish, and certainly conduce 
towards the comfort of the community. They 
are condemned by Nietzsche as the slave morals 
of the herd, and are, it must be confessed, 
not characteristic of the original geni ises to whom 
mankind has owed the discoveries ; nd inventions 
that have been the guiding stars of progress. 

Reproductive. — We have here two imperious 
impulses — the generative (or sexual) instinct, 
and the devotion to offspring, which is strikingly 
illustrated by the self-sacrificing care of bees for 
their eggs and larvae, and the labour of birds on 
behalf of their young. Amongst mammals this 
instinct is generally concentrated in the female 
sex, which has developed special organs for 
sharing its own nourishment with its offspring. 
Maternal love is, perhaps, the most beautiful of 
all human impulses, and in many religions has 
been enshrined for adoration. The mystery of 
reproduction has, indeed, forcibly impressed 
thinkers of all races, and has been introduced into 
religious cults, with consequences that have some- 
times been prejudicial to sexual morality. 

When the lustful impulse runs at its strongest, 
it is crudely indifferent to anything but the sex 
of its object : so it acts upon some of the brutes 
and upon degraded men. From this crude animal 
passion romantic love may be distilled if there 
are thrown into the crucible such other emotions 
as admiration, sympathy, and self-restraint. 
These are aroused by the charms which are dis- 
covered by the intensity of a lover's gaze, lust 
in this fashion stimulating the birth of impulses 
which compete with it. In certain abnormal 
dispositions one of these may actually be the 


8o 


INSTINCTS 


instinct of cruelty. The impulse of acquisitive- 
ness is commonly aroused : this shows itself in 
a desire for exclusive possession of the loved one. 
But generally they are of an etherializing kind. 
The beloved may excite admiration, kindliness, 
sympathy, and even self-sacrifice : in the com- 
pany of these impulses lust may almost wholly 
conceal itself. The extent to which its crudeness 
is softened by alloys varies very greatly amongst 
individuals and peoples ; and the marriage 
customs of the different races of mankind show 
how much or how little refinement it may gather 
from the association of other feelings. Romantic 
love may be less imperative than lust ; but it 
casts a gleam of enchantment across the dull 
stream of practical life which may change its 
course or transform it into a torrent. 

Provident. — In this group are brought to- 
gether those impulses which urge living creatures 
to contend against their environment instead of 
accepting it as their inevitable lot. The roots of 
all these instincts may be traced in an impulse to 
anticipate — in foresight, as it would be termed in 
conscious life — which is a stimulus to make 
provision against future deficiencies or hardships. 
Thus many insects store up food for their young, 
or against the winter ; squirrels make a hoard of 
nuts ; dogs, of their bones. Throughout the 
animal kingdom we may find illustrations of the 
provision of shelter for self or for offspring. In 
conscious life the effect of this impulse is of 
supreme importance : we gather from it that 
there is a future before us : from our sensations 
and our memories we could learn of nothing but 
a present and a past. Touched by imagination it 
breeds hope and despair — two of the strongest 
of human emotions. 


PROVIDENT IMPULSES 


81 


Acquisitiveness is the most elementary of the 
human impulses that fall into this group. Apart 
from man, very few mammals make stores of 
food. Amongst some birds, as those of the crow 
tribe, there is a curious development of a passion 
for hoarding. But we have to descend to the 
insects to find illustrations of such a desire to 
appropriate as urges human industry. There 
are species of ants which have enslaved other 
ants, and keep, as milch cows, the minute insects 
known as " aphides." Constructiveness is dis- 
played in every class of the animal kingdom. 
Some minute unicellular protozoa (Foraminifera 
and Radiolaria) construct shells of marvellous 
delicacy and beauty : zoophytes have their corals, 
molluscs their shells : fish and birds make nests : 
the larva of the caddis-fly protects itself with a 
mantle of sand and fibre. Curiously enough this 
impulse influences mammals but little, and in this 
class, apart from man, there are few animals that 
construct themselves a house. Its importance in 
human development needs no illustration. In- 
genuity has taught man how to domesticate 
animals, has endowed him with the art of agri- 
culture, and has enabled him to make tools and 
machines which, commencing with the stone axe, 
have culminated in the aeroplane. But man owes 
to this group of impulses his avarice, eovetous- 
ness, and propensity to overreach his fellows. 

We shall see that the reproductive and pro- 
vident instincts are in some measure antithetical : 
one gains strength as the other loses it. There is 
a curious illustration of this contrast in the loss 
of sex by those bees which are specially charged 
with the construction and management of the hive. 


CHAPTER V 


instincts (continued) 

We now pass to four classes of instinctive im- 
pulses which, from a rigidly material point of view, 
appear to be superfluous, and can hardly have been 
of practical usefulness in the physical evolution 
of man. 

Cruelty. — Not only do living creatures eat 
other creatures : in many cases they seem to take a 
fiendish pleasure in inflicting torture and in watch- 
ing the agonies of their victims. We know too 
little of the psychology of the lower animals to 
accuse them with certainty. But a cat playing 
with a mouse is a familiar illustration of this 
instinct. It apparently attains its strongest in 
man. Boys naturally delight in mutilating insects 
and teasing animals : savage tribes torture their 
captives : cruelty, as well as courage, actuates 
the soldier in the heat of conflict, and suggests 
the shameful mutilations which semi-civilized 
races can perpetrate upon the slain and wounded. 
Crowds of delicate women are fascinated by the 
disembowelling of horses at a Spanish bull fight, 
just as their sisters, centuries ago, critically gazed 
upon the agonies of gladiators and Christian 
martyrs. It is difficult to believe that it is only 
ten generations since Englishmen — the dons and 
undergraduates of Oxford — stood round while 
venerable bishops were burnt in the streets. At 

82 


CRUELTY AND KINDNESS 


83 


the present day, newspapers find that their cir- 
culation is increased by the publication of horrors. 
x4nd which of us will not confess with shame to 
having been assailed by an impulse to say things 
which he knows will unnecessarily hurt the 
feelings of a friend ? 

Kindness appears to be an emotion which is 
derived from an impulse to fondle or embrace. 
We may, perhaps somewhat fancifully, detect the 
effects of this instinct in the curious association of 
different creatures, known as commensality or 
symbiosis. Instances of this are very numerous. 
A species of sea anemone (Adamsia) attaches 
itself to the shells of hermit crabs : puffins and 
rabbits, prairie dogs and prairie owls amicably 
share the same burrow : grackles nestle round 
the nest of the osprey. There is no question of 
parasitism : each animal lives its life independ- 
ently, but appears to be attracted by the other's 
society. In mankind the propensity to keep pets 
is very strong, and may not improbably have led 
the way to the domestication of animals. In some 
districts of India every man carries a bulbul about 
with him, and caged birds enliven homes through- 
out the East as well as Europe. Many people are 
not happy without a dog. As objects of worship, 
and as totems, animals, since the beginning of 
history, have been treated by man with an 
affectionate regard which the propensities of our 
own boys will enable us to realize. The natives 
of Peru have domesticated a snake : many a 
schoolboy will carry one within his waistcoat, 
and would sleep very agreeably with guinea pigs 
and white rats nestling against him. 

In their dealings with one another, men, even 
the most depraved, are often moved, most un- 
expectedly, by feelings of kindness. In the cynical 

G 


84 


INSTINCTS 


days of classical brilliancy, when more than half 
the population of Athens and Rome lived in 
slavery, society could hardly have existed if the 
authority of the master had not been tempered by 
a humanity which prompted frequent emancipa- 
tion. Kindness shows itself in feelings of pity. It is 
the pride of our own times that philanthropic 
sympathy should have prompted us, not merely 
to a liberal dispensation of charity amongst the 
poor and afflicted, but to self-sacrificing legislation 
on their behalf. 

Some emotions which are generally attributed 
to the individualistic or social instincts may, it 
appears, be more appropriately assigned to im- 
pulses of cruelty or kindness. Hate, revengeful- 
ness and jealousy are concerned with injury to 
others, not with profit to ourselves. And friendly 
affection, generosity, mercy, and gratitude arise 
rather from the springs of kindness than from any 
promptings which are connected with our depend- 
ance upon others. 

^Esthetic Impulses. — In these we can trace, 
from very humble origins, the genesis of the 
artistic feelings and creativeness which in the 
opinion of some mark the highest flight of human 
accomplishment. The instinct of self-adornment is 
probably the germ of our sense of the beautiful. 
We see the fruits of its sub-conscious action in the 
brilliant colours of birds and insects. Amongst 
savage humanity it is a universal passion, leading 
to the tattooing of the body, and to the most 
absurd distortions of the ears, lips, and nostrils 
by the insertion of ornaments into the flesh. It, 
and not a desire for the useful, was, in all pro- 
bability, the origin of clothes, which, as a matter 
of fact, are hardly required for warmth over a 
great part of the inhabited world. And in the 


AESTHETIC IMPULSES 


85 


northern latitudes of Europe and America, where 
some body covering is needed, by far the greater 
part of the expenditure that is incurred upon 
dress goes to provide adornment for the body, 
not protection. Dancing is a passion with many 
birds : peacocks and cranes dance before their 
mates, tame parrots will dance to a tune, the 
movements in both cases resembling, not very 
distantly, the jerky undulations of the Eastern 
dancing girl, and the rhythmical spasms which 
follow " rag time " music in Western ball-rooms. 
It expresses an appreciation of rhythm which has 
led to the invention of rhythmical instruments, 
such as the drum, the tom-tom, and the castanets. 
Singing is a wonderful and charming talent of 
bird life : reptiles, the cousins of birds, are capable 
of its rudiments, and many insects express their 
joy in the sunlight by uttering sounds, which to 
us may seem harsh, but are beyond a doubt 
ecstatic. The Cicala gives up almost half its 
body to the mechanism of its notes, and may be 
likened to an animated musical box. Men and 
women are, perhaps, inferior to birds in natural 
capacity for singing ; but, finding in the instinct 
a basis xor the artificial composition oi music and 
the cultivation of the voice, they have elaborated 
melodies, harmonies, and methods of execution 
which appeal most touchingly to human feelings 
and can work marvellous transformations in 
human moods. Declamation, or recitation, is 
allied to singing, and is the origin of poetry, 
rhetoric, and style in prose. Prostration 1 is asso- 
ciated with the emotions of wonder, admiration, 
dread, and self-abnegation. Men share this 

1 Some of the manifestations of the self-abandoning impulse may 
hardly be distinguished from expressions of pleasure and pain, or 
of the emotions — the manifestations, that is to say, of reflected 
impulses. But they are generally marked by greater definitiveness 
of purpose, 


86 


INSTINCTS 


impulse with the dog ; and we may perhaps see 
traces of it in the comical bows that are executed 
by penguins when surprised by the apparition 
of Antarctic explorers. Its most humiliating 
forms are characteristic of savage communities: 
it is a leading feature of all religions, and amongst 
civilized nations it survives in the salutations of 
everyday life. The curious habit of, apparently, 
feigning death, practised in the face of danger by 
some insects and higher animals, may be a mani- 
festation of this impulse. Its origin can hardly 
be explained by suppositions of evolutionary 
utility, and we are quite likely to be incorrect in 
imagining that it is of practical value. 

The manifestations of the aesthetic impulses are 
accompanied by a mental attitude of self-aban- 
donment, an emotion of ecstasy, which is strongly 
contrasted with the prim egotism of relf -conscious 
life. We may observe this emotion in the soaring 
lark, and in the impassioned orator or artist. It 
is a characteristic feature of earnest religious 
experiences ; and the transfiguration of moods 
that is compelled by its influence, affords the 
intense relief which is felt by the " sick soul " 
that is bathed in the deep waters of spiritual 
self-abandonment, j 

3 

Ethical Impulses. — We now come to a set of 
impulses which are popularly supposed to be a 
splendid monopoly of mankind's. They are 
characterized by self-control, or self-repression, 
and they are]! essentially opposed to aesthetic 
promptings. Some of them, such as justice, 
honesty, and truth, benefit others as well as those 
who act upon them : others, such as courage, 
purity, patience, and asceticism, are almost wholly 
self -regarding. So different are these impulses from 
the instincts of practical life that their possession 


ETHICAL IMPULSES 


8/ 


by mankind has appeared to the religious- 
minded to be a convincing proof of Divine inter- 
vention. Evolutionist philosophers have felt 
obliged to attribute their existence to the dis- 
criminating power of the human intellect which 
could perceive utilitarian reasons for the adoption 
of behaviour that to the unenlightened appears to 
be a foolish disregard of practical interests. But, 
considered dispassionately, these impulses appear 
to be undoubtedly instinctive. There is hardly 
a man, however degraded, whose pulse is not 
quickened by the display of self-sacrificing cour- 
age, of self-denial, of undaunted chastity. No 
reasoning calculations could have evoked so 
useless, so painful a habit as the ascetic. Indeed, 
the eccentricities of asceticism are sufficient to 
prove that its foundations lie far below human 
ingenuity or the human will. What social con- 
ventions could have produced an emotion which 
is capable of urging mankind to the unnatural 
practice of celibacy, to the self-infliction of 
torture, even to self-mutilation — all supremely 
useless, from a practical point of view, to society 
and to themselves ? 

Our search for the germs of these impulses 
amongst the lower animals is impeded by our 
inability to enter into their minds. But it is not 
altogether fruitless. Many insects display self- 
devotion in the cause of their community, and the 
unresisting submissiveness of the males of certain 1 
kinds to be eaten by the females excites our 
astonishment. A cock will deny himself for his 
family of hens ; both horses and dogs appear to 
possess a sense of justice ; and we may perhaps 
see in the practice of monogamy by many birds 
and quadrupeds, some indication of a self-denying 

1 Certain mantises and beetles. This curious self-devotion also 
occurs amongst some scorpions and spiders. 


88 


INSTINCTS 


impulse. But, however this may be, if these im- 
pulses are instinctive, their germs must be lying 
dormant in the animals below us. And to deny 
that they are instinctive is only possible for those 
who hold that they have been breathed into man 
by a special act of Providence. 

§ 

These various impulses may be regarded as 
Life's endowment, if not, indeed, as part of Life 
itself. But all tribes of living creatures do not 
possess the gift in its entirety. All animals must 
be equipped with individualistic and reproductive 
impulses if they are to preserve their own lives 
and continue their species : all gregarious animals 
must at least possess the social impulse of deference. 
In most beasts and birds we can detect traces of 
both cruelty and kindness. But the provident, 
the aesthetic, and the ethical impulses are posses- 
sed far less generally. Apart from man, provi- 
dence is manifested most strikingly by insects ; 
birds, it is true, construct nests, but these are 
for their young, not for themselves, and we find 
no trace of providence in its most elementary 
form — an impulse to store up food when it is 
abundant against the time when it becomes 
scarce. In quadrupeds, also, the provident in- 
stinct is extraordinarily weak : few of them have 
any notion of putting by for the future, or con- 
struct a dwelling of any kind. The aesthetic 
impulses are strongly developed in birds ; self- 
abandonment can hardly be better illustrated 
than by a bird in the ecstasy of its singing. Here 
again quadrupeds are curiously deficient : man 
appears to be the only mammal that takes pleasure 
in dancing, whereas its delights are appreciated 
by many birds. Outside mankind we can only 
discover faint traces of the ethical impulse of 


ANOMALIES IN IMPULSES 


89 


self-restraint. Its fruit is generally negative : it 
is represented by abstention rather than by action, 
and can hardly be detected without a deeper 
insight into the minds of animals than we possess. 
We may, however, assume that its development 
beyond a germinal stage is the peculiar stamp of 
humanity. Man's other impulses have been 
developed by various animals, some of which are 
exceedingly remote from him. In providence he 
is the heir of the insects ; in aesthetic feeling of 
the birds. His own kin, the mammals, have had 
little to bequeath to him. But certain of them 
have transmitted what they could not develop, 
and have passed on to him germs which, springing 
into activity, have enabled him to outshine each 
order of the animal kingdom in its peculiar 
excellencies. 

On a broad view we may conclude that each tribe 
of animals is characterized by a general similarity 
of impulses. But there are striking anomalies. 
We are impressed by the industry of insects : 
vast numbers, however, pass their lives in idleness. 
Wasps that are closely related may be gregarious or 
solitary in their habits. The crustaceans generally 
protect themselves by secreting a horny covering ; 
but the hermit-crab is imperfectly endowed with 
this capacity, and must take refuge in deserted 
shells. Nest-building is characteristic of birds ; 
but the cuckoo lacks the impulse entirely. More- 
over, we may discover such irregularities as these 
within the ranks of the same species. What con- 
trasts do we perceive between the characters of 
different breeds of dogs and horses ! So, amongst 
mankind, a general similarity of impulses is 
broken by astonishing individual and racial differ- 
ences. Some men appear to have little provi- 
dence : in others kindness is altogether obscured 
by cruelty : some are extraordinarily deficient in 


go 


INSTINCTS 


aesthetic sensibility, have no sympathy whatever 
with tune or rhythm: in others any notions of 
self-restraint appear to be altogether lacking. 

§ 

The groups into which impulsive instincts have 
been gathered, fall, it will be observed, into four 
pairs of contraries — individualistic and social, 
reproductive and provident, cruel and kind, 
self -abandoning (aesthetic) and self -restraining 
(ethical). From this antagonism results the 
extraordinary variety of human nature. For these 
impulses, as we have seen, are not of uniform 
strength in individuals : some men lack almost 
entirely the hunting instinct, others are abnor- 
mally affected by music, in some kindness, in 
others cruelty seems to predominate. By an 
abnormal development of the individualistic 
impulse some men are happiest in solitude and 
are restless and uneasy in the society of their 
fellows. These peculiarities, 1 like peculiarities of 
feature and complexion, sensibility and aptitude, 
are in great measure hereditary, and we can under- 
stand, then, how there comes about such diversity 
between the characters of different individuals, 
families, and races. But we have still to find an 
explanation for the inconsistent behaviour of 
individuals — how a man may be at one time kind, 
at another time cruel, at one time transported 
by ecstatic passion, at other times restrained by 
the sombrest asceticism. We have to remember 
that impulses come upon us, not singly, but in 
assortments : that they mingle with, or react 
upon, one another, and are affected in particular 

1 Similar inborn eccentricities of impulse oblige the Japanese 
waltzing mouse to whirl itself when running, and the tumbler 
pigeon to turn somersaults in flight. 


IMPULSES AND BEHAVIOUR 91 


by the intrusion of self-consciousness. A hungry 
man will moderate his appetite if he fears that 
to his companions it will appear so large as to be 
vulgar. The impulse to dance may be checked 
by feelings of self-conscious vanity, or be rein- 
forced by the emotion of love. The virtue of 
courage may be rooted in self-control : this alone 
will give us cold-blooded fortitude in the presence 
of death ; but it may also draw strength from 
self-abandonment, from cruelty or from self- 
consciousness. The passion of love becomes an 
enduring emotion when it is strengthened by the 
social and kindly impulses. The powerful emotions 
of pugnacity and love may arouse very remark- 
able developments of kindness or of cruelty, of 
aesthetic or of ethical feeling. Conditions of warfare 
appear to force into flower the artistic talents of 
a nation : the noblest productions of Greece, 
the dramatic glories of the Elizabethan era are 
illustrations in point. Under the influence of 
love most men become poets. 

Our behaviour upon any occasion will depend 
upon the impulses which assail us and the im- 
pulses which prevail. There may be differences 
in both of these elements, even when the 
circumstances that stimulate us are precisely 
similar. For, in the first place, the impulses that 
are called up by a sensory impression or a recollec- 
tion depend very largely upon the impulses to 
which we are subject at the time : if we are under 
the influence of irritation our reason may fail to 
control us and a trifling mistake on the part of 
another will make us positively hate him. We 
have seen, moreover, that certain impulses gain or 
lose force with the passage of time : love may 
lead a man astray after middle life, but not with 
the blinding authority it exercises over the young. 
Secondly, similar impressions do not at all 


9 2 


INSTINCTS 


times evoke the same recollections, and, if the 
recollections differ, the impulses which are released 
will also be different. The feelings with which we 
meet an acquaintance will depend upon the 
recollections that spring up of previous meetings. 
Thirdly, there is the difference which will result 
from our exerting or not exerting our power of 
will — of deliberately choosing or deliberately 
rejecting. There are, then, an indefinite number of 
possibilities in a man's behaviour under any 
stimulus, and human nature is accordingly very 
uncertain and very inconsistent. 

Are we, then, it may be asked, as fallen leaves, 
set in a whirl by conflicting gusts of passion, and 
finally driven this way or that by the strongest oi 
them ? So, in a measure, may be represented the 
ever-running drama of man's temptation. But 
the impulses which we have been attempting to 
catalogue do not possess the stage to themselves : 
they are joined, in particular, by three others — 
reason, will, and habit — which are of a different 
character, which act as prompters to the company 
and may give to one of them the accession of 
energy that enables it to lead. Reason may be 
improved by education : will may be invigorated 
by practice. And by the acquisition of habits 
through his will power and his imitative faculty 
man may so facilitate the outwellings of some im- 
pulses at the expense of others as apparently to 
transform the character with which he was born. 
By yielding to an impulse we, so to speak, widen 
the outlet for it, and proportionately lessen the 
stream of impulses which compete with it. By 
working steadily we may enhance the influence of 
the industrial impulse, as by indulging our 
appetites we strengthen their hold over us. By 
habit, then, as well as by will, a man may bring 
unruly impulses under discipline. Yet his for- 


IMPULSES AND SCHOOLS OF PHILOSOPHY 93 


titude may be wasted, his habitudes may be 
upset, should he chance to meet a woman who 
disturbs the balance of his emotions by exciting 
his love. 

§ 

To many men an explanation of Life or of 
Nature appears to be unsatisfactory unless it 
resolves the complex into the simple, unless it 
tends towards the conclusion that the various 
links between happenings, which we term 
" causes," are but manifestations of an ultimate 
unity of purpose. They will condemn as retro- 
gressive — even as absurd — an attempt to account 
for human behaviour by attributing it to a num- 
ber of inconsistent and antagonistic impulses. 
Yet if we review the endeavours which have been 
made by men of intellect during the past twenty- 
five centuries to discover the foundations and 
foresee the ultimate development of human 
conduct — and, in the theories of ethics and 
political economy, to formulate the aspirations 
that should guide it — we shall conclude that their 
ideals have been as numerous and as diverse as 
the impulses which we have been cataloguing, and 
may, indeed, be generally defined as the accept- 
ance of one or other of these impulses as superior 
in strength or desirability to all others. So 
Epicureanism idealizes the individualistic im- 
pulses, Altruism the social impulses, Stoicism 
the ethical impulses of self-restraint, Hedonism 
the aesthetic impulses of self-abandonment. We 
may, in like fashion, conclude that kindliness is 
the moral ideal of Christianity. Political Economy 
is concerned with the methods in which the 
provident impulses can be most effectively satis- 
fied. Reason, which, as we shall see, may also 
be classed as an impulse, is adopted by some 
philosophers as the guiding star that will lead 


94 


INSTINCTS 


mankind towards a state of perfection. As the spirit 
of utilitarianism, it takes note of the feelings of 
pleasure and pain, of happiness and unhappiness, 
which arise from our sensations and our impulses, 
and pictures the pleasure or happiness of the indi- 
vidual or the community as the goal towards 
which conduct should strive. This theory, ac- 
cepted nakedly as it stands, would sanctify all 
sensations and impulses which afford pleasure or 
happiness : but so stark a conclusion would be 
practically demoralizing, and it has therefore 
been limited by more or less artificial definitions 
of pleasure and happiness. We may, then, take it 
that the multiplicity and variety of the theories to 
which philosophy has been driven in its search for 
a science of living, strongly corroborate the view 
that human nature is a compound of a number of 
discordant elements. 

§ 

The two impulses that remain for our considera- 
tion do not suggest definite lines of activity, but 
are compelling guides to general behaviour. They 
are in the sharpest contrast — Directive Instinct 
and Reason — and represent methods of shaping 
external behaviour to environment that are 
characteristic, respectively, of the lower and the 
higher orders of the animal kingdom. 

Directive Instinct. — In some of its manifes- 
tations this may perhaps be described as a subtle 
penetrating sympathy which gives a living crea- 
ture instinctive knowledge of other living crea- 
tures, or of substances, that subserve its nourish- 
ment or its reproduction. 1 Such a mysterious 

1 The experiments of M. Fabre have convinced him that the 
females of some bees can not only lay male or female eggs accord- 
ing as the provision for the larva (as controlled by experiment) is 
large or small — in cell capacity or food — but can actually deter- 
mine the sex of each egg as it is laid by them. 


DIRECTIVE INSTINCT 


95 


sympathy must also guide the internal organs of 
our bodies : the heart and the lungs act with full 
appreciation of each other's requirements, and the 
stomach realizes what substances should be 
accepted, and what rejected by it. But this 
description is not sufficiently comprehensive. 
Directive instinct is apparently the energy by 
which living creatures grow from their initial to 
their adult stages, and it must therefore include a 
realization of purposes — not merely of the ends to 
which certain organisms and substances of the 
environment should be applied, but of the final 
development to which growth tends. And it must 
also include a precise and detailed realization of 
the means by which growth, nourishment, and 
reproduction are effected. The characteristics of 
this faculty have already been described. They 
include independance of experience, inevitability 
of sequence, and accuracy of execution. An 
organism that is guided by it knows no doubt or 
hesitation : it proceeds towards its aim with the 
unfailing punctuality of clockwork. So appears 
to us the undeviating regularity of a beehive, and 
so would appear to us the working of our internal 
organs could we realize its accurate complexity. 

An accomplishment which simulates the pro- 
cesses of directive instinct is that known as the 
" ideo-motor," by which we are able to execute 
elaborate series of movements, such as those of 
walking, speaking, or playing the piano, without 
any dependance upon the brain, each sensory 
impression or recollection producing the appro- 
priate muscular reaction by the independent 
functioning of local nerve centres. But this 
accomplishment is only acquired by deliberate 
practice. Processes that are directed by instinct 
need no practice whatever. A young caterpillar 
on emerging from the egg is as efficient in its 


96 


INSTINCTS 


activities as when full grown. The inexplicable 
acuteness of the Scolia wasp and its larva has 
been already mentioned. The life histories of the 
Yucca moth and the Sitaris beetle are not less 
astonishing. The former takes a lump of pollen 
from the anthers of one Yucca flower, lays its eggs 
in the ovary of another flower, and, before flying 
off, fertilizes this flow r er by depositing the lump of 
pollen upon its stigma. The larvae feed upon the 
ovules in the ovary, and would be short of 
nourishment unless these were fertilized and grew 
to maturity. But they do not consume all the 
ovules : some are spared and form seed to carry 
on the life of the plant in the next generation. 
The transfer of pollen from one flower to another is, 
then, necessary for the life both of the larvae and 
the plant. But we are quite unable to understand 
how these two distinct necessities come to be 
linked through the impulses of the moth. The 
Sitaris beetle lays its eggs at the mouth of the 
burrow of the Anthophora mason bee : its young 
are active little creatures with prehensile claws, 
and leap on to the drones as they pass out of the 
burrow on their nuptial flight. They transfer 
themselves to the females during the process of 
mating, are carried by the females to the nest, 
and transfer themselves again on to the eggs, when 
laid, living upon them and upon the store of 
honey until the time comes for their metamor- 
phosis into adult beetles. The larvae are endowed 
with special organs and special impulses for their 
threefold migration, the object of which is to 
enable them to live, in a most complicated 
fashion, upon the lives of others. 

Directive instinct is absolutely unreasoning, and 
will accept no guidance from inference. A mud- 
wasp (Pelopoeus) will continue to provision its 
nest-cell for its young after the egg which it has 


HUMAN APTITUDE 


97 


deposited has been removed: it does not per- 
ceive that its labour has become objectless. When, 
having completed its cell, having deposited its egg, 
and stored provisions for the larva, it returns with 
clay to cover the orifice, and finds that during its 
absence the cell has been destroyed, it will not 
appreciate the effect of this calamity, and will 
carefully affix the clay on to the place where the 
cell would be if undestroyed. It appears, as we 
shall see, that insects are not altogether devoid 
of reasoning powers. But, when acting under the 
obsession of directive instinct, they seem generally 
unable to make use of them. 

All animals are dependent upon directive 
instinct for their development, growth, and the 
functioning of their internal organs. Inverte- 
brate animals also rely upon it for the guidance of 
most of their external activities. The communal 
life of a bee-hive, or an ant's nest, is almost 
wholly regulated by it, in complications of con- 
structive art, social organisation, and even civil 
government, the elaboration of which appears to 
us to be inconceivable without the use of reasoning 
intelligence. As we ascend the scale of verte- 
brates, directive instinct loses its efficiency and 
resigns its paramount authority, until in man it is 
almost extinguished as a guiding force in beha- 
viour. To hold tight and to suck are almost the 
only innate accomplishments of a new-born baby. 

But it would be extraordinary were so vigorous 
a force to vanish entirely, and we may believe 
that it survives in men, albeit with changed au- 
thority. We may, perhaps, trace to its influence 
our aptitudes for acquiring the accomplishments of 
our kind. We are born in the utmost inefficiency 
— unable to walk, to speak, or to realize our im- 
pressions : but the facility with which we learn 
these ideo-motor processes seems to indicate that 


9 S 


INSTINCTS 


we are endowed with special aptitudes for them. 
Directive instinct changes its role : when it no 
longer instructs, it smooths the path of learning. 
In man this change is almost complete : we may 
observe it progressing in the animals below him. 
The innate equipment of all the higher animals 
appears to include aptitudes as well as ready- 
made accomplishments. Some birds appear to 
need lessons in flying from their parents : thrushes 
may be seen instructing their young to break 
snail shells. Aptitudes vary in individuals — not 
perhaps very greatly, when we consider how much 
of them is common to all of us — but the dif- 
ferences are sufficient to distinguish talented from 
untalented men. Some persons are endowed 
with special aptitudes for games, others for 
learning languages, others for literary expression, 
others for mathematics. Their talents may not 
be accompanied with strong impulses for using 
them : we all know of talented but idle men. On 
the other hand, impulses may be possessed without 
special aptitudes : such is the case with tongue- 
tied poets, with earnest but unsuccessful golfers. 
When impulses are combined with special apti- 
tudes we have the equipment of an able man. 

If talent is nothing more than an addition to an 
aptitude which is possessed by most men, and is 
not an endowment peculiar in itself, we can 
understand why it should so often appear unex- 
pectedly in families : it is a thing not of kind, but 
of degree, and would be liable to such variations 
as bring about differences in colour of hair, or 
complexion, between children of the same parents. 
And just as these physical traits, however varying 
in the individuals of a family, tend towards 
uniformity within the family, so may we expect 
special developments of aptitudes to be frequently 
hereditary in particular families. 


REASON 


99 


Reason. — In man, as already remarked, in- 
stinctive machinery for the regulation of outward 
conduct has become obsolete. In exchange he 
is equipped with Reason far more generously than 
any other animal. In attempting to define 
this faculty we enter upon ground which is strewn 
with the fragments of psychological discussion. It 
may, perhaps, be described as a process by which 
we weave our impressions and recollections into 
a connected tissue, instead of leaving them as a 
tangled mass of random happenings. To this 
end we are, in the first place, impelled to link 
together different impressions by their similarity 
of appearance, or by their contiguity in space, or 
in time — that is to say, we associate impressions 
that resemble one another, are related in space to 
one another, and precede or follow one another. 
We connect in this way one dog with another dog, 
a dog with its kennel, and a dog with a bite. In 
the next place we are impelled to infer that like- 
ness in appearance implies likeness in what pre- 
cedes, accompanies, or follows. I have been 
pricked by a bramble : I infer that if I touch that 
bramble, or another similar bramble, I shall be 
pricked again. I have, then, learnt to avoid what 
an insect would have avoided instinctively. But 
with my reasoning powers at this stage I have to 
leam a separate lesson for each particular set of 
objects. My learning gains in scope immensely 
when my reasoning powers are completed by an 
impulse to distinguish things by their properties, 
instead of accepting them as indivisible wholes, 
and to see in these properties the causes 1 of hap- 
penings. I observe that the bramble has the 
property of thorniness, and, by attaching my 
inference not to the plant, but to the property, I 

1 To recognize, for instance, a soporific property in opium as the 
cause of its inducing sleep. 

H 


100 


INSTINCTS 


learn to avoid all plants that may prick me. We 
proceed to class as " properties 55 the similarities, 
contiguities and sequences that were the funda- 
mental points of attachment by which we first 
linked our impressions together : similarity is 
figured as relationship, connection in space as posi- 
tion, sequence as cause and effect. I have learnt 
when using a slate that a squeak is caused by (that 
is to say, is preceded by) friction : I infer that the 
squeaking of a tram-car is also caused by friction. 
I suffered from headache w r hen ascending a 
mountain : I infer that a balloon ascent would 
give me (that is to say, would be followed by) a 
headache. Prodigious have been the consequences 
to mankind, for evil as w T eli as for good, of this 
assumption that the links of inference are them- 
selves properties. For, in discovering these links, 
we are not assisted by instinct, but are left to our 
powers of perception, and we are accordingly 
liable to great error. I may confuse the dream of 
a pain with an actual pain, and may wrongly infer 
that I need medical treatment. I may perceive 
the stars as lying close to one another, and may 
imagine that they are 66 pattens of bright gold " 
set in a crystal sphere. I may attribute an attack 
of indigestion to lobster salad when it was really 
caused by champagne. We are especially liable 
to error when we see in happenings the property 
of being causally connected with what precedes 
them, since a happening is preceded not by a single 
thing, but by a complicated tangle of things, out 
of which we are liable to make a wrong selection, 
and so to dignify as the "cause 55 of the happen- 
ing a thing which had in reality no connection 
with it. I may, for instance, infer that an old 
woman is a witch because I felt queerly when I 
passed her, and had read that witches, by the 
evil eye, could affect malignantly those who 


REASON 


IOI 


approached them. Science is the diagnosis of 
essential — as opposed to accidental — properties. 
But science has come very slowly into the reason- 
ing processes of mankind. 

Reason differs radically from directive instinct 
in that it is helpless without experience and 
memory, and may be misled by them. The 
action of directive instinct may be compared to a 
machine that is devised to execute a particular 
movement upon the playing of a particular chord 
of music. Reason resolves the chord into its 
component notes, which, by inferences from ex- 
perience and memory, are brought into connec- 
tion with opinion or behaviour. The experience 
may be direct, or indirect — that is to say, may 
have been derived from the sensory impression 
of an object or from information acquired from 
others by means of gestures or words. A new-born 
baby is helpless, since it lacks all but the very 
rudiments of directive instinct and also lacks 
experience and memory. 

Reason is popularly supposed to be man's 
prerogative, and even evolutionist speculation 
is sometimes coloured by the assumption that 
this capacity is a development peculiar to human- 
ity. But if the doctrine of evolution is reliable 
the germs of reason must be inherent in all crea- 
tures, and an unprejudiced survey of the be- 
haviour of the lower animals will find no lack of 
evidence of some capacity for reasoning. Insects 
which will pursue the routine of nest-making 
and egg-laying in complete disregard of accidents 
that render their labour useless and absurd, will 
use careful discrimination in the preliminary tasks 
of choosing a site for the nest and in selecting its 
materials, showing a judgment that seems to 
indicate that they can compare the merits of 
different sites and substances, and can draw 


102 


INSTINCTS 


inferences in choosing one or other of them. There 
are, in fact, occasions when they are free from the 
dominating influence of directive instinct. In 
some cases, indeed, reason appears to have actually 
modified instinct. Caterpillars that have pro- 
tected themselves by rolling up leaves have, 
under different circumstances, taken to burrowing 
within them : beetles that rolled up balls of dung 
(for the deposit of their eggs) have taken advan- 
tage of sheep droppings: a New Zealand parrot 
(Pastor mutabilis) has within recent years become 
carnivorous, and causes much loss to farmers by 
w r ounding sheep. Birds and insects will occa- 
sionally alter the customary form and situation of 
their nests, and will make shift to economize 
materials. A crucial case, quoted by Romanes, 
is that of a flycatcher which nested in a conserva- 
tory and, appreciating the heat maintained by 
the furnace, left its eggs to hatch of themselves. 
In all these cases there must have been some dis- 
tinguishing of properties, and inferring from ex- 
perience. A familiar illustration is that of a dog 
which has been shut into a garden. At first he 
will endeavour to scrape himself under the gate, 
or through the bars, but if he fails to get past and 
is an intelligent animal, he will attempt to jump 
the gate. He notices that the gate has the pro- 
perty of being surmounted by a jump, and infers 
from past experience that he can leap over it. 
He would not try to jump a high wall. Man 
has been assisted in outdistancing the most 
intelligent quadrupeds by his almost total loss 
of directive instinct : he must rely upon his 
reason, whereas the dog or the monkey is subject 
to instinctive promptings which confuse its 
reasoning faculties. Habit, it is true, similarly 
enables man to dispense with his reason : but 
habit is less imperious than instinct, and may 


REASON 


*°3 


be over-ridden by reason. The efficiency of reason 
may be improved by education : by practice we 
can extend our power of discerning properties 
in things. But the gulf which separates man from 
the brutes is formed not only by superiority in 
reasoning powers, pure and simple, but also by 
the far-reaching effects of language and in- 
trospective consciousness. By language proper- 
ties, once perceived, are clearly defined. By 
introspective consciousness not only has the 
appreciation of properties, and the accuracy 
of inferences, become very greatly enhanced, but 
properties themselves are subjected to analysis, 
and are discovered to possess properties of their 
own. So have originated the abstract sciences of 
logic, numbers, and quantities. These all-impor- 
tant developments will be further considered 
in Chapter VII. 

A word of explanation should be added. We 
have brought together in this and the preceding 
Chapters certain of our vital impulses and have 
classed them as instinctive, because they are of a kind 
to which the term "instinct" is generally applied. 
But in their essential character as innate prompt- 
ings to action they do not differ from the impulses 
to which Chapters II, III, VI, VII, and VIII are 
devoted — that is to say, from the impulses of 
changefulness, responsiveness to sensation, mem- 
ory, habit, imitation, consciousness, and will. 
These attributes of Life have been treated 
separately because they are so general in their 
character and so far-reaching in their effect. 


CHAPTER VI 


MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 

We have grouped Memory, Habit, and Imitation 
together because they are all repetitive influences 
— influences which may perhaps be ascribed to a 
tendency of living tissue to repeat the results of 
impulses. Memory is the repetition of mental, 
or nervous experiences ; Habit, the repetition of 
mental or muscular action ; Imitation, the repeti- 
tion of mental impressions in mental or muscular 
action. The physical world around us is pervaded 
by the rhythmical repetitions, or vibrations, oj 
light and sound ; and memory, habit, and 
imitation appear to have more in common with 
Matter than with the spontaneous irregularity 
which is the chiefest characteristic of Life. Many 
of the nervous reactions of living creatures dis- 
play a sympathy with rhythm : such are the 
regular pulsations of the jelly-fish (Medusa), the 
timed movements that synchronously agitate 
swarms of insects, and the human accomplish- 
ments of music, poetry, and dancing. But neither 
memory nor habit, so far as we can judge, is an 
influence of paramount importance in the inferior 
classes of the animal kingdom. Here the processes 
of directive instinct maintain the regularity of life. 
Higher up the scale, memory and habit become 
controlling forces : they are tyrannical, but 
infinitely less so than the almost inevitable regu- 
larity which they displace. Imitation, on the 

IO+ 


MEMORY 


165 


other hand, appears to be an impelling force 
throughout the animal kingdom, and may have 
contributed to the spread of physical changes 
from the individual to the species. 

§ 

Memory. — It may very well be that we forget 
nothing, that we store up a recollection of every- 
thing that has affected us. The great mass 
of our impressions is collected subconsciously, 
and will only recur to us when we are in a sub- 
conscious condition, as, for instance, when we 
are dreaming. The strange materials which enter 
into our dreams are derived from impressions 
which we have registered, but have not marked 
in consciousness. There is a well-known case of 
a Dutch maidservant who, when delirious in 
hospital, declaimed passages from the Talmud. 
It was ascertained that she had been in the service 
of a Rabbi who was in the habit of reading the 
Talmud aloud as he paced up and down the pas- 
sage which led to the kitchen. His recitations had 
subconsciously been registered in the girl's mem- 
ory, and emerged from it when she was in a state 
of subconsciousness. In conscious life she could 
not remember a word. 

A stream of recollections is flowing unceasingly 
through our brains. It may perhaps be inter- 
rupted during very deep sleep, or when we are 
unconscious, as during a fainting fit. When 
awaking from deep sleep we may experience a 
strange feeling of not knowing where we are. 
This may be due to an interruption of memory, 
which has the same effect as the stoppage of the 
heart during a fit of unconsciousness. Should 
the stream of memory become blocked, our life, 
our character, our personality is changed. Such 
is the inference we may draw from the experience 


io6 MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 


of a young American clergyman, Mr. Hanna, 
who suffered complete loss of memory owing to 
a fall from his dog- cart. When he recovered con- 
sciousness he was as helpless as a baby. His past 
was a blank ; he had no perception of distance 
or solidity ; he could neither eat, speak, nor walk. 
It took some months 5 instruction to restore these 
capacities, but, having recovered them, he remained 
with an entirely new personality. Gradually old 
memories surged up, at first in dreams, then dur- 
ing waking moments ; and, after a strange conflict 
between his two personalities, his original disposi- 
tion slowly reasserted itself. 

The ever-flowing current of recollections is for 
the most part subconscious, and is not apprehended 
by us in our conscious conditions. But it rises to 
the surface from time to time, thrown upwards 
by touching a feeling of pleasure or pain, an 
emotion, or a resolution of the will. We are 
suddenly aroused from a " brown study " by the 
occurrence of a recollection that we have omitted 
to post a letter. For a time — it may be a long 
time — the stream will flow through the realms of 
consciousness. It may take one of three courses, 
which may, respectively, be compared to a river 
which runs straight, to a river which meanders, 
and to a river which is twisted by sharp deflec- 
tions. Our recollections will be, in the first case, 
a continuous reproduction of former impressions ; 
in the second case, a recombination of impressions 
linked by trivial coincidences ; in the third case, 
such a recombination linked by emotional ex- 
periences. 

A good illustration of the first class of recollec- 
tions is the repetition of a piece of poetry : word 
succeeds word as originally learnt, and, the less 
is the emotion aroused by the recital, the more 
word-perfect it will be. Some boys will repeat 


THE MEMORY STREAM 


107 


a book of the JSneid after a few hours' study. 
Did the poetry interest them they would be 
less successful. In India Mohammedan children 
will recite chapter after chapter of the Koran, 
in a language (Arabic) with which they are 
entirely unacquainted. 

Recollections of the second class are connected 
by points of contact, which arise out of purety 
accidental properties, but are sufficiently strong, 
in the case of trivial minds, to disarrange the 
sequence in which the original impressions were 
received. The recollections are linked (in the 
language of psychology) by " contiguity." Memo- 
ries which function in this manner are admirably 
illustrated by the conversations of Mrs. Nickleby. 
Persons who are afflicted with them are unable 
to keep to the point, or leading interest, of an 
anecdote, but wander from one side issue to another 
in a manner which to listeners is intolerably boring. 

Recollections of the third class are strung 
together by resemblances that arouse emotional 
interest. This process is termed " memory by 
association." My attention is suddenly aroused 
by an emotion of fear, which has been suggested 
by the subconscious recollection of a fall from my 
bicycle. Thence onward there pass before me 
the church I was on my way to visit, my opinion 
of its architecture, a tour in France in the course 
of which I saw a church of similar style, an inter- 
esting conversation with the cure of the parish, a 
regret that I was not taught French more effi- 
ciently at school, and a recollection of recent 
correspondence in the newspapers regarding the 
respective educational advantages of classical and 
modern languages. Each recollection is connec- 
ted with its predecessor by a link of emotional 
interest : and the more emotional interests a man 
possesses the more varied, the more suggestive, 


ioS MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 


the more imaginative will be his recollections. It is 
mainly in the equipment of emotional interests 
that lies the difference between the intelligent and 
the stupid man. 

An emotional impulse may not only deflect the 
course of the memory stream, but may set up a 
vortex in it which constantly brings the same set 
of images before the consciousness. A lover's 
thoughts can hardly stray from his mistress, and 
the conversation of men who are given up to 
racing or golf shows how little is presented to their 
minds that is unconnected with their passion. 
The eddy may grow into a whirlpool that engulfs 
the memory stream altogether, but seizes hold 
of a few recollections that are circulated incessantly 
before the sufferer's attention. This is madness. 

§ 

By investing an impression or a recollection 
with an emotional interest, we endow it, so to 
speak, with a magnetic attraction for other im- 
pressions and recollections that have been touched 
by the same emotion. Recollections that are so 
connected tend to fly towards one another if the 
regular subconscious course of the memory-stream 
be disturbed by an emotion or an effort of will. 
The fruit of these attractions is the faculty of 
Imagination, which is one of the most sentimental 
and most practical attributes of mental life. We 
think of it as a creative faculty, and so it may be 
regarded from one point of view. Yet, strictly 
speaking, it can create nothing, and is absolutely 
dependent upon the memory for the material with 
which it builds up its fabrics, whether they be 
artistic, mathematical, or castles in Spain. But 
our memory can supply us abundantly with 
materials that may be fashioned, combined, and 


RECOLLECTIONS SUMMONED BY THE WILL 109 


recombined ; and there are almost infinite possi- 
bilities for the activity of the imagination in 
creating new forms out of pre-existing elements. 
The imagination may be stimulated by the con- 
scious establishment of a u field of volition/' or 
mental disposition towards a certain theme or 
subject, as, for instance, the composition of a 
landscape. This " field of volition 55 may, perhaps, 
be likened to the magnetic field that is developed 
round the poles of a magnet. It sets up an 
activity that causes the memory-stream to present 
to us recollections which are apposite to the 
subject before us — which are, that is to say, 
attracted by the same emotional interest. The 
fertility of the imagination — the abundance of the 
materials with which the artist can construct — 
depends upon the emotions that have been aroused 
in him by the various features and phases of 
actual landscapes that he has seen, and the links 
which his emotions have established between 
them. If he is of an emotional disposition — that 
is to say, an " imaginative " man — from his 
memory will surge up a flood of detail. If he is 
of colder temperament, or his brain is not 
functioning actively, he may have to cudgel his 
memory for ideas. By a similar process the 
poet is inspired with similitudes and rhythmical 
expressions, the musician with sequences and 
combinations of sounds, the mechanic with new 
contrivances, and the mathematician, who can find 
emotional interest in the properties of numbers, 
quantities, and positions, can picture in a form 
which hardly eludes his conception such unsub- 
stantial possibilities as a fourth dimension. Crea- 
tive art is the offspring of imagination ; so are the 
theories of science, and the mechanical inventions 
that have given a special character to modern 
civilization. Occasionally, it may be objected, 


no MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 


discoveries are made by accident. But it is 
doubtful whether these accidents have occurred 
to men who were not prepared to welcome them. 
It may be objected again, that undue stress has 
been laid upon the power of the will in the 
assembling of the materials with which imagina- 
tion fashions its designs. Every writer is well 
aw^are of the assistance w r hich he owes to sub- 
conscious thought : ideas and sentences suddenly 
present themselves to him, as the spontaneous 
offerings of his brain, that are astonishingly 
superior to those w r hich he has been able to con- 
jure up by the concentration of his will. Not a 
few may confess to ideas that have come to them 
during sleep, and did not vanish before they could 
be recorded. It is said, indeed, that Coleridge 
awoke one morning with Christabel ready com- 
posed in his brain. But the theme to which these 
suggestions contribute has previously been en- 
shrined as the altar-piece of a mental disposition : 
the memory has been reassorting its treasures 
subconsciously, but under an impulse which it 
received from conscious volition. Imagination 
may, then, be defined as the assembling of memories 
which have been reassorted by emotion under the 
influence of the will. 

The effect of a mental disposition, or " field of 
volition/ 5 is familiar to many of us in the process 
by which w r e call to mind a name that has escaped 
us. We try to recollect it, but in vain ; we cease 
to strive after it, when it suddenly presents 
itself. Influenced by our desire, the memory- 
stream has subconsciously delivered up the 
symbol which would not obey the summons of 
conscious effort. 

By imagination we can repeat emotional ex- 
periences of the past. Direct recollections of them 
may be but pale, sentimental, reflections of the 


SYMBOLIC RECOLLECTIONS 


in 


original passions. But if summoned indirectly, by 
the imagining of the impressions which originally 
evoked them, they may affect us as powerfully as 
when they first arose. We owe to imagination 
hope and despair — two of the strongest emotions 
of mankind. The one is the vision of satisfied, 
the other of unsatisfied impulses. 

§ 

Such are, so to speak, the dynamics of memory. 
But it must also be considered as a static force — 
not as a stream but as a store-house of recollec- 
tions. These, when assorted and, so to speak, 
indexed by consciousness, constitute knowledge — 
a fund from which disbursements may be made at 
the call of the will. Recollections may be direct — 
simple repetitions of former sensory impressions — 
or symbolic : we may have direct recollections of 
St. Petersburg, presenting the place to us as we 
have seen it ; or we may have recollections of 
words, or symbols, describing the city, which, so 
to speak, construct views of it by calling up 
certain direct recollections (of rivers, streets, and 
so on) which originally had no connection with 
St. Petersburg, but are reassorted and recom- 
bined in the process. 

Direct recollections are clearest when they are 
visualized, when, that is to say, the original 
sensory impressions repeat themselves as a defi- 
nite, detailed picture. In such a case one may be 
able to catalogue a number of different objects 
that have been presented only for a moment. 
Readers of Kipling will remember Kim's en- 
deavour to rival the jeweller's apprentice in this 
accomplishment. Visualization can undoubtedly 
be strengthened by practice. It is strongest in 
children and in savages : it fades away as age 
advances, and has been shown by investigation 
to be at its weakest amongst men of science. 


ii2 MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 


Symbolic recollections are much more than 
recollections of symbols : they involve the recol- 
lection of the object which the symbol denotes, 
and proceed from the capacity of the memory to 
link together objects and symbols in correlative 
pairs. Words are of course the principal symbols 
in use, and our power of expressing ourselves is 
entirely dependent upon the tenacity with which 
a w r ord and the thing or conception which it repre- 
sents, cling together. Unless the word " rose " 
is attached to the flower it would be impossible 
to speak about roses. We know very well how 
often, with foreign languages, this link between 
symbol and object becomes broken : we say, 
then, the word fails us. Amongst other symbols 
are children's toys. Their attractiveness lies 
entirely in their power of recalling the objects 
for which they stand. In children, as already 
observed, the faculty of visualization is exceed- 
ingly efficient, and this explains the fact, so 
commonly noticed, that a child will often prefer 
a rough toy-symbol of its own to an elaborate 
purchase at the toy-shop. 

A third class of these, so to speak, static 
recollections are those which enable us to adjust 
our sensations by correcting them in the light 
of experience — by means of which we see as a 
round object a table which is really presented to 
our eye-sight as an oval. These subconscious 
recollections enable us to convert crude sensory 
impressions into "percepts"; lacking the faculty 
of directive instinct, we should be entirely at sea 
without them. 

The links which bind together a pair of corre- 
latives in the memory — which unite an object 
with its symbol — weaken very greatly in the 
case of new impressions, as age advances. Adults 
learn languages with far more difficulty than 


HABIT 


ii3 


children : many of us know how hard it is to 
memorize botanical terms which in boyhood 
were instantly fixed in our memories. On the 
other hand, with increasing years, we improve 
in the faculty of appreciating the properties of 
our impressions, and of detecting connections 
between one impression and another which, 
incidentally, enable us to illustrate our ideas 
with greater fecundity. This is what is called 
the " wisdom of the aged." 

Some individuals are blessed with good, others 
are afflicted with bad memories. But in mankind, 
generally, the faculty of remembering is more 
highly developed than in any of the lower animals. 
We speak of the good memories of dogs and horses, 
but should be surprised by an anecdote which 
showed that recollections endured with them for so 
long as ten years. Lower down the scale the scope 
for memory diminishes with the growing usurpa- 
tions of directive instinct. Recollections are vivid 
during the performance of an instinctive task, 
but, this completed, they fade away. Whilst an 
egg-cell is under construction, it is ever-present 
to the bee : once finished, it ceases to exist for 
her. But the faculty seems to persist, however 
little it may be developed : some insects recollect 
occurrences that are unconnected with their 
instinctive processes. 

§ 

Habit. — Nervous tissue has a tendency to 
repeat its reaction to a stimulus. Our hearts and 
lungs illustrate this tendency by their regular 
pulsations, and many of us know how rapidly 
faults of style, in playing games or performing 
upon instruments, become stereotyped. This 
proclivity to repeat is strengthened by practice : 
it is by practice that we attain the repetitive 
facility that is needed for walking, speaking, and 


ii 4 MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 


for the daily tasks of dressing and undressing. 
By practising these operations we " short circuit " 
the chain of reactions that they represent, detach 
it from the brain and permit it to pass subcon- 
sciously along local (ideo-motor) nerve systems. 
The force of Habit produces similar results, but 
in a different fashion. It is concerned with im- 
pulses as well as with processes, and its most 
noticeable effect is to facilitate our response to the 
promptings of particular instincts, memories, and 
beliefs. We may imagine its action as wearing 
by repetition the channel by which an impulse 
frees itself, and so increasing the volume of the 
impulsive current. 

Thus by a life of enforced solitude, such as that 
of a hunter or explorer, the individualistic im- 
pulses may become so predominant as to render a 
man unwilling to mix with his fellows and uneasy 
in their society. Under different circumstances the 
same man may become so dominated by social 
impulses as to consider a day wasted if some hours 
of it are not spent at his club. Feelings of respect 
grow under the influence of respectful manners. 
By the systematic practice of asceticism — even in 
the pettiest of matters — the self-repressive im- 
pulses may be stiffened until they form a moral 
backbone that will enable one to confront with 
courage tribulations before which those whose 
wills are undisciplined fall prostrate in nervous 
self-abandonment. In a life of industry the indus- 
trial impulse may become as imperative as life 
itself, so that death follows upon the heels of 
release from toil. We may educate ourselves in 
kindness by practising it. Our cruel feelings may 
be stimulated by spectacles which use bloodshed 
or inhumanity as instruments of excitement. 
Should it pander to lust, the theatre strengthens 
the tyranny of man's lustful passions. 


HABIT A CONTROLLING FORCE 115 


Habit, then, tends to regularize our conduct 
by canalizing the impulses that affect it. In 
its results it may be compared to the directive 
instincts that dominate the life of insects and give 
their behaviour such undeviating precision. But, 
below the channels which habit elaborates, the 
innate impulses seethe, fundamentally unchanged: 
so, indeed, we must conclude from the glimpses 
of human nature which we obtain when habits 
are shattered by strong excitement. In such 
moments individuals and races display the traits 
with which they were born, and we realize 
that habit, which appearing to transform char- 
acter, in fact merely drills it, and depends 
very largely for its success upon the innate 
strength or weakness of the impulses which it 
endeavours to bring under discipline. The con- 
flict between habit and character, and the in- 
ability of habit radically to overcome the more 
deeply seated impulses, is strikingly illustrated by 
the inconsistencies which we so frequently observe 
between the words and the conduct of individuals. 
Habit may guide the current of smoothly-flowing 
words, whilst the less plastic activities of practical 
conduct remain under the control of the innate 
impulses that constitute character. 

A nervous reaction, once experienced, tends to 
repeat itself, irrespective of feeling. We easily 
contract subconscious habits. But its conscious 
repetition may be assisted or checked by memories 
of associated pleasure or pain ; and it is very 
largely by their effect upon the formation of 
habits that these feelings may powerfully in- 
fluence our ideas and behaviour. Thus the 
dangers and hardships of war have urged man 
towards peaceful habits in opposition to the 
promptings of his combative impulses ; and since 
with increasing comfort the pain of wounds, of 
1 


n6 MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 


hunger, and of exposure becomes more apparent, 
man has become more peaceful as his civilization 
has advanced. 

§ 

Habit is the foundation of all that is conserva- 
tive in our ideas and conduct. Representing, 
as it does, a response to an impulse of life, 
its action affords happiness, and it is accordingly- 
able to form inclinations out of conduct or pur- 
suits which have been forced upon us by circum- 
stances. In some of its forms labour must 
be naturally distasteful. But by repetition 
it may become a dominating passion. We may 
wonder how mankind can tolerate such existences 
as that of a fisherman afloat throughout the winter 
on the North Sea, or that of a miner or a slaughterer. 
But to those who earn their livelihood in these 
fashions their lives have become habitual, and 
are, therefore, not merely tolerable but even 
pleasant. So is society supplied with willing 
servants to minister in the utmost hardship to 
its luxuries. Habit — not a desire for gain — is the 
force which consolidates trades and professions. 
To those who first enter them they are generally 
not more attractive than is to young children 
attendance at church. On the other hand habit 
weakens the spontaneity to which we are urged 
by our impulse towards change, and, since it 
reinforces itself by repetition, it tends to become 
the more powerful of the two, especially in adult 
life. If accepted undeviatingly as a guide of 
conduct it may render us altogether incapable of 
independent thought or action. We may see 
this tendency very clearly in the effects of such a 
habitual routine as is imposed by military disci- 
pline. It is notorious that soldiers who return 
to civil life are deficient in resourcefulness, and it 


HABIT MAY ENSLAVE 


117 


may be a vague apprehension of this deteriora- 
tion which has rendered the British generally- 
averse from military service. There are critics 
of our public schools who maintain that the 
discipline which they enforce, admirably calcu- 
lated as it is for the training of efficient soldiers 
and administrators, cramps the lively activity that 
is needed for success in professions or callings 
which are less sequestered from the stressful 
competition of the struggle for life. Habit affects 
our ideas as well as our behaviour. It increases 
the effect of particular impressions, memories, and 
beliefs. Our devotion to games grows as we play 
them ; our opinions on such subjects as religion, 
morality, and politics are hardened into prejudices 
which argument is powerless to assail. These 
prejudices are commonly miscalled " ideals." 
To compromise a point in a political or social 
dispute, may thus be stigmatized as the " aban- 
donment of an ideal," and is rarely possible to 
those who have not outgrown the leading-strings 
of habit. 

The obsession of a mental habit may spread 
from an individual to a people which then becomes 
overpowered by a fixed idea that may launch it 
into a useless and unjustifiable war, or into such 
comprehensive philanthropic resolutions as the 
abolition of slavery. The crusades resulted from a 
fixed idea which pervaded Europe during two cen- 
turies. A fixed idea has the effect of a habit in 
reinforcing the instinct which generates it, and the 
Press, by encouraging its growth, may bring to a 
bloody arbitrament such rivalry in progress as now 
breeds suspicion between England and Germany. 

The tyranny of fixed ideas is strengthened if 
the reasoning impulse is completely satisfied by 
the vision of an accepted cause for every happen- 
ing of life — if no blanks are left to be filled by 


nS MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 


observation or enquiry. This is the condition of 
a people who are completely dominated by the 
authority of a religion, or superstition, which 
provides a specious explanation for every inci- 
dent of man's experience. Without scepticism 
there can be no enquiry : science can make no 
appeal to a mind which attributes every happen- 
ing to the visioned intervention of Providence or 
Fate. Such is, generally, the state of Oriental 
peoples, and they owe to it that they are so in- 
different to new impressions, so firmly addicted 
to traditional practices. We may see in the 
material progress of the Japanese the effect of 
a strongly developed scepticism, which urges 
them to receive new ideas with attention and 
to investigate them carefully before rejecting 
them. A Turk, a Persian, an Indian is politely 
inattentive to suggestions for the improvement 
of his agriculture or processes of manufacture. 
A Japanese listens to them with the keenest 
interest. 

§ 

So far considered habit is the enemy of free- 
dom. But, with the strange contrariety which 
we may discern everywhere in life, it is also 
a means of gaining freedom. It enables us 
to redistribute the strain of the shackles with 
which we are fettered from our birth. By facili- 
tating the action of particular instinctive impulses, 
it subjects us more strongly to their influence, and 
proportionately weakens the influence of impulses 
which compete with them. Often, indeed, the 
result is harmful. The propensity to drink is 
reinforced by indulgence : so may a child become 
addicted to sucking its thumb, or biting its 
nails — proclivities which are outgrowths of the 
instinctive actions of sucking and mastication. 


HABIT THE ROOT OF CULTURE 119 

But generally it has been of inestimable benefit 
to mankind. The impulses of charity, modesty, 
and decency would fare badly in the struggling 
crowd of emotions were they not assisted by 
practice. Our instinctive impulses may, as we 
have seen, be grouped in a series of pairs ; and 
mankind has agreed that, of each pair, one is 
more desirable than the other, so selecting the 
social, provident, kindly, and self-restraining im- 
pulses as of particular benefit to society. Im- 
pulses of these classes, when strengthened by 
habit, are the moral ideals, which, commended by 
philosophy and sanctified by religion, have lit 
up the path of human endeavour. Habit may 
restrict the influence of religious reformers and 
radical politicians ; but it affords civil govern- 
ments some measure of stability, enables them to 
forecast with some confidence the drift of public 
opinion, preserves the decencies of civilized life, 
and is the basis of the conventional morality 
which makes people respectable. 

Habit appears to influence the behaviour of all 
living creatures. 1 In the lower ranges of the 
animal kingdom it can find but little scope amidst 
the imperious mandates of directive instinct. As 
we ascend the scale, and the authority of instinct 
becomes less widely embracing, habit plays a part 
of increasing importance in regularizing behaviour. 
And, since habit is the outcome of experience, 
whereas instinct is a hereditary constraint, the field 
for individuality in action gradually broadens. 
Such conduct as in man is guided by acquired 
habits, amongst the lower vertebrates is very 

1 Plants show traces of memory or habit. They ordinarily 
make their strongest growth during the dark hours. But if day 
and night be reversed by the use of electric light, they will 
continue for a time to grow by the clock. 


120 MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 


generally instinctive : it pursues the same 
lines throughout all the individuals of the 
species. All birds of a kind tend to build their 
nests according to a common plan, and are ac- 
tuated by similar home-staying or migratory im- 
pulses. Wild animals that are caged continue to 
act as if the earth were below and the sky above 
them : squirrels will make believe to bury nuts : 
mateless birds will collect nesting materials as 
spring approaches. Domesticated animals, on the 
other hand, appear to possess a special aptitude 
for forming, individually, habits of their own : 
horses become used to riding or driving, and 
resent a change of service : dogs accommodate 
themselves to the domestic arrangements of 
their masters. It is, indeed, owing to this plas- 
ticity that they have been domesticated at all. 
Amongst wild animals behaviour which we speak 
of as habitual is very frequently instinctive. A 
tiger, after killing its prey, does not eat it forth- 
with, but lies up, near by, for some hours before 
commencing its meal — conduct which assists 
very greatly the sport of tiger shooting. This 
peculiarity is instinctive not habitual : it runs 
throughout the species. By instinct, not by 
habit, birds put their heads under their wings 
when sleeping: the penguin pretends to do so, 
although its degenerate wings afford no cover. 
A dog turning round before settling itself to sleep 
is also acting instinctively, not by force of habit : 
dogs, generally, preserve this survival from the 
past. 

§ 

Can habit produce changes which become 
innate and hereditary? Has man radically im- 
proved his nature by the practices of civilization ? 
Are we born more decent, more orderly, more 


HEREDITARY INFLUENCE OF HABIT 121 


industrious than our forefathers ? Could we 
answer these questions in the affirmative we 
might open before our eyes a vista of limitless 
progress. But experience affords little founda- 
tion for so encouraging a dream. 

In respect to directive instinct we have, 
perhaps, some grounds for believing that habit 
may amplify the capabilities of this faculty by 
grafting new processes upon it. We have seen 
that it is impossible to attribute to experience 
many of its subtler and more complicated work- 
ings. But some instinctive processes, such as the 
turning round of the dog. plainly appear to have 
been generated by habit. The possibility of this 
is, however, strenuously denied by an influential 
school of biologists, who maintain that instinct 
cannot be affected by experience, and owes its 
multiform complexities to variations that occur 
in the reproductive cells of parents, quite inde- 
pendently of any new shifts to which they may 
have been put in gaining their livelihood. Many 
of the practices which appear to be habits that 
have, so to speak, crystallized into instinct, are, 
it is alleged, not innate but are learnt by imita- 
tion of parents or companions. Imitation no 
doubt accounts for more than may readily be 
supposed, especially in the behaviour of gre- 
garious creatures. It seems that the fear with 
which wild birds regard man is not inborn but 
is caught from their parents : it may be imitation 
that leads the house-marten to build its nest under 
the eaves of house-roofs, displaying what appears 
to be an instinct that has been acquired since 
man began to build houses. But imitation will 
not account for the predilection of the mud- wasp 
(Pelopoeus) for chimney-corners as sites for its 
nest : it lives a solitary life ; it will build its nest 
in other places, and, so far as experiment can 


122 MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 


throw light upon its propensities, it appears to 
have no particular preference for the spot in 
which it finds itself on emerging from the cocoon. 
Yet it seeks very persistently a site for its nest 
which has only become available for it since man 
has constructed substantial habitations. The 
American grey squirrel has the practice of burying 
nuts in the ground : squirrels taken from the 
nest when quite immature and reared in cap- 
tivity will make believe to bury nuts in a carpet. 
The practice is then inborn, not acquired by 
imitation. Yet its beginnings may be more 
reasonably ascribed to habit than to casual 
varieties in a reproductive cell. We must remem- 
ber that Life is not uniform in its methods, and 
we should not conclude that habit has been the 
origin of no instincts because we find that it 
certainly has not been the origin of some of them. 

When, however, we turn from the low r er animals 
to man we can hardly find the slenderest grounds 
for believing that habits have become hereditary. 
Lacking directive instinct he possesses no stock 
upon which to graft them. But he possesses 
aptitudes : might they not be strengthened by 
habits — by the culture of civilization ? We may 
scarcely conclude so. We see that dexterity in 
games is as innate in Indians who have never 
played them as in Englishmen to whom they have 
afforded a pastime for many generations. The 
children of quite unlettered tribes, when brought 
to school, may display astonishing proficiency in 
learning arithmetic. Nor does it appear, that 
habits of refinement are innately stronger in a 
civilized than in uncivilized races. How easily 
in the past has the light of culture been extin- 
guished ! How rapidly have civilized nations 
relapsed into barbarism ! A child of European 
parentage reared in the squalor of an Indian 


IMITATION 


123 


bazar, and transported to an orphanage, will not 
learn cleanliness and decency more easily than 
an Indian child under like circumstances. The 
Fuegian children, whom Darwin brought to 
England with him, rapidly acquired the externals 
of civilized life, although they had behind them 
centuries of primitive savagery. Habits of mind 
appear to regulate impulses by wearing, so to 
speak, larger outlets for some of them, and we 
seem forced to the conclusion that each individual 
in controlling his innate propensities must trust 
to himself and is not assisted by the customs of 
his ancestors. Nor need we regret that we are not 
hereditarily affected by the habits of past ages : 
else might we still be inclined towards cannibalism. 
What hope should we have of progress were our 
eyes blinded before birth by the errors of our 
forefathers ? 

§ 

Imitation. — We imitate when we repeat a 
sensory impression by translating it into nervous 
or muscular action. The sensory impression may 
be actual or symbolic — may be gathered by a 
perception of (so to speak) the thing itself or by 
means of signs or words. We may imitate 
skating because we have watched a skater or 
because we have studied a treatise on Alpine 
sports. The impulse to imitate is one of the 
strongest and most far-reaching of Life's mani- 
festations. In animals of the higher orders it 
compensates for the waning force of directive 
instinct : it appears that some birds owe in a 
measure the uniformity of their nest-building 
and of their song to the example of their parents. 
By mutual imitation the mental development of 
young creatures is greatly stimulated : the intel- 
ligence of a puppy suffers if it is brought up alone : 


124 MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 


street Arabs are markedly quick-witted. Imita- 
tion governs imperiously the behaviour of children 
and urges the young to acquire in a few years 
the habits which represent long centuries of 
endeavour on the part of their ancestors. 
Memorizing apart, the process of education is in 
fact a course of imitation : we carry out an 
instruction by imitating in action the impressions 
that we have acquired from it. In adult life imita- 
tive activity is strongly bridled by the force of 
habit. But it remains the chief stimulus to reform 
— the force which leads men from time to time to 
alter their ideas and behaviour. We owe to 
it, not only the transmission of our culture, from 
generation to generation, but the halting steps 
by which we have followed the lamp-bearers of 
progress. 

A habit may be acquired by an original exercise 
of will, but in the vast majority of cases it is 
established by mimicking others. Imitation may, 
then, generally be described as the origin of 
habit. But a habit tends to become stronger than 
the impulse to imitate : it checks us from imita- 
ting things that are novel : it represents, in fact, 
the conservative propensity which is so strong in 
man's — and especially in woman's — nature. The 
history of mankind, considered in its broadest 
aspect, may be figured as a conflict between imita- 
tion and habit. Since the beginning of time men 
of original, or, eccentric, disposition have been 
offering to their fellow-men novelties for adoption. 
Their ideas have generally been rejected. Habit 
has been too strong to admit of a reform, unless 
there have been circumstances to reinforce the 
impulse to imitate. 

Amongst these reinforcing circumstances is 
the frequency of the impressions we receive. 
We rapidly pick up the accents or mannerisms 


STIMULI TO IMITATION 


of those with whom we live ; we may indeed 
begin to stammer if we associate with a stam- 
merer, and are half-impelled to expectorate if 
we travel in America. Advertisements move 
us by their insistency. Personal influence receives 
the homage of imitation, especially from those who 
are not naturally self-assertive : one who is 
hypnotized abandons himself entirely to the 
suggestions of the hypnotist. Our imitative 
impulse is strengthened by the social instincts 
of veneration or sympathy. Children copy their 
parents, scholars their teachers, servants their 
masters : a hat, a necktie that is favoured by 
royalty — even a limp with which a royal person 
may be afflicted — is copied by loyal subjects. 
The inventions, or novelties, the imitation of 
which has gradually advanced civilization, have 
owed their adoption rather to the influence of 
authority than to their intrinsic merit. Religions 
have spread very largely through the conversion 
of princes; and the conquests of the past owe their 
enduring interest to the impulse that has been 
given by the authority, or prestige, of the con- 
queror to the assimilation of a language, an idea, 
or a custom. Sympathy, on the other hand, 
urges us to imitate our own kind. If one dog 
barks, or a jackal howls, the dogs and jackals 
of the vicinity start barking or howling. Sym- 
pathy breeds the respect for the crowd which 
impels us to act according to the opinions of the 
majority — to imitate behaviour which we see 
practised around us. A boy translated to a 
school, a recruit incorporated in a regiment, imi- 
tates a multitude of fashions, some of which may 
be ludicrous, and none would have attracted him 
in the environment of his home. 

But habit also may be reinforced by feelings 
of reverence or sympathy. Inventors may search 


126 MEMORY, HABIT, AND IMITATION 


long for imitators when their ideas are opposed 
to habits that are so strengthened. This was 
Galileo's experience ; and it may be remarked 
that the commanding authority of Newton and 
Darwin has repressed, as well as stimulated, 
original research. 


The imitative impulse influences the external 
actions of the body. May it not also affect its 
physical development ? There is apparently no 
reason why we should limit the powers of mimicry 
to conscious behaviour : we may quite sub- 
consciously acquire an alien accent. Many plants 
and animals will change their colour — some will 
indeed change their form — in a changed environ- 
ment : many appear to have mimicked the colours 
of other animals, the colour and even the shape 
of the foliage amidst which they live. We search 
for a useful purpose in these transformations, 
and assume that they are protective. Some ol 
them are : others are not. So also some flowers 
that may be attractive to insects are fertilized by 
insects : others, not less attractive in appearance, 
fertilize themselves. It is the fashion to hold that 
these "protective" devices are the relics of a multi- 
tude of casual variations which owe their survival to 
their incidental possession of some utility. On 
this hypothesis variations that have become 
innate owe nothing to the imitative impulse. 
It is, however, difficult to believe that random 
changes, however closely weeded by the struggle 
for life, could have led to the mimicry of leaves 
and twigs by certain insects, to the imitation 
of snow by some Arctic animals during the 
winter months. It may be urged that no instances 
are forthcoming of the development of a trait 
from its origin in individual mimicry to its 


MIMICRY 


127 


establishment in the breed. But, indeed, we could 
not expect to discover them in the few years 
which have been devoted to this enquiry. Many 
centuries would doubtless be required before a 
tendency to mimic evolves as a completed innate 
peculiarity. If we require instances of completed 
imitative action we have only to look about us 
with an open mind. In the present uncertainty 
of biological science we may take courage to 
suppose that imitation has also contributed to 
the spread of newly-arisen peculiarities from 
one individual to countless others — a marvel for 
which, if the novel trait is not actively helpful, 
the struggle for life affords no explanation. 
Why, then, it may be asked, should living creatures 
imitate some peculiarities and not others ? We 
do not know. Children, it may be observed, copy 
some, but not all, of the peculiarities of their 
parents, and often select for their mimicry 
very unimportant tricks of manner. 


CHAPTER VII 


CONSCIOUSNESS 

In Consciousness and Will — in the faculties of 
appreciating the points of a question and of 
deciding upon them — Life displays its supremest 
manifestations. In shaping his behaviour, man 
has left the instinctive automatism of the insects 
far behind him. Instinct holds his hand, but is 
blindfolded, urging rather than guiding him. 
Habits may cling round him ; but they are of his 
own making. For the rest he is free. It is pos- 
sible to imagine a machine that would illustrate 
the working of directive instinct, of sensation and 
reaction — even of reasoning inference. But no 
mechanism can be imagined that could develop 
consciousness, that could become aware of itself, 
or that could spontaneously decide upon the 
movements of its wheels. 

The meaning of consciousness has been obscured 
by the theories that have grown up around it. 
We may translate it simply by the term 44 aware- 
ness. 55 In Chapter III we have found some reason 
for believing that a nerve-cell not only receives 
an impression and develops a muscular reaction 
in response, but feels, or becomes aware, of what 
has passed. The feelings of nerve-cells are no 
doubt of the vaguest, most shadowy character. 
But when concentrated in the nerve ganglia they 
take more substance and definition, and produce 

128 


SUBCONSCIOUSNESS 


129 


the floating, effortless feeling to which the term of 
" subconsciousness " has of recent years been 
applied. This may, apparently, arise in a diffused 
or in a localized form — may produce a mood in the 
body as a whole, or may influence the behaviour 
of single organs. We are subconscious when not 
very deeply asleep, when indulging in day-dreams, 
when under the influence of an intoxicant or a 
violent passion ; and there is reason to believe 
that impressions received, or emotions experi- 
enced, in this condition are registered by us 
separately from those which affect us in our 
conscious states. The existence of a localized 
subconsciousness — of a feeling that is experienced 
by an organ, or limb of the body — may be hard to 
believe ; but it is suggested by many very curious 
phenomena in cases of hypnotism and anaesthesia. 
From these vague states of subconsciousness the 
concentrated and definite feeling of consciousness, 
or awareness, is developed. This is primarily a 
state of observation in which we mark the im- 
pressions, memories, and emotions which affect 
us : by a further development it becomes a state 
of introspection in which we take note of the 
actions of our various organs in response to stimuli ; 
finally, by a still more elaborate outgrowth, it 
blossoms into a realization of self as a whole, into 
self-consciousness — the introspective observation 
of ourselves, under the influence of the various 
stimuli that are upon us. So are we not only 
aware of our impressions, memories, and emotions, 
but are aware that we are aware of them : we 
know that we are tempted, and we know that we 
fall. This extraordinary faculty is localized in 
the brain. When consciousness is acute the brain 
arrogates to itself functions that are ordinarily 
deputed to local nerve systems, such as the per- 
formance of those accomplishments that are 


130 


CONSCIOUSNESS 


committed by practice to the ideo-motor mach- 
inery, and not infrequently fails in executing 
them. A fit of consciousness may unnerve the 
fingers ot a skilled pianist, and make an orator 
forget his sentences. But however deeply we 
may probe it, however minutely we may analyse 
it, consciousness remains an insoluble enigma. 
We speak of it as an instrument. But does it not 
appear to be ourselves ? It is from one point of 
view the microscope, from another the micro- 
scopist. It is aware of itself. To materialistic 
philosophers it may appear to have sprung from 
some strange fermentation in the vessel of Life ; 
but it soars aloft, like the genius of the Arabian 
tale, overshadows its vessel and critically examines 
it. By many it has been identified with the 
human soul. But the genius may be reimprisoned 
by sleep, by intoxication or by a fit of passion : 
it will vanish before a slight concussion of the 
brain : hypnotic influence affects it strangely. It 
has the powers of a magician ; but it is as unstable 
as a dream. 

§ 

If we can believe that each nerve-cell may 
develop a rudimentary feeling or consciousness 
of its own, we may arrive at some explanation, 
indefinite though it be, of the power of the brain 
to apprehend the memories and thoughts which 
stream through it. How are these intangible 
shadows brought within the grasp of conscious- 
ness ? By, we may suppose, sympathetic and 
reciprocal action of the " awareness " of the 
nerve-cells, which communicates to one cell the 
happenings in another without need of any special 
transmitting machinery. And if nerve-cells, in 
virtue of their inherent " awareness," can com- 
municate with one another they can communicate 
across space ; for within the cavity of the skull 


RECIPROCAL CELL-FEELING 131 


they are separated, in some cases, by space that 
is by no means inappreciable. If they are not 
isolated from one another by space that is within 
the body, neither need they necessarily be isolated 
from one another by space that is outside the 
body — in fact, the nerve-cells of one body may 
be able to communicate with the nerve-cells of 
another body if their awareness is actively 
reciprocal. In this thought we may find an 
explanation of certain very curious manifesta- 
tions of sympathy between different individuals — 
of intimacies which seem to lay bare the inner- 
most moods, and even thoughts, of one friend 
to another, and of the puzzling phenomena of 
thought-reading, telepathy, and hypnotism. The 
remarkable affection that binds dog to man may 
be due to a certain innate responsiveness in the 
attunement of their nerve cells which enables one 
to sympathize with the other. Most lovers of 
dogs will affirm that they can read the mind of a 
dog as intimately as that of a human companion. 
At night, in the tropics, the trees are haunted by 
myriads of fire-flies, which flash their light some- 
times independently, but at other times in most 
exact 1 accord with one another, so as to illumine 
the foliage as by a gleam of lightning. They 
must time themselves by such a feeling of sym- 
pathy as we have been considering : and we may, 
indeed, hold that their simultaneous flashing 
illustrates the sudden processes which sweep 
through our brains when we cogitate and form 
conclusions. 

If the faculty of consciousness is inherent in a 
sensitive cell, it must be possessed, in however 
rudimentary a form, by all living creatures. But 
self-consciousness appears to be a refinement that 

1 Similar concerted action commonly occurs in the insect world, 
and is very noticeable in the accurate evolutions of a flight of 
gregarious birds. 

K 


132 


CONSCIOUSNESS 


is a monopoly of mankind's. We can, of course, 
only judge of the mental states of the lower 
animals by observing their behaviour. Dogs 
may show some slight traces of self-conscious 
bashfulness. Other animals do not appear to 
experience this feeling. 

§ 

We are surrounded with things that are inex- 
plicable : self-consciousness is the nearest to us 
of them all. It appears, from the phenomena of 
hypnotism, to be a delicate outgrowth of conscious- 
ness, which may, so to speak, be amputated without 
depriving our conscious faculties of their acute- 
ness, although their purposeful unity is withered 
by the severance. The most striking, and 
probably the essential, feature of the hypnotic 
condition is the complete loss of self-conscious- 
ness — the indifference of the hypnotized person 
to the figure which he may present to by- 
standers, and his readiness to behave in a manner 
which would ordinarily cost him agonies of shame. 
There is no failing of awareness to externals : his 
consciousness of impressions, and of the move- 
ments of his own limbs, may indeed be abnormally 
effective, enabling him to overcome difficulties 
which would ordinarily baffle him. At the same 
time he becomes exceedingly amenable to sug- 
gestions : the imitative impulse completely dom- 
inates him. He acts, it is true, only upon the 
suggestions of the hypnotist, and this seems to 
indicate that the imitative impulse is swayed by 
an influence subtly exercised by the hypnotist's 
mind. These conditions are not unparalleled in 
ordinary life : the less self-conscious a man is — 
the less he is impressed with a sense of his own 
individuality — the more prone he will be to mould 
his behaviour upon that of others ; and we are 


SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 


133 


all disposed to copy those who influence us 
through our feelings of admiration or respect. 
The abnormal acuteness of the faculties when 
under hypnotic influence is also illustrated by 
common experience. Our energy and skill are 
at their highest when evoked by an impulse that 
is strong enough to make us forget ourselves : 
there are few who have not suffered from the 
paralysing effect of a fit of self -consciousness. 
The hypnotic condition can be brought about in 
various methods, and it is difficult to isolate the 
actual cause. But it appears that in all cases the 
attention of the person who is to be hypnotized 
must be attracted and concentrated, and it may 
be that he loses his consciousness of himself by 
strengthening his consciousness of externals — 
that the concentration of his ordinary perceptive 
awareness costs him the temporary atrophy of 
those tender shoots which we have figured as 
representing consciousness of self. So we all 
know that self-consciousness vanishes when we 
are engrossed in study, or in any pursuit which 
absorbs the whole of our attention. 

If our faculties are appraised by their practical 
helpfulness in the struggle for life, self-conscious- 
ness appears to be an injurious superfluity. If 
acute it may interfere, not only with' the exer- 
cise of acquired dexterities but with the per- 
formance of our instinctive bodily functions. 
There is no more fruitful cause of " foozling " on 
the links than self-conscious thoughts of our 
style at the moment when our attention should 
be concentrated upon the ball. If self-conscious- 
ness is exceedingly acute the limbs may fail, 
the articulation of speech become difficult, and 
even the beating of the heart may be interrupted. 
These are the terrors of a bashful man. But if 
we consider the causes that have led to the ethical 


134 


CONSCIOUSNESS 


progress of mankind, there are none that have 
been stronger, or more beneficial, than the appre- 
ciation of oneself. Modesty and decency owe their 
origin to it. Consciously valuing our own person- 
ality, we come to respect the personality of others, 
to regard them as, in some measure, our equals, 
and entitled to our sympathy. Refined by such 
ideas the instinct of kindness has carried us far 
beyond the elemental impulses of indiscriminate 
benevolence : our philanthropy is thoughtful as 
well as generous, and our charity is dispensed in 
such fashion as best to save the self-respect of 
those who receive it. 

Self-consciousness is self-assertive, and under 
its influence a revolutionary change is taking 
place in the feelings with which social and 
political institutions are regarded. In former 
days they were supported by the social im- 
pulses of reverence, loyalty, and deference : 
these do not appeal to self-consciousness : indi- 
vidualistic (egotistic) impulses come uppermost 
when we think of ourselves, and in this mental 
condition loyalty of any kind would be hardly 
possible could a basis not be found for it in our 
self-esteem. If a government or an institution is 
a credit to us we may reasonably adhere to it for 
the most selfish of motives. In fact, whereas 
formerly we were patriotic because we desired to 
be a credit to our country, we are now patriotic 
in order that our country may be a credit to our- 
selves. To win our support a social or political 
institution or ideal must gratify our self-esteem, 
either by associating us with its activities or by 
marking us with the distinction of an exclusive 
peculiarity. To be popular, government must rest 
upon the votes of the people. Dependent nation- 
alities such as the Czechs, the Irish, and the Welsh, 
fortify their self-respect by reviving their racial 


PERSONALITY 


135 


languages. These feelings may seem very petty 
compared with the uncalculating loyalty of our 
ancestors. But we must not hastily condemn 
them. They certainly make for self -improve- 
ment. And they probably will conduce to peace. 
Those who love their country because it is of 
advantage to them, are not so likely to shed their 
blood for it as those who regard its welfare as an 
object in itself. And if self -consciousness, by 
increasing the influence of the individualistic 
impulse of self-assertion, is weakening the social 
impulses, and is, so far, loosening the bonds which 
are the primordial mainstays of society, it is pro- 
viding an antidote for this disintegration. By 
accentuating the impulse of kindliness it is swell- 
ing a force which will link mankind together as 
effectively and upon a broader basis. 

§ 

The fruit of self-consciousness is the idea of 
personality, the notion that we are not part and 
parcel of the Nature around us, not merely 
members of a family or tribe, but are individuals, 
each with a sphere of his own. The genesis of this 
idea does not appear to lie very far back in the 
development of mankind. We can discover signs 
of its growth during the period of recorded his- 
tory. It is hard to enter into the mind of a savage. 
But from the completeness with which in savage 
life the interests of the individual are submerged 
below those of the family, or the tribe, we may 
infer that a man is hardly conceived as an inde- 
pendent personality : he is of consideration only 
as a member of a group : it is the group which 
has an independent existence and is responsible 
for the conduct of each of its members. A similar 
idea also pervaded ancient law, w r hich hardly 
recognized any rights or responsibilities that were 


CONSCIOUSNESS 


not common to the family, the clan, or the neigh- 
bourhood as a whole. In grammar the idea of 
personality is expressed by the nominative case 
of the first personal pronoun : in Sanskrit and 
most European languages this differs radically 
from the oblique cases — a distinction which 
perhaps marks the growth of a consciousness that 
man, when he comes to the front of the stage, 
should be distinguished from man when he stands 
back with the rest of the company. Beyond a 
doubt, go back as far as we may, the leaders and 
rulers of the people have had a very clear idea 
of their personal importance : the proclamations 
of the kings of Egypt and Assyria were drafted 
in a vein of most flamboyant self-conceit. But 
their egotism was as naive as that of the patriarch 
of a herd of antelope ; and they regarded them- 
selves rather as instruments of the Divine than 
as independent authorities. Amongst the com- 
mon people, not a flicker appeared of inde- 
pendance or self-respect. There were, in those 
days, no popular revolutions : history was con- 
cerned with the fortunes of dynasties. Indeed, 
in classical days the condition of slavery was 
accepted by white men with an apathetic con- 
tentedness which to modern ideas appears very 
strange. Self-consciousness appears to be a 
faculty the authority of which has increased of 
recent years, and is still increasing, under the 
influence of egotistical habits of mind. 


In consciousness, as in a mirror, we see re- 
flected the drama of our inner lives, the impres- 
sions and memories which guide and pay court to 
us, the impulses which tempt, cajole, or admonish 
us, the habits which constrain us, and the balan- 
cing deliberations of our reason and will. We see 


THE MIRROR OF CONSCIOUSNESS 137 


not only the forces which act upon us, but our 
behaviour under their influence, and (to use a 
homely comparison) the spectacle gives us such 
assistance as we derive from a looking-glass 
when dressing ourselves. 

Consciousness marshals our perceptions and 
recollections for reasoning analysis. It converts, 
so to speak, a disorderly pile of literature into a 
well-arranged library, classifying a store of desul- 
tory information into definite knowledge, which 
can be used to correct the instinctive propensity 
to link together, as cause and effect, events that 
are not essentially connected, merely because one 
has followed the other in our experience. We owe 
it to knowledge, for instance, that we can deny 
that the state of the atmosphere upon St. Swithin's 
day determines the course of the weather during 
the forty days following. 

Consciousness, further, sharpens the edge of the 
reasoning faculty by which we appreciate the 
properties of things. We perceive that a red flower 
is not an indivisible whole — to be taken as it 
stands — but is a flower that possesses the prop- 
erty of redness. Our grasp of this property 
is styled " conception 55 as opposed to our 
" perception " of the flower as a whole. Con- 
sciousness enables reason to go further and 
to apprehend that properties may have prop- 
erties of their own. Reason sees that a flight 
of three birds has the property of " threeness " : 
assisted by consciousness it sees that "threeness" 
has the property of being number, and can be 
classed with " fourness " and " fiveness " : so 
also it can distinguish the property of shape in 
roundness and squareness, of colour in redness 
and blueness. Properties are, in fact, figured as 
abstract ideas, and we gain such concepts as those 
of sweetness, bitterness, virtue, and vice. Nor 


138 


CONSCIOUSNESS 


does the process of analysis stop here. In the 
light of consciousness we perceive and regard as 
properties the fundamental links between one im- 
pression and another, by which we instinctively 
weave our impressions together. These links 
are idealized into relationships in space, in 
number, in appearance, or in sequence : so we 
obtain conceptions of geometry, of arithmetic, 
of classification, of logic, and of cause and effect. 
These conceptions, refined again and again by this 
process of discrimination, yield us the materials 
for the most abstract investigations of science 
and philosophy. By this dissection of properties 
we perceive, for instance, the relations which are 
expressed by grammatical sentences : we analyse 
an occurrence into agent (nominative) action 
(verb), and affected (accusative), and apprehend 
the various conditions, qualifications, and possi- 
bilities that are expressed by varying the verb 
in mood and tense, and by the use of adverbs, 
prepositions, and conjunctions. We can trace 
the process of this analysis by observing its im- 
perfections amongst backward races. Some of 
the indigenous tribes of South America have never 
completed the dissection from which the verb 
emerges : they have, for instance, a word for 
washing clothes, but none for washing in the 
abstract. 

But man would have remained as dumb as 
the brutes had conscious reason not brought 
him to perceive the property of symbols, and 
to understand that a thing may be represented 
by a sound, a gesture, or a sign, which is not 
inseparably connected with it, but can be dis- 
sociated from it if we please. In primitive 
stages of reason, symbol and object are merged 
indissolubly together : to a terrier the word 
" rats 5 5 is linked inseparably with the memory 


CONSCIOUSNESS AND REASON 139 


of a rat hunt : an idol, to a savage, is the deity 
itself. With the discovery that words could 
be employed as transferable signs it became 
possible to form a language. But men took 
time to appreciate the usefulness of words as 
representing objects. At a time when Rome had 
long been founded, land could only be transferred 
by handing over a clod from its surface. Without 
the use of words the processes of reason could 
never have outgrown their primitive stage, for 
it is only by words that properties are distin- 
guished — are, so to speak, mounted for examina- 
tion. How could we consider the intricacies of 
logic if our ideas of them were only to be ex- 
pressed by gestures ? 

Not less momentous have been the conse- 
quences of the discernment of properties upon the 
material practical life of man. It has enabled 
him to invent tools and machines. A stone, with 
which he has killed an adversary, is perceived to 
be of value not as a stone but as a missile, and 
the way is open for discovering other missiles. 
So have been invented the appliances which man 
has turned against Nature to limit her tyranny, 
converting her wildernesses into fields, and her 
fibres and timber into clothing and houses : so 
also the weapons which man has fashioned for the 
destruction of his fellow-men. 

In the light of consciousness our instincts also 
become amenable to analysis. We can dissect 
our emotions, and compare them, estimating, for 
instance, how far our conduct is actuated by sel- 
fish and how far by social motives. Our vague 
aesthetic and ethical impulses are dissolved, 
refined, and crystallized into systems of art and 
morals. We can also observe and appraise our 
habits. Consciousness, then, provides the will 
with the material that it requires for the exercise 


140 


CONSCIOUSNESS 


of its powers of choice. It sets before the will the 
impulses of instinct, the promptings of habit, 
and the inferences of reason, so that the will has 
before it, so to speak, a catalogue of the various 
courses that are open for adoption. The cata- 
logue is often exceedingly incomplete. The 
suggestions of instinct and habit are faithfully 
presented ; but the inferences of reason may be 
a travesty of those at which a cultivated intelli- 
gence would arrive. Thus the case for burning 
a witch will give full weight to the instinct of 
fear, and the habit of persecution, but will be 
ludicrously inadequate in the inferences which 
are marshalled to justify the act. 

§ 

Consciousness has assuredly been the most 
potent of the influences which have raised man 
above the brutes. But it has led him into errors 
and unhappiness with which the brutes are not 
troubled. They are not distracted by the super- 
stitions of magic and fetishism; they do not 
mutilate themselves, torture their fellows, or 
endeavour to exterminate their own kind under 
the impression that they are earning merit. 
These, it may be said, are errors of reason, not of 
consciousness. But reason is misled by mis- 
apprehending happenings, or drawing wrong 
inferences from happenings, with which it would 
not concern itself were they not set before it by 
consciousness. The reasoning powers of a monkey 
are not exercised over the cause of a toothache, 
or a plentiful crop of nuts, because it is not con- 
scious that these events are causally connected 
with anything that precedes them. And, beyond 
doubt, consciousness has increased very materially 
the tale of human unhappiness. It overshadows 
us with the foreknowledge of death — also, it 


EVILS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 


should be added, disposes us to seek the con- 
solations that are offered by religion. It deepens 
into misery the irritation which proceeds from an 
unsatisfied impulse : if we are moved to acquire 
a thing, consciousness brings home to us the 
bitterness of failure. And it afflicts us with the 
anguish of repentance — that feeling which arises 
from the failure of the conscious will to hold its 
own against the temptations of instinct. The 
freedom of the brutes from these refinements of 
trouble moved Walt Whitman to envy them : — 

They do not sweat and whine about their condition ; 
They do not lie awake in the dark, and weep for their sins ; 
They do not make me sick, discussing their duty to God ; 
Not one is dissatisfied — not one is demented with the 

mania for owning things ; 
Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived 

thousands of years ago ; 
Not one is respectable or industrious over the whole world. 

I. Errors of apprehension. — Before conscious- 
ness are unrolled two sets of images — the sensory 
impressions, representing actualities, and the 
recollections, or memorial visions, that are con- 
jured up by the memory. The latter may be 
exceedingly distinct, and are generally very 
distinct during childhood and in persons who are 
weakly endowed with critical powers. Their 
verisimilitude is heightened by the faculty of 
visualization — or seeing an image in detail — 
which appears to be strongest when reason is 
weakest. Children are easily disposed to see 
ghosts in the dark, and savage life is overshadowed 
by mysterious hauntings. But the seeing of 
visions is not confined to the young or the un- 
cultured. Many men of intelligence have been 
troubled by hallucinations — of presences or of 
voices — whose unreality can hardly be established 


142 


CONSCIOUSNESS 


by the assurance of their friends. Dreams may 
be so impressive as to leave some conviction of 
reality : in early days they were, indeed, re- 
garded as intimations of realities, and their inter- 
pretation has influenced the course of history. In 
savage communities they are still accepted as 
communications of fact. A sensory impression 
is shown by touch to be based upon reality. Can 
a real foundation be denied to an insistent vision 
which only critical thought could assign to 
memory ? We see an object when our eyes are 
open : we also see it when our eyes are closed. 
If the first image was caused by the object itself, 
the second must be caused by the object's 
" double. 55 By such an inference men easily 
persuaded themselves of the duality of things, 
and came to believe that the possession of both 
body and soul — as of substance and shadow — was 
the normal condition of the objects around them, 
whether living or lifeless. This conclusion became 
of poignant interest when applied to man, and 
the deeper we go into ancient history — or into 
the practices of existing barbarism — the stronger 
conviction we find of the existence and persistence 
of a human soul. A hill-people of Assam, when 
burying a kinsman, fence the grave with a hedge 
of thorns, in fear of which his tender spirit will 
be content to remain in confinement under- 
ground. The most elaborate and practical concep- 
tions of the needs of the soul are perhaps to be 
found in the religions of ancient Egypt and of 
modern China. In Egypt the " double 55 — or ka 
— of the deceased was provided with all the equip- 
ment which would enable it to continue in shadow- 
land the life of its earthly counterpart ; but since 
the ka was a " double,' 5 the articles provided for 
it might be " doubles ' 5 also, and could be supplied 
in the form of effigies or symbols. Such meticulous 


ERRORS OF APPREHENSION 


care for matters of practical detail is also a feature 
of Chinese funerals : when the dead, as often 
happens, are not buried for some time, and their 
coffins are deposited in vaults round a " garden 
of the dead," each vault is furnished for the souPs 
enjoyment ; and, when the relatives periodically 
assemble to do honour to the dead, a chair is left 
vacant for the soul's accommodation. Similar 
memorial services, marked by such concrete 
acknowledgments of the souPs existence as the 
offering of food, bound families together in Rome, 
in Greece, and in India, and made a deep impres- 
sion upon the national laws. 

II. Errors of inference. — We are instinctively 
impelled to link together happenings which follow 
one another in sequence. This is the basis of the 
process of inference upon which we depend every 
moment for the guidance of our behaviour. If 
one wasp stings us we avoid another. The 
connection of two events in sequence, seen in 
the light of consciousness, appears to be that 
of happening and consequence — of cause and 
effect — and we conceive of causing and being 
caused as inseparable properties of happenings, 
just as we conceive of colour and of number as 
essential properties of all things. Accordingly we 
link every happening backwards and forwards — 
as being caused by another happening, or as 
causing another happening — and we are dis- 
concerted if a cause is not evident for every 
occurrence. Observation is an imperfect guide 
where knowledge is elementary. In simple 
matters it may guide us correctly enough. One 
who touches fire is burned : the burn is justly 
attributed to the fire. But the vast majority 
of life's experiences are not simple : they 
are preceded by a number of happenings, any 


144 


CONSCIOUSNESS 


one of which may be the cause. There is no 
room in the mind of an uncultured man for the 
idea of chance or accident : the acknowledge- 
ment of ignorance is a sceptical refinement that 
is out of accord with the first promptings of our 
instinct to infer. Accordingly, where causes are 
not discoverable by his observation, he is ready to 
accept as such any ideas that are suggested to him 
with a show of authority, although they may be 
derived from visioned as opposed to observed 
experiences — are the fruit not of observation but 
of imagination. So he may believe that rain is caused 
by the performance of a magic ceremony. Thus 
was opened a curious chapter in the history of man- 
kind. Its last pages record the achievements of 
science and philosophy : but, for the most part, it 
is an account of extraordinary error. A concep- 
tion of cause and effect has enabled man to put 
the earth into a balance and to determine the 
chemical constituents of the stars. For untold 
generations it has led him to believe in the grossest 
extravagances of magic and witchcraft. 

Children display very instructively the begin- 
nings of these delusions. They are insatiably 
curious respecting the causes of things, but they 
accept without question the answers that are 
given them, whether as to the constitution of the 
moon or of the origin of babies. So is the rapacity 
of a dragon accepted in India and China as the 
cause of an eclipse of the moon. Unending would 
be a list of the errors to which man has been com- 
mitted by an imperfect use of his reasoning facul- 
ties. Fetishism, magic, witchcraft, and astrology : 
belief in a fateful connection between man and 
various animals, which are adopted as totems, 
worshipped as protectors, dissected as a means of 
discovering the future and eaten in the hope of 
appropriating their qualities : the ascription of 


ERRORS OF INFERENCE 145 


the forces of Nature to divine personalities, the 
worship of the sun, of fire, and the upgrowth of 
myths that appealed very strongly to the aesthetic 
instinct : sacrifice as a means of propitiating evil 
— even human sacrifices to safeguard great under- 
takings such as the opening of a campaign or the 
building of a bridge : customs which plumb the 
depth of absurdity, such as the couvade, which 
obliges a father to take to his bed on the birth 
of a child and eschew all food which would be 
harmful to the infant. 

Such are the errors which have sprung from the 
first imperfect effects of consciousness. As this 
faculty has gained strength it has gradually 
dispelled them by the assistance of accumulated 
knowledge, which sifts out, and rejects as causes, 
such happenings, or properties, whether visioned 
or imaginary, as are only accidentally connected 
with the occurrence for which an origin is being 
sought. Blanks in the chain of inference — con- 
fessions of ignorance — are preferred to links which 
will not bear examination, and we are content to 
ascribe to chance or accident events that cannot 
be explained by experience. These blanks have 
opened a field for the entry of science : there was 
no room for scientific inquiry when the inferring 
impulse insisted upon being satisfied by the vision 
of a cause for every occurrence. 

In these modern days science is supported 
by the close deduction of effects from causes, 
and we are gratified to observe that its flights 
are ever attaining higher altitudes. But there 
are countless relics to remind us of our descent 
from our ancestors. In Mediterranean countries 
people commonly believe in the evil eye : nearer 
home there are those who would not sit down 
thirteen to table, who think it lucky to touch 
wood, unlucky to spill salt, and put their trust 


i 4 6 


CONSCIOUSNESS 


in a mascot. Nay further, unreasonable in- 
ferences may seriously affect the course of 
politics : should prices rise there are multitudes 
of voters who will hold the ministry in office to 
blame. Nor is science itself quite free from the 
illusion that happenings which transcend our 
powers of conception can be strung together by 
reason as cause and effect. 

III. Unhappiness. — We enter here upon the 
workings of Conscience, that influence which, 
through unhappiness — or the threat of unhappi- 
ness — controls all but the most lawless of men. 
Conscience appears to us in the guise of a judicial 
authority which commends or reproves us accord- 
ing as we obey or disobey certain rules of conduct 
or laws — it may be human, or divine. But no rule 
or law affects our conscience unless it has been 
adopted by our will, either as an original resolu- 
tion of our own or on the authority of the society 
to which we belong. A Mohammedan does not 
repent of bigamy or a soldier of looting. The 
prick of conscience which leads to repentance, 
results, then, from a failure of the will to assert 
itself — a failure which our consciousness glaringly 
portrays ; it is unhappiness that arises from the 
dissatisfaction of the will, which resembles our 
other impulses in causing us distress if its cravings 
are unfulfilled. This feeling has reinforced very 
potently the efforts of authorities, whether religi- 
ous or civil, to restrain human conduct from 
disorder which would break up society. But, 
however useful to the community, repentance is 
unhappiness to the individual: to one of sensi- 
tive character it may indeed be torturing anguish. 

Misery rather than unhappiness is the lot of 
those who are afflicted with imperious impulses 
that conscious will impels them not only to 


CONSCIENCE 


*47 


restrain, but to conceal, even from themselves. 
In such a case the satisfaction of the will is a poor 
recompense for the denial of the stronger instinct : 
the baffled impulse becomes an obsession, at 
some times shaking the mind with fits of nervous 
excitement and depression, at other times en- 
gulfing it in the prof oundest religious melancholy, 
occasionally even sweeping it away into the 
whirlpool of insanity. No one whose ears have 
not been filled with the rushing of these waters, 
whose hands have not been thrown up in the help- 
lessness of despair, can realize the words of the 
Psalmist — " Out of the depths have I called upon 
Thee, O God. 55 

The instinctive origin of this melancholy may 
be traced in the symptoms that are manifested 
in its extremest cases. Insanity that has devel- 
oped out of profound depression is commonly 
marked by a most surprising display of elemental 
instinct. Patients exhibit impulses and know- 
ledge which are in the most violent disaccord 
with their former dispositions : their characters 
appear to have been completely changed by their 
disorder, indeed, they may seem to be possessed 
by a diabolic spirit. In fact, the restraints of 
consciousness having been withdrawn, instincts 
have been freed which had been straitly confined 
by the will. They may have been penned alto- 
gether within the domain of subconciousness, so 
that their existence was not apparent to the victim 
whom they tortured. But they fed upon his 
vitals, and distracted his moods, with the swayings 
of a violent internal struggle. 

Release from such an obsession will rarely be 
obtained by any striving of the conscious will. 
Instinct must be countered by instinct : depres- 
sion will vanish before the impulses of hunting, 
fighting, or drinking. But the completest and 

L 


148 


CONSCIOUSNESS 


most abiding relief is to be found in that instinct 
for self-abnegation which underlies our aesthetic 
emotions. Accepted as a counsel of despair, self- 
abandonment would only set free the demons ; 
but, proceeding from the influence of the aesthetic 
impulse, it is not merely the hopeless relinquish- 
ment of a struggle ; it is an emotion that is 
strengthened and illuminated by feelings of 
adoration, trustfulness, and love which give the 
beaten soul an assurance of victory. 

§ 

Man's instinctive expectation of a cause for 
every happening appears to be the origin of the 
sense of injustice which has influenced incalcul- 
ably the ideas of individuals and communities. 
If I am industrious and of good conduct — if, that 
is to say, I act in accordance with the teaching I 
receive — I ought, on any reasonable view of 
things, to be prosperous. Success is always held 
out as, at all events, an incidental fruit of right- 
eousness. But, as a matter of fact, this expecta- 
tion is constantly belied. We see good men in 
trouble and oppressed, the wicked flourishing in 
prosperity, often, indeed, obtained by the oppres- 
sion of the good. The crops of the religious are 
blighted, whilst those of a blasphemer come to 
harvest. This does violence to our reasoning 
instinct — our impulse to infer — and renders us 
dissatisfied and unhappy. Since first man became 
conscious of his condition his cry has gone up 
against life's injustice. He may, in some degree, 
be reconciled to it by habit. And religion offers 
him potent consolations. It urges that what 
appears to be injustice is the consequence of sin, 
is a discipline for the character, or the inscrutable 
ordering of an All- wise Providence, to be accepted 
without question in trusting self-abandonment. 


APPRECIATION OF INJUSTICE 


The Psalms are inspired by these messages of 
comfort : for centuries they have calmed the 
distressed and strengthened the faint-hearted 
amongst every denomination of Christians in 
every country of Europe. Christianity offers a 
more substantial solace : the wrongs of this life 
will be redressed hereafter : even the injustices 
of death are only passing. The doctrine of 
Fatalism offers no hope, and is content to point 
out that preordained fate is the cause of both 
justice and injustice. Yet it has reconciled 
millions of Orientals to tyranny, poverty, and 
degradation. But these explanations are not 
always convincing : at times men violently 
reject them, and, inferring that their wrongs are 
capable of being remedied, set their hands to 
strikes, riots, and revolutions. 


CHAPTER VIII 


VOLITION 

If we examine the processes by which we form 
resolutions, or " make up our minds/ 5 we shall 
find that it is only in a small proportion of cases 
that we can claim to have acted spontaneously, 
or by the exercise of free will. Our conclusions 
are generally suggested to us by habit, by im- 
pulses which we do not control, or by the people 
around us. Thus, when I awake in the morning, 
I am sensible of a struggle between a desire to 
remain in bed and a desire to get up. I make up 
my mind to get up, and do so. But in reality my 
mind was made up for me by habit : I rise because 
it is the usual hour for rising. I prove that this 
is so by rising about the same hour every morning 
— a consistency of behaviour which could never 
be expected did I exercise every morning an 
unfettered spontaneity. On the other hand, at 
times I appear to act entirely of my own accord, 
and untrammelled by habit. I may suddenly 
determine to rise an hour earlier than usual on 
Midsummer Day, to take a stroll before breakfast. 
We may then class our resolutions as of two 
kinds — suggested (or imitative) and original. I 
may invest money in oil shares because I am 
infected with the excitement of a u boom " in 
oil : in this case my decision has been suggested 
to me. Or I may invest after carefully examining 
market reports, and comparing the prospects of 

150 


ORIGINAL AND SUGGESTED RESOLUTIONS 151 


oil with those of other enterprises : in this case 
I have formed an original decision. 

Resolutions that are suggested are formed very 
easily indeed. But an effort is required to make 
up our minds when there is no assisting suggestion. 
The effort may be accompanied by a good deal 
of mental perturbation. Many of us have 
experienced the annoying perplexity that may be 
occasioned by the necessity of making a spon- 
taneous choice — it may be in the purchase of a 
necktie or a wedding present : we should feel 
thankful were there only one article in stock 
which could possibly be selected, and we hail with 
relief any suggestion the shopman may make to 
help us to a conclusion. We are sometimes even 
impelled to go by the chance result of a u toss 
up. 55 To most men life would be unendurable 
did it require them very frequently to form con- 
clusions by spontaneous judgment : they are 
content to be led by habit or suggestion. 

§ 

When we act upon a suggested resolution we 
cannot, of course, claim to have exercised spon- 
taneity or free will. There is a large and influ- 
ential school of thought which denies that our 
behaviour is at any time spontaneous, asserting 
that resolutions which bear all the appearance 
of originality are in reality forced upon us, 
and merely give effect to suggestions that can be 
detected if we cast our eyes backward in search 
of them. My determination to rise early was the 
outcome of a casual glance at an almanac : my 
preference for oil sharfes was prompted by a 
remark which I chanced to overhear in a railway 
carriage. It is impossible to disprove this theory. 
The action of our brains is limited by experience ; 
it is compelled to mould itself upon the past, and 


152 


VOLITION 


every decision that we form can without doubt be 
connected with something that has occurred to 
us. On the other hand, the theory appears to be 
equally incapable of proof, for it cannot be shown 
that the happenings to which it points as having 
caused our action did not, in fact, merely have the 
effect of conditioning it. I cannot eat unless I 
have teeth : but I do not eat because I have teeth, 
but because I wish to do so. A young man adopts 
an Indian career after casually reading a book on 
the Indian Services : if he had not chanced 
upon the book, he might have lived his life in 
England. But he goes to India not because he read 
the book, but because he was disposed to try the 
new. Had he not possessed this disposition, no 
book would have moved him : possessing it he 
is ready to receive from any source information 
that enables him to see his way to a career to- 
wards which his bent inclines him. It is, then, his 
disposition, and not the reading of the book, that 
is the true cause of his resolution : the latter is 
merely a condition. 

But, it will be objected, this argument merely 
shifts the cause further back: it is his disposi- 
tion, not a choice of free will, that sends him to 
India. It is true that we can hardly escape from the 
sway of our instinctive impulses : but in man these 
impulses are so conflicting and of so general a 
character that they leave ample scope for the 
exercise of free choice in giving play to them. 
That we possess a measure of independance is 
shown very clearly by the process of " fixing our 
attention." Our attention may be attracted 
by an object subconsciously, in which case, 
of course, no question of spontaneity arises. 
But it may also be fixed by an effort of will. We 
are conscious, very distinctly indeed, of possessing 
the power of fixing it upon anything that we please ; 


DETERMINISM 


153 


and the effort which it costs us to do so seems to 
prove that the process is actively original, and 
is not the resultant of predetermining impressions. 

The " determinist 33 theory, which denies the 
existence of free will, is attractive to those who are 
inclined to view Life as the result of mechanical 
or chemical causes. If Life is simply a series of 
reactions to external stimuli, there is no place in 
it for either consciousness or free will. Free will 
may be ruled out of existence, as an illusion, if 
we dignify as the causes of our behaviour the 
facts of our experience which necessarily condi- 
tion it. The existence of consciousness cannot 
possibly be denied. But it is regarded by this 
school of thought as a functionless superfluity, to 
be compared with the sparks that fly off from an 
electrical machine, the shadow of a moving object, 
or the humming of a top. Yet in spite of these 
explanations we feel that we possess free will as 
well as consciousness, and can use them for active 
purposes. We can treat consciousness as an 
accident and free will as an illusion only if we dis- 
regard introspective observations which, in such a 
matter as the appraisement of our mental facul- 
ties, are an infinitely safer guide than inferences 
that are based upon our experience of inanimate 
things. The most materialistic of philosophers 
does not venture to repudiate altogether the 
promptings of these feelings. He will not deny 
the existence of consciousness. But he distrusts 
their revelations when they contradict the con- 
clusions to which he is led by the inferences that 
he draws from material happenings. We are, 
however, compelled to trust to introspection for 
most of the knowledge which we possess of our 
mental processes, and it is unreasonable to discard 
it, in one province of our enquiry, simply because 
its promptings are out of accord with our experi- 


154 


VOLITION 


ence of material energies. If we place any trust in 
our self-conscious powers of observation and ana- 
lysis, we must arrive at the conclusion that spon- 
taneity, or free will, guided by consciousness, is 
not only a vital force, but that it is the highest and 
most wonderful of the vital forces that are mani- 
fest to us : it lies at the extremest limit of the 
territory which Life has w r on in its struggle with 
the Matter that fetters it ; and in its capricious 
irregularity it presents the strongest contrast 
to the uniform, calculable energies that are dis- 
played by Matter when unallied with Life. Prac- 
tically, of course, we know very well that human 
nature introduces an unpredictable element into 
our experiences. 

And, if the majority of men are content to 
regulate their lives by the suggestions of others, 
or by habit, and make no original use of their wills 
except to decide trifling questions of every day 
routine, those who aspire to lead their fellows are 
generally characterized by strong will-power, 
which is, indeed, often their only title to ascend- 
ancy. So also with the men who have led human 
progress by their inventions, whether in forms of 
art, or in standards of conduct, or in material 
contrivances. Free will is distinct from the 
inventive impulse : it is a disposition towards 
choice, not a motive towards construction. But 
it is obvious that an inventor must use it very 
largely in selecting and combining the ideas that 
occur to him. Man owes his moral and material 
advancement, as well as his social organization, 
to the exceptional powers of volition enjoyed 
by some of his kind. He has risen above the 
brutes, little by little, through the inventive 
spontaneity of a few of his species, to whom it 
has occurred to suggest changes of idea or of 
habit. Some of these have been adopted through 


FREE-WILL IN CHOICE 


155 


the assimilating force of the imitative impulse. 
Others have been derided, or neglected, and 
forgotten. 

§ 

There are, however, limits to the spontaneity 
of the most eccentric of men. His wildest vagaries 
are circumscribed by the range of his experience. 
So also with the inventive impulse : the most 
original designer merely expands or applies ideas 
that have been gathered by him from outside, or 
combines several of them together. Free will 
cannot, then, open a new and original path of action 
for itself : it can do no more than select one out 
of the various paths that are offered by instinct, 
by habit, by imitation, or by reasoned inference. 
It is, in fact, concerned not with invention, but 
with choice. The questions with which we are 
confronted differ immensely in complexity accord- 
ing as they are concerned with alternative 
methods of satisfying a single impulse, or with 
conflicting impulses. Influenced by the instinct 
of benevolence, we may be doubtful of the 
particular charities to which we should subscribe : 
we may hesitate over the dishes wherewith to 
satisfy our appetite, or, having determined upon 
a visit to France, over the advantages of the 
routes by Calais or Boulogne. These are only 
questions of method; but if the alternatives are 
very nearly balanced, neither scale being weighted 
by any strong feeling on our part, a distinct 
effort will be needed to decide upon one or the 
other. 

The strain upon the will is much greater when 
the alternative that confronts it is not one of 
methods, but of conflicting impulses, as, for 
instance, between an impulse to show ill-temper 
and an impulse to be kind, between an impulse 
to take ease and an impulse to work. In such a 


VOLITION 


case the will is tried very severely, often, many 
of us have felt, beyond its strength. But, by 
persistent effort, a man of character may gradu- 
ally reinforce the weaker of the two impulses 
until the tendency for which he strives becomes 
a habit. Then the battle is won : the will has 
triumphed. The will may be assisted in this 
struggle by the infliction of punishment — by the 
association, that is to say, of pain with the 
successful predominance of the impulse which 
it is desired to subdue. Punishment, or penance, 
may be self-inflicted, and may be used by the 
will itself as an instrument to weaken a persis- 
tent assailant. So St. Paul by " buffeting " his 
body and " leading it about as a slave, 55 accus- 
tomed unruly impulses to live in servitude. 

This is, however, a triumph which is reserved 
for the strong. An impulse may be naturally so 
forceful, or have been so encouraged by habit, 
as to be irresistible : the will may choose the 
better, but, however fortified by conscious reason, 
cannot turn us from the worse, and our prayer 
must be to be spared from the temptation. So a 
drunkard or debauchee may be well aware that 
he is ruining himself — may wish in his heart that 
he could resist his proclivities — but is unable to 
fight against them. The tempter may, however, 
be subdued if the assistance of a rival impulse can 
be enlisted against it. Drunkenness, which will 
not yield to the reasoned counsels of moderation, 
may be conquered by other impulses, if the alle- 
giance that is given to them is complete. Fear 
may be driven out by blood-thirstiness. Instinct 
must be countered by instinct : but our will may 
assist us to set up this antagonism. One who is 
enslaved by a passion may, by an effort of 
will, conjure into activity an impulse that is 
derived from the aesthetic or from the ethic^ 


THE STRUGGLE OF TEMPTATION 157 


instincts that are inherent in us all ; and, if he will 
surrender himself completely, will make no reser- 
vations, but will bind himself by vows to utter 
obedience, he may develop force that will enable 
him to outmaster his familiar demon. Here 
again, punishment may be helpful in undermining 
the control of the dominant impulse. In the 
nature of the case it can hardly be self-imposed, 
and is in many cases inflicted by the State. But 
although it may weaken the unlawful propensities 
of a criminal it cannot be trusted to reform him. 
To establish such a change it is necessary to 
awaken some dormant impulse which will give 
him a new object in life. 

§ 

It will, perhaps, not be altogether fanciful if we 
see some connection between the development 
of spontaneity, or free will, and the individuality, 
or separateness, of living creatures. Life does 
not appear to pervade space ubiquitously, like 
the energies of gravity or electricity : it is dis- 
tributed amongst a number of isolated closed 
vessels, for as such may be considered plants and 
animals. Each of these is a separate centre of 
energy. In dividing itself amongst millions of 
different carriers Life has reserved possibilities 
of activity which would have been lost were it 
diffused through a continuous mass of living 
plasma or tissue. A structureless living jelly 
(Bathybius) appears to cover large areas of the 
ocean floor : but, if the original type of living 
matter was of this kind, it was abandoned for the 
cell, the distinctive feature of which is separateness. 
It is only in the lowest ranks of the animal and 
vegetable kingdoms that cells have fully preserved 
this characteristic : higher up the scale they have 
cohered into masses, exchanging their inde- 


158 


VOLITION 


pendence for co-partnership, and their vague 
freedom of action for definite special duties. The 
bodies of the higher plants and animals are com- 
posed of countless thousands of such cells, which 
have undergone great changes of form in order 
to become fitted for their particular functions. 
But by this sacrifice of individuality, a new 
individuality has been created, that of the mass of 
cells, or organism, as a whole. We may perceive 
here a fresh illustration of Life's indifference to 
the means by which it achieves its purposes. 
Individuality begins with the cell, but pursues 
its development in cell-masses, the units of which 
may have lost it. 

§ 

Below the limits of the sway of reason — below, 
that is to to say, the higher classes of the animal 
kingdom — volition is concerned with little else 
than the control of movement, and it must have 
become attenuated almost to extinction in those 
organisms which have lost the power of moving 
themselves. Plants, of course, illustrate most 
typically this sacrifice of activity to convenience. 
But there are multitudes of animals, notably of 
the zoophyte class, which are also rooted in the 
ground. At one stage in their lives, however, these 
stationary animals — and some portions of all plants 
— appear to manifest spontaneous movement. This 
is during their embryonic growth, or in the process 
of reproduction. The coral zoophyte and the 
barnacle, during their larval stages, are free- 
swimming and active : and the pollen grains of 
flowers fertilize the ovules by developing a measure 
of independent activity. So is kept alive the 
impulse of mobility, which is one of Life's essen- 
tial features, and is obscured, not extinguished, 
even by so close an alliance with Matter as ties 
the organism to the soil. 


VOLITION AMONGST THE BRUTES 159 


But, it will be said, the behaviour of the lower 
animals is regulated by directive instinct : what 
scope can be left to them for spontaneous action ? 
Their behaviour, indeed, approaches the mechani- 
cal. But it does not exactly resemble clock- 
work or the movements of iron filings in the 
presence of a magnet. In the lower ranges of the 
animal kingdom the promptings of instinct are 
very peremptory and extraordinarily detailed. 
But cases arise for which they do not provide, 
and we may see ants, bees, and spiders hesitate 
and make trials when confronted with unusual 
difficulties. In fact the directions of instinct do 
not cover the whole of the ground, and leave 
some opportunities for the making of mistakes 
and of attempts to rectify them. The behaviour 
of insects is occasionally guided by trial and rejec- 
tion, and in this differs altogether from the action 
of machinery. You may see a line of ants checked 
and apparently perturbed by an unusual obstacle : 
one of them finds a way to circumvent it, and the 
rest follow its spontaneous lead. Bees will vary 
the shape of their cells in order to carry their 
combs round an obstruction. Higher up the 
scale, as the promptings of instinct become less 
and less elaborate, the scope for experiment — 
for making choices — widens : we have already 
seen that birds, for instance, will on occasion 
depart very considerably from their instinctive 
procedure. In man the field for spontaneous 
action is incomparably wider than in any of the 
animals below him. But the field extends through- 
out the province of Life, narrow though it be 
when we reach its humblest regions. There is a 
period in the life of each plant when certain of 
its cells appear to be confronted with a choice. 
And the lively activity that is displayed by the 
minute unicellular organisms which flit across the 


i6o 


VOLITION 


stage of a microscope is scarcely to be explained 
by the impact upon them of external forces. 
Volition, like consciousness, has its roots in the 
beginnings of Life, although we may hardly 
compare the spasmodic capriciousness in which 
it first becomes manifest, with the freedom that 
is exercised, consciously and deliberately, by the 
mind of man. 


CHAPTER IX 


RECAPITULATION 

According to the conclusions at which we have 
arrived a living creature may be defined more 
appropriately by its impulses than by its organs : 
its organs are, in fact, the products of its impulses. 
We do not see because we have eyes, but we have 
eyes because we have an impulse to see. This 
statement may appear paradoxical at first sight : 
but on further consideration its truth becomes 
self-evident : for how, indeed, could a minute 
fragment of protoplasm develop an eye unless 
there was within it an impulse to do so, or unless 
it was constrained by an impulse from outside ? 
An organ which is not animated by an impulse 
degenerates into a useless survival, like the 
rudiments of hind limbs in the whale or the muscles 
by which man once moved his ears. But an im- 
pulse needs no organ in order to manifest itself. 
The primitive forms of life can appreciate light 
without eyes, and can feel and recognize their 
food without sensory organs ; and we have seen 
that from less humble ranks of the animal 
kingdom illustrations can be drawn of the dis- 
charge of functions that ordinarily appertain 
to special organs, by the unspecialized vitality 
of the body as a whole. We must etherialize our 
conceptions of Life as we have begun to etherialize 
our conceptions of Matter : we must regard it, 
not as a series of activities that are produced by 
a particular type of substance or machinery, but 

161 


l62 


RECAPITULATION 


as a complicated energy of (it may be figured) in- 
terlacing whirls, which animates the mechanism 
of the body and is not caused by it. 

But, it will be objected, if we lose our eyes we 
cannot see : if an organ is diseased its activities 
fail : if the machinery of our bodies is stopped, we 
die. How can it be denied that our vital functions 
are the product of the organs by which they are 
discharged ? By broadening our view, it may 
be replied, and taking into consideration not 
only the higher forms of living creatures, but 
the undifferentiated, unspecialized, unicellular 
organisms in which living matter is at its simplest. 
These possess functions without organs : nay 
more, they do not appear to suffer death. In 
reproducing their kind they divide themselves 
up ; but nothing perishes : the whole of the 
organism passes, so subdivided, into the next 
generation. If they are cut into pieces, each 
fragment becomes a new centre of vitality, which 
rapidly grows into the typical form of its species. 
May we not, then, surmise that death is the 
penalty of differentiation — the consequence of 
separating out the functions of Life, and attaching 
them to different arrangements of living tissue, 
of breaking up, so to speak, the multitudinous cross- 
whirls of instinct into a number of separate eddies ? 
By this division of functions Life gains immensely in 
efficiency. But it sacrifices itself. Its endurance 
is weakened by its disintegration, and it is no 
longer capable of resisting indefinitely the 
clogging influence of the material elements with 
which it is associated. We know, however, that an 
impulse may for a time sustain vitality against 
the effects of organic degeneration. Many men 
are kept alive through illness or old age by their 
interest in their work, and die as soon as they take 
relief from industry. 


EVOLUTION CAUSED BY CHANGEFULNESS 163 

§ 

Evolution may, then, be defined as the develop- 
ment rather of impulses than of organs. Some of 
these affect the body, others the character, and 
in tracing the affinities of plants and animals, 
and of races of mankind, we are as likely to find 
clues in behaviour as in bodily features. The 
evolution of species in the world of life has been 
commonly attributed to natural or sexual selec- 
tion. But this confuses a condition with a cause. 
Evolution must proceed from a changefulness 
that is inherent in living creatures, for, unless 
changes occurred, there would, indeed, be nothing 
for selection to act upon. It would be pleasing 
to feel that this changefulness was systematically 
directed towards the organism's benefit. But 
against such a supposition there is an overwhelm- 
ing mass of evidence. Variations occur in every 
direction. Those that are harmful are eliminated 
by the struggle for life : those that are beneficial, 
or harmless, may survive. But we need not 
assume, on the evidence that has been collected, 
that variation is entirely uncontrolled — that in 
no case is it directed by outside influences. Facts 
are very numerous which appear to indicate that 
plants and animals may be stimulated to vary 
their forms or dispositions by their environment, 
by their habits, or by the imitative impulse ; 
and in this case the variations would be generally 
to their advantage. We cannot absolutely deny 
that the giraffe may have been stimulated to vary, 
so as to lengthen its neck, by continued striving 
after higher foliage ; that the migration of swal- 
lows is not impelled by an instinct which was 
generated by habit, or that Arctic animals did 
not gradually acquire the faculty of turning 
white during winter by subconscious imitation of 
the colour of snow, 

M 


164 


RECAPITULATION 


§ 

In examining our own instincts we are assisted 
by the emotions which some of them excite : to 
the instincts of other persons, and of the lower 
animals, we have no clue but their behaviour, 
and our conclusions can merely be inferential. 
The knowledge that we can gain by introspection 
and inference is very incomplete. But it appears 
to warrant us in attempting to classify instincts 
according to their tendencies, and in making some 
generalizations regarding the character and extent 
of their influences. We may distinguish them as 
impulsive and directive according as they simply 
impel the organism to seek a certain end, or 
elaborately direct it in the means of securing that 
end — according, for instance, as they impel an 
insect to provide for its offspring, or direct it in 
the detailed steps that are needed for such 
provision. Impulsive instincts appear to be 
uniform in general character throughout the 
animal kingdom : directive instincts vary greatly 
in different classes of animals. In the lower 
ranges of the animal kingdom directive instincts 
are exceedingly strong, and govern peremptorily 
almost every detail of external behaviour, as 
well as the processes of growth and the develop- 
ment and functioning of the internal organs. 
As we ascend the scale we find their authority 
gradually withdrawn from the control of external 
action, until in man they have altogether relin- 
quished this domain. Their vestiges, however, 
remain in our aptitudes for acquiring accomplish- 
ments, and they continue to govern despotically 
the functioning of our internal organs. Reason 
is the development of an instinct which guides 
us indirectly, and not seldom wrongly, by telling 
us, not that which we require to know, but how 
we should learn it. Consciousness assists reason 


IMPULSIVE FORCES 


165 


by directing its inferences from the accidental to 
the essential ; also by extending immensely its 
scope, and so enabling it to draw inferences not 
merely from impressions or recollections of things, 
but from conceptions of their properties. By 
volition, or the exercise of will, we are able to 
enforce the conclusions of reason, and we are thus 
equipped with the means of guiding ourselves 
through difficulties which, in the case of the lower 
animals, are met by the injunctions of directive 
instinct. But reason, consciousness, and will 
share their authority over us with a multitude 
of impulsive instincts — selfish and social, repro- 
ductive and provident, cruel and kind, aesthetic 
and ethical — which vary greatly in strength from 
individual to individual, but can generally set 
up from amongst their number, in each one of us, 
some tyrant, or tyrants — some " favourite " 
propensity — which our conscious reason and our 
will are unable to coerce. But, if assisted by 
habit, they may be able to prevail. Habits, 
acquired sometimes by will power, more generally 
by imitation, or education (a form of imitation) 
may be employed to facilitate the outflow of 
particular impulses that are commended by 
reason, and, proportionately, to weaken the 
influence of others of which reason disapproves. 
But, if entrusted too confidingly with the direction 
of our behaviour, habit may enslave us, and grow 
into such a tyranny as we employed it to dethrone. 
Our path is, indeed, strewn with pitfalls. We have 
liberty such as is denied to the insects ; but it 
leads us through dangers from which their lives 
are free. 

§ 

Features of the body vary from individual to 
individual in size, shape or colour : so do in- 
stinctive impulses vary in strength ; and, since 


i66 


RECAPITULATION 


they are very numerous and act in combina- 
tions, the possibilities of diversity in human dis- 
position are practically infinite. Individuals, 
moreover, differ in their sensibility and in their 
aptitudes for acquiring accomplishments, and 
these unlikenesses introduce a further complica- 
tion into the possibilities of human nature, so that 
no two individuals are exactly alike. The impulses 
that are aroused by a sensory impression or a 
recollection may differ surprisingly on different 
occasions : the associated set of recollections 
can never be the same, and will arouse a novel 
assortment of impulses : the relative strength 
of impulses may be modified by habit, or in some 
cases, influenced by the will : we are also affected 
by the mood which governs us at the time. 
Moreover, it seems that some impulses may rise 
or fall at periodic intervals. Human nature is, 
accordingly, not only very diverse from individual 
to individual, but results in behaviour which 
varies very greatly in the same individual. We 
may, indeed, believe that human behaviour, if 
purely impulsive, would be so eccentric as to be 
irreducible to rule. But the outflowings of 
impulse are controlled — brought within sluice- 
gates, so to speak — by habit. To this regulation 
of discharge individuals and communities owe the 
regularity of their lives, their general uniformity 
in dress, manners, and amusements, even the 
ideas which direct their outlook upon life. Not 
only is habit the foundation of conventional 
morality: it guides our aspirations and fortifies 
our conclusions upon religion and politics. 

§ 

Pleasure and pain may be distinguished from 
happiness and unhappiness. The former arise 
from our sensations : the latter from our instinc- 


PLEASURE AND PAIN 


167 


tive impulses. Happiness is obtained by satis- 
fying an impulse : unhappiness results from 
inability to satisfy it. One who is devoid of 
strong impulses cannot be happy : one whose 
impulses are strong and are unsatisfied must be 
miserable. Impulses may, within certain limits, 
be modified in strength by habit, and we are 
able in some measure to fashion our desires to our 
opportunities. The happy man is he who makes 
this correspondence complete. Pleasure and 
happiness commonly lead to the virtuous and the 
useful. But they may also be obtained by the 
enjoyment of tastes and the satisfaction of desires 
which are pernicious for the individual and for 
society. 

§ 

The impulses which have been classed as in- 
stinctive, in the ordinary use of this term, are 
extraordinarily contradictory. They fall into 
groups of opposites. It may appear incredible 
that Life should display itself by the ordering of 
antagonisms. But each one of us may satisfy 
himself by introspection that his character is in 
fact a mass of contradictions, and that he often 
acts in a way which he afterwards regrets. A 
duality runs through us which appears to be 
altogether inconsistent with such a simple ex- 
planation of Life as is given by materialistic 
hypotheses : we seem to be the resultants of two 
rival forces, which may perhaps be contrasted as 
Life and Matter. We are insatiably curious to 
penetrate the veil behind which are concealed 
the mysterious influences that have filled the 
earth with its varied hosts of plants and animals, 
that have brought some to honour, others to 
dishonour, and that elevate and deprave the mind 
of man. We are in no way assisted by the know- 


i68 


RECAPITULATION 


ledge that comes to us through our senses. This 
simply enables us to catalogue, symbolically, the 
effects that these influences produce. The word 
" ocean 55 of itself affords no idea of the great 
waters : it is merely a symbol which stands for 
them in speech and writing. The impressions 
which we gather of the ocean by sight, hearing, 
and touch resemble it no more nearly than does 
the word : they also are merely symbolic — 
sensations which give us, not veritable pictures, 
but artificial signs. What can we know of the 
essential disposition of Nature when her face is 
shrouded from us ? What should we know of man 
if we could see nothing but his material accom- 
plishments — his furniture and houses, his roads, 
railways, and shipping? The clues which Nature 
vouchsafes to us are infinitely less instructive, 
for what we judge to be her accomplishments are 
but visionary symbols of things which we may 
never hope to realize. 

§ 

We are, then, deceived by our senses. And we 
are misled by our reason. We watch its pro- 
cesses in the mirror of our consciousness. They 
rest entirely upon the assumption that like 
happenings involve like consequences : we regard 
this sequence as the result of the abstract pro- 
perty of cause and effect, and are uneasy in our 
minds unless we can assign a cause to every 
happening. It seems particularly necessary to 
assume that the circumstances upon which our 
lives and happiness depend are ordered, and not 
the result of purposeless change, and this assump- 
tion has influenced the speculations of agnostic 
philosophy quite as strongly as the meditations 
of religious feeling. Evolutionists are incessantly 
engaged in searching for utilities in the colours, 


MISGUIDING REASON 


169 


shapes and qualities with which plants and animals 
are endowed ; and we all feel gratified when it is 
shown, for instance, that an animal's particular 
colour may assist it in evading danger or in 
attracting a mate. But it must be confessed that 
these explanations very often assume that birds 
and beasts are easily deceived by superficial 
resemblances, and that females are pleased by 
eccentricities of appearance which, when they 
first developed, would simply be deformities. In 
the vast majority of cases peculiarities of shape 
and colour are quite inexplicable on utilitarian 
grounds, and appear to be merely the fruits of an 
impulse for change. If harmful, they would 
generally be weeded out in the struggle for 
existence, which seems, however, to have spared 
some of them, as, for instance, the monstrous 
beak of the horn-bill. But, if harmless, they 
would remain to testify to the irresponsible 
activity of the impulse to vary. 

An analysis of human character discloses 
similar anomalies. There are instincts that are 
useful in the struggle for life : there are instincts 
that are useless from this point of view : there 
are others that are harmful, such as the lust for 
cruelty, the passion for intoxicants. If we turn 
from ourselves to the course of the world around 
us, we find much that is beautiful, much that is 
repellent : there are smiling pastures, there are 
desolate wildernesses : in some years the earth 
brings forth her increase, in others millions of its 
inhabitants are starved by famine. Life, the most 
precious of treasures, is poured out wastefully — 
often with bitter dregs of misery. The mere fact 
that animals eat one another shocks our sense of 
morality and kindliness. If there be a purpose in 
the course of Nature, we may hardly conclude that 
it is in accord with our notions of justice or mercy. 


170 


RECAPITULATION 


There is an antithesis of good and evil — an appar- 
ent duality of control — that has been frankly- 
recognised in many religions. Christians, indeed, 
are taught to believe that " the devil, as a roaring 
lion, walketh about seeking whom he may devour.' 5 
To many men the idea of duality is unsatisfactory: 
it is out of accord with the desire to simplify — to 
discover an ultimate unifying principle — which 
influences modern thought. But there is nothing 
to show that this desire is well-founded : it may 
be as misleading as the notions which led to 
magic and witchcraft. We do not reject the 
distinction between positive and negative elec- 
tricity because we are unable to explain it. 

§ 

From this mysterious confusion one fact emerges 
clearly — that in the animal world the course of 
evolution has promoted the growth of individual 
liberty. Instinct at first wields almost despotic 
authority over both the aims and the methods of 
existence : its impulses drive living organisms 
along certain lines of conduct ; its directions 
minutely prescribe their itinerary. It is gradually 
displaced, so far as external behaviour is con- 
cerned, by reason, consciousness, and will ; self- 
government is, so to speak, substituted for a 
tyranny. But it is left to us to discover how best 
to use this new constitution in shaping our 
behaviour to our instinctive impulses. An im- 
mense variety of choice is opened to us, and we 
should be distracted with this liberty did we 
retain the whole of it. The generality of mankind 
resign their privileges and are content to be ruled, 
for the most part, by imitation (stimulated by 
suggestion) or by habit. But others are less 
apathetic, and their influence may be traced in 
the gradual extension of ideas of freedom. During 


DEVELOPMENT OF LIBERTY 171 


modern times notions of liberty have spread very 
rapidly. To self-consciousness liberty can make a 
special appeal. The recent revolutions in Turkey, 
Persia, and China were inspired by a conscious 
desire for self-assertion which was felt by large 
numbers of the population. However ineffective, 
it was at least a new element in the feelings of the 
East. We still hold that children must obey their 
parents, servants their masters, and that all are 
constrained by the laws of their land ; but society 
no longer supports the absolute power of the father 
over his children, of the master over his slave, 
of the despot over his subjects. Liberty, that is 
to say, spontaneity of will, appears to be gradu- 
ally weakening the chains of habit. And habit 
itself, it must be remembered, is not an hereditary 
despotism, differing in this respect from directive 
instinct. Our habits are contracted by ourselves, 
and it is possible for us to change them. By 
habit, moreover, we can gain deliverance from, 
so to speak, inherited enslavement. For by its 
help we may control the impulsive instincts 
which survive as the mainsprings of our actions 
and emotions, and, by facilitating behaviour that 
is good, strengthen ourselves to resist the tempta- 
tions of evil. 

With a gieat price man has obtained this 
measure of freedom : he has paid for it in count- 
less years of degrading error into which, in his 
liberty, he has drifted. Mistaking images of the 
memory for visions of the supernatural, he has 
concluded that the material world has a spiritual, 
or shadowy, counterpart, with which he is in 
communication through the counterpart, or 
" double, 55 of himself. It seemed unreasonable 
that either the substance or the shadow should be 
subject to annihilation : death accordingly ap- 
peared to be an unnatural termination of activity, 


172 


RECAPITULATION 


and was ascribed to the malign influence of an 
enemy, exercised by magical powers. Each 
death, then, involved at least one murder in 
revenge ; and even in these days tribes are known 
who are exterminating themselves by super- 
stitious retaliations, because they consider them- 
selves to be naturally immortal. Impelled to 
seek a cause for everything that happens, they 
are left to themselves to make the search; and they 
connect together, as cause and effect, events which 
have no relationship whatever to one another. 
From similar errors of judgment have proceeded 
the thousand superstitions that have not only 
darkened man's intelligence and retarded his 
progress, but have turned him in blind anger 
against his fellows, and have made violence and 
bloodshed the outstanding features of human 
history. 

But if the past is dark there is light before us. 
Man can improve himself : he is not merely a 
completed link in a chain of evolutionary meta- 
morphoses. His reason may be trained to discover 
more and more accurately the properties of things, 
and the properties of properties : it may be assisted 
immensely by the accumulation of knowledge. 
His will may be strengthened by self -discipline. 
Habits, of mind as well as of body, may be 
changed for the better. His advancement has 
proceeded in the main from the birth of men of 
originality, or " supermen " — sports in the 
parterres of convention — whose novel ideas are 
gradually adopted, sometimes because they are 
endorsed by reason, but more often through the 
influence of the impulse to imitate. It is owing to 
the possession of this impulse that man can be 
educated : the education of the young is a special 
application of its virtues, the usefulness of which 
will be greater or less according as it is directed to 


ANTAGONISM OF IMPULSES 


*73 


the training of the reason and will, and the ac- 
quirement of useful habits, or is devoted to the 
memorizing of symbolic knowledge. The imita- 
tive faculty is powerfully assisted by self-con- 
sciousness : this enables us to see ourselves and 
compare ourselves with others, and the impression 
which we gather may be a most efficient incentive 
to improvement or reform. Habits of mind now 
prevalent appear to be reinforcing the faculty of 
self-consciousness : its influence has extended 
very materially during recent centuries, especially 
amongst the peoples of Northern Europe and 
America. This reflection will assist us in ex- 
plaining the acceleration of progress which is 
undoubtedly to be seen during the period of 
modern history. 


Perhaps the most striking fact which has been 
brought out by these analyses is the antagonistic 
duality of our instinctive impulses : it is almost 
incredibly strange, but it seems to be true, that 
we live under the influence of contraries. We are 
urged towards change : variety pleases us, 
monotony fatigues us. But we have also a long- 
ing to repeat our mental and bodily experiences, 
and, if we give way to it, we become bond slaves 
of custom. We are impelled to look solely to 
ourselves, but also to neglect ourselves for the 
benefit of others : blindly to devote ourselves to 
the propagation of our kind, with foresight and 
industry to make the most of Life's practical 
opportunities. We are naturally cruel, and also 
naturally kind. We are endowed with aesthetic 
appreciations which are heightened by self- 
abandonment : we are also endowed with ethical 
aspirations of which the ground note is self- 
control. Our vital organs are controlled by forces 


*74 


RECAPITULATION 


that are hidden from our consciousness, but our 
external behaviour can be influenced by the 
conscious exercise of reason and will. Freedom 
is the ideal of our will : slavery the result of our 
habitudes. Through these series of opposites there 
appears to run, like a double strand, two distinct 
strains or tendencies, one which approximates in 
some fashion to what we know of the working of 
the physical lifeless world, the other in strong 
contrast to it. Thus repetitive habit is closer to 
the rhythmical vibrations of inorganic matter 
than is changefulness : to be self-centred, to have 
no object but the reproduction of the species, and 
to be cruel may appear, not altogether fancifully, 
to be more material, more accordant with the 
unfeeling action of physical laws, than to be 
sympathetic, provident, and kind-hearted. So 
also with the impulses that have been classed as 
aesthetic and ethical : the one trembles with the 
thrills of light and sound with which Nature is 
beautified, the other severely rejects her attrac- 
tions. The influence of directive instinct closely 
resembles the regular, unhesitating action of 
physical laws : conscious reason and will appear 
to be poles apart from it. 

We appear, then, to be influenced by two an- 
tagonistic tendencies, the one representing the 
cramping mechanical energies of Matter, the other 
proceeding from activities of a more spiritual 
character which we may venture to identify 
with Life itself. Life, as we know it, cannot 
be manifested except in combination with Matter, 
and the development of the living world has 
proceeded from the clashing energies of these 
linked antagonists. The impulses of Life may 
appear to be supernatural when contrasted with 
the mechanical activity of Matter. From them 
we have kindled the beacons which we term our 


THE SPIRIT OF LIFE 


175 


" ideals." We idealize self-sacrifice not selfish- 
ness, industry not lust, kindness not cruelty, 
liberty not habit. We speak, it is true, of " artis- 
tic ideals " ; but these are, in fact, hardly com- 
parable with the ideals which have led human 
society up the path of progress. We may reflect 
upon the thought that these impulses are endorsed 
very markedly by Christian doctrine — may, in- 
deed, be described as fundamental principles of 
unsophisticated Christianity. There is not a 
point in our contrast between Life and Matter 
but is authoritatively endorsed by texts of 
Scripture. To "do unto others as we would that 
they should do unto us " is an ideal expression of 
the social instinct. Upon the impulse to foresee 
is grafted man's hope of immortality and of 
the ultimate redress of this world's injustice ; 
and, if no encouragement is given to the amassing 
of wealth, industry is not dishonoured : laborare 
est or are is a maxim of the Church. The heart of 
Christ was aglow with kindness for all men, and 
during the cruellest ages of Christendom some 
reflections of this glow were caught by those who 
turned their faces towards Him : ideas of kindness 
inspired St. Paul with one of his sublimest ex- 
hortations : unless they were instinct with kind- 
ness, his zeal and eloquence, he confessed, were 
" as sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal." And, 
whatever be the opinion of modern divines, self- 
restraint, hardening into actual asceticism, has 
undoubtedly been sanctified by the example of 
Christ and the teaching of His apostles. In the 
character of our Lord the impulses of Life 
irradiate humanity with supernatural lustre. His 
face was set against the morality of habit, turned 
towards the spontaneous flowerings of the conscious 
will. He was vehemently opposed to the ordered 
sanctimony of convinced self -righteousness, strong 


176 


RECAPITULATION 


in maintaining that sins could be forgiven if they 
were judged sincerely by the reason of the sinner, 
and condemned by him in resolutions of voluntary 
repentance. He opposed no meticulous rules of 
ethics or ceremonial to the changeful current of 
man's social development : the principles which 
He defined lie as deep as Life itself. The key-note 
of His teaching was echoed by St. Paul — " The 
letter killeth, the spirit giveth life. 55 No one 
who believes in the spirit of Life but will accept 
Jesus Christ as his Example and his Master. 


PART II 
CONSTRAINING INFLUENCES 


CHAPTER X 


RACE 

The usefulness of a spaniel depends, firstly, upon 
its breed, secondly, upon the circumstances in 
which it is reared, and, thirdly, upon the training 
that it receives. Unless it is well-bred we do not 
expect it to display the qualities of a good 
spaniel ; but these qualities may be ruined by 
over-feeding or by unhealthy surroundings, and 
they need education for their development. So 
with a people of mankind. Their behaviour 
appears to be the result partly of racial pecu- 
liarities, partly of the climate and surroundings 
in which they live, and partly of culture — that is 
to say, partly of inborn instincts, partly of the 
pressure of the environment, and partly of the 
habits that are engendered by the social, ethical, 
artistic, and religious ideas of the community. 
Differences between one people and another may 
all be traced to the effects of these three influences 
— Race, Environment, and Culture. The difficulty 
is to allot national characteristics between them, 
to decide which of them is responsible for any 
particular trait. Few will deny that gipsies have 
a character of their own, and that they preserve 
some traits of this character in every country of 
their adoption. It is then hardly affected by a 
change of environment. It may be racial ; but 
it may also be the result of culture — of religious 
and social ideas which have been preserved from 
obliteration. To distinguish between the effects 

i 79 

N 


i8o 


RACE 


of race, environment, and culture, is exceedingly 
difficult. But there are few problems which raise 
questions of more practical interest in attempting 
to explain, or to forecast, the history of mankind. 
For a peculiarity that has become innate and 
heritable cannot be eradicated except by a change 
of breed — or, perhaps, of environment — whereas 
one that is freshly implanted in each individual 
may be modified by a change of culture. By 
styling a peculiarity " racial 55 we imply that it 
is heritable. Peculiarities that are derived from 
culture are, we shall see, not heritable : those 
that proceed from environment appear to be in 
some cases heritable, in others not. 

§ 

Race. — The racial peculiarities that force them- 
selves upon attention are those which are mater- 
ialized in distinctive bodily features, such as the 
dark hair and complexion of tropical peoples, 
the prominent jaws and woolly hair of negroes, 
the oblique eyes, flattened and hairless faces and 
high cheek-bones of the Mongols. According 
to our theory these distinctions arise from peculi- 
arities of impulse, of which, indeed, they are the 
manifestations. Other peculiarities of impulse 
affect the character : man's instinctive impulses 
are so numerous that character may vary very 
widely if some of them are innately stronger or 
weaker than the average. Character may be 
further modified by variation in the strength of 
aptitudes. We all know that these differ con- 
siderably from individual to individual : some 
men have a peculiar aptitude for learning lan- 
guages, others for mathematics or games of skill. 
Individuals vary, moreover, in the delicacy of their 
senses : some are unable to appreciate certain 
shades of colour, are deaf to the charms of music ; 


RACIAL TRAITS 


181 


and we may believe that the " joy of life," which 
in some persons is so exhilarating, proceeds from 
keen sensibility as well as from strong aesthetic 
impulses. But the difference in impulses, ap- 
titudes, sensibility and physical traits betw r een the 
members of a family are generally less than those 
between persons who belong to different families. 
A race, as we shall see, may be likened to a 
family, except in cases where interbreeding 
between different sections of it is artificially 
checked, and we may then expect to find such a 
general similarity between the members of a race 
as there is between members of a family. Traits 
of character cannot be discerned directly : they 
can only be inferred from behaviour, and in ex- 
amining them we are confessedly upon ambiguous 
ground, especially when dealing with large bodies 
of mankind. But certain of them are unmistak- 
ably plain. Such are the low reasoning powers of 
savages, and the weakness of the impulse which 
leads to industry. Others, equally undeniable, 
may require closer observation or comparison to 
be detected. No one will dispute that amongst 
Mediterranean peoples, for instance, the aesthetic 
impulses are unusually strong. 

There is a school of thought which is reluctant 
to admit that character is determined by race, 
since in this case it cannot be radically changed 
by education. But practical men of affairs, whose 
success depends upon knowledge of racial charac- 
ter — such as commercial travellers or contractors 
— will ridicule the idea that differences in racial 
disposition are only skin deep. When races are 
marked by peculiar bodily features, it is only 
reasonable to suppose that these distinctions are 
accompanied by peculiarities of character. We 
habitually recognize the association of features 
with character : thus we speak of a determined 


182 


RACE 


eye,Tan intellectual forehead, a sensual mouth — 
connections which have been established by 
practical experience. The Jews are generally 
distinguished by a particular type of features : 
they also possess a distinctive character which 
they have preserved during centuries of vicissi- 
tude. It may be urged that they have preserved 
their national culture through these changes, 
and that to the continuity of their culture should 
be ascribed the endurance of their distinctive 
disposition. In preserving, or modifying, tradi- 
tional behaviour, culture exercises beyond doubt 
an immense influence. Anglo-Saxons who have 
settled down amongst lower races — " squaw- 
men " or " beach-combers 55 — appear to sink 
almost to the level of their associates. But there 
is something in character that is independent of 
cultured or uncultured habits. We feel that it is 
absurd to attribute to culture alone the persistence 
of British characteristics in the white population 
of North America and Australia, and of Dutch 
characteristics in the Boers of South Africa. 

It is difficult, as has already been observed, 
to isolate the effects of racial, or hereditary, 
traits from those of artificial conventions that 
are imposed upon man by the conditions of 
his environment, or by his culture, especially 
as there is reason to believe that some racial 
traits owe their origin to conditions of environ- 
ment. But in some cases we can make this analysis. 
The in-and-in breeding of the Indian caste system 
has established or preserved, on a hereditary 
basis, some variations of the Asiatic physique 
and temperament. The Bengali Kayasths, for 
instance, possess a character and features of their 
own : so do the Mahratta Brahmins (Chitpawans) 
of the western coast, and the martial caste 
(Rajputs) of Raj put ana. These castes are, each, 


HEREDITARY CHARACTERISTICS 183 


one of many in the areas which they inhabit, and 
are subjected to no special influences of environ- 
ment. Their physical peculiarities can hardly 
be due to their culture, and, if these are innate, 
their peculiarities of disposition may justly be 
held to be innate also. The Armenians, the Jews, 
the Basques of Northern Spain, the Parsees of 
India, and the gipsies, all appear to possess traits 
of character that are peculiar to them, and have 
resisted for many generations a change of environ- 
ment. In the case of the gipsies they have also 
resisted a complete change of culture. The 
negroes of the United States, of the Caribbean 
Islands, and Brazil have for more than six 
generations been living in a changed environ- 
ment and under a changed culture. They have 
been Christianized. But missionaries who have 
spent a lifetime amongst them will admit that, 
if the influence of white men was withdrawn, 
they would rapidly deteriorate. The persistence 
of racial character is illustrated even more 
strikingly by the Moplahs of the Indian Malabar 
coast. These men are the descendants of Arabs 
who settled in the country over twenty-five 
generations ago. In a moist enervating climate 
they have preserved the fierceness of their 
ancestors, and from time to time have risen in 
disturbances which it has required the use of 
regular troops, and much bloodshed, to quell. 
They are Mohammedans amidst a population of 
Hindus, and their character, it may be urged, 
is the result of their religious culture and tradi- 
tions. But the other Mohammedans of India are 
not endowed with this peculiarity of disposition. 
In truth, however, we hardly need these illustra- 
tions to be convinced that racial character exists 
as a thing in itself, quite apart from the influences 
of culture and environment, and that for some 


184 


RACE 


period, at all events, it can maintain its identity, 
although culture and environment are completely 
changed. 

§ 

Character is the product of a multiplicity of im- 
pulses, and is affected by any special strength or 
weakness in any one of them. The resulting pecu- 
liarities of disposition must make their mark upon 
the genius and the development of a people. But 
they may often lie hidden from observation 
behind the veil of conventional behaviour. In 
some cases, however, they are sufficiently apparent 
amongst the generality of individuals to be recog- 
nized as typical racial features. Thus we speak of 
the fierce pride of the Arabs, the agreeable levity 
of the Persians, the incurious introspective pessi- 
mism of the Hindus, the placid industry of China- 
men, and the energetic adaptability of the 
Japanese. These, it may be objected, are merely 
habits of mind, not innate peculiarities. May we 
concede this ? Is there reason to believe that an 
Arab, a Chinaman, or a Japanese, brought up from 
infancy in a European family, would lose the tem- 
perament of his race ? Experience shows, on the 
contrary, that he preserves it, however thickly 
overlaid by European conventions, and shows it 
on occasions in his behaviour. His character, 
must, then, be innately affected by some peculiar 
strength or weakness of instinctive impulse. The 
larger are the populations we contrast in this 
fashion, the more evident become the differences 
between them. Thus there is a gulf between 
tropical peoples and those of temperate climates, 
a breach between Asiatics and Europeans. In 
Europe itself dissimilarities between race and 
race, or nation and nation, are overlain by a 
broader difference — that which separates the 
North from the South — which distinguishes the 


RACIAL TRAITS : NORTH AND SOUTH 185 


groups of peoples that respectively show their 
typical features most strongly on the shores of the 
Baltic and Mediterranean seas. 

What are the traits which stand out most clearly 
if we compare, say, an Italian with a Dane ? We 
notice, in the first place, that the former is much 
the more impulsive of the two — that is to say, is 
swayed more powerfully by the instinct of self- 
abandonment than by that of self-control. He is 
accordingly the more aesthetic, but the less 
ethical ; he excels in artistic sensibility, but is 
deficient in the sense of moral discipline from which 
arose the puritanism of the north. 

We may, further, observe a difference [in the 
relative strength of the individualistic and the 
social instincts. The bent of the southerner 
is strongly social : he cleaves to his family with 
superstitious reverence ; he is happiest in a 
crowd ; he possesses in a marked degree the 
virtues of warm-heartedness, generosity, and 
loyalty which cement mankind into a cheerful 
society : he is also disposed to accept the arbitrary 
management of the leaders of his community, 
and to regard disobedience to their authority 
as justly punishable with great severity. The 
northman, on the contrary, has been distinguished 
since the days of Tacitus by his individuality, 
his independance ; he readily abandons his 
family surroundings in search of profit or adven- 
ture, and is n,ot harassed in his exile by thoughts 
of his motherland : his ideal of private life is not 
a crowd, but a home : he will not readily suffer 
a government or a religion in which his individual 
existence is submerged. 

Southerners are not troubled by the self-con- 
sciousness which causes hesitation or awkwardness 
of address : they are, consequently, expansive in 
their manners and often very eloquent in their 


i86 


RACE 


speech, are not checked by themselves from naive 
expressions of vanity, nor, it should be added, 
safeguarded from the inconsistencies between 
language and conduct which are detected by 
an introspective mind. Nor are they sensitive in 
regard to appearances — indeed they are surpri- 
singly unconscious of grotesqueness or untidiness 
in dress — and they accordingly are not steadied 
by one of the surest foundations upon which 
" respectability " can establish itself. 

We may, also, notice amongst them a lack of 
originality in will-power. All men are more 
inclined to adopt opinions that are current than 
to form them for themselves. But the Mediter- 
ranean peoples seem to be peculiarly susceptible 
to the catchwords of the day. The extraordinary 
infatuation shown by the French over the Dreyfus 
case is a striking illustration of this tendency. 

It seems, moreover, that the impulse to change 
is less forcible in the Mediterranean than further 
north. The bonds of habit are stronger. If we 
look below the surface of modern Italian and 
Spanish 1 civilization we shall discover a surprising 
continuity of ideas from the days of the Romans. 
The style of domestic architecture has remained in 
some measure unchanged : even so far afield as in 
Buenos Ayres the houses of the Italian immigrants, 
in their construction and decoration, offer more 
than fanciful resemblances to those of Pompeii. 
Christianity has become the religion of the 
people ; but in its Mediterranean form it betrays 
many connections with the cults of pagan times. 
Pausanias — the Baedeker of Greece eighteen 
centuries ago — was interested to notice black 
statues of Artemis : there are black Madonnas 
at the present day, and the cult of the Virgin 

1 Marius, Sulla, or Catiline would feel quite at home in 
present-day Mexico. 


LOVE AND INDUSTRY 


187 


in Spain appears to be tinged by traditions of the 
worship of Diana (the moon-goddess) to which the 
ancient Spaniards were particularly affected. The 
Madonna is commonly represented in Spanish art 
as standing upon the crescent moon. There is no 
essential difference between a bull-fight and the 
games of the Roman circus : now, as then, a 
cruel spectacle touches the very heart of the 
people. Northern manners, on the other hand, 
have during the past ten centuries been so com- 
pletely transformed as to present few material 
traces of their former complexion. In the north, 
Christianity has changed its character, and has 
become a religion of morality rather than of 
ceremonial. 

And there appears to be a momentous difference 
between the north and the south in the relative 
strength of the two instincts which have been 
described in Chapter IV as reproductive and provi- 
dent. These are the mainsprings of the two leading 
objects of life — to perpetuate our kind, and, by 
foresight and industry, to ameliorate our condi- 
tions. The former is undoubtedly more insistent 
amongst Mediterranean than amongst Baltic peo- 
ples. In southern countries the young attain sexual 
maturity earlier : this is a physical peculiarity 
which can hardly leave character unaffected. 
The passion of love, which in the north is an 
episode, in the south is an abiding stimulus : 
judging by their literature, it is hardly paradoxi- 
cal to say that southerners think only of love, 
whereas the people of the north have a thousand 
interests. We may figure to ourselves the in- 
fluence of this propensity upon the national 
character if we recollect what it was to be in love 
ourselves. So affected, we exhibited some of the 
leading features of the Mediterranean tempera- 
ment ; we were impulsive, little concerned with 


iS8 


RACE 


our own personality, inconsistent, not greatly 
interested in our material surroundings, and 
without any desire to improve them, except in so 
far as the object of our affections was concerned, 
Northmen, on the other hand, under ordinary 
conditions, are distinguished by the practical 
energy 1 with which they meet their surroundings: 
they are continually impelled to improve them, 
and, by altering them, they create novelties in 
environment which reinforce the impulse for 
further reform. A southerner accepts without 
disgust conditions of life which in the north would 
excite the strongest repulsion. The effect of these 
two contrary proclivities — the reproductive and 
the provident — is to be seen very clearly in the 
position of woman. In the south she is treated 
as a sexual appendage of man, to be guarded very 
safely, as is the rest of man's property. In the 
north, from the earliest historical times, she has 
been man's companion and partner, and love for 
her is clarified by sentiments of chivalry and 
romance — that is to say, by feelings which have 
their origin not in self-abandonment, but in 
self-control. 

Our generalizations respecting the southern 
temperament may be extended to the East. 
There is much in common between the features 
of the Mediterranean and the Eastern character. 
Orientals are easily excited to impulsive self- 
abandonment, are swayed by ambitions which 
are rather social than individual, regard the 
government under which they live as a force 
apart from themselves, are not shocked by in- 
consistencies between opinions and behaviour, 

1 The number of spindles to which a mil'f hand can attend is a 
very good indication of his practical efficiency. In English cotton 
mills only three hands are employed for 1,000 spindles ; in Germany 
(North and South) seven are needed ; in Italy thirteen ; and in 
Bombay twenty-fi\e. 


ORIGIN OF RACE 


have allowed the spirit of changefulness to be 
choked by habitudes, and regard woman as an 
instrument for reproduction rather than as an 
element of society. 

The traits of character, which in this com- 
parison are attributed to the Baltic races, beyond 
doubt serve the development of the ideas, indus- 
tries, and institutions which we regard as the 
hall-marks of modern progress. But the southern 
races have their compensations. The cultivation 
of philosophy, artistic creativeness, and the clear- 
sighted exercise of the logical faculty of the mind 
are repressed rather than stimulated by the 
material ideals of the north. And it is doubtful 
whether these ideals make for such happiness 
as is given by the aesthetic temperament, and 
sociability of disposition — impulses which can 
be satisfied with very small means. These are 
strongly developed in the Mediterranean — and, 
speaking generally, in Eastern peoples — and offer 
substantial compensations for lack of riches and 
monotony of life. 

§ 

It is difficult to resist the conclusion that the 
various races of mankind are derived from a single 
original type : in this case racial differences are 
the outcome of variations, or " sports, 55 which 
occurred subsequently to man's first appearance. 
It seems probable that many of these differences 
are not the result of random variation, but of 
variation which has been controlled and guided 
in a particular direction by climate or other 
conditions of environment. For we see that 
certain racial distinctions are associated very 
closely with certain environal influences. Peoples 
of the tropics are dark-complexioned and dark- 
haired, and are, moreover, distinguished by the 


190 


RACE 


early arrival of puberty. Hill men are generally 
short of stature. The moulding influence of 
environment will be discussed in the next chapter : 
but we may refer here to the theory, held by some 
high authorities, although repudiated by others, 
that environal influences are responsible for some 
notable changes which have occurred in human 
features and character within the period that is 
covered by historical records and archaeological 
research. It is believed by Professor Ridgeway 
that a short-skulled people have become long- 
skulled by migration from the hills to the plains. 
According to Professor Boas, under the conditions 
of America, Anglo-Saxon immigrants are gra- 
dually changing the shape of their heads ; and 
it is not uncommonly admitted by Americans 
that their features are becoming remodelled upon 
lines that have a curious resemblance to those of 
the native Indian stock. In the Mediterranean 
climate of Australia, Anglo-Saxons appear to be 
contracting the pleasure-loving gaiety of Medi- 
terranean peoples. It seems probable, then, that 
many racial peculiarities of features and character 
are the outcome of environal influences, although, 
once established, they will resist during many 
generations such a change of environment as 
is caused by migration. And this power of 
resistance is, as will be shown, stronger in 
southern than in northern characteristics, very 
probably because they are the more ancient of 
the two. 

Variations that are stimulated or guided by 
environment would promote uniformity among 
the inhabitants of the same locality and would 
tend to produce a racial type. But the change- 
fulness of Life is constantly producing variations, 
or " sports," in diverse directions, and these might 
lead a race into very abnormal eccentricities were 


LEVELLING EFFECT OF MARRIAGE 191 


they not controlled by the effects of marriage. 
From one point of view, as we have seen, sexual 
generation may be regarded as a cause of change, 
since it results in the production of individuals 
that differ from their predecessors, exactly re- 
sembling neither of their parents. But from 
another point of view it is a conservative influence, 
since its effect is, so to speak, to dilute any 
peculiarities possessed by either parent, and by 
intermixture to produce offspring that diverge 
less markedly from an average type. This 
tendency has been formulated as the law of 
" filial regression." Tallness in the father will 
be represented in his sons, but in a less degree. 
Galton found that in the families of 286 judges, 
who sat on the bench between 1660 and 1865, 
eminence was shown by 12.6 per cent, of their 
sons, 3.7 per cent, of their grandsons, and only 
0.5 per cent, of their great-grandsons. Their 
talents fell rapidly to the normal in their offspring. 
So also children tend towards the normal when 
their parents are defective. It has been shown 
by a large body of statistics that parents who are 
both congenitally deaf may expect three out of 
four of their children to be free from this defect ; 
and when only one parent is deaf the chance of 
deafness amongst the children is only one in eight. 

The levelling effect of marriage is no doubt due 
very largely to the fact that the sexes are not 
systematically mated so as to bring together males 
and females that agree in possessing some definite 
peculiarity. By selective breeding on these lines 
an immense variety has been produced amongst 
cultivated plants and domesticated animals. But 
if selection is relaxed, reversion to type follows. 
And under normal conditions, whether of men or 
the lower animals, there would be very little 
chance that pairing would occur between two 


ig2 


RACE 


abnormal individuals whose peculiarities were 
similar. This is the difficulty in accepting the 
Mendelian hypothesis as an explanation of the 
origin of fixed varieties or species. It may be 
proved that certain peculiarities which arise as 
" sports " are represented by certain elements in 
the germ-cells that are not obliterated by inter- 
breeding, although they may be concealed. A cross 
that results from the interbreeding of such a 
sport and a normal individual produces only a 
certain proportion of reproductive-cells that 
possess these new elements, so that if two such 
crosses come together it would be necessary that 
one of a particular number of sperm-cells from 
the male should unite with one of a particular 
number of germ-cells from the female, in order to 
produce an individual in which the new character 
would be fixed. This could only come about with 
the closest in-and-in breeding, and from a 
theoretical point of view the chances of the estab- 
lishment of a new variety seem to be very remote. 
But the fact remains that varieties have been estab- 
lished : we owe to them the multiplicity of species 
in the animal and vegetable kingdoms. They have 
withstood the swamping effect of sexual interac- 
tion. But it is clear, nevertheless, that marriage 
has generally the effect of reducing eccentricity 
to normality : we observe that relationship is 
marked by resemblances of feature and character. 
We also find this resemblance, although in a less 
degree, within the circle of a nation, for, unless 
interbreeding has been artificially checked, in the 
course of few centuries the greater number of its 
families have blood in common. 

It is difficult to realize how extensive are the 
bonds of collateral relationship. Misled by genea- 
logical tables we picture the continuance of a race 
in the similitude of a tree. This serves its purpose 


A RACE LIKE A FAMILY 


193 


when we are considering a few generations of a 
single family. But it is fallacious in that it em- 
phasizes direct succession, and conceals from us the 
immense importance of collateral inter-connection. 
We shall appreciate its deceptiveness if we consider 
the course of reproduction with reference to direct 
succession only. The number of our ancestors 
doubles in each generation, and if we go back 
twenty generations the forbears of each of us 
must number a million. But the population of 
that time would not have sufficed to provide 
ancestors, in this number, for more than a few 
persons now existing, and it is obvious that, owing 
to extensive intermixture of lines, a vast number 
of the present inhabitants of the British Isles 
must have ancestors in common. Where free 
intermarriage is checked by law or custom a line 
propagates itself still more directly by the union 
of blood relations. The ancestry of the German 
Emperor might have included 4,096 individuals 
during the last twelve generations : as a matter 
of fact less than 550 persons within this period 
contributed to his birth, in so many cases have 
individuals filled several places in the genealogical 
scheme, owing to the intermarriage of more or 
less distant cousins. It is easy to comprehend 
how in these circumstances family peculiarities 
of strength or weakness wouldbecomeaccentuated. 
But such restrictions upon intermarriage have 
not been general ; and in the past there has, more- 
over, been extensive intermixture of blood by 
illegitimate connections. So it has come about 
that, speaking generally, a race may be likened to 
a family, in that its propagation tends to repress 
divergences from a type or standard, and to pro- 
duce a racial uniformity. 


194 


RACE 


§ 

We have, however, to remember that races have 
very seldom remained undisturbed in their 
marriage connections, but have usually suffered 
admixture with other races which have migrated 
amongst them. This introduces a factor of 
immense importance. At the present day, 
migration generally takes the form of peaceful 
colonization ; but in the past the history of 
mankind has been a continuous record of warlike 
aggression. In some cases the conquerors appear 
to have almost exterminated the people they 
subdued : this seems to have been the ideal of 
the Hebrews when they colonized Palestine, and 
our Saxon forefathers do not appear to have left 
very many of the native inhabitants of Eng- 
land to adulterate their kind in future generations. 
But in the great majority of cases the conquerors 
have been content to reduce the natives to serfdom 
or helotage, and have endeavoured to safeguard 
the purity of their race by rigid restrictions upon 
intermarriage. So the Aryan invaders of India 
established a caste system ; the Spartans punished 
unions between themselves and their helols by 
degrading the offspring ; the patrician? of Rome 
denied the jus connubii to the plebeians, and the 
Americans of to-day visit with the severest social 
penalties any sexual relations between their own 
kind and those who possess even a few drops of 
negro blood. But in the past these restrictions 
have failed with the passage of time, and mixed 
unions have generally brought the two races 
together. 

The effects of cross-breeding are many and 
diverse. As is well known to breeders, a small 
admixture of strong alien blood may increase very 
greatly the strength and certain of the qualities 
of a line. This is particularly the case when the 


ALIEN IMMIGRATION 


*95 


individual whose blood is introduced is of pre- 
potent reproductive fertility. The Paulistas of 
Brazil illustrate very remarkably the stimulating 
effect of a single alien strain. They are, perhaps, 
the most forceful of the mixed races of South 
America, and for many generations they exhibited, 
in war and in slave hunting, a fierce energy which 
made them the terror of their neighbours. It was, 
indeed, their courage that preserved Southern 
Brazil from Spanish domination. At the present 
time their energy flows in more peaceful channels : 
they grow the coffee which is the main staple of 
Brazil and has so greatly enriched the province 
of San Paolo. They claim descent from a 
Portuguese sailor who was shipwrecked on the 
coast early in the sixteenth century, and settled 
amongst the Indians. When, thirty years later, 
he was discovered by a party of explorers, he had 
become the patriarch of a tribe of half-breeds. 

In cases where cross-breeding takes the form of 
a general intermixture of two or more races, there 
is a tendency for that strain to prevail whose repre- 
sentatives are most numerous, whose peculiarities 
are most deeply seated, or whose features and 
characters are most in accord with the environal 
influences of the country. Circumstances are, 
then, usually in favour of the native strain, 
especially when the natives have been spared 
from slaughter in considerable numbers, for 
those who have been long established in a country 
have developed in directions that are favoured by 
its climate or other conditions. This is especially 
the case with strains of southern blood, which 
appear to be so tenacious of their qualities as to 
overpower, in the course of time, any northern 
blood that comes into mixture with them in less 
than greatly preponderating quantities. 

The gradual absorption of alien blood is no 

o 


196 


RACE 


doubt assisted by the action of infertility. In a 
population which is increasing in numbers but 
slowly, fertility is almost balanced by infertility. 
If we cast our eyes round the circle of our 
acquaintances how many are the families we shall 
find to be verging upon extinction, after perhaps 
a transient burst of fecundity ! Infertility very 
speedily disembarrasses a race of an admixture of 
alien blood that is of lower reproductive vitality 
or is unsuited to the local environment. The immi- 
grant strain may for a time revolutionize society 
by setting up an eddy of abnormal activity, or by 
the introduction of new arts or ideas. The survival 
of foreign elements may from time to time be 
disclosed by the birth of exceptional individuals, 
whose character approximates more closely to 
that of other races than to that of their own. But 
as time advances, the occurrence of these irregu- 
larities will become rarer, until the blended race 
settles down into homogeneity. These reflections 
assist us in understanding how a race may retain 
its peculiar character although it has interbred 
with alien immigrants ; or may revert to its 
ancient type after temporary bursts of eccen- 
tricity caused by the admixture of alien blood. 

Infertility, it may be added, contributes to the 
levelling effect of marriage in preventing a race 
from improving itself by the breeding of men of 
talent or " supermen." Persons of exceptional 
talents are not as a rule of prepotent reproductive 
fertility, and it is upon less abnormal individuals 
that the race depends for the continuity of its 
existence. 

§ 

The earliest of our historical records are con- 
cerned with little else than wars of invasion, and 
there is no reason why we should believe that 
these movements of population only commenced 


IMMIGRANT BLOOD 


197 


with the beginning of written history- They may, 
indeed, be almost comparable in antiquity with 
the annual flight of the swallows. They have 
flowed in various directions, but the main current 
has trended from north to south, since until recent 
centuries the temptations of wealth and luxury 
have lain southwards, where conditions of life have 
been easier and more productive. India owes its 
intellectual glories to tribes of northmen, gen- 
erally styled the " Aryans, 55 who some 3,500 
years ago broke through its mountain barriers and 
settled in the Xndo-Gangetic plain. They intro- 
duced into India the Sanskrit language. The 
modern tongue which is most nearly akin to it 
is the Lettish, which is spoken on the shores of the 
Baltic ; and, from this fact and from references to 
scenery which occur in ancient Sanskrit hymns, 
we may assume without rashness that the 
Aryans had their original home in Northern 
Europe. It appears from their early literature 
that their women were free, and were actually 
permitted to choose their own husbands. But 
most of the Aryan tribes took wives from amongst 
the daughters of the Indian soil : the Indian 
climate cannot have been congenial to them, and 
by the beginning of our era they appear to have 
lost their northern characteristics. They have 
bequeathed to India a literature which may be 
compared with that of classical Greece. But 
within historical times their blood has not been 
able to stir the habitual placidity of Oriental 
thought. 

The ancient civilizations of Egypt and Assyria 
appear to have had much in common with the 
conditions of modern China. The people were 
fast bound by ties of family and religion : their 
lives were directed by vivid conceptions of 
existence after death- Their houses were small, 


198 


RACE 


single-storied, and unsubstantial, crowded closely 
together, and their skill and expenditure upon 
architecture were confined to temples and tombs. 
To judge from the tales of Herodotus, there was 
little or no sexual restraint. The people looked 
to the government for despotic interference, 
and were proud of a ruler who was capriciously 
tyrannical. Dynastic revolutions were of frequent 
occurrence, but were moved by personal jealou- 
sies, not by political aspirations. Peace was 
frequently interrupted by invasions and con- 
quests, achieved not so much by hard fighting 
as by the slaughter of armies that nervously 
shrunk from the test of conflict, and, saving in 
Persia, not bringing into racial admixture any 
strains from Northern Europe. 

The shores of the Mediterranean, on the other 
hand, seem to have attracted invasion from North- 
ern Europe from time immemorial. Greek and 
Roman traditions and history abound with refer- 
ences to attempted or successful invasions of north- 
men : Gauls, Goths, Vandals, Germans, Lombards, 
and Normans swept downwards in successive waves 
of aggression, bringing their vigour to the conquest 
of Mediterranean peoples, losing it, and becoming 
absorbed by the races they subdued. The 
weapons, vessels, and ornaments that have been 
disinterred from ancient burial grounds show a 
surprising connection between the manners and 
customs of the early Greeks and Romans and those 
of tribes which had their homes in Alpine Europe 
or in the northern regions of the Balkan penin- 
sula ; and we may find in Greek and Roman 
psychology much to assure us that their ruling 
classes were descended from invaders who gradu- 
ally lost their northern attributes. There is a 
gulf between the ideals of Homer and those of 
later classical days. The heroes of the Iliad 


IMMIGRANT BLOOD 


199 


exhibit the traits which we associate with the 
Norman crusaders : Richard Coeur - de - Lion 
galloping his horse along the Saracen lines at 
Jaffa might, indeed, have been a reincarnation 
of Ajax from the fields of Troy. In the time of 
Themistocles very different were the ideals of 
manly conduct. The references to women in 
both Iliad and Odyssey carry us far from the 
ideas of a Mediterranean people. There is 
nothing of the Levant in Hector's farewell to 
Andromache, in the independence of Penelope, 
in the punctilious reserve with which Ulysses 1 
meets the naivetes of Nausicaa. We may 
realize the change which came over Greek thought 
if we compare a passage in the Odyssey with a 
sentence from the funeral speech of Pericles. 
According to the ideals of Ulysses — a man of 
many successes with women — 

Naught beneath the sky 
More sweet, more worthy is than firm consent 
Of man and wife in household government : 
It joys their wishers-well, their enemies wounds, 
But to themselves the special good redounds. 

Pericles held, on the contrary, that it was the high- 
est glory of woman to be unknown outside her 
house-door, for either good or evil. In the days 
when Athens reached the summit of her glory, 
woman had begun to fall into Oriental degradation. 
The wife was man's slave, the courtesan was his 
companion. Thence onward we may watch the 
rapid orientalization of the Greeks until, during 
the Byzantine empire, their ideas, their passions, 
their government became those of an Asiatic 
country. Constantinople would in all probability 
have been captured by Islam four centuries earlier 

1 Is not Ulysses represented in Odyssey vi. 232 as a yellow- 
haired man? 


200 


RACE 


had it not been protected by the courage of a 
regiment of northmen — the Varangian guard, 
which was recruited from the shores of the 
Baltic. It is difficult to avoid the conclusion 
that Greece, like India, w T as energized during some 
centuries by streams of northern immigrants, 
whose blood in the days of Homer retained its 
physical vitality, in later centuries, as in India, 
could produce an intellectual ferment, but finally 
became too attenuated to give changeful vigour 
to either mind or body. 

We may observe similar features in the history 
of Rome. The earlier Romans exhibited the 
simplicity and reticent doggedness of a Germanic 
race : their women were held in honour, w r ere 
even a force in politics, and female chastity was 
an asset of society. Their ideals were of self- 
control rather than of self-abandonment : the 
stern endurance of patriotic self-sacrifice was in 
higher esteem than artistic talents. They favoured 
the government by council which is so universal 
a sign of the individualistic ambitions of Northern 
Europe. But these excellencies evaporated. The 
republic was torn by personal jealousies : in 
Rome, as in Greece, politics became a means of 
securing personal profit. It finally degenerated 
into Oriental despotism, under which the people 
accepted without question the ruler who could 
scheme his election to the throne. Sexual 
restraint appears to have vanished, and women 
lost all seriousness of esteem. In the Western 
Empire an endeavour was actually made to 
crystallize society upon a caste system. Could 
we transport ourselves back to those days, 
we should find ourselves in the conditions 
which we term Asiatic. The streets and houses 
of Pompeii recall in miniature those of Canton, 
and Imperial Rome, with its crowded, servile 


CAUSE OF ROME'S DECLINE 201 


population, its mystical religions, its open sexual 
immorality, must have had much in common with 
Memphis or Babylon. Intellectual force sur- 
vived for some period the loss of physical vigour, 
and we have in Roman law the last traces of the 
energy which in Greece bore autumnal blossoms 
of poetry and philosophy. But the scholastic 
studies of the Romans degenerated into the 
trivial, mechanical kind that are still favoured 
at the Moslem university of El Azhar in Cairo. 
In Rome, as in Greece, we appear to witness the 
gradual exhaustion of an exotic stream of northern 
vitality. 

Many have been the explanations that have 
been marshalled by historians to account for the 
fall of the Roman Empire. The immediate cause 
was the incursion of savage enemies. But 
behind this lies, as the causa causans, the loss of 
spontaneity — of the spirit of change — in paralys- 
ing inclinations towards habitude. In the soften- 
ing conditions of peace the people could not 
retain the energy that might impel them to take 
up arms and meet their enemies. They were 
content to bribe them, or to enlist them. They 
might even resort to such childish expedients 
as were used by the Spaniards of Panama when 
they attempted to head off the forces of the 
Welsh freebooter, Morgan, by loosing a herd of 
bulls upon them. The marauders shot the bulls, 
dined off them, and were refreshed for a deter- 
mined assault on the morrow. We may read in 
the pages of Gibbon of the despairing artifices 
which a people that had become inured to peace 
attempted to substitute for the self-sacrifice of 
war. Peace and prosperity are only consistent 
with security when they leave unquenched in the 
national spirit some sparks of spontaneous and 
changeful energy which, touched by the wind of 


202 


RACE 


danger, may fire the people to throw aside un- 
warlike habits — when, in the words of Tennyson — 

The smooth-faced snub-nosed rogue will leap from 
his counter and till 

And strike, if it be but a blow with his cheating yard- 
wand, home. 

§ 

We may, then, conclude that the history of the 
Mediterranean up to quite recent times has 
been determined by successive floods of northern 
blood, each of which left a stratum of novelty, 
the relics of which are disinterred, like fossils, 
by the spade of the archaeologist. There was a 
similar current towards India which could not 
be diverted even by the barrier of the Himalayas. 
Ceaseless immigrations of Aryans, Scythians, and 
Tartars are clearly to be discerned across the 
misty backgrounds of Indian history. To an 
uncivilized people the north offers little hope of 
riches or leisure. Nature requires to be combated 
with practised skill. The south allured them 
with its easier opportunities, and they drifted 
southwards, infusing accessions of vigour into 
the southern races, but forfeiting in time their 
own vitality. During recent centuries there has 
been a change. The arts of civilization have 
enabled the northmen to produce wealth at home ; 
and America and Australia have offered fields for 
colonization which promise to be less enervating 
than those of the Mediterranean. 

But migration has not always been from the 
north to the south. The Jews and the gipsies 
are Asiatic peoples who have drifted northwards, 
far afield from their homes. And it is to be re- 
marked that they have preserved their charac- 
teristics with a persistency which we cannot find 
illustrated by any northern race which has been 


THE STRENGTH OF THE NORTH 203 


attracted towards the tropics by the amenities 
of the south. Observing the many peculiarities 
in character and ancient custom which the 
native peoples of Ireland and Wales share with 
the races of the Mediterranean — with some races 
indeed of the East — and their extraordinary 
persistency, we may indulge in the speculation 
that these peoples have also come from southern 
latitudes, and are, in consequence, as remote in 
their sympathies from the English, as the English 
are from the inhabitants of Italy and Spain. 
During the last few centuries northern countries 
have increased immensely in wealth and have 
attracted immigrants, who may in time change 
very materially the character of their inhabitants. 
The Irish have spread in large numbers to England 
and America : the Italians and other Mediter- 
ranean peoples have flocked to New York in 
hundreds of thousands. Large seaports have 
always attracted a foreign population : for gen- 
erations Londoners have been receiving into their 
houses strangers from all countries of the world, 
and it may be held that traces of an intermixture 
of southern blood may already be seen in their 
features and character. There is certainly ' 
great difference between them and the towns 
population of northern England, which have 
been affected less intimately by alien immigration. 

Generally, however, the outstanding feature of 
the ancient history of Europe has been the 
periodic infusion of northern energy into the 
productiveness of the south. Modern history 
begins when the north became productive as well 
as energetic. But the success of northern races 
is won by their character not by their riches, and 
it would be an evil day for the progress of mankind 
were their traits to be obliterated by an influx of 
alien blood. We might gain a wider development 


204 


RACE 


of aesthetic feeling, a clearer perception of the 
chains by which logic leads us to true — or, it 
may be, to false — conclusions, a finer lucidity of 
expression ; but we should lose the industrious 
spadework which is disputing with Nature the 
conformation of the earth, and is establishing 
conditions of comfort and cleanliness, not only for 
a privileged few, but for the masses of the people. 


CHAPTER XI 


ENVIRONMENT 

No one who has taken a trip to Brighton — who 
has fled from the exhausting heat of a London 
August to the crisp air of the Alps, or the fresh 
breezes of Scotland — will deny for a moment 
the exhilarating effect of the change in sur- 
roundings. And no one who has visited a boys' 
club in the East End of London but has been 
struck with the effect of city life in sharpening the 
features and paling the complexion. That en- 
vironment affects men for good and evil is indis- 
putable. It may affect their physical growth and 
form : it may affect their character : it may affect 
their habits. A tropical climate appears to stifle 
the energy of European settlers : the extra- 
ordinary development in means of locomotion, 
which is one of the characteristic features of our 
times, has beyond doubt stimulated a changeful 
spirit in modern Europe. Do such influences as 
these affect the race as well as the individual ? Do 
they touch the reproductive cells from which new 
individuals arise, so that they start in life with an 
advantage or a handicap ? This question is of 
immense importance. In so far as environment 
affects individuals, its influence may be corrected 
by a change of surroundings, or, perhaps, by a 
change of culture. But if it affects the germs 
which carry on the race, the peculiarities that it 
causes become a heritage which may hardly be 

205 


206 


ENVIRONMENT 


put off. We shall find reasons for concluding that 
the effects of environment may become hereditary 
in their influence upon physical features, or upon 
the relative strength of the innate impulses which 
constitute character ; but that, when they are 
merely concerned with the formation of habits — 
although these habits may be the most important 
element in civilization — their influence does not 
extend beyond the generation that is immediately 
touched by it. An English baby is born with a 
complexion and a character which it owes in some 
measure to the country of its forefathers ; but it 
is not innately more disposed towards the artificial 
usages of civilization than the child of a family of 
Esquimaux. 

Environment and the individual 

We frequently style ourselves " creatures of cir- 
cumstances 55 ; if, speaking literally, circumstances 
do not make us, it is assuredly true that they can 
mar us entirely. We are absolutely dependent 
upon supplies of food : if they are inadequate the 
noblest genius may wither in fruitlessness, a 
healthy people may be enfeebled, may, indeed, be 
destroyed in millions, as during an Indian famine. 
There is good evidence to show that food may 
affect sex development : a bee may become a 
female or a neuter worker according to the 
food which it receives in its larval state. The 
colour of canaries may be deepened into orange 
by the admixture of some cayenne pepper with 
their seed. We cannot endure extreme cold : 
yet a certain chilliness of air undoubtedly has a 
bracing effect upon our energy. A dry climate is 
exhilarating ; a damp climate depressing. The 
diseases, which are so masterful an element in 
our environment, not only reduce the length of 
human life, but mar the physique of those whose 


ENVIRONMENT AND THE INDIVIDUAL 207 

lives escape them. Even our colour may be 
affected by our surroundings. An Englishman 
not only loses his ruddiness of complexion in the 
tropics : his skin may be darkened, apart from 
sunburn, by the development of a pigment which 
has become an hereditary peculiarity of the 
coloured races. Naturalists have collected many 
instances of the changing of colour by environ- 
ment. An Arctic fox, kept in a warm room, has 
been known to resist its hereditary impulse to 
turn its fur white during the winter months. 
The chrysalides of some butterflies will reflect 
the colour with which the caterpillars were 
surrounded at the time of their metamorphosis. 
Alpine plants transferred to the lowlands by the 
botanist Nageli changed their habit of growth, 
but reverted to their original type when retrans- 
ferred to the mountains. The closeness of the 
connection between an individual and its en- 
vironment is shown by the exceedingly narrow 
limits within which many plants and animals are 
localized. Their haunts may not be distinguished 
by any unusual abundance of food. This pecu- 
liarity may be noticed amongst British butter- 
flies : the Adonis blue will not stray beyond the 
limits of a few favoured fields : the Lulworth 
skipper only occurs at the place from which it 
takes its name. 

§ 

With mankind, at all events, environment affects 
mental disposition as well as physique. Some peo- 
ples take an optimistic, others a pessimistic view of 
life. There is a gulf between the active hopefulness 
of the Englishman and the passive endurance of 
the Hindu. We may ascribe this difference to pecu- 
liarities of race or climate, but may find a contri- 
buting factor in scenery, the effect of which is 


208 


ENVIRONMENT 


particularly apparent in the bent of the religious and 
artistic emotions. The simplest religions — mono- 
theistic or dualistic — have arisen amidst landscapes 
which emphasize the impressiveness of simplicity 
and uniformity : the most complicated vagaries of 
polytheism occur where the darkness of forests, the 
imminence of precipices, the rushing of torrents, 
and the slow spread of floods display Nature as a 
many-headed terror for mankind. It has been 
held that the influence of hill scenery may be 
detected in the architecture of a people. Archi- 
tectural styles spread very rapidly by imitation, 
and lose all connection with the region of their 
birth. But we may gather from observation that 
amidst mountains and pine trees buildings tend 
to be more sharply roofed than in featureless 
plains. Tall, far-spreading trees are a feature of 
environment in Northern Europe : in the vaulted 
aisle of a Gothic cathedral we feel as if over- 
shadowed by their interlacing branches. Nor 
need we doubt that the exquisite formulation of 
artistic feeling which was the glory of classical 
Greece was stimulated by impressions of clear- 
cut beauty in mountain, valley, and sea. Life 
in a crowded city produces sharpness of character 
as well as of features ; and amidst these sur- 
roundings it is particularly true that " evil com- 
munications corrupt good manners." Within 
certain limits hardship strengthens, luxury 
weakens the character. Some of us may remem- 
ber Mr. Barlow's illustration of this truth in that 
old nursery classic, Sandford and Merton — how 
cowardice and courage changed about between 
two dogs which alternately became used to the 
hearth-rug and the sheep fold. A muscle, or a 
faculty, is generally strengthened by use, and 
circumstances that compel its use are therefore 
invigorating in respect to it. Energy is also 


ENVIRONMENT AND HISTORY 209 

developed by opportunities of remunerative effort : 
an English labourer or artisan is a different man 
after a few months' experience of the stimulating 
prospects of Canada. The consciousness of danger 
may harden the endurance of a community as of 
an individual. We may wonder whether Rome 
would have been great had there not been before 
her the fear of Carthage. In quite recent times 
w r e have seen Australia drill herself under appre- 
hensions of Japan, and South Africa draw herself 
together to confront the menace of a large and 
vigorous black population. 

§ 

It is, then, indisputable that the influences 
of environment have powerfully affected the 
course of human history — have encouraged or 
retarded the steps by which man has slowly 
emerged from the darkness of primaeval savagery. 
We may give further illustrations. Unassisted by 
art man cannot compete with dense vegetation : 
forest-clad regions have i^ever been the homes of 
an original civilization. In tropical countries 
races that dwell beneath the shadow of trees 
become trammelled with a shyness or timidity 
which is as incurable as the instinctive nervous- 
ness of the lynx: they are enslaved by the gross- 
est and cruellest forms of superstition, and by 
habits which resist all changeful impulses. The 
most savage and untamable of the native races 
of America are those which inhabit the dark 
forests of the Amazon : and of Africa and India 
it may generally, though not universally, be 
stated that humanity is least advanced where 
foliage is densest. In the temperate regions a 
forest life is less degrading ; but it appears to 
blunt and depress human faculties, and it may be 
doubted whether the German tribes which roamed 


210 


ENVIRONMENT 


the forests of Northern Europe, would ever have 
emerged from barbarous simplicity had they 
remained unaffected by outside influences. But 
they possessed energy which could resist the 
gloom of their environment, and, touched by the 
glow of Roman civilization, they assimilated 
knowledge and imitated accomplishments which 
speedily gave them the command of Nature. 
The birthplaces of agriculture, and of civilization, 
have been treeless valleys. Such are Egypt and 
Mesopotamia, the expanses of Northern India 
and the densely inhabited portions of China. 
Far away across the ocean there were two other 
centres, the treeless upland valleys of Mexico 
and Peru. In all these localities cultivation 
reached a high pitch of efficiency. 

But the regularity of an agricultural life 
may fatally reinforce the growth of habits. 
Agriculturists are generally conservative in their 
opinions. Under a tropical sun, more espe- 
cially, the spirit of changefulness cannot survive 
the cramping effect of custom : the people 
become so inured to the monotony of peace as 
to be unable to rise to the exigencies of war, 
and helplessly suffer their fields to be trampled 
by the feet of restless invaders. Hordes of 
these have been bred on the grazing lands which 
lie along and across the valley horizons. Pasture 
must be searched for over vast areas of country 
at different seasons of the year, and a pastoral 
life nourishes the spirit of adventure by its hard- 
ships and its constant vicissitudes. The Hebrews 
were trained for the conquest of Palestine by 
their wanderings in the desert. Egypt has con- 
stantly been overrun by Bedouin tribes, India 
and China by Mongol races which have swept 
eastwards and southwards from the steppes of 
Tartary and Siberia. In our own time we have 


ENVIRONMENT AND CIVILIZATION 211 


seen the civilization of Egypt seriously threatened 
by a horde of cattle-keeping (Baggara) Arabs, 
and, since the beginning of our era, nomadic 
forces, whether Tartar, Arab or Teutonic, have 
uprooted every civilization then existing except 
that of China and Japan. Living in open pas- 
tures, nomadic races may become so indifferent 
to the beauty of foliage that when they settle 
down, whether in Turkey or in China, they reck- 
lessly destroy all the trees of the country. But 
in return they infuse into it a spirit of active 
vitality which may initiate some changes in 
popular habits, may effloresce in such transient 
glories as those of Khubla Khan or of the 
Mogul emperors of Delhi. Agricultural and 
pastoral conditions may, then, be regarded as, in 
some ways, complementary factors in human 
progress : the former has provided the mechanism, 
the latter the energy, for advance. 

§ 

Modern achievements in scientific discovery, and 
in increasing the comfort and variety of life, stand 
like a tower amongst the monuments of human 
history : the difficult and tortuous path of pro- 
gress seems to have been suddenly smoothed and 
straightened. This rapid development may be 
ascribed in great measure to the conditions of 
modern environment. Facilities for travel, for 
commerce, and for the dissemination of news have 
drawn all the civilized nations of the world into a 
partnership of enterprise and research, and have 
enabled each of them to profit immediately by the 
discoveries of others. Nor is this all. They have 
quickened curiosity and the desire for novelty,, 
and have broken down the barriers which the con- 
servative spirit opposes to reform. This trans- 
formation of mental habit, once begun, progresses 

p 


212 


ENVIRONMENT 


with increasing rapidity, since each of these multi- 
form changes in environment acts as an incentive 
towards further change. But in tracing the 
origin of this revolution we must avoid the danger 
of mistaking a condition for a cause. The com- 
plexity of modern life has afforded energetic and 
industrious peoples opportunities for developing 
the resources of their disposition. But the pos- 
session of energy and industry is essential. During 
the last half century the conditions of India have 
been revolutionized by the construction of rail- 
ways and the diffusion of education. Yet the 
general effect upon the outlook of the people has 
been disappointingly small. However forcibly 
advertised in the environment, the material ideals 
of Europe do not impress Asia, where leisure is 
preferred to industry, and men show their appre- 
ciation of wealth by burying it in the ground. 

§ 

In human society the reproductive impulses 
are very closely controlled by fashions, moral 
rules and ambitions that conflict with them, and 
it is exceedingly difficult to determine whether 
variations in the birth-rate result from changes 
in reproductive fertility or from various artificial 
causes. Its very great fall amongst the peoples of 
Western Europe, and of the Anglo-Saxon colonies, 
may be due to the postponement of marriage 
until long after the age that is indicated by 
the arrival of puberty, or to the voluntary limi- 
tation of families. But it is an accepted fact that 
luxury in diet diminishes fertility. Indeed, under- 
feeding appears to stimulate it : an Indian famine 
is followed by a very extraordinary rise in the 
birth-rate, amounting not infrequently to a third 
above the normal. Families run large amongst 
the thrifty Scotch, and the extraordinary fecun- 


ENVIRONMENT AND FERTILITY 


213 


dity of the very poor, even in countries where the 
general birth-rate is declining, may be connected 
with a sparseness, or irregularity, of diet which 
brings into their life something of the conditions 
of man's natural, or savage, state. The English 
peerage may fairly be taken to represent condi- 
tions of ease and luxury : few patents of nobility 
outlast the course of three centuries. 

It also seems to be true that idleness is prejudi- 
cial to fecundity. Breeders are well aware of the 
importance of keeping their stock well exercised. 
But, in the case of women, labour must not be 
too fatiguing : their employment in factories 
appears to lessen their capacity for child-bearing. 
And disease may, of course, severely check the 
increase of a population : repeated attacks of 
fever cause an enfeeblement of virility which 
may end in impotence. For the rest, the causes 
which at the present day are lowering the average 
size of families appear to have more connection 
with the culture than with the environment of 
society. 

Environment and the race 

Scientific opinion is sharply divided as to the in- 
heritance of acquired peculiarities. One school of 
thought not only insists that peculiarities acquired 
by the individual may become innate in the race, 
but regards the acquirement of peculiarities as the 
principal means by which plants and animals have 
developed their multiform species. Another school 
denies that acquired characters are heritable, 
and is persuaded that the differences which 
divide one species from another have their origin 
in spontaneous mutations or variations. It 
fortifies its conclusion by maintaining that the 
reproductive tissue — or germ-plasm— is entirely 
distinct from the sentient and active body, and 


214 


ENVIRONMENT 


cannot, then, be affected by peculiarities that are 
acquired by the latter — a contention which, it 
must be admitted, lacks adequate proof. Each 
school can adduce instances to show that acquired 
characters have, and have not, been inherited. 
In this uncertainty we may remember that Life 
does not limit its activities by any consideration 
for uniformity of procedure, and that, while in 
some cases it may evolve changes of form spon- 
taneously, in others it may utilize the experience 
of individuals. Amongst those who most positively 
deny that environment produces racial changes 
by its action upon individuals are some who will 
admit that its influences may predispose organisms 
to vary in directions that are favoured by their 
circumstances. And no one will dispute that 
environment affects very potently the course of 
racial development by eliminating any change 
that would put an organism out of accord with its 
surroundings. 

There is, however, much to justify us in going 
beyond this narrow conclusion and in ascribing 
to environment an active part in originating 
peculiarities that become hereditary. Size, for 
instance, is a hereditary peculiarity: the dimen- 
sions attained by either men or the lower animals 
generally correspond with those of their pro- 
genitors. But the size of their progenitors appears 
in many cases undoubtedly to have been deter- 
mined by their environment. The grey wolf and 
the common fox of North America grow con- 
siderably larger in the north than in the south, 
the difference in size amounting to as much as a 
fifth. Deer of the same species also increase 
in size very materially towards the north. We 
may notice a similar tendency in the peoples 
of Europe. Life at a high elevation appears, on 
the other hand, to lower the stature of men and 


ACQUISITION OF PERMANENT TRAITS 215 


cattle. This is very noticeable as one ascends the 
slopes of the Himalayas. A dwarfed condition 
has become hereditary in Himalayan cattle and is 
retained by them if transported to the plains. 
Breeders of cattle are well aware that in estab- 
lishing large or small varieties food is a factor 
of importance. A liberal diet will enable young 
stock to surpass the growth of their parents 
and to acquire additional bulk which they transmit 
to their descendants. Conversely, cattle may be 
dwarfed by starvation, and when small Alderney 
cows were in fashion the systematic under- 
feeding of the calves was a recognized expedient 
for reducing the size, not only of individuals, but 
of the breed. To draw another illustration from 
India : there is a surprisingly close correspon- 
dence between the size of the village cattle and 
the character of the fodder they receive. In the 
rice districts of the eastern coast they are very 
diminutive compared with those of the northern 
and western regions, where they are fed on wheat 
or millet straw. Rice straw is of very poor 
nutritive value. It cannot, then, be denied that 
the character of the food supply may hereditarily 
affect the development of some animals. It 
has been known since the days of Pliny that the 
garden radish can be raised from the wild species 
by intensive cultivation, and manure has been 
of vital assistance to the nurseryman in breeding 
new varieties of flowering plants and vegetables. 
If we concede that from bodily nourishment may 
arise peculiarities of form that are transmitted 
to offspring, we cannot maintain that the sentient 
and active body is isolated from the special tissue 
which secretes the reproductive cells. 

Colour also appears to be connected with 
environment. Speaking generally the coloured 
races of mankind are those that live under a 


2l6 


ENVIRONMENT 


tropical sun : their colour is a hereditary trait, 
but it results from a pigment which (as already 
mentioned) may be acquired in some degree by 
a European who resides for many years in the 
tropics. If we follow the representatives of the 
Equidae that occur wild in Asia and Africa, we find 
that colour markings become brighter and cover a 
larger surface of the body as we approach the 
equator from either north or south. The wild horses 
of Mongolia and the Asiatic deserts are striped 
indistinctly on the legs. In the ass of Nubia and 
Abyssinia stripes are developed on the shoulders 
as well as on the legs, and become more con- 
spicuous. They cover the body of the tropical 
zebras, but disappear from the legs and under 
surface of the zebra (Chapman's) of the Orange 
River, and were limited to part of the upper 
surface of the (now extinct) quagga, still farther 
south. Brilliancy is a conspicuous feature of 
tropical insects and flowers. Tropical birds are 
also generally distinguished by brightness of 
colour, as w r ell as by the length of their beaks 
and tails. On the other hand, it is in the temperate 
regions that birds develop their sweetness of 
song. There is no obvious connection between 
coolness and vocal capacity : nor is there 
between aridity and the spiny growths that are 
thrown out by plants — and by some lizards — in 
widely separated 1 desert countries. Yet in both 
cases we may feel sure that a connection exists. 
Doctors are well aware that the recuperative 
virtues of health resorts are frequently limited, 
very unaccountably, within quite small areas. 
The influence of environment, by promoting or 

1 In similar environments the ostrich and the llama have 
developed a curious similarity of form. Darwinists ascribe this to 
the effect of similar selective influences. But it will corroborate 
the existence of more subtle influences to those who have been led 
by other coincidences Co believe in them. 


EFFECTS OF ENVIRONAL PRESSURE 217 


hindering the use of an organ, or a faculty, may- 
strengthen or weaken it : the resulting develop- 
ment or degeneration may become fixed heredi- 
tarily in the offspring. The eyes of a newt 
(Proteus), which lives in the dark waters of the 
Adelburg cave, have become quite rudimentary 
and sightless. The horses of a mountain country 
are born with hoofs that will stand the jarring 
of hard rocks and city pavements much better 
than those of lowland breeds. Physical changes 
that are caused by mutilation are, as a general 
rule, not inherited ; nor should we expect them 
to be, since sudden modifications of an organ would 
not affect the germ-plasm so strongly as modi- 
fications which have resulted from gradual pres- 
sure. But cases are numerous in which mutila- 
tions have been passed on to offspring : in one 
of the most curious, a cat with a broken tail 
bore kink-tailed kittens, her tendency to transmit 
her defect increasing with each successive litter 
until not one of her kittens was born with a 
straight tail. It has been demonstrated that 
guinea pigs, which have become epileptic from 
a surgical operation, may transmit an epileptic 
tendency to their offspring. 

A sudden change of environment appears to 
stimulate the occurrence of mutations or "sports." 
Under the artificial conditions of domestication 
plants and animals sport much more freely than 
in their natural wild state — display, that is to say, 
eccentricities of form which are heritable and are 
seized upon by breeders as a means of developing 
new varieties. The numerous breeds of dogs, 
fowls and pigeons have for the most pa ^ung 
from these sudden eccentricities ; t v ts, 
assisted by cross breeding and intense na- 
tion, we owe a large proportion of Vt 
conspicuous garden flowers and our 1. 


2lS 


ENVIRONMENT 


vegetables. Under artificial changes of environ- 
ment — the alteration of the proportion of salt in 
the water in which it lives — a shrimp (Artemia) 
will become transformed by changes which would 
suffice to distinguish not merely a new species, 
but a new genus. Sponges and zoophytes which 
have apparently migrated from the sea to a fresh- 
water habitat, have changed the course of their 
development : the organism emerges from the 
egg in its adult form instead of as a free-swimming 
larva. Breeds of English sheep transported to 
the pampas of Argentina become endowed with 
novel characters : the legs grow long at the 
expense of the body : the wool turns coarse 
and hairy. So substantial a distinction as that 
between short-skulled and long-skulled races is 
believed by some authorities to have resulted 
merely from the differing influences of a moun- 
tainous and a plains habitat ; and at the present 
day an American environment appears to be 
curiously modifying the Anglo-Saxon type in the 
shape of the head, and in the modelling of the 
features. If, as appears, changes of environment 
are followed by hereditary modifications of form, 
or stimulate the occurrence of hereditary muta- 
tions, we may infer that migration has been a 
powerful factor in the development of new species 
of animals and races of mankind. 

§ 

There appears to be, then, good warranty for 
the conclusion that the action of environment 
may produce changes which become fixed in the 
breed and are passed on from parents to offspring. 
The character of these changes may often appear 
to have no connection with any special features 
of the environment : it is not clear, for instance, 
why birds should develop their powers of song 


FEATURES AND HABITAT 


219 


most harmoniously in a temperate climate* In 
the soil, surface features and climate of a locality 
there may exist stimulating or directing elements 
which are too subtle to be detected in the present 
state of our knowledge. This supposition is 
strengthened by the closeness with which some 
species of plants and animals are localized 
within their habitats, and, even more, by the 
replacement of one species by a closely related 
species on the further side of a geographical 
boundary line. In India, for instance, the black 
francolin of the northern alluvial districts gives 
place on the peninsular plateau to the painted 
francolin : there are three varieties of hares, 
each confined to its particular region : the Indian 
peacock is in Burma replaced by a species in 
which the green colour is more predominant. 
These species differ from one another by pecu- 
liarities of marking or colour which cannot be 
directly associated with any feature of the 
environment. Yet it is difficult to believe that 
environal influences did not contribute to the 
spread of these distinctions until they became 
universal throughout the species. 

It follows that the features and characters of 
the different races of mankind may, in great 
measure, be the outcome of the environment in 
which these races have lived during a long course 
of generations : racial peculiarities that are now 
innate and heritable may have been in the first 
instance derived from soil, geographical features, 
or climate. This theory will be strengthened if 
we find that similar conditions, in widely separated 
regions of the earth, are accompanied by similar 
innate peculiarities of feature and disposition. 
Around the globe a dark complexion is almost 
invariably associated with a tropical sun. As a 
rule it grows darker with approach to the equator, 


220 


ENVIRONMENT 


and, where exceptions occur, there are circum- 
stances which entitle us reasonably to ascribe 
them to the effects of immigration from the north. 
The new-comers retain for many generations traces 
of their original light complexion, and diffuse 
them by intermarriage with the natives of the 
soil. In India complexion darkens very notice- 
ably from north to south : the southerners live 
under a stronger sun : but it is also to be observed 
that they have lain remote from the torrents of 
invaders which, pouring across the passes of the 
Himalayas, have infused a light complexion into 
Northern India. The lowest castes of Northern 
India may be presumed to consist of families 
with which the immigrants did not intermarry. 
They are almost as dark complexioned as the 
people of the south. Africa has been protected 
from invasion by the deserts which shut it off 
from the Mediterranean, and it is in Africa that 
we find colour in its darkest shades. It can, then, 
hardly be disputed that complexion is a trait 
which has been derived from environal influences, 
and has become innate in the breed. 

The early arrival of puberty is another physical 
characteristic which is associated with a hot 
climate, and has become hereditary. This is a 
functional peculiarit}^ which must have far- 
reaching effects upon character. It lessens the 
period during which the young can acquire useful 
habits before their minds are preoccupied with 
sexual feelings ; and it may not improbably be 
connected with the relations between man and 
woman which are to be observed throughout the 
warmer countries of the world. Romantic love 
is burnt up in lust ; women are regarded as the 
slaves of men's appetites ; and polygamy is 
generally practised. We have already considered 
the influence which the predominance of sexual 


PHYSICAL EFFECTS OF ENVIRONMENT 221 


feelings appears to have exerted upon the history 
of southern races. 

A mountainous environment is almost every- 
where associated with shortness and sturdiness 
of growth, and with an abnormally large develop- 
ment of the muscles of the calf. This is of course 
the result of hill climbing : but it has become a 
hereditary trait of hill people. Some localities 
are distinguished by the muscular strength of 
their inhabitants : the f ellahin of Egypt are 
amazingly strong for an Oriental people. We are 
tempted to assume some connection between 
vigour and diet. Flesh-eating peoples are gene- 
rally supposed to be more forceful than vege- 
tarians, and in India those who subsist upon wheat 
and millet are certainly hardier than the rice-eating 
peoples of the eastern deltas. But the qualities 
that are associated with a particular diet may 
in reality be caused by the circumstances of soil 
and climate which determine the character of the 
food supply. In India flesh-eating Mohammedans 
are scattered amongst a population of vegetarian 
Hindus : speaking generally they are not more 
vigorous than the Hindus, although they un- 
doubtedly enjoy a higher birth-rate. And Japan 
affords a very strong argument for vegetarian 
enthusiasts. The diet of its people is rice : but 
no one can deny their physical and mental force- 
fulness. 

§ 

Turning now more particularly to peculiarities 
of character, we observe that a climate of moist 
heat is almost invariably — and very naturally — 
reflected in the physical inertness of the people 
that are subjected to it. There is a marked con- 
trast in India between the bodily inactivity of the 
Bengalis and the vigour of the Panjabis or Mara- 
thas who inhabit a region of lighter rainfall ; 


222 


ENVIRONMENT 


and Bengalis who change their domicile to drier 
climates do not lose their quietism in one or two 
generations. In Africa also the inhabitants of the 
drier regions are more strenuous than the tribes 
who live under a tropical rainfall. The men of 
Northern Nigeria — the Hausas — make infinitely 
better soldiers than the negroes of the south. We 
need not labour this point, which we habitually 
recognize by applying the term " enervating 55 to 
a moist hot climate. Exceptions occur. But 
immigration will account for them. The Moplahs 
of Western India have already been mentioned as 
having preserved through many generations the 
courage of their Arab ancestors amidst enervating 
surroundings. But the persistency of their traits 
merely shows that environment may need time 
to produce its effects. Dry heat, on the other 
hand, develops restlessness and courage. We 
need only instance the Turkomans and the Arabs. 
The energy that is produced by cold is quite as 
strenuous and is far more persevering. It will 
apparently withstand for some centuries the 
gradual effects of migration southwards. But if 
suddenly exposed to tropical conditions it seems 
to wilt more rapidly than the vigour that 
is derived from desert surroundings. English 
families which have settled in the tropics deterio- 
rate more rapidly than the Moplahs of Malabar. 
The energy and persistence of purpose which 
characterize the Teutonic peoples of Northern 
Europe are not relieved by the versatility of mind, 
the expansiveness of heart, which we associate 
with the Gallic and Mediterranean temperaments. 
We habitually ascribe this emotional sensibility 
to the effect of clearer skies and a warm climate. 
In the native population of Wales and Ireland 
it may be a relic of the south that has survived a 
change to a less genial environment. 


ENVIRONMENT AND CHARACTER 223 


The glimpses of local character which ancient 
history affords us suggest that peculiar traits of 
disposition have been curiously persistent in 
certain localities, although the race of the in- 
habitants has been greatly changed. The Athen- 
ian character, for instance, has been closely 
preserved by a people which retains very few 
drops of Athenian blood. 

§ 

We find, then, that certain human traits are so 
closely associated with peculiarities of environ- 
ment as to justify us in assuming that there is a 
causal connection between them. In many cases 
we may be quite unable to apprehend the links of 
this connection — to understand why certain facts 
of environment should involve certain physical 
and mental features. But it is permissible to 
draw inferences from occurrences which are in 
themselves unintelligible : science, has indeed, 
won its victories by the use of such reasoning. 
The effects of environment may be distinguished 
according as they have modified physical features, 
traits of character, or habits of mind and conduct. 
The two former have become hereditary, and 
innate, in the race which displays them. We may 
hardly deny that strong developments of energy 
or quietism, of susceptibility to passion, of 
artistic sensibility and practical foresight, have 
become as congenitally inherent in races of man- 
kind as peculiarities of feature and complexion. 
Habits of mind and conduct, on the other hand, 
do not appear to have become ingrained in the 
race ; they require to be acquired afresh by the 
individual. Such are modesty, decency, and the 
civic virtues. A European nurtured by savages 
would not revolt against the practices of savagery. 
In distinguishing between a trait of character and 


224 


ENVIRONMENT 


a habit we are on difficult ground : both affect 
conduct and it is only by observing conduct that 
we obtain any glimpses into character. But we 
may define the former as an impulse which is 
innately strong, the latter as an impulse which 
has been reinforced artificially by the routine oi 
behaviour. The one proceeds directly from the 
influences of the environment — in what fashion 
we may not be able to understand — and becomes 
implanted in the race ; the other is of man's own 
cultivation, under the pressure of circumstances, 
and needs to be sown afresh in each generation. 
The influence of our surroundings has thus been 
felt by us in two directions : it has modified the 
race, and it has swayed very powerfully the 
progress ot culture. 

§ 

There appears to be no reason in the nature of 
things why environal influences should not affect 
the reproductive capacity of a race and increase 
or diminish its innate fertility. They certainly 
may lessen the fecundity of individuals. There 
are some facts to show that the reproductive func- 
tions may be innately modified by locality. The 
Eschscholtzia, for instance, in Brazil must be 
cross-fertilized : flowers will not bear seed under 
the influence of their own pollen. But in England 
it becomes occasionally self-fertile, and self-ferti- 
lized seed appears to produce stronger plants 
than seed which has resulted from crossing. 
When, however, we are dealing with mankind we 
depend for evidence upon birth and death rates, 
and these may be affected by such diverse causes 
— many of them quite unconnected with environ- 
ment — that we can hardly find material for con- 
clusions which are not ambiguous. There is an 
extraordinary difference between the birth-rates 


ENVIRONMENT AND FERTILITY 225 


of Eastern and Western Europe. In Russia and 
the Danubian countries they are 40 per mille or 
over : in the United Kingdom the birth-rate is 
only 24, in France it hardly exceeds 20. But this 
difference is of quite recent date. At the begin- 
ning of the nineteenth century the French birth- 
rate was 34 : forty years ago that of the United 
Kingdom was 35. The birth-rate of Germany is 
now as high as was that of France a century ago ; 
but it is falling. 

We might be tempted to ascribe this general 
decline of births in the most progressive countries 
of Europe to some influences connected with the 
density of population. But it may be imputed with 
more probability to artificial causes, noticeable 
amongst which is the postponement of marriage. 
In India, with a very dense population, the birth- 
rate approaches 40 per mille : marriage is there 
generally contracted at the age of puberty. In the 
United States, where we should imagine that a 
rapid development of material resources would be 
accompanied by a rapid growth of population, 
birth-rates are no higher than in the United 
Kingdom. In the Anglo-Saxon colonies of Aus- 
tralasia they approximate to 30 per mille ; but 
except in Tasmania, they have fallen very con- 
siderably during the last 20 years. These facts 
do not indicate any relationship between fertility 
and environment ; indeed amongst the poorest 
classes of our large cities the birth-rate is even 
now as high as 40 per mille and families would 
increase with great rapidity were it not that 
deaths are abnormally numerous. The conditions 
of town life are so far removed from those of 
nature that one would be inclined to suspect that 
they were unfavourable to fertility. There is an 
idea that London families die out in two or three 
generations. The population of London is main- 


226 


ENVIRONMENT 


tained very largely by new-comers : more than 
a third have their birthplace elsewhere. But it 
is difficult to establish a connection between 
fertility and immigration : indeed we find the 
highest birth-rates in districts of East London 
where the immigrant population is comparatively 
small. And, taking England as a whole, urban 
life does not appear to be prejudicial to fertility. 
The average birth-rate is actually lowered if we 
exclude the 100 largest towns from our calcula- 
tions. 

It may be that the very high infantile death- 
rate amongst the poorest classes of our towns 
results from a form of infertility which denies 
length of life to offspring although it may per- 
mit them to be engendered. But this is only a 
surmise ; and, generally, if we understand by 
fertility reproductive capacity, there is little 
to show that it is affected by surroundings — that, 
in fact, the English birth-rate would not rise very 
greatly if celibacy fell into disrepute, child- 
bearing became fashionable, and marriage was not 
so long delayed after the attainment of the age of 
puberty. 

§ 

If the physical features and characters of the 
races of mankind are derived very largely from 
environal influences we should expect to find them 
modified where these influences are changed. 
We have seen that this has very often occurred 
even within the period of history. English fami- 
lies lose their vigour in tropical countries : a like 
change was suffered by the northern peoples who, 
band after band, fought their way to the shores 
of the Mediterranean, by the Aryan, Scythian, 
and Tartar invaders of India, by the Arabs who 
left their deserts for the amenities of Syria, North 


RACE-CHANGE BY ENVIRONMENT 227 


Africa and Spain. It has often been noticed that 
English families settled in Ireland become " more 
Irish than the Irish. 55 English colonists in South 
Africa contract many resemblances with the 
Boers. This may be ascribed to the effect of 
intermarriages or imitation. But no such reason 
can be given for the change which is taking place 
in the North American type, and in the character 
of the Anglo-Saxons who have settled under the 
cheerful skies of Australia. 

Southern traits are less mutable. The Jews, 
the gipsies, have lived for generations in Northern 
Europe, but have remained practically untouched 
by its influences in feature or in character : the 
Moplahs have resisted for eight centuries the 
enervating climate of Malabar : negro character 
has not been changed materially by a long exile 
from Africa and by conversion to Christianity : 
the Latin colonists in South America have re- 
mained Spanish and Portuguese — indeed the 
distinctive traits of the Basques and Gallegos of 
Northern Spain may still be traced in localities, 
such as Costa Rica, where they formed a large 
proportion of the colonists. America, indeed, 
illustrates on a grand scale the contrast between 
the compactness of southern and the fluidity of 
northern attributes. The Anglo-Saxons, Germans 
and Scandinavians who colonized North America 
have developed some unmistakable distinctions in 
their new environment, whilst Spanish or Portu- 
guese from South America would pass for natives 
of Madrid or Lisbon, and have infused many of 
their leading characteristics into the native races 
with whom they have interbred. But, it will be 
urged, if southern traits are, alike with northern 
traits, derived very largely from environal in- 
fluences, they should also be modified by a change 
of environment. If, however, as seems probable, 


228 


ENVIRONMENT 


they are by far the more ancient of the two, it is 
only reasonable to suppose that they will be 
more resistant to new influences. In the one case 
time may act by centuries : in the other it may 
be ineffective unless measured by thousands of 
years. 


CHAPTER XII 


CULTURE 

By " culture " is meant the store of traditions, 
ideas and habits which is passed on from genera- 
tion to generation, not by way of inheritance, but 
as a hand-to-hand gift. The term embraces all 
that we understand by civilization — almost all 
that is included in our religious, moral, artistic 
and industrial lives. Culture, like complexion, 
has been acquired from our environment ; but from 
an environment not only of things, but of men — 
of human society, as well as of material conditions. 
Civilization has been developed by the successive 
inventions of individual men, just as the multi- 
formity of the animal and the vegetable kingdom 
has sprung from the physical variations of indi- 
vidual organisms. If we characterize as c 'natural 5 ' 
the ordinary balancing of instincts which is to 
be observed amongst the lower animals, culture 
may be described as " artificial.' 5 It rests upon 
the effects of habit in enhancing the influence 
of certain instincts, and in diminishing corre- 
spondingly the influence of others. The repro- 
ductive instinct, for instance, prompts male and 
female to come together at the age of puberty: * 
urged by the instinctive desire to make the most 
of life, culture has postponed the date of marriage. 
It has conducted man to a pinnacle far above the 
station of the brutes ; but it has led him upwards 
along devious paths of error. Undisciplined 

229 


230 


CULTURE 


reason is a dangerous guide. By arguments 
which accurate observation would have discre- 
dited it has induced men to mutilate their bodies 
by such practises as circumcision an,d foot- 
binding, to kill their new-born children, their 
aged parents, and to make unprovoked and 
objectless wars upon their fellow r men. Led by 
directive instinct, the lower animals make no 
such futile mistakes : if instinct has contrived 
the hereditary mutilation of worker bees by the 
loss of their sex, it has certainly benefited the hive 
by their concentrated industry. 

Man's extraordinary progress may in great mea- 
sure be ascribed to a weakening of directive 
instinct which has compelled him to rely upon 
his reasoning capacity. The faculty of reason is 
no monopoly of mankind's : we can detect its 
working very far down the animal kingdom. But 
when subjected to the rivalry of directive instinct 
it is out-distanced by the straighter running of its 
competitor. So, in the case of the lower animals, 
instinct generally makes good its claim to leader- 
ship, and we may observe its influence in a uni- 
formity of conduct amongst the individuals, or 
communities, that belong to the same species. 
One troop of monkeys in an Indian jungle pre- 
cisely resembles another in its manners and 
habits. But the castes of an Indian village are 
sharply distinguished by peculiarities of behaviour. 
Man has gained incalculably in liberty of action 
by the loss of a tyrannical faculty, which, however 
safe a guide, tolerates no wandering on the part 
of its followers. 

What is discovered by reason is recorded by 
memory, and since the records of memory do not 
become hereditarily imprinted upon the mind, 
each generation would start from the commence- 
ment of the track were it not equipped, by means 


LANGUAGE 


231 


of language, with its predecessors' knowledge. 
Without language there could be no progression 
of culture. And, unsharpened by words, the 
reasoning instinct would have remained very- 
ineffective, since causal connections, other than the 
very simplest, can hardly be conceived until the 
links are defined by means of symbols. It is diffi- 
cult to imagine how we could think of heat as ex- 
panding a gas, or of 3 as the cube-root of 27, unless 
we possessed symbols — in words and in figures — to 
denote each of the conceptions involved in these 
ideas. Language has then assisted conscious rea- 
son. But conscious reason has created language. 
Directive instinct might suggest some means of 
communication by signs or sounds, and it certainly 
appears that many animals can give practical 
information to others of their kind. The use of 
language, however, goes far beyond this : it 
enables men to share abstract ideas, and, above all 
things, to instruct one another as to causes. It 
has progressed by the detection and isolation of 
qualities or properties, and by the attribution 
to each quality of its distinctive effects. A 
developed is distinguished from a rudimentary 
tongue by the provision of separate words to 
express stages of becoming or acting which are 
not detected by the uncultured mind. The 
embryonic stage of language has already been 
illustrated from South America, where tribes have 
not isolated, for instance, the idea of " washing," 
and use separate single words to express washing 
their bodies and washing their clothes. 

Nor must we forget the effect of writing and 
printing in spreading culture, and in securing it 
against the accidents of time and human des- 
tructiveness. In past ages how many buds have 
been put forth by human aspiration only to be 
frosted, overwhelmed, or deliberately cut back ! 


232 


CULTURE 


On fragments of horn and stone we have sketches 
of reindeer and galloping horses which have been 
disinterred from the beds of the interglacial 
period, and carry us back across a period of, per- 
haps, two thousand generations. They are roughly 
scratched, but, in fidelity to life and in the ex- 
pression of movement, they far surpass the artistic 
efforts of early mediaeval Europe, and are indeed 
superior to much that was produced by the 
talents of Egypt, Assyria, India, and China. But 
by war, pestilence, or natural catastrophes, the 
culture that flowered in them was altogether 
blotted out. Even the literature of such modern 
nations as the Greeks and Romans has required to 
be reconstructed from fragments which have been 
recovered from the debris of barbarian conquests. 
But, so numerous are the books in which our 
knowledge and ideas are now recorded, that it 
is inconceivable that they should pass away. 

§ 

Reason, we have seen in Chapter V, consists in 
the linking of results with causes — in the inferring 
of happenings from other happenings — assisted 
by an appreciation of the properties of things — of 
missibility as the property of a stone, of lightness, 
invisibility, and elasticity as the properties of air. 
An urgent practical problem of life is to discover 
the causes of success or failure, why an arrow at 
one time hits, at another time misses, why crops 
may either grow or wither. We have learnt to 
attribute misfortunes to our own mistakes, or to 
unlucky accident. But there are hosts of illus- 
trations to show us that these explanations are 
not satisfactory to untrained reason. Many days 
have not passed since misadventures which we 
should in these times attribute to ill-luck were 
regarded as manifestations of Divine interference. 


THE SEARCH FOR CAUSES 233 


This is the view which is still taken of them in 
Asia, where, if the purposeful intervention of a 
God is doubted, they are still ascribed to the work- 
ings of Fate. In the early days of his mental 
development man regards himself, not as an 
independent agent, responsible for error, but as 
a puppet in the hands of stronger forces. He 
seems unable to conceive of such an undirected 
existence as that of chance, and is persuaded that 
there is an outside cause for everything. It may 
appear extraordinary that the savage mind should 
have so rigid an idea of causal connection. But 
the voluminous records of beliefs and customs, 
which have been collected by anthropologists, 
testify very clearly to the existence of this 
conception. Indeed there are tribes at the 
present day who are convinced that man is 
naturally immortal, and that death is always 
the result of either violence, poison or witchcraft. 
We may then believe that a search for causes was 
an imperious propensity in primitive man. 

Two sets of impressions make their mark upon 
us — firstly, those which are received by us through 
our senses, and, secondly, those which are pre- 
sented in memory. To us it seems impossible 
that sensible objects should be confused with 
imaginary visions : we have been taught from 
childhood to distinguish the two. But an un- 
cultured mind can hardly discriminate between 
the visions of a dream and sensory perceptions : 
the two impressions may doubtless appear to be 
of different orders, but one seems to be as real as 
the other. There are persons who are tortured 
by the most deceptive hallucinations of sight or 
hearing : most of us take time to lose the con- 
viction of reality that is given by a very vivid 
dream. The verisimilitude of a vision is greatly 
increased if the memory is able to visualize clearly 


234 


CULTURE 


— if it presents a picture in specious detail. This 
faculty is possessed by us strongly during child- 
hood : it weakens as age advances, but there is 
reason to conclude that amongst savages it 
endures more persistently. To them the world 
resembles a cinematograph show, which presents 
two moving films, passing before them side by 
side, one of things observed, the other of things 
visioned. There are, then, two sets of happenings 
from which they can select causes, and, since the 
boundary line between the two series of im- 
pressions is not clearly defined, they may con- 
fusedly see in one series a cause for something 
that happens in the other. Their reasoning 
accordingly proceeds along a double track — one 
line concerned with observed, the other with 
visioned causes. We are ourselves not free from 
this duality. We offer prayers for fine weather, 
but do not neglect to take an umbrella — or to 
cock the hay — when clouds are about. The 
selection of causes, whether observed or visioned, 
has often been exceedingly erroneous. An Indian 
cultivator confidently believes that grain germi- 
nates most freely when it is sown by a pregnant 
woman, that the sprouting of sugar cane is 
stimulated should a horseman ride into the field. 
These are mistakes affecting observed causes. 
Everywhere in the Indian fields we may 'find 
illustrations of a belief in visioned causes. Sowing, 
harvesting and threshing are attended by rites of 
magic or worship that are supposed to control or 
propitiate unseen influences. 

Another conviction, of far reaching conse- 
quences, resulted from the confusion of the seen 
with the unseen. It was imagined that every 
object possessed a double existence, one appear- 
ing to observation, the other in visions, the former 
transient, the latter everlasting. Such a con- 


THE SEARCH FOR CAUSES 


235 


elusion may seem preposterous to educated 
minds. But by an effort of introspection we may 
conceive its possibility, and may understand how 
our ancestors thought that they were haunted 
by apparitions which were not phantasmal but 
realities. It is only in this idea that an origin 
can be found for the extraordinary fancies of 
magic and witchcraft — relics of our own history 
that have been preserved by barbarous tribes. 

§ 

Human society probably originated in small 
troops which lived in constant dread of the 
dangerous beasts that were so numerous, even in 
Europe, at the commencement of the quaternary 
epoch. The first cause of success was obedience 
to their chief, who was represented not only by 
the living head of the troop, but by the visioned 
spirits of departed ancestors. To revere the 
unity and the headship of the little group may have 
been the earliest beginning of religion : we can 
find traces of this observance everywhere. It 
is still the most popular cult of China : it is a 
living force in India : it swayed the ideas and the 
habits of the Greeks and Romans, and in modern 
Europe is acknowledged by the crowds which 
flock to the cemeteries on All Souls' Day. 

In man's adventures with the brutes an observed 
cause of success was the use of weapons : a visioned 
cause was to capture or kill the spirits of the beasts 
in a mimic hunt. Man made himself flint arrows 
and axes, and drew pictures which would keep 
before him the visions of his dreams. So, in domes- 
ticating animals, practical skill in taming might be 
assisted by visionary influences : man added their 
images to his collection of idols. The cow appealed 
to his admiration with particular impressiveness : 
she typified the success that made men rich, and 


236 


CULTURE 


was used to measure the extent of his riches : 
she was worshipped in Egypt, even by the 
Hebrews under Sinai : she is worshipped in 
India, and traces of this cult may be discovered in 
Europe. Could not the forces of Nature be domes- 
ticated also ? Fire was tamed by some remarkable 
genius, whom some nations have deified and all 
should revere. The sun, the rain, the winds of 
heaven could at least be conciliated by worship. 
With the increase of population wars arose, and 
the victorious leader, or a foreign conqueror, was 
remembered with the honours of a supernatural 
hero. Around these definite conceptions of divi- 
nity there upgrew a tangle of dreads and beliefs — 
erroneous connections of cause and effect — 
which darkened the mind with the degrading 
superstitions of fetishism and magic. Yet we 
must remember that from these fantastic imagin- 
ings, this visionary .logic, have been distilled 
religions of spiritual faith and moral endeavour, 
and that from them are descended our modern 
ideas of art and ethics. 

In the quest for causes our reasoning instinct has 
taken the lead : but it has been closely attended by 
our other instincts, which have at some times 
prompted its suggestions, and have at all times 
commended or opposed the ideas, visionary or 
practical, to which it has pointed. Thus the 
institution of slavery, which was declared by 
reason to be a means of securing comfort and 
leisure, was confidently approved by the selfish 
instinct : the social instinct firmly consolidated 
the respect for the family which co-ordinated its 
efforts in the chase or in war. The reproductive 
instinct confirmed polygamy, and might infuse 
into religion conceptions which actually idealized 
the obscene : the provident instinct sweetened 
the industry which reason dictated as the means 


IMPULSES AND CULTURE 237 

of livelihood. If reason advised the undertaking 
of a war, cruelty prompted the extermination of 
the enemy : kindness endorsed the emancipation 
of slaves which might reasonably be expected to 
encourage their honesty. Marvellous beyond all 
have been the effects of the aesthetic and ethical 
instincts — of the impulses to self-abandonment 
and self-restraint which are perhaps the most extra- 
ordinary manifestations of Life, and may almost 
plausibly be regarded as supernatural tendencies, 
unconnected, as they are, with practical needs* 
The former impelled man to prostration, dancing 
and music as methods of testifying his veneration : 
the latter to self -mutilation, asceticism and moral- 
ity as means of conciliating the spirits of his 
dreams. Painting and sculpture may have grown 
out of the rock pictures which brought home to 
the cave dwellers the spirits of animals that they 
fought, hunted or domesticated. We may find 
in the mimic hunt the prototype of the drama, 
the first-fruits of the dramatic passion through 
which the theatre appeals to us all. Side by side 
with this life of visions grew up a life of practical 
endeavour. It was discovered that bronze made 
more effective weapons than flint, that stone was 
more durable than timber for building purposes. 
We are disposed to regard the harnessing of steam, 
of electricity, of petrol, the elaboration of machin- 
ery, as the greatest of man's practical inventions. 
But can we see a less originality of intelligence in 
the domestication of plants and animals, the 
control and usage of fire, the discovery of the 
loom, of the plough, of oars and sails, and of 
the wheel ? 

§ 

There is a tendency to believe that a community 
progresses in concert, as a crop of wheat grows, 
under the influence of an imagined " spirit of 


238 


CULTURE 


the age. 55 But if we carefully observe the origin 
and spread of modern inventions, we shall discover 
no trace of the general development of an in- 
ventive spirit. Novelties owe their birth to the 
original talents of comparatively few individuals, 
whose ideas are adopted — or may be neglected — 
by the crowd. It is as though a crop grew by 
imitating the size of a few precocious plants. An 
impulse to change is inherent in all mankind ; 
but generally it is strictly shackled by the chains 
of habit, and only becomes effective in those 
original, or eccentric, men who are endowed with 
a special measure of spontaneity. Some of these 
innovators are recollected and honoured ; others 
have been forgotten in the mist of the past, 
amidst the distraction of wars and migrations. 
Whether as mystics, philosophers, artists, poets 
or mechanics, they have brought messages to 
mankind. Their ideas have generally been dis- 
regarded, and they themselves have been despised 
— often indeed, like the prophets of Israel, they 
have been cast out and stoned. They have had 
opposed to them the prejudice of consolidated 
habit, and, when they have moved their fellows, 
it has been rather by the assistance of a chieftain, 
a priest, or an advertising agency, than by the 
intrinsic value of their ideas. But we must not 
forget that their notions have commonly been 
erroneous, and that society would have perished 
had it adopted them all. We owe to inventors 
not merely the arts and industries that adorn 
modern life, but the wild, degrading and cruel 
superstitions which have distorted the path of our 
progress into labyrinthine complexity, and still 
misguide vast numbers of mankind. How extra- 
vagant are the cults which within recent times 
have been accepted by the disciples of eccentric 
enthusiasts ! 


PIONEERS OF CULTURE 


239 


It appears, nevertheless, that society owes to 
individual inventors or reformers the whole of its 
culture, whether moral, artistic or material — that 
progress has. in fact, been pioneered by invention 
and accomplished by imitation. Until recent 
years the development of culture has been exceed- 
ingly slow. For the innovator has the imitative 
impulse against him as well as for him: imita- 
tion is not only a dynamic but a static force : 
it is, indeed, far more potent in consolidat- 
ing habit than in introducing reform, and the 
bonds of habit can seldom be loosened 
unless the impulse to imitate is reinforced by 
some more strenuous feeling. And when habit 
has been strengthened by the emotions of respect 
or sympathy, it becomes a settled custom, with 
foundations so strong as to be almost unassailable 
by reform. Loyalty to a church, or to a king, 
will survive the greatest discouragements ; sym- 
pathy between members of a caste, or a profession, 
will resist to the utmost any suggestions for 
change, even in so small a matter as in traditional 
style of dress. The Indian costume has remained 
practically unaltered for many generations : so 
has village dress in remote corners of Europe ; 
and it is only of recent years that any relaxation 
has been tolerated in the customary dress of 
Anglican clergymen. The conservative force of 
habit is strikingly illustrated by the immobility 
of the East. But, judging from the slowness with 
which man has climbed upwards from the savagery 
of palaeolithic days, custom everywhere froze his 
endeavours and shackled his faculties during 
uncounted centuries. 

A change has come over modern Europe. 
Amongst us, at the present day, inventive genius 
has less prejudice to overcome. By travel, by 
the dissemination of ideas in books and through 


240 


CULTURE 


the press, the bonds of habit have been loosened, 
and inventors not infrequently see their ideas 
accepted with much credit to themselves — may, 
indeed, amass large fortunes. Custom is no 
longer firmly crystallized ; and it is interesting to 
observe that its disintegration began amongst 
the leisured classes whose habits were not hardened 
by the unbending routine of daily work. It is 
amongst the aristocracy of Europe that dress has 
for centuries been exhibiting its protean changes : 
it has been the upper classes that have introduced 
tobacco, tea, and coffee to their immense import- 
ance in modern economics : it has been amongst 
them that the liberal ideas have arisen which have 
revolutionized the tone of politics. These ideas 
have insisted upon the fundamental equality of 
man : they have spread to the masses and have 
had the natural result of impelling the poor to 
imitate the rich. Political power may be shared 
by all : deference must be reciprocal, and respect 
develops into mutual courtesy. However in- 
expensively, the dress of the leisured is imitated 
by the working classes ; and we may instructively 
compare the fashionable garb of a Sunday crowd 
on Hampstead Heath with the time-honoured 
costumes still worn by the peasantry of a remote 
Bavarian village. The inclination towards reform 
— the promptings of a questioning spirit — have, 
we may believe, been assisted very greatly by the 
influence of self-consciousness, for which increas- 
ing scope is afforded by modern habits of mind. 
The more clearly we see ourselves the less 
mechanical we are disposed to be in our behaviour. 
But to affect the heart-strings, imitation must be 
energized by the spirit of change — -stronger in 
some individuals and races than in others, un- 
nerved during countless generations by the 
hostility of Nature, or pent beneath the weight of 


IMITATIVE CULTURE 


241 


traditional habit, but still alive, and, when once 
emancipated, gaining new strength with every 
reform that it produces. 

Even in Western society it is only of recent 
years that the desire for change has liberated itself 
into forceful activity. In the past, innovators 
could only overcome the prejudice of habit when 
they could enlist the assistance of other impulses, 
or could appeal to the pressure of changing circum- 
stances. The most potent of these impulses has 
probably been that of reverence or loyalty. Inno- 
vations which are favoured by a king or a priest- 
hood may spread very rapidly. In the remarkable 
fluctuations of dogma which agitated the early 
Christian Church, we may see the ebb and flow 
of the ascendancy of particular bishops : the 
crusades are a striking, if familiar, illustration of 
the spread of a strange ideal that was favoured 
by the Church. To the conversion of monarchs 
Christianity and Islam have owed sudden and 
wide extensions. The prestige of a conquering 
race is a powerful stimulus : and war, however 
bloody and destructive, has brought different 
cultures into the same melting pot, so that each 
could attract something from the other. The 
conquests of Alexander spread Greek culture 
throughout Western Asia. Even in distant India 
the coins of Asiatic dynasties bore Greek inscrip- 
tions during several centuries. A subject people 
will imitate the language of its conquerors, how- 
ever inconsiderable their numbers may be. How 
much does not the English language owe to 
Norman-French ! The people of Ireland and Wales 
adopted the tongue of their English over-lords ; 
and, if prospects remain unchanged, in another 
century English will be the language of the Indian 
continent. 


242 


CULTURE 


In one department of social life the faculty of 
imitation must always be reinforced by feelings 
of reverence. This is in the education of the 
young, which is ultimately based upon the respect 
which is felt for parents and teachers. Learning, 
it may be objected, is acquired rather by obedience 
than by imitation. But obedience is essentially 
a form of imitation : it is the repetition of an 
impression that is received under stress of 
authority. Fortunately for the progress of man- 
kind the imitative instincts of the young are not 
encumbered with accretions of habit, and act so 
effectively that in a few years 5 time the growing 
generation can appropriate the acquirements of 
many centuries. At the present day knowledge 
has become so extensive and so diversified that it 
is impossible that individuals should learn the 
whole of it. Teaching is specialized, and par- 
ticular branches of science are committed to 
different classes of the community. But, taken 
as a whole, each generation assimilates all that 
its predecessors have gained. And the boys of a 
village school are in possession of knowledge that 
lay beyond the ken of Plato and Aristotle. 

When the chains of custom have once been 
unlocked, sympathy may assist the spread of 
changes, instead of retarding it. This is illus- 
trated by the vagaries of fashion, which directs 
not merely our dress and manners, but our artistic 
ideas. The appreciation of mountain scenery is a 
modern taste. The Romans were not an uncultured 
people : they crossed and recrossed the Alps, but 
appear only to have formed impressions of diffi- 
culty and discomfort. In Dr. Johnson's time there 
was little admiration for Highland landscapes. 
A fashion for Greek art led the Renaissance. In 
modern painting and music strange tastes are 
arising under the fashion of the day. During the 


STIMULI TO IMITATION 


243 


past generation fashion has changed the behaviour 
of society by discouraging the use of alcoholic 
drinks. It has accomplished what legislation 
could hardly have attempted. 

In cases where innovations appeal to strong 
elemental impulses, or to the feelings of pleasure 
and pain, they may gain currency without the 
assistance of reverence or sympathy. Such 
institutions as polygamy and slavery need no 
endorsement but such as is given by human 
passion. We may believe that the use of intoxi- 
cants spread very rapidly. Trade appeals to the 
acquisitive impulse, and international commerce 
is of more ancient date than is commonly sup- 
posed. Twenty centuries before the commence- 
ment of our era merchants were tracking their 
way through the forests of Germany to bring 
amber from the Baltic to the Mediterranean ; and 
the traffic in Cornish tin dates from almost as 
remote an antiquity. Indeed, the farther we 
look back into history the more surprise do we 
experience at finding that in days which we picture 
as barbarous, there was peaceful communication 
between lands that are separated by the breadth 
of continents. In the spread of culture from one 
nation to another, trade may have been less 
effective than war, but may justly be compared 
to it. If a people is richly endowed with aesthetic 
impulses, artistic craftsmanship may develop with- 
out artificial encouragement. During an epoch 
which is incalculably remote the cave dwellers of 
the Dordogne valley attained very remarkable 
skill in sketching from life ; and long before Rome 
or Athens were founded — even before Europe had 
learnt the use of iron — there were centres of 
handicraft manufacture in Germany and Scan- 
dinavia, at which stone and bronze were fashioned 
into arms and decorations with originality of 


244 


CULTURE 


design and finish of execution. These artistic 
upspringings were subsequently over-laid by- 
influences from the Mediterranean ; but they 
rose again to the surface, and flowered in Gothic 
architecture. 

Individuals and communities have not un- 
commonly followed a lead because they were pressed 
from behind by circumstances. The migrations 
which have influenced human history so pro- 
foundly have often been urged by scarcity of land 
or pasturage : customs and laws have perforce 
been adapted to the complications that arise from 
a growing population or material progress. It 
was an argument for the abolition of slavery that 
slave labour was ceasing to be profitable. In 
these cases reason has played a part in the advance 
of reform. But, generally, its authority has been 
less compelling than it w r ould please us to believe. 
Even at the present day its vision is clouded by the 
prejudice of habit. We may, indeed, be excused if 
we distrust our reasoning faculties. On the most 
burning political questions of the day we see men 
of acute intellect divided in opinion and arrayed, 
one side against the other, in opposing camps. It 
is not, then, strange that we should be content 
with the guidance that we receive from our 
feelings and habits. We are astonished that, in 
the East, improvements in economics or in man- 
ners should spread so slowly. But our own 
expenditure is regulated very largely by the 
dictates of custom. It can hardly be said that 
patent medicines generally deserve their wide 
popularity. Political economy, in so far as it 
assumes that conduct is determined by calcula- 
tion, may justly be termed a visionary science. 
The articles which we purchase, and the shops 
at which we purchase them, are settled for us, in 
great part, by habit and imitation. 


HABITS OF MIND 


245 


Nor must we belittle our imitative faculty by- 
supposing that it merely imposes upon us a 
mechanical uniformity, or conducts us forward 
by leading strings which simply affect our external 
behaviour. By following the ideas or actions of 
another we gradually strengthen in ourselves the 
influence of the impulses which these express, and 
equip ourselves not only, as it were, with new 
machinery, but with new motive power. We 
form new habits of mind, or " ideals," which affect 
us in spirit as well as in conduct. Thus the accept- 
ance of Christianity leads not only to kindliness of 
manners but to a more effective working of the 
kindly impulse. So also conditions of warfare 
subject us more strongly to feelings of cruelty ; 
and democratic politics stimulate our impulse of 
deference to the crowd. 

And, although we may find that culture has been 
won by steps that cheapen our ideas of human 
dignity, we may well be proud of the actual results. 
Man has so far outstripped the brutes as to deserve 
a place for himself, above the ranks of the animal 
kingdom. Between the chimpanzee and the 
lowest savage there is such a gulf as divides no 
other two classes of related animals. The one can 
only progress by the slow-moving wheels of evo- 
lutionary development : the other, able in some 
measure to change himself, has invented and 
adopted complications of behaviour which may 
have added to misery, which may have hastened 
death, but are the primaeval foundations of 
modern culture. It is impossible to deny that 
there has been progress — that in manners and 
ideas we surpass the Greeks and the Romans as 
they surpassed the Egyptians and Babylonians. 
It may be objected that so comforting a conclu- 
sion might hardly be reached were our survey 
made from a point in the Dark Ages of Europe, 


246 


CULTURE 


The tide of progress has flowed and ebbed. But, 
even at that time, there was a breath in the air of 
the spring of a new and more spontaneous 
vitality. The evils of those days are tearfully 
deplored by religious chroniclers. But it is 
something that they were deplored. And we 
must not forget that there is another side to the 
picture — that above the darkness of a confused 
morality there uprose the splendour of Gothic 
cathedrals. 

§ 

How far can culture modify the innate charac- 
ter of an individual or a race ? What are the 
limits of the artificiality which it can impose ? 
This is a question of immense importance. Upon 
the answer to it depends our prospect of the 
future of each people of mankind. We have 
already seen reason to believe that there are 
persistent and obdurate elements in individual 
and racial character which cannot be modified by 
culture, and will continue to underlie the veneer 
which habits and conventions impose upon be- 
haviour. If the children of a family, or the boys 
of a school, exhibit strong individualities under 
identical influences of training, we may feel sure 
that races will similarly retain peculiarities of 
disposition, however closely they may be com- 
pressed by the levelling force of civilization. 
Habit — or culture — effects miracles. We owe to 
it our rise from conditions of barbarism. A 
European child, brought up from infancy amongst 
savages, will behave like a savage ; and each of us 
repeats the development of the race in his progress 
through culture, from savagery to civilization. 
If culture can transform an individual, within 
the space of a few years, from a barbarian into a 
citizen of a civilized community, may it not be 


CULTURE AND CHARACTER 


247 


able to transform, for instance, the disposition 
of a Dane to that of an Italian ? So far as present 
knowledge goes we must reply in the negative. 
With however much artistic training, Englishmen 
will not catch the ecstatic abandon of the Mediter- 
ranean temperament. In external behaviour 
culture may produce striking resemblances be- 
tween different individuals and races. But it 
appears to leave the original character funda- 
mentally unchanged. The force of habit has, in 
fact, its limitations. It regularizes our impulses 
not, it would seem, by modifying their innate 
strength, but by facilitating their emergence into 
action. If we imagine the various instincts of 
humanity confined like the winds of iEolus, and 
able to free themselves, each through an orifice 
of its own, habits increase the influence of certain 
of them by widening the .outlets for their emer- 
gence, and so augmenting the stream of their 
activity. Within the receptacle their innate 
strength, or potential, remains unchanged. So 
we may observe that, under the influence of a 
strong excitement, such as is occasioned by war, 
love or acute emulation, the passions of the race 
display themselves in their innate peculiarity. 
When an impulse is innately weak, no enlargement 
of outlet will avail to give it sufficient strength 
to overcome competing impulses : when it is 
innately strong, it does not need the assistance of 
habit to flood the disposition with its activity. 

But it has been the theme of this chapter to 
explain that, although culture does not alter the 
strength of man's heritable impulses, it regulates 
their action upon his conduct, and works extra- 
ordinary changes not only in behaviour but in 
habits of mind, or ideals. If a further illustration 
is required, we may find it in the lives of Christian 
converts. Changes of religion undoubtedly leave 


248 


CULTURE 


much that is fundamental quite unaltered. But 
he would be blind who could not see amongst the 
negroes of the Carribbean, and the native races 
of South America that Christian culture has 
created new ideals, has ameliorated manners and 
raised the standard of comfort, quite apart from 
its spiritual effects. The same remark may be 
made of the converts whom Christian missions 
have gathered in other parts of the world. Those 
who become Christians develop a new set of 
sympathies : they become affiliated to the pro- 
gressive societies of Europe, and are impelled 
to imitate them, whereas the adherents of other 
cults are opposed to Christian manners and cus- 
toms by not unnatural feelings of loyalty to their 
creed. In Eastern Europe the progressiveness 
of Christian, and the stagnation of Mohammedan 
peoples convincingly illustrates the effects of these 
feelings. The Bulgarians are racially akin to the 
Turks. They have profited very remarkably by 
their inclusion within the pale of Christian fellow- 
ship, although we may conclude from the incidents 
of the late Balkan war that, when culture is 
dissolved in the heat of conflict, there is little to 
choose in malignant ferocity between the followers 
of Mohammed and those of Christ. 

§ 

From the physical point of view, culture is 
working momentous changes in the conditions of 
human society. By subordinating the interests 
of reproduction to those of intelligent activity 
it is reducing the procreation of children, and 
actually threatens with extinction the most 
cultured classes of mankind. Amongst the poorest 
classes children are still born as plentifully as in 
Russia or India; but as the social scale rises, 
the birth-rate diminishes, until, in the uppermost 


CULTURE AND BIRTH-RATES 249 


levels, it hardly amounts to a quarter of what 
Nature intends it to be. This fall is customarily 
imputed to the deliberate use of preventives 
against child-bearing, but we must hesitate to 
conclude that an artificiality which has not in- 
fluenced the continuity of the race throughout 
countless centuries should, within a single genera- 
tion, have become so widely adopted as to dimin- 
ish the reproductiveness of a whole population 
by as much as a third. Undoubtedly it has an 
effect — and a great effect — in limiting the size 
of families amongst certain classes of the com- 
munity. But we must not forget that the falling 
birth-rate has been accompanied by changes that 
are of immense importance to reproductiveness — 
a fall in the proportionate number of marriages, 
and a rise in the age at which marriage is con- 
tracted. In England, within the last forty years 
the proportion of marriageable women that are 
married has fallen from 57 to 46 per cent. It has 
been shown by elaborate statistical investigations 
that woman's potential fertility — her prospect of 
bearing children — which is at its maximum when 
she is 18, diminishes exceedingly rapidly as her 
age advances : indeed at 28 it has probably fallen 
by almost 40 per cent. Moreover it seems that 
a woman who is married in youth maintains her 
potential fertility longer than one who is un- 
married — in fact, that a woman of 28 who was 
married at 18 has a better chance of bearing off- 
spring than a bride of 28. In a less degree man's 
potential fertility also declines as his age advances 
over 25. Since the English birth-rate first showed 
signs of declining — forty years ago — the average 
age of brides has risen by 2 years, and that of 
bridegrooms by 3 years, and the proportion of 
married women who are under 25 has fallen from 
15 to 10 per cent. The effect of this change in 


250 


CULTURE 


custom will be evident if we compare the marriage 
ages and birth-rates of different sections of the 
population. In the classes who live by mining 
and textile work, where the birth-rate is still 
comparatively high, women are married, on an 
average, 3 years, and men 7 years, earlier than in 
the professional classes amongst which the 
birth-rate is at its lowest. If we compare the 
parishes of Bethnal Green and St. George in the 
East with those of Mayf air and Belgravia, we find 
that the percentages of married women who are 
under 25 years of age, are respectively 20 and 
7 ; and we may reasonably believe that the higher 
birth-rate of the poorer parishes (37 per mille 
against 16) results in a measure from the larger 
proportion of young wives. The fall in the 
general birth-rate which has occurred since 1871, 
is, no doubt, too considerable to be accounted 
for altogether by the avoidance or postponement 
of marriage. The deliberate prevention of child- 
bearing has been a contributing cause. But it 
seems probable that if more women married and 
at an earlier age, the birth-rate would recover 
much of its former amplitude. 

Generally, marriage is postponed for pruden- 
tial motives, and where children are profitable 
to their parents, as for instance in the colliery 
districts of South Wales, young people marry 
early and have large families. The attitude of 
religion towards marriage has also been of im- 
portance. In religions which make a strong 
appeal to the aesthetic feelings, the reproductive 
impulses of mankind are boldly accepted as a gift 
from Providence ; but those which express man's 
ethical aspirations avert their attention from 
these instincts as, in some way, shameful. We 
find, accordingly, that in the religions of Asia, 
in the Jewish faith, and in Roman Catholic 


EUGENIST APPREHENSIONS 251 


Christianity early marriages are accepted as a 
desirable accomplishment of providential inten- 
tions, whereas Protestant Christianity cannot 
actively encourage what it is ashamed to discuss. 
It certainly seems dangerous for the welfare of a 
community that its most successful classes should 
not subscribe effectually to the next generation. 
Delay in marrying is due very generally to a 
natural reluctance to lower the standard of 
comfort, and this feeling might be counteracted 
could social usages be so far altered as to render 
it incumbent upon grandparents to contribute 
liberally towards the up-bringing of their grand- 
children. But the older generation cannot be 
expected cheerfully to accept the prospect of, say, 
putting down a motor-car in order to educate child- 
ren's children: they are the custodians of the canons 
of social morality, and in these individualistic days 
they will hardly be persuaded to modify them to 
their disadvantage for the sake of posterity. 

There are, however, some consoling reflections. 
It is by no means certain that the rich have any- 
thing more to transmit in begetting descendants 
than is possessed by the superior working classes, 
and these are increasing in numbers as rapidly as 
the very poor: their birth-rate is somewhat lower; 
but so also is their death-rate. Experience offers 
no ground for the belief that the culture of the 
leisured classes is transmissible to their children by 
inheritance. Would an Englishman, kidnapped by 
savages in infancy, show any traces of civilized 
polish in mind or in manners ? Are not children 
born to most scrupulous parents endowed with 
a propensity to lie and to steal ? Talents, or 
aptitudes, may certainly be passed on by inherit- 
ance, and the rich have often acquired their 
wealth by abilities which in the interests of the 
community might usefully be transmitted to the 


252 


CULTURE 


next generation. But in the interfusion of 
marriage the qualities of the father very fre- 
quently miss descending to the son ; and, judging 
by the number of rich who rise from obscurity, 
talents often take birth in the families of quite 
humble folk. Moreover, we must remember that 
our chief national indebtedness is to men not of 
aptitude but of genius, who have generally risen 
from the undistinguished crowd, and have contri- 
buted, not children, but ideas to posterity. There 
are illustrations to show that striking originality 
may emerge even from negro parentage. In the 
present uncertainty of our knowledge it appears 
discreet to keep an open mind upon questions of 
heredity. Degenerate parents will breed liability 
to disease : by selective breeding size of stature, 
strength of muscles, and beauty of features may 
doubtless be promoted. But originality of genius 
is a more subtle character : it seems unaccount- 
ably to be allied with reproductive sterility. When 
so much is doubtful, theories are hazardous. It 
may be that, in their impulse to treat mankind 
from the purely physical standpoint, eugenists are 
leading us to such results as appear to have 
attended the Indian caste system. We have 
progressed by imitation ; but we have been led 
by genius ; and no excellencies of body could 
compensate for the loss of upspringings of 
spontaneity. 


PART III 
HUMAN ACHIEVEMENTS 


CHAPTER XIII 


MATERIAL PROGRESS 

To preserve itself, Life enjoins upon each genera- 
tion the imperative task of producing a generation 
to succeed it. Not a few creatures die as soon as 
this task is accomplished. But, generally, time 
remains for the care of oneself, as well as of 
posterity ; and this may be spent by the indivi- 
dual, not merely in the search for food, or in the 
service of the herd, but in provident activities 
which appropriate or rearrange the things around 
it. In man, these activities have become so com- 
plicated and widespread as to overshadow the 
elementary interests of animal life : he owes to 
them his elaborate civilization, the contrivances 
by which he seems to command Nature in place 
of obeying her. But they are shared, in some 
degree, by lower animals, and appear to arise 
from a special instinct — that of providence — 
which prompts living creatures not to submit 
themselves to their environment — or slavishly to 
adapt themselves to it — but with active foresight 
to mould it to their needs. The construction of 
protective, and often very beautiful, shells is a dis- 
tinctive feature in the life history of molluscs ; and 
far below them, in the very lowest ranks of the 
animal kingdom, organisms which are mere specks 
of structureless jelly extract materials from the 
lime or silica in the water around them, for 
building shells, which, so small as to be invisible 

*5S 


256 


MATERIAL PROGRESS 


except under the microscope, are as complicated 
in form as that of the nautilus, and are adorned 
with elaborate markings that must be unseen in 
the darkness of the ocean floor. These minute 
organisms not only decorate themselves at the 
cost of their environment, but effect marvellous 
changes in it : they die, but their shells remain, 
and, accumulated in the course of ages, form 
deposits of immense thickness which, subse- 
quently raised above sea-level, contribute largely 
to the dry crust of the earth. The chalk of the 
English downs is constituted in the main of these 
tiny shell-cases. Corals support themselves upon 
a stony framework which they build up from 
materials that are dissolved in the sea: their 
labours also have the effect of extending the earth's 
land surface. Higher up the scale, the compli- 
cated nests of insects and birds illustrate very 
strikingly the action of a constructive instinct. To 
these activities the reproductive impulse contri- 
butes ; their architectural skill is directed to the 
needs of their young. But there are cases, such as 
that of the bower-bird, in which materials are 
gathered and fashioned from the pure love of 
fashioning, from an impulse akin to that which 
prompts man to lay out a pleasure garden. 
Amongst mammals the provident instinct is 
singularly ineffective until we reach man. In 
him it is very strongly developed, and is one 
of the peculiarities which has enabled him so 
greatly to outstrip all other animals. In its 
simplest form it is the impulse to appropriate 
that is illustrated by the thievish propensities 
of a magpie. But when strengthened by a 
desire for comfort, or the thousand other am- 
bitions of humanity, it will not only compel 
man to labour industriously ; it is a powerful 
incentive to discovery and invention. 


THE USE OF FIRE 


257 


§ 

The domestication of fire is perhaps the most 
eventful fact in human history. It completely 
changed man's diet, and, since cooked food is 
more easily assimilated than raw food, it may have 
set free energy that was absorbed in digestion. 
In metals it revealed a material for tools and 
weapons that was infinitely more effective than 
flint. And it opened out the earth's surface for 
man's habitation : without means of warming 
himself, he could never have migrated from the 
tropics. How fire was brought into harness can 
only be conjectured. Obviously its use must have 
become evident before efforts were made to keep 
it or kindle it ; and we may suppose, with Charles 
Lamb, that its value first became apparent 
through the accidental discovery of its service 
in cooking. It is believed that the fires which 
rush through the forests of India and other tropical 
countries may be kindled by the friction of dry 
branches under a persistent hot wind, or by 
lightning : the bodies of animals that have been 
overtaken by the flames may be found scorched 
amongst the ashes ; and it is quite possible that 
savage man, by chancing upon them, may have 
been led to the idea of cooking for himself. This 
would only be possible if brands from the forest 
fire were carefully preserved and fed : once 
extinguished they could not be rekindled, and we 
can understand the reverence with which the 
hearth was regarded, and the importance that 
was attached to the continuity of its glow. In 
the East the desolation of a village is picturesquely 
described by the expression " its fire has gone out." 
There followed the discovery that fire could be 
kindled by fire-sticks, or by flint and steel. We 
have grown too familiar with lucifer matches 


258 


MATERIAL PROGRESS 


to realize what they mean to us. In India it is 
not very long since a pedlar could attract a crowd 
around him by striking a match. 

The domestication of animals was another long 
step in material progress. We may believe that 
this was a development from the keeping of pets, 
to which man is naturally inclined by his instinct 
of kindness. Some species of birds and quad- 
rupeds are curiously distinguished by the readi- 
ness with which they become tame ; owing, it 
appears, to some weakness of directive instinct 
they can contract artificial habits more easily 
than other species to which they may be closely 
related. The intelligent, playful docility of the 
sea-lion is an extraordinary " sport " — a gem 
which lies hidden in the ocean. A little bird of 
Ecuador — the chiroka (Icterus grace-annae) — in 
a few weeks will become quite habituated to 
man's society, and will be frightened by no 
noise or sight that it has once harmlessly ex- 
perienced. The American grey squirrel fearlessly 
accosts passers-by in the parks, and there is a 
large Indian squirrel which will in a few days 
become astonishingly intimate with its captor. 
The tameness of the Indian mongoose is well 
known. But the docility of these animals is 
exceptional. Most birds, even although born in 
captivity, never lose their instinctive timidity ; 
and such near relatives of the dog as the wolf and 
the jungle dog of India are quite untameable. We 
may suppose that the animals that have been 
domesticated by man were distinguished, as pets, 
by the facility with which they could acquire new 
habits : this peculiarity of disposition inured 
them to slavery, when it was perceived that they 
could serve man as well as amuse him. In the 
tropical regions that were man's first habitat, his 
first essays in domestication would be with the 


DOMESTICATION OF ANIMALS 


259 


dog, 1 the pig, and the fowl. Cattle may also have 
been tamed from a stock which lived in tropical 
forests, like the Indian bison and the buffalo of 
the present day. To domesticate animals of such 
large size was a great achievement : cattle not 
only supplied man with milk and flesh, but lent 
their strength to cultivate with the plough, and 
we can understand how they came to be regarded 
as wealth par excellence, and were accepted as the 
symbols of private property. Sheep and goats 
would be added by tribes which left the plains 
for the mountains : the horse, the camel, and 
the ass would be met by the wanderers as, in their 
northward course, they emerged upon the plains 
of Central Asia and spread towards Egypt. The 
strange conditions of domesticated life stimulated 
variations in these captive animals : peculiarities 
that arose were fixed by breeding, so that in the 
course of time they departed very widely from 
their ancestors in colour, form, and size. But, 
if permitted to regain their freedom, they will 
still revert to their original type. 

Not less momentous was the discovery that 
man could intervene between Nature and her 
plants, making them to grow in uniform crops 
instead of sporadically, as in the jungle, and 
improving the quality and quantity of their pro- 
duce. So long a period has elapsed since the 
principal food plants were reclaimed from the 
wilderness that the ancestors of many of them 

1 Upon the companionship of man and his brute associates 
certain parasites have built up a very peculiar course of livelihood. 
The tape-worm of man passes its embryonic stages, as a trichina, 
in the tissues of the pig, whence it passes to man by the eating of 
pig's flesh. It is disconcerting to learn that a tape-worm of the 
dog's occurs as a trichina in human tissues. There are traditions 
of peoples who maintained packs of hounds as cemeteries for the 
disposal of their dead ; and we may conjecture that in the days of 
primaeval darkness the dog was drawn to man by this gruesome 
office. 

S 


260 


MATERIAL PROGRESS 


have disappeared from the wild flora of the earth. 
No wild progenitors can be indicated with any 
certitude for maize, the millets, wheat, barley, 
rye, oats, beans, lentils, yams, sweet potatoes, 
and sugar cane. On the other hand, rice, cotton, 
potatoes, tobacco, and the various root-crops can 
be traced to plants that still occur in a wild state. 
When grain-yielding plants had been brought 
under control the advantage would be perceived 
of growing oilseeds to provide a relish in diet and 
a means of lighting ; also of growing fibres, the 
usefulness of which was enormously increased by 
the invention of the loom as a substitute for 
finger-plaiting. If diversity of crops may be taken 
as an indication of antiquity, it was in sub-tropical 
Asia that agriculture achieved its first develop- 
ments. The principal cereals of European agri- 
culture are exotics : wheat and barley were 
originally Asiatic, and it was not until the Arab 
conquests of the seventh and eighth centuries 
that cotton and sugar cane became known in the 
Mediterranean. Maize, potatoes, the haricot 
bean, and tobacco are heritages from the culti- 
vators 01 Mexico and Peru. But Europe has 
specialities of its own — root crops, in particular, 
such as the turnip, the swede, and beet, which will 
not flourish outside the temperate zone. 

In the development of mechanical art European 
civilization incomparably surpasses that of Asia. 
There is no such difference in regard to agriculture. 
The cultivation of Egypt, of Mesopotamia, China, 
and India, reached a very high standard of 
excellence : plants were differentiated into a vast 
number of varieties — indeed, over 700 kinds of 
rice are grown in India : the value of manuring 
and of rotations was fully appreciated. Modern 
science has ascertained that leguminous plants, 
through the agency of microbes which form 


AGRICULTURE 


261 


nodules on their roots, can enrich the soil by- 
fixing atmospheric nitrogen : for centuries the 
cultivators of India have been aware of the 
fact, although not of its explanation, and have 
sown these plants in association with cereals. 
Much is now made of the " dry farming " which is 
to revolutionize the agriculture of South Africa. 
This simply consists in maintaining a fine surface 
tilth, and so checking evaporation from the sub- 
soil. It is systematically practised by the ryots 
of Upper India, who will not sow wheat until, by 
repeated ploughings, the soil has been reduced 
to the consistency of powder. Far away across 
the ocean, on the treeless plateaux of Mexico and 
Peru there were other centres of agricultural skill, 
which followed lines that were curiously similar 
to those of Asia. The plough which is used in the 
uplands of Cuzco is the counterpart of .one that 
may be seen in India ; and the character of the 
crops and the disposition of the fields vividly 
recall the features of an Indian village. Modern 
agriculture has generally been content to grow 
crops that have been grown from time immemorial 
although it has improved their quality very 
greatly. It is only within the last century that 
tea, coffee, and cocoa have revolutionized the 
course of civilized diet. 

To us it appears quite natural that individuals 
should possess property of their own : we are 
disposed to scout communistic theories as vision- 
ary, and opposed to fundamental proclivities of 
human nature. Yet, judging by the survival^ of 
antiquity that may be discovered in laws and 
customs and in the practices of uncivilized races, 
we must conclude that in early times property 
belonged to the tribe, or the family, not to the in- 
dividual, and that it was originally as unthinkable 
that a man should appropriate things in private 


262 


MATERIAL PROGRESS 


ownership as that a hive-bee should maintain 
a store of honey of its own. Man was of account 
only as a member of a society, and it was out of the 
question that he should hold anything in antagon- 
ism to his fellows. At the present day in a typical 
Hindu family there is no separate ownership : its 
members remit their earnings to the head of the 
family, and receive at his hands their fitting main- 
tenance. There are still villages in India which 
periodically " pool " their fields and redistribute 
them by lot. 

It seems probable that private ownership 
in women, land, or other things arose out of 
predator conquest. Success in war could 
hardly be expected unless the fighting men were 
encouraged by the expectation of retaining for 
themselves what they had won by their valour ; 
and it is plausibly conjectured that marriage, 
the exclusive possession of a woman by a man, 
has its origin in the forcible capture of alien 
women. This supposition would explain two 
curious survivals — the simulation of ill-temper 
by the bride and her relatives, which is a common 
feature of marriage ceremonies, and the very 
general prejudice against taking a wife out of the 
bridegroom's own clan. It may easily be believed 
that the mastership of one man was less disagree- 
able to women than the promiscuous intimacy 
of the herd, and that they accordingly favoured 
their own enslavement. Warriors who were per- 
mitted to appropriate their plunder would, if 
victorious, become owners of slaves and cattle ; 
and, if the vanquished tribe was driven off its 
land, they might also be rewarded by the grant 
of allotments, which would be their own, exclus- 
ively, and free of all demands for the benefit of 
their fellows. War is now condemned by many as 
one of the most destructive of evils : it may be 


MECHANICAL APPLIANCES 263 

so, but, such are the anomalies of Life, that we 
may owe to its influence our family relationships, 
our homes, and the very idea of our possessions. 

The gorilla builds a nest amidst branches, 
and, prompted by a like impulse, man provided 
himself with shelter on the ground. In the 
tropics huts of grass or leaves would be his 
first essays in home-building. In the colder 
climate of Northern Europe he seems to have 
commonly taken refuge in caves, the occupancy 
of which he disputed with bears and hyenas. 
With an increasing population a new danger 
arose : inter-tribal wars became frequent and 
buildings were desiied for protection against 
enemies. An earthern rampart might be thrown 
up, or the safeguard of a moat might be secured 
by building the village huts upon piles that were 
surrounded with water. On this plan the ancient 
lake villages of Switzerland were designed. With 
the improvement of tools durable materials could 
be handled : dwellings of more than one storey 
might be erected : castles for defence, temples in 
honour of the gods and monuments in honour of 
the dead might be built so solidly as to resist the 
corrosions of time during many centuries. But 
it was long before designs were altered with 
the change in materials ; and to this day the 
bridges in Japan mimic in stone the beams and 
joints of wooden structures. 

Man has been defined as a " tool-using animal." 
Without special appliances insects would be 
unable to construct their elaborate fabrics : by 
peculiar modifications of the jaw they are provided 
with as varied an assortment of implements as 
may be found in a mason's tool bag. Left to the 
guidance of his reason man for countless genera- 
tions possessed no such resources as this instinc- 
tive equipment. His only tools were fragments of 


264 


MATERIAL PROGRESS 


chipped flint. Fire, transported from the hearth 
to the furnace, brought the metals into his service. 
Copper, tin and zinc were blended into bronze and 
brass : iron was not more refractory, but in Asia 
and Europe was a later discovery. Carbonized iron 
(steel) of good quality could be produced by simple 
appliances if used with skill. To steel-edged tools 
most materials are submissive : the blacksmith 
could work in iron, the carpenter in wood, the 
mason in stone, and could elaborate ornamental 
embellishments which in some countries were 
brought to a high pitch of artistic excellence. 
But the motive power was man's own strength : 
manufacture was by handicraft. Only a century 
and a half has passed since the discovery was 
made that by the burning of coal energy could 
be evolved which could employ tools with 
infinitely more efficiency than was attainable by 
human muscle, so that man, having once harnessed 
this power to his machinery, could stand aside 
and watch the achievements of the jinn he had 
enslaved. 

Dress originated in an idea not of decency or 
of warmth, but of ornament. It has accordingly 
been the practice of almost all races of men par- 
tially to undress themselves as a sign of respect. 
Orientals uncover the feet ; Europeans the head. 
It is related of the Sultan of Melli that he would 
permit no women to enter his presence until they 
had discarded all their clothing ; and ladies may 
not be presented at the royal courts of Europe 
unless they are clad in decollete fashion. Amongst 
uncultured peoples beads are often more prized 
than clothing, and their women are loaded with 
necklaces when scarcely provided with a nether 
garment. Civilized nations, under the prompt- 
ings of reason, have discovered the protective 
value of clothes : they have also strayed into 


THE ART OF WRITING 265 


the most fanciful ideas of their connection 
with decency. The history of dress throws an 
interesting side-light upon human character. 
Amongst the richer classes of Europe there has 
been, during a thousand years and more, a desire 
for change which has led to increasing alterations 
of fashion. Until recently the poorer classes were 
content to wear a customary dress. In India 
fashions have hardly changed during many 
centuries. 

There are tribes, with some pretensions to 
culture, and much skill in handicraft and agri- 
culture, that have remained ignorant of the art 
of writing until they learnt from Christian mis- 
sionaries that they might express their language 
in Roman characters. Yet pictorial writing 
appears to be an obvious development of such 
elementary acquaintance with drawing as is 
possessed by most savages. It seems easy to 
represent the idea of a house by a rough picture 
of one, and it is surprising that the art of writing 
pictorially — or ideographically — did not become 
as widespread as the use of fire or of the loom. 
It was the idea upon which Egyptian hierogly- 
phics were elaborated : they were eventually 
turned to express syllables or letters, but continued 
to be used ideographically until classical days. 
The cuneiform characters of Mesopotamia were 
similarly of pictorial origin. The natives 1 of North 
and South America were familiar with the use 
of pictorial writing ; and in the Bolivian museum 
at La Paz there is a parchment, of comparatively 
recent date, on which Indian hands have repre- 
sented pictographically so abstruse a subject as 
the tenets of Christianity. Ideographs are still 
used by the Chinese, and in a less degree by the 
Japanese. They have one great advantage : 

1 As also the inhabitants of Scandinavia during the Bronze age. 


266 


MATERIAL PROGRESS 


expressing not words, but ideas, they can be used 
between persons who speak different languages : 
they are understood in Pekin and in Canton 
although the languages of these places are quite 
dissimilar. But they are cumbrous, and unless 
complicated by many artificial conventions — 
such as, for instance, the addition of symbols to 
signify sounds — they are hardly capable of ex- 
pressing abstract ideas or shades of meaning. 
The nations of the world have generally come to 
write phonographically, that is to say, to employ 
symbols to denote not things, or the ideas of 
things, but the sounds by which things or ideas 
are denoted in speech. This improvement was 
discovered very slowly. It must have been 
difficult for unscientific minds to conceive of the 
reproduction of a sound by a mark or symbol, 
and the first dawnings of the idea may have 
arisen out of punning — by the employment, for 
instance, of the picture of a post to signify a post- 
office. In this case the picture actually recalls 
not an object, but a sound, and is really phono- 
graphic. The next step would be to use pictorial 
symbols to denote the first syllable of the name of 
the object that they represented : thus the picture 
of a cabin might stand for the syllable " ca. 55 The 
analysis of syllables into letters, and the allot- 
ment of abbreviated symbols to individual letters 
was the final stage of the invention. But phono- 
graphic writing could easily be misunderstood 
and took time to gain confidence. In the hiero- 
glyphic inscriptions of Egypt the phonographic 
representation of an idea is commonly followed 
by an ideographic picture known as the " deter- 
minant 55 : as a child, after scrawling the word 
" bullock, 55 might add, for greater clearness, a 
picture of the animal. 

The most difficult step in the development of 


TRADE 


267 


writing was the analysis of syllables into letters : 
this once accomplished, it was possible to express 
the sound of each letter by an arrangement of 
dots and dashes such as is used in the Ogham 
alphabet of ancient Ireland — and in the Morse 
system of modern telegraphy. 

§ 

By trade, or the exchanging oi articles, men 
are able to obtain things which they cannot 
produce or make for themselves or seize from 
others. It has been attended by abuses which 
have increased the tale of human misery. Slavery 
has followed in its train, and the ruin of backward 
races by spirituous liquors. But with a magnetic 
attraction it is drawing together the different 
races of mankind and is developing a practical 
idea of human brotherhood — in money-making if 
not in sympathy. Less strong a bond than reli- 
gion, it is infinitely more extensive. At first it 
enclosed the village w r ithin its meshes of mutual 
inter-dependance, uniting the cultivators with the 
artisans upon whose industry they relied for their 
implements, their furniture and their clothing. 
From the village its tentacles spread to the 
nation, to groups of nations, and finally have 
embraced the whole world. Under its influence 
civilized lands have been covered with a network 
of railway lines and telegraph wires, along which 
streams of travellers, letters and messages are 
incessantly hurrying, regardless of the boundaries 
which artificially separate communities of man- 
kind. The financial reservoirs of cash and credit, 
from which trade draws the streams of its activity, 
have been internationalized, and the obligations 
of different peoples are so closely interlaced that 
an injury to the resources of one is felt by all. 
Financially, it may then be urged, war is a 


2 68 


MATERIAL PROGRESS 


mistake ; and there are enthusiasts who expect 
that considerations of profit will gradually soften 
men's fighting instincts and reconcile the civilized 
world to unbroken peace. So high are the hopes 
that may be built upon a system which is founded 
upon the narrowest conceptions of self-interest. 

International trade may, accordingly, be re- 
garded as a flood which is spreading ideas and in- 
ventions throughout the world, and does not permit 
them to be monopolized by any particular nation. 
But we must not forget that from the beginning of 
human civilization there must have been a current, 
however slow and intermittent, which maintained 
some intercommunication between the races of 
mankind. There is no tribe, however backward, 
which is unacquainted with the use of fire : the 
plough and the loom are known almost univer- 
sally. We can hardly believe that these discoveries 
— and other surprising similarities between the 
culture of widely separated peoples — originated 
independently at several centres ; and we must, 
then, suppose that in the course of ages a know- 
ledge of them filtered gradually around the 
world. Trade routes have been respected by the 
most barbarous nations : the blackmail that they 
levied spared sufficiently high trading profits ; and 
we find that amber from the Baltic was well- 
known in Asia centuries before the Trojan war, 
and that Greek ornaments and vases reached 
Northern Europe when, to the people of the 
Mediterranean, it was a land of terrifying fable. 
Some inventions were so patently useful as to 
command immediate adoption : the spread of 
others would be impeded by the force of custom 
until it was urged by some special pressure. 
Such may have been exerted by rulers of intelli- 
gence, or by religious priesthoods. But more 
potent influences would be those of war and 


BALTIC IDEALS 


269 


intermarriage ; during the ages in which trade 
brought nations into merely surface connection, 
it was the ebb and flow of conquest and migration 
that most effectually transported new ideas and 
usages from land to land. Northern India was no 
doubt desolated by the Aryan invaders, as subse- 
quently by the Tartars and Moghals : but from 
both it gathered some novelties of culture. The 
Turkish conquest of Constantinople shattered the 
last fragments of Greek civilization ; but refugees 
from the catastrophe brought ideas into Western 
Europe, which took root in eager but uncultured 
minds and blossomed in the Renaissance. 

§ 

Material civilization was late in spreading to 
Northern Europe, but, once planted there, flour- 
ished with a changeful vigour which speedily 
gave it a character of its own. Amongst the 
Baltic races the provident impulse of acquisitive- 
ness is very strongly developed ; but until 
modern times it was chiefly exercised in robbing 
others, and their history exhibits a covetous 
turbulence that contrasts very strongly with the 
placidity with which the Mediterranean races 
accepted the domination of Rome, and with the 
acquiescence of the peoples of India in British 
rule. The prospects of gain that were opened by 
civilization diverted their energies into more 
productive channels. Finding that riches and 
comforts could be acquired by industry or by 
commerce they have thrown themselves into these 
pursuits with an aggressive activity which has 
effected more change in material conditions than 
had come about in many thousands of years pre- 
ceding. They have cared little for the philosophi- 
cal speculations which occupied the minds of the 
Greeks, and still influence the opinions of Indians 


270 


MATERIAL PROGRESS 


and Chinese, and have generally been content to 
accept morality and religion as affairs of law or of 
habit. The aesthetic impulses which stir southern 
races to self -abandoning ecstasy excited in them 
much colder feelings. Their instincts sought more 
practical activities and have been turned to the 
improvement of their material surroundings. 
Death, which by other peoples has been accepted 
as decreed by fate, has by them been met in a 
spirit of antagonism — as an evil which man should 
show his skill by averting. Cleanliness has 
become accepted as a gospel message, and com- 
fort as man's most rational desire. Surroundings 
should not only be clean : they should be pretty ; 
and, when travelling, we may learn from the 
cottage gardens of the poor that we are under 
Baltic not Mediterranean influences. The strong 
individuality of these northern peoples is mani- 
fested in their idealization of the home, and by 
their desire to beautify it : this feeling influences 
them even when in distant exile : the German 
colonies in Brazil and Chile are markedly dis- 
tinguished by neatness of houses and house- 
surroundings from the cheerless villages of their 
Latin neighbours. Religion and politics are 
regarded from a practical standpoint. Their 
religion has not been so much concerned with 
technicalities of belief, or mysticism of ceremonial, 
as with the construction of churches and cathe- 
drals, with philanthropy and social improvement. 
Even during the dark ages of Teutonic Christianity 
the monastic life was esteemed more as an oppor- 
tunity for industry and good work than for the 
religious meditation which other races have 
accepted as its crowning merit. Protestantism 
sets a higher value upon moral behaviour than 
upon niceties of belief. The personal issues which 
everywhere give politics their most exciting 


MATERIAL INFLUENCE OF WOMEN 271 


interest have in the north been linked with 
practical considerations, and men's adherence to 
one politician or another has to some extent been 
guided by their opinion of the social effect of the 
views that he professes, and has not been solely 
determined by sentiment or jealousy. 

The industry of these Baltic peoples has been 
stimulated very greatly by the freedom of their 
women. Swayed less masterfully than south- 
erners by the reproductive instinct, they have, 
from the beginnings of their history, prized woman 
for her companionship as well as for her purely 
sexual attributes, and have conceded to her a 
substantial measure of liberty. The mediaeval 
ideas of romance and chivalry manifest a self- 
restraint in regard to her which seems strange, 
if not ludicrous, to a Mediterranean. Her material 
desires are treated with indulgence, and they 
have been a most important factor in creating 
the demand for dress and furniture which has 
started the wheels of factories and has swelled 
the current of trade. Man is generally content to 
live in barbarous simplicity, or to share with other 
men the comforts of a club. It is to woman that 
we owe the multifarious demands of the home — 
the extravagances, if you will — that attend the 
establishment of a separate centre of life for each 
family. Imagine the streets of London deserted 
by women : nine-tenths of the shops would be 
shut : the tramways and omnibuses would pay 
no dividends. 

§ 

It must be confessed that these material ambi- 
tions are in themselves less respectable than the 
ideas that may be evoked by introspective medi- 
tation : the pursuit of comfort, of riches, can 
hardly be ranked with the moral aspirations that 
have been enshrined in all ages by religious and 


272 


MATERIAL PROGRESS 


philosophic thought. It is a truism that riches 
do not give happiness : neither can they mitigate 
the terrors of death : a wise man will surely prefer 
to them the careful training of his own mind. 
But it must be remembered that, although wealth 
may in itself be vanity, its pursuit gratifies the 
provident instinct and is therefore exceedingly 
pleasurable. And from the desire for riches have 
arisen new standards of ambition which may 
at first blush appear sordid, but have in effect 
conduced to human benefit. We are impressed 
by wealth almost as much as by birth or breeding. 
We are coming to respect success in industry or 
in commerce more than the authority of a king or 
the antiquity of an institution. The East still 
admires the capricious despotism of a strong ruler; 
but " Bluff King Hal " or " Good Queen Bess " 
would, we feel, be unacceptable anachronisms 
in England of the present day. We wonder what 
the Somersetshire peasants can have seen in 
Monmouth that they should have shed their 
blood for him. The House of Lords, the Estab- 
lished Church, are no longer secure in popular 
veneration. Material ambitions may appear an 
unworthy substitute for feelings of reverence and 
loyalty. But they make for freedom, and the 
spread of culture. In the pursuit of wealth 
artificial class barriers are levelled : success is 
open to the poorest, and the difference between 
the lower and the upper classes of the people is 
seen to be one of circumstances not of essence. The 
poor may accordingly copy the rich in dress and 
in manners : dress they must imitate in cheaper 
materials, but in manners they may be — and are 
becoming — of the finest. Culture is, then, be- 
coming the heritage of all, not the privilege of a 
few. 

These feelings of emulation may bear bitter 


SPREAD OF BALTIC IDEALS 273 


fruits : the current of industry is frequently 
disturbed by strikes of workmen. But the 
increasing similarity of interests and pursuits 
tends to draw rich and poor together : kindliness 
on the part of the well-to-do is the more appre- 
ciated as it becomes more sympathetic and less 
patronizing. Moreover, the activity which is 
exercised upon material objects appears inciden- 
tally to react upon the mind, weakening the 
instinct of cruelty and strengthening that of 
kindness. It certainly does not arouse such 
jealousy — that cruellest of emotions — as is pro- 
voked by struggles for social or political prece- 
dence. So the Baltic races, in wrestling with 
substance, have found more abiding visions of 
the spirit than have been vouchsafed to peoples 
of less practical instinct. They have led the 
world in philanthropy as well as in industry, 
illustrating the fable in which a man's heirs, by 
digging for treasure in his orchard, find in the im- 
provement of its produce the gold which his will 
had promised them. Their wealth and prosperity 
have drawn upon them the eyes of all other 
peoples, and, by imitation, their cult of the 
material — and even their attitude towards women 
— have spread, and are spreading far and wide 
amongst nations that fall within the pale of 
Christendom. Outside this circle of religious kin- 
ship the ideas of Northern Europe are adopted 
much less eagerly : they can hardly be accepted 
without some suspicion of disloyalty to creed, 
some sacrifice of natural pride. So Turkey hesi- 
tates to follow her Christian neighbours ; and India 
lags, in her standard of comfort, behind the 
humbler families of the British Isles. 


CHAPTER XIV 


SOCIAL PROGRESS 

Man is a gregarious animal, and it is, then, in the 
herd, rather than in the family, that we should 
search for the foundations of our social fabric. 
We may perhaps discover some of its primaeval 
features in the behaviour of a troop of monkeys. 
Amongst them there is neither marriage nor 
private property ; all things are in common, save 
for the interference of superior strength or 
courage. These qualities are respected, as also 
is age. There is generally a leader of the troop 
who must be strong and courageous : he must 
also, it seems, be old, and he is generally ill- 
tempered. 

The first beginnings of exclusiveness were due, 
we may believe, to the predilections of woman, 
who, naturally disliking to be at any man's 
disposal, reserved her attractions to certain 
members of the herd. This introduces us to the 
custom of polyandry, which is still a living force 
in some respectable communities ; it has, for 
instance, maintained itself amongst certain 
peoples of India and Tibet. Woman took a 
further step when, following the dictates of her 
heart, she denied herself to more than one 
man, whom she accepted, more as her custom- 
ary lover than as her legal husband. Amongst 
a very intelligent tribe of Assam, marriage is 
still in this embryonic stage. A man does not 

274 


ORIGIN OF MARRIAGE 


275 


live with his wife — does not, indeed, take his 
meals with her : he visits her, more or less 
stealthily, at night, and has no concern with 
the upbringing of the children. In these circum- 
stances woman, not man, is the pivot of society, 
and we have the conditions of the matriarchate. 
Children belong to their mother's family ; women 
are the titular holders of property, and succession 
to property tends to go through the female line. 
We find traces of the matriarchate, subsisting 
throughout the world, in the cult of female 
divinities. 

Conditions of warfare introduced momentous 
changes. Men who captured women in inter- 
tribal conflicts could hardly be denied the 
exclusive possession of them, and might retain 
them as their particular share of the booty. Life 
elaborates beauty from the humblest origins, and 
we need not shrink from believing that marriage 
has sprung from conditions of slavery. There are 
(a^ has already been mentioned) some curious 
survivals in marriage customs which seem to 
indicate that the wife was originally a captive 
woman, who, belonging to an alien tribe, was not 
subject to the claims of her captor's tribesmen. 
A leading warrior might not content himself with 
a single wife : to possess a number of wives might 
indeed become a sign of dignity. The conditions 
of peace were reversed, and a multiplicity of wives 
took the place of a multiplicity of husbands. Man 
became the pivot of society : the matriarchal 
gave way to the patriarchal system, and the 
foundation was laid for family life as we now 
know it. 

Woman's rule was, then, born of peace, man's 
rule of war ; and it is amongst warlike races that 
we find the most despotic developments of the 
power of the husband and father. Marriage 

T 


276 


SOCIAL PROGRESS 


customs, like all other customs, spread by 
imitation : unwarlike communities would tend 
to copy the manners of their more forceful con- 
querors or neighbours. Man's authority advanced ; 
woman's declined, and we can trace the progress 
of this revolution during the period of recorded 
history. Succession through males is now almost 
universal amongst races who have any pretension 
to be civilized. But in legends and fairy tales 
how often does it not come down to us that 
anciently a young man might win a kingdom by 
attracting the affections of a king's daughter! 

But, it may be urged, if the patriarchal system 
arose out of woman's slavery, how comes it that 
woman has been so highly esteemed amongst some 
races which have accentuated strongly the author- 
ity of her husband ? She might be honoured or dis- 
honoured under the mastership of man. In Asia the 
patriarchate has commonly been polygamous. In 
Northern Europe, under the impulse of peculiar in- 
stincts, the subjection of the wife had the effect of 
identifying her interests with those of her husband : 
servitude grew into partnership, and the chastity 
which she contributed to the common stock was 
regarded as her most cherished possession. It 
might be preserved in the face of whatever 
temptation, and did not need to be safeguarded 
by the bars of the harem. 

§ 

We may, then, conclude that the family, which 
appears to be the most natural element in the 
constitution of society, is in reality an artificial 
creation — the composite result of various im- 
pulses. Sexual attraction is its foundation ; but 
this is transitory, and can fortunately be replaced 
by feelings which spring from our impulses of 
sociability, habit, and kindness. Selfishness 


FOUNDATIONS OF FAMILY LIFE 277 


enters into its framework : the marriage tie is 
reinforced by notions of exclusive possession, of 
particularity, of service. Maternal love is its 
cement ; for this imperious impulse finds in 
family life the best means of expressing itself. 
The affection of a mother is one of the most 
beautiful impulses of life : the complete self- 
abandonment of its promptings appeals very 
powerfully to our aesthetic instincts, and we should 
like to believe that it is directive — that it leads a 
mother infallibly to detect her children. Not so : 
it is blind. A hen will bring up as her own the 
chickens of another, will feel motherly love for 
a brood of ducklings, has been known to adopt 
a litter of ferrets in spite of the distress they 
occasioned her in searching lor her teats. The 
hedge-sparrow will labour incessantly to feed a 
young cuckoo, although its large size should 
repel her, and she may have seen it shoulder her 
own young out of the nest. Cats will suckle 
puppies — even rats. A mother will cherish as 
her own a baby that has been substituted, if she 
is unaware of the substitution ; indeed, a foster 
mother's love may show all the self-sacrifice of 
the maternal instinct. When this instinct is not 
satisfied by maternity it may be lavished upon a 
pet dog. It wells up from the depths of a woman's 
heart, but laves the object that is nearest to her. 

Marriage that is monogamic makes a further 
appeal to elementary human feelings. In its 
intimacy — its mutual confidence — man and 
woman enjoy the completest satisfaction of 
that social instinct which makes it so hard 
for the individual to stand alone. The mask 
is thrown down that hides self from society : 
each gives the other visions of reality, and it is 
a blessed relief to be rid, during some hours of the 
day, of the artificiality with which individuals 


278 


SOCIAL PROGRESS 


protect themselves against the crowd that they 
are compelled by their impulses to contemn and 
to respect. It is often claimed for the monogamic 
family that it provides a nursery and a class-room 
for the next generation, and is essential to civiliza- 
tion, if only on this account. It may certainly 
enable children to profit to the utmost by a 
mother's care, and by the expenditure which a 
father is willing to incur upon those whose 
interests he identifies with his own. But many 
mothers are inefficient nurses : few parents are 
inspiring teachers ; and from long time past, in 
the upper classes of English society, mothers have 
been content to leave their little sons to be 
instructed by schoolmasters, and to be initiated 
by other boys into the ways of life. The difference 
between the ideal of family life and its actualities 
has been recognized by the State, which during 
the last generation has itself undertaken to 
educate the children of the poorer classes, and 
has even commenced to feed them. These 
children generally regard the school house as their 
home, and feel more respect for the school- 
mistress than for their mothers. And this is no 
matter for surprise. Family life loses its attrac- 
tiveness in a single-roomed lodging and amidst 
the recreations of the pavement. 

§ 

If, marriage apart, we endeavour to analyse 
the cement which consolidates human society, 
we shall find, here again, a variety of elements. 
Some relationships, such as that of master and 
slave, are upheld by the narrowest impulses of 
selfish interest : others, such as comradeship, 
display the depth of our social, or unselfish, 
sympathies. Sympathy may be warmed by 


SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS 279 

kindliness : selfishness may be blunted by kindli- 
ness or sharpened by cruelty. 

Turning, in the first place, to the influence of the 
social impulses in linking men together, we observe 
that, like the maternal impulse, they are vague 
and uninstructive until, focussed by propinquity, 
they find their object in the persons whom we see 
around us. We insensibly defer to our close com- 
panions : friends may be more to us than relatives : 
our charity is moved more strongly by sights than 
by tales of distress. Men w T ho have lived amongst 
alien races — and ma} r criticize them severely — will 
defend them in case of need even against their 
own kin. Anglo-Indian officials will champion 
the cause of Indians against such belittlement as 
is implied by the immigration policy of the South 
African government. But the propinquity may 
be ideal as well as actual : notions of it may be 
evoked by conceptions that arise out of memories, 
as well as by the impressions of our senses. The 
idea that another is a blood relation predisposes 
us towards him. 'So also do ideas of comradeship 
in religion, in business, or in opinions. A Moham- 
medan is drawn towards a Mohammedan, a sur- 
geon towards a fellow-surgeon, a radical in politics 
towards another radical. Ideas of closeness that 
arise in this fashion have been of immense impor- 
tance in human progress : they are, indeed, the 
foundation upon which much of our social 
structure rests. Sympathy that is born of sight 
or touch may be stronger than can be generated 
by ideas of fellowship. But obviously it can bind 
only a small society ; and towns, countries, and 
nations would lose all coherence were their 
inhabitants not welded together by the wider 
feelings which may be aroused by ideal concep- 
tions of relationship. The history of the birth 
of these conceptions — whether religious, social, 


280 


SOCIAL PROGRESS 


or political — is in fact the history of the develop- 
ment of modern society. 

The earliest of these conceptions is that of 
blood brotherhood. This was the foundation of 
the tribe. It was assumed that the members of a 
tribe were descended from a common ancestor ; 
outsiders might be admitted, but only by a formal 
adoption ceremony which had the mystic effect 
of a rebirth. From the tribe sympathy broad- 
ened to the nation, or group of tribes, unified 
by the possession of a single government, but 
not effectually compacted until the right of 
inter-marriage was generally conceded. Or, sym- 
pathetic conceptions might take a different course 
and collect around ideas, not of relationship but 
of neighbourhood. Thus the village, the town, 
the country became, so to speak, endowed with a 
consciousness, a patriotism, of its own, which 
might at times be in conflict with tribal sym- 
pathies. Within the State men became collected 
into groups by the notions of fellowship which 
originated in similarity of occupation : the Indian 
caste sj^stem, originally tribal, has been reinforced 
by these notions : the solidarity of guilds, and 
trade unions, illustrates their force ; indeed, 
traders and artisans who follow the same line or 
calling have tended to congregate together in the 
same quarter of the town. Endless, indeed, are 
the ideas which, like centres of magnetic 
attraction, draw men into clusters within the 
circle of the State. There is an esprit de corps of 
the class, of the political party, oi the club, of the 
regiment; and the community may be honey- 
combed with secret societies, which to some races 
are irresistibly fascinating. So attractive may be 
these partisan interests that they may undermine 
the sympathy of the nation as a whole. Patriotism 
may be choked by them. This needs a unity of 


PATRIOTISM AND LOYALTY 281 


interest, and we may learn from the marvellous 
successes of the French revolutionary republic 
that, when this is forthcoming, no feat of arms is 
impossibly difficult. 

Loyalty to a general or a king may take the 
place of patriotism — indeed, has often been its 
predecessor in time. We intuitively reverence 
the leaders of the herd. The institution of 
monarchy probably originated in conditions of 
war, in which a nation is greatly advantaged if 
its forces are directed by a single authority. For 
this reason the Jews desired a king ; and within 
recent years a curious illustration has come from 
the experiences of some hill tribes across the 
Assam frontier. They sought British assistance 
against a small immigrant tribe which they were 
unable to withstand because, amidst democratic 
communities, it was governed by a raja. But 
feelings of loyalty must be supported by ideas of 
kingly attributes, which in these intelligent days 
will not long irradiate a monarch who does not 
possess these qualities. 

We need not insist upon the unifying effect of 
religious beliefs. Their influence has been immense 
in consolidating peoples — and in disintegrating 
them — in raising the moral tone of a nation — and 
in hurling it blood thirstily against other nations. 
Amidst the distractions of modern philosophy, 
politics and pleasures, religion is losing its compel- 
ling authority. But that it is still a living force may 
not be doubted if we regard the present state of 
Ireland, and of French Canada, the recent war in 
the Balkans, the bitter animosities which occa- 
sionally antagonize Mohammedans and Hindus. 

A feature of present day conditions is the remark- 
able development of the spirit of nationality. From 
Ireland and Wales to China sections of the popula- 
tions of empires and kingdoms are asserting claims 


282 


SOCIAL PROGRESS 


to, so to speak, a national personality. These pre- 
tensions are based upon notions of unity that are 
derived from past history, and their advancement 
may be attributed to the increasing attention that 
is paid to historical studies. To corroborate them 
by evidence of singularity, attempts may be made 
to resuscitate languages that are actually dead. 

So far for the ties between man and man which 
rest upon the influence of the social instinct. But 
these are not the only links in human society. 
By the selfish, or individualistic, impulses, bonds 
have been compacted which have drawn men 
together as by hoops of iron. Many of them have 
been forged in the smithy of war. Slavery is 
technically dead ; but up to quite modern times it 
was a vital element in the constitution of society, 
and, from a practical point of view, it is still a 
living institution in some Spanish and Portuguese 
countries. It is not peculiar to mankind : some 
species of ants have slaves, which appear to become 
greatly attached to their masters and will fight 
energetically on their behalf. Slaves might be 
acquired by raiding : in this case their condition 
generally became that of domestic servitude. 
Or, when a country was conquered, the indigenous 
population might be degraded to a position of 
helotage, in which they might labour on their 
fields, but for the conqueror's benefit, and were 
carefully excluded from political privileges. As 
time advanced, and their condition improved, 
they have claimed freedom, and even political 
equality, and they have generally made good their 
claim except in cases where the ruling class has 
rigidly maintained its vigour and exclusiveness. 
The conflict between the patricians and plebeians 
of Rome is a familiar illustration of this social 
revolution ; and we have an instance nearer home 
in the history of Ireland. 

Since commerce has become a temptation 


CONQUESTS TO SECURE TRADE 283 


for the world, countries have been conquered 
in the interests, not of colonization, but of 
trade. In these cases there has been little 
interference with the activities of the subject 
inhabitants ; indeed, they may be infinitely more 
prosperous than they would have been under a 
government of their own. So it is in the Asiatic 
dependencies of Britain, France, and Holland. 
It may be urged that under alien rule the native , 
peoples lose heart for self -improvement. It does 
not follow, however, that they would have ad- 
vanced more briskly under native rulers. The 
peoples of India are decidedly more progressive 
than those of Turkey, Persia, or China. Culture 
has spread by imitation, and in the past civiliza- 
tion has owed much to the lead of foreign con- 
querors. But it is true that in these days self-con- 
scious pride may hold men back from adopting 
alien fashions. 

Domestic slavery has given place to the rela- 
tions of master and servant : predial slavery to 
the relations of employer and employed. In 
modem society these are, beyond all comparison, 
the most important of the social links that are 
formed, not by the social, but by the selfish 
impulses of men. Servants and employees so far 
resemble slaves in that they are obliged to work. 
But they may choose their employers ; they may 
combine, and may gradually compel the pay- 
ment of higher wages. But large numbers of 
them live in abject poverty, lacking even the 
security of a slave's subsistence ; and it would 
be idle to pretend that their indigence does 
not prove that our social organization has its 
signal failures. Their misery is in great measure 
the result of their freedom : there are two exits 
from the Temple of Liberty, one leading upwards, 
the other down. 


284 


SOCIAL PROGRESS 


§ 

Ideas of liberty are, indeed, alwa}^s striving to 
unloose the fastenings — whether selfish or un- 
selfish — wherewith society is bound together. 
According to the theory of human behaviour 
which we are endeavouring to maintain, liberty 
means little more than opportunities for change. 
None the less is the desire for it a fundamental 
impulse of human nature, which in the majority 
of men is restrained by habits of mind or body, 
but leads others violently to attack established 
ideas and customs. Through the shrine of Liberty 
one may pass sometimes to a promised land, 
sometimes into the wilderness, often, indeed, 
only from one walled labyrinth into another. The 
soaring ideals of the French Revolution accepted 
their accomplishment in a military despotism : 
the liberty of combining — so precious to workmen 
— reconciles them to such a tyranny, at the hands 
of their union, as no monarch would dare to 
impose. We may, in fact, conclude that, generally, 
liberty means little more than freedom to choose 
one's master. 

Not infrequently, moreover, the ideas of enthu- 
siasts may be demonstrably pernicious. Yet 
they are none the less strongly urged against the 
established bulwarks of society. What wonder, 
then, that the guardians of these ramparts, 
whether kings, priests or lawyers, should have 
regarded reformers as the enemies of mankind, 
and have striven to repress their propaganda by 
ostracism, persecution, and martyrdom ! They 
have erred — erred cruelly — but not altogether so 
selfishly as is sometimes imagined. For, until 
reason has been trained and knowledge dissemi- 
nated, the quack has as great a vogue as the 
qualified doctor, and it may reasonably appear 
safer to stand still than to advance in complete 


IDEALS OF LIBERTY 


285 


uncertainty. None the less is it true that progress 
is impossible without liberty to change; and it is 
a striking proof of the advancing intelligence 
of mankind that in western countries people may 
be left almost unchecked to listen to exhortations 
whether good or evil. 

Freedom 01 choice — be it only of a tyranny — 
is undoubtedly an ideal of growing influence. It 
is the mainspring of modern democracy, and is 
gradually revolutionizing society by disposing 
mankind to dislike the routine of discipline. We 
hear of strikes every day. Women are in revolt 
against the dominance of men. Girls leave domes- 
tic service for factory work : armies can hardly 
be maintained by voluntary enlistment : work- 
men repudiate the promises of their leaders. This 
tendency is, naturally, deplored by those who 
suffer from its consequences ; and we may un- 
doubtedly discern in it threatenings of evil as 
well as promises of good. It may even endanger 
the existence of a State by disarming it in the 
presence of enemies. But, if change is Life, we 
must not hastily condemn the swaying of our 
impulses. If civilized man is becoming less 
amenable to discipline, he is at the same time 
becoming more kindly in feeling, less inclined 
to close his eyes to the interests of others. 

§ 

A philosopher searching for the key-note of our 
present culture might indeed find it not in know- 
ledge, nor in wealth, nor in luxury, but in the 
astonishing development of man's kindly feelings. 
The emotion of kindliness is, as we have seen, 
connected with the impulse to embrace or fondle, 
which is manifested very clearly in the social life 
of southern nations. In northern peoples the 
impulse is not focussed so strongly upon flesh and 


286 


SOCIAL PROGRESS 


blood, and, perhaps for this reason, can excite 
emotions of more general sympathy. The Mediter- 
ranean races are still very far from humane : their 
descendants in Central and South America are 
not infrequently obsessed by a maniacal lust 
for cruelty. The Baltic races may claim with 
some reason that they are less passionately 
afflicted with a desire to torture, mutilate or 
kill ; but their history abounds with illustrations 
of the fierce over-mastery of cruel impulses. 
Now, however, amongst them — and especially in 
England — philanthropy has become a fashion of 
the day. It is not merely that enormous sums are 
dispensed in charity, or that the well-to-do 
consent without much grumbling to be taxed in 
order to educate and feed the children of the 
poor, but that there is a desire to see and mix with 
the poor, to visit them in their homes, and render 
them personal service. Cynics may object that 
these benevolent feelings are prompted by the 
consciousness that the poor have votes. Not so : 
they are also awakened by the ill-treatment of 
animals ; and, indeed, there are many to whom 
the overloading of a horse is more distressing than 
the sight of a neglected and hungry child. In 
Canada and the United States alms-giving is 
hardly practised : if any need it, they would 
resent the offer of it. But a spirit of mutual 
helpfulness is manifest everywhere : it is good 
to watch frock-coated doctors and lawyers, at a 
suburban railway station on their way to town, 
turn their hands to assist market-gardeners in 
loading their boxes of fruit on to the train. In 
both Europe and America this impulse of kindly 
consideration for others is taking the place of 
formal rules of morality. It can find excuses for 
crime, which are mitigating the severity of the 
penal laws. It may soften the struggle between 


THE KINDLY IMPULSE 287 


capital and labour, and heal the social wounds 
that are caused by their conflict. In countries 
where this kindly feeling prevails, strikes leave 
no great aftermath of bitterness : masters and 
men can shake hands when their disputes are 
settled, and bear no malice for the sternness oi 
the fight. 

Its effect may be seen in the desire to spread 
culture amongst the masses. This is a distinctive 
note of modern times. In ancient days culture 
was the monopoly of the wealthy : the poor were 
left in unenlightened ignorance, and the advance 
of civilization can be measured by nothing more 
significantly than by the increasing proportion of 
the population who enjoy its amenities. In 
England, for many centuries past, religious and 
charitable foundations have afforded free education 
to some children of the poor : during the last forty 
years the State has undertaken to extend this 
privilege to all of them. The fruits, it must be 
confessed, hardly satisfy our hopes. So dispas- 
sionate an observer as Mr. Charles Booth writes 
of the " palpable failure to secure the results 
anticipated, 55 and recently several experts in 
education have publicly criticized in a tone of 
keen disappointment the effect of our schools in 
raising popular intelligence. It is, nevertheless, 
impossible to deny that their influence is plainly 
to be discerned in the dress, manners and ideals of 
the new generation. Intellectually the harvest 
may fall short of anticipation ; but this may be 
due to imperfections of method. Education is 
still under the influence of mediaeval authorities 
who believed that it was concerned with little 
more than the acquisition of knowledge, and did 
not perceive that it should be really the intro- 
duction to a life of self -improvement. The sons 
of the richer classes still spend much of their 


288 


SOCIAL PROGRESS 


youth in learning Latin and Greek, although it is 
certain that few of them will pursue in after life 
the study of languages, which are not more 
flexible or expressive than French and German, 
and are of no practical usefulness to men of 
affairs. So also, in the schooling of the masses, too 
much stress has been laid upon the memorizing 
of knowledge and too little upon the training of 
the mental faculties. It is necessary to memo- 
rize : an abundance of word-symbols is needed 
for expression. But man has risen above the 
brutes by his 1 discernment of properties, by the 
exercise of his will, and by the possession of useful 
habits, and if education were directed more fully 
to the strengthening of these impulses, it might 
have greater effect in raising the level of character 
and intelligence. Habits, it should be explained, 
include habits of mind — that is to say beliefs 
and ideas : these affect very powerfully the drift 
of society, and an agnostic philosopher may very 
well believe that it would be an evil day for 
England were religious instruction excluded from 
the influences which shape the minds of the 
young. 

It is tempting to dilate upon the contrast be- 
tween riches and poverty as an evil feature of 
modern times ; it is indeed amazing that members 
of the same social organism should, some, have 
more than they can waste in the most extrava- 
gant luxury, and others, less than they require 
for the bare necessities of life. But this is as 
ancient as human aggressiveness, and indeed 
present day conditions are infinitely to be pre- 
ferred to those of classical times when half the 
population was bound in slavery. Speaking 

1 The practising of volition is a leading feature of the Montessori 
system of education. Children select their own tasks, and accord- 
ingly guide their studies by choice, not by imitation. 


POVERTY 


289 


generally, poverty is the outcome of poverty — 
the result of a lack of advantages in possessions, 
birth or character which may enable a man to 
bargain advantageously with other men. His 
helplessness is woefully increased should he be 
constitutionally idle, should he be lacking, that 
is to say, in the impulse to industry, or should he 
be oppressed by the tyranny of other impulses, 
such as the passion for drink or for gambling, 
which fatally affect the impulse to industry. 
The misery of helplessness reaches its climax in 
unemployment : this (as will be seen in the 
following chapter) may plausibly be ascribed to 
a slacking, or interruption, in the current of ex- 
change — of the changing of goods for goods or 
goods for services — which, like a stream of 
electricity, turns the wheels of modern economic 
life. Such remedies as may be found for it must 
have the effect of stimulating this current. 
Poverty that is deepened by defects of impulse 
demands remedies of greater complexity. 

The enquiries of Booth and Rowntree have 
shown that about one per cent, of the population 
is composed of wastrels — persons to whom work is 
constitutionally repugnant. This is perhaps, not a 
large proportion of infructuous buds on the tree cf 
life, and these degenerates, it may be remarked, 
are born in all classes of society. How many sons 
of the rich might we not find idling through their 
summers in the London parks were they not 
maintained by the charity of their relations ! 
Men of this disposition will only work under 
strict compulsion : so they may acquire habits of 
industry, but these will rarely become so strong 
as to survive in conditions of freedom. Far more 
numerous are those who lack the comforts and 
decencies of life because their impulse to industry 
is clogged by the passions for drink or gambling. 


SOCIAL PROGRESS 


These may be reckoned, it appears, at something 
more than a quarter of the town population. 
Education may sober them by offering a wider 
range of interests : much mav also be done bv 
efforts of will — artificially stimulated, it may be, 
by the taking of pledges. So great is the evil that 
the richer classes may not unreasonably be asked 
to deny themselves for the benefit of the com- 
munity, and to consent to the absolute prohibi- 
tion of the sale of intoxicants. But men drink or 
gamble to satisfy the inherent passion for change 
or variety of mood, and the most effective method 
of bridling this propensity is to offer them means 
of excitement which are less expensive and less 
degrading. From this point of view we may con- 
template with satisfaction the growing popularity 
of football matches, variety entertainments and 
cinematograph shows. 

More numerous again are those whose cir- 
cumstances must be described as poor, but 
suffice to provide them with sufficient subsis- 
tence, and with some margin for the amenities 
of civilization. They cannot afford domestic 
servants : but they live in decent quarters and 
have some money to spare for simple luxuries. 
These are the conditions of about half our 
population. It is easy to be too gloomy in 
commiserating their lot. Happiness results from 
the satisfaction of impulses: lacking strong im- 
pulsesTone^could not be happy : with impulses 
unsatisfied one must be miserable. But the 
impulse of ambition, for instance, may be satisfied 
by small degrees of promotion : moods may be 
changed with no large expenditure : children 
play in the gutter as happily as in the nursery. 
And the working man who takes a pride in his 
work satisfies his provident impulses quite as 
completely as the merchant or stockbroker who 


POVERTY AND HAPPINESS 


deals in thousands of pounds. The impulses of 
love may be satisfied by marriage — more often, 
it may well be, amongst the poor than amongst 
the rich. ^Esthetic impulses may be gratified by 
a street organ : and if they are developed more 
abundantly by the rich, the poor have, as com- 
pensation, ampler up-wellings of the ethical 
aspirations that are manifested by the self-denial 
of wives for their families and the astonishing 
generosity of the working man. Poverty may 
be unacquainted with the pleasures that are 
derived from luxurious sensation — may not be 
tickled by the taste of truffles and champagne. 
But happiness is more desirable than pleasure. 
And the poor are, at all events, untroubled by the 
pangs which are suffered by respectability in 
maintaining appearances before the world. One 
may, then, easily be too severe in condemning 
modern society. Pessimistic criticism is very 
attractive : indirectly it flatters one's own ideals. 
It is probable, indeed, that the strictures of 
moralists and divines have overrated considerably 
the extravagances and miseries of the past ; and 
in future centuries a student of our times may 
be seriously misled by much that he may come 
across in the accounts that we are giving of 
ourselves in current literature. 1 

Human society has, then, developed into its 
present complexity by the progressive adoption 
and abandonment of various ideals, or habits of 
mind. Submissiveness to a patriarch or a tyrant 
has gh en way before notions of deference to the 
majority, of liberty and equality. The idea of 

1 Is not there too much shadow in this opinion of Mr. Frederic 
Harrison's? " Our present type of society is, in many respects, 
one of the most horrible that has ever existed in the world's history 
— boundless luxury and self-indulgence at one end of the scale, and 
at the other a condition of life as cruel as that of a Roman slave, 
and more degraded than that of a South Sea Islander." 

V 


292 


SOCIAL PROGRESS 


blood-brotherhood has widened into that of civic 
relationship. Traditional custom has been shat- 
tered by the expansion of industrial enterprise. 
How, it may be asked, have these transformations 
of feeling come about ? Partly, it would appear, 
through the growing influence of self-conscious- 
ness. But in greater measure through the imita- 
tion of reformers, who have introduced new stand- 
ards of conduct, and habits of mind, which, by 
reinforcing the influence of particular impulses, 
have profoundly modified man's valuations of 
life. By the exercise of deference and kindness, 
we subject ourselves more fully to our deferential 
and kindly impulses, as by the practice of warfare 
we have strengthened the authority of pugnacity, 
cruelty and self-sacrifice. Have we, then, in reform- 
ing zeal and the imitative propensity, a panaceaf or 
everything that is injurious to human society, or 
obstructs its development ? We may not take so 
sanguine a view of human possibilities. The im- 
pulses, with which we are born, subsist beneath the 
grating which convention imposes upon them. 
Habit, while, so to speak, regularizing their dis- 
charges, leaves their essential strength unchanged. 
We see that individual differs from individual, and 
race from race, under similar conditions of culture. 
An Englishman brought up from infancy amongst 
savages would no doubt exhibit many fundamental 
traits of Anglo-Saxon character : but we can 
scarcely believe that he would be impelled or 
restrained by any of the ideas which differentiate 
the English from their barbarian forefathers. 


CHAPTER XV 


MODERN ECONOMICS 

Wealth is a means of procuring the satisfaction 
of impuses ; and it may be defined as potential 
satisfactions that are embodied in a material 
form, and are therefore capable of being trans- 
ferred from hand to hand, and of being pledged 
as security for a loan. Immense is the importance 
of this last quality. For our economic system 
is based upon credit — that is to say, upon the 
anticipation of future receipts. The manufac- 
turer pays his workmen because he expects to 
sell the things that they make : his capital may 
be provided by borrowing upon the security of 
his buildings, machinery and stock of unsold 
goods : the merchant raises money wherewith to 
continue his business by hypothecating his 
consignments before they are delivered. Money 
itself may, indeed, be considered as a form of 
credit that is insured against failure by its 
intrinsic value. A sovereign is of use to us 
because it represents a sovereign's worth of 
future satisfactions. It is true that money may 
be borrowed upon security that is not material : 
a tradesman may borrow upon the goodwill of 
his business, an artist may obtain credit upon the 
money value of his talents. But security is 
imperfect unless it is represented by a thing that 
can be transferred from hand to hand before it 
is finally appropriated. The pawnbroker is the 

293 


294 


MODERN ECONOMICS 


poor man's friend : from no one else can he raise 
money. 

Wealth is produced by the action of our provi- 
dent impulses — those of foresight, industry and 
a desire for possessions and comfort. But these 
impulses are, as a rule, not sufficiently strong of 
themselves to induce us to labour persistently. 
They need to be reinforced by habits, and by 
other impulses which can only be satisfied by the 
products of industry — that is to say, by wealth. 
The desire for food or for luxuries, ambition and 
the longing for social esteem, the love of children, 
the passion for change which may be satisfied by 
travel, by amusement, or by drink, our artistic 
tastes, may all contribute to enhance the force- 
fulness of our industrial impulses. The possession 
of industrial or provident impulses is essential ; 
they are the roots of our industrial activities : 
failing them man would remain as poverty-stricken 
as the brutes. Where they are weak, wealth is not 
produced. Indian labourers prefer their habits 
and their leisure to a rise in wages ; and the large 
amounts of coin and bullion which are annually 
received by India in payment for raw T produce, 
are in great measure buried under ground. But 
when the industrial impulses are at their strongest, 
they still appear to need reinforcement before 
they will urge mankind to continuous exertion. 

Our economic development has then progressed 
through the strengthening of our provident or 
industrial inclinations, firstly, by the acquisition 
of industrious habits, and secondly, by focussing 
upon industry the stimuli that can be derived 
from other propensities. Money is the lens by 
which our various desires are concentrated. We 
are told that money serves the community as a 
standard and measure of value, and as a medium 
of exchange. In truth it is something more. It 


MONEY 


295 


gives its possessor an option of acquiring whatever 
he pleases that is within its value and is exposed 
for sale. One who possesses a sovereign possesses 
a sovereign's worth of choice, and, so far, has the 
world at his disposal. Money, then, stimulates 
our impulses by offering them every variety of 
satisfaction. It gives full play to the desire for 
liberty, for choice, which to a greater or less 
degree is inherent in all men. Remuneration 
that is offered in kind is far less stimulating, and 
payment in food or in goods has passed out of 
usage in all progressive communities. In some 
parts of India a ploughman still works for thirty 
bushels of grain, a blanket and a pair of shoes as 
his yearly wages. There is nothing before him to 
relieve the monotony of life, not even the chance 
of beggary. It is not surprising that the payment 
of wages in truck — that is to say, in goods, not in 
money — has been strenuously opposed by the 
English working classes and has been prohibited 
by law. Such a system starves the enjoyment of 
life and the zest of industry. 

If we search for a fundamental difference 
between the economic conditions of the present 
day, and those, let us say, of ancient Egypt, we 
may find it in the stream of money which per- 
meates our society, passing through such a 
multiplicity of channels as conduct the blood to 
every recess of the body. It is ever-flowing : 
the humblest family makes its daily purchases. 
It passes in broad channels through the homes of 
the rich: the poor receive rivulets only. But there 
are no members of the community, except those 
in workhouses, asylums and prisons, who do not 
at least dip their fingers in the current. It is 
surprising that human inventiveness so long fell 
short of the discovery of money. The earliest 
known coins were struck by the Lydians some 


296 


MODERN ECONOMICS 


twenty-seven centuries ago. Tokens 1 in the form 
of miniature hoes, axes, and other implements 
Avere in use for some time previously. But we 
may conclude that the monetary system that now 
appears essential to social life, has come into 
existence since the beginning of classical history. 

§ 

The life of a community which subsists by 
hunting, cultivation or the pasturing of cattle 
is borne, as it w r ere, upon a smooth-flowing 
stream : when men forsook these pursuits for 
the manufacture of things, they threw themselves 
upon a whirlpool, and entrusted their lives to the 
circulation of its current. Manufacture can con- 
tinue only if goods are sold : selling and buying 
must never cease. Political economy used to 
teach us that a demand for commodities is not a 
demand for labour : but if a demand for com- 
modities did not exist, no manufacturing labour 
would be employed at all. Industrial prosperity 
depends upon the rapidity with which this current 
circulates, as w r ell as upon its volume. 

Its rapidity is increased by improvements in 
communications which lessen the time that is 
required for the completion of a purchase. It is 
also increased by the enterprise of retail dealers 
who by bringing goods to the doors of the custo- 
mers quicken the current of selling and buying. 
If, from any cause, rapidity of transit is seriously 
diminished, the industrial population is thrown 
into such distress as results from the closing of a 
market. It is kept alive by such a stream of ex- 
changes as is supposed to be the nature of the 
electric current, and its vitality suffers if the 

1 Is it not possible that the miniature, or " pygmy,' 1 flint 
weapons that are a puzzle to archaeologists were used for this 
purpose ? 


THE WEALTH STREAM 


297 


stream is obstructed. This is one of the perils of 
war. 

The volume of the wealth current is maintained 
or augmented by the action and interaction of a 
large number of factors. First may be mentioned 
the employment of credit. By credit all the 
available goods of a community are drawn into 
the market and used in purchasing. 1 A man may 
have money, with no desire to expend it. But 
he will rarely be unwilling to add to his potential 
satisfactions by lending or investing it at interest, 
and in this case he contributes to the fund that is 
employed in purchase — in the purchase of goods 
that are exposed for sale, or in the purchase of 
goods by an employer from his workmen that takes 
the form of paying them wages. Credit is based 
upon the transferability of wealth : but when 
commercial confidence runs high, goods or land 
may be pledged several times over, and the 
industrial fund of the country may enormously 
exceed the amount of the actual available wealth. 
But when security is based, not upon w r ealth, but 
upon trustfulness, its existence is precarious : 
if a link is broken, the chain collapses, and such a 
commercial panic ensues as periodically disorgan- 
izes industry and throws workmen out of employ. 

Cheapness also increases the volume of pro- 
duction. There is always a reluctance to part 
with money. This is lessened if its expenditure 
will give a substantial return in satisfaction. 
And the cheaper are goods the greater is the 
surplus that remains, after procuring them, for 
the purchase of other varieties of satisfaction. 
Accordingly cheapness promotes variety of de- 
mand and stimulates the establishment of new 

1 " Purchase " is used throughout as including the payment of 
wages by a manufacturer to his workmen in return for the goods 
they create for him. 


298 


MODERN ECONOMICS 


industries. Why, then, it may be asked, is there 
an impression that high prices are favourable to 
trade ? High prices must necessarily restrict 
the number of purchases upon which a limited 
income can be spent. The manufacturers upon 
whose goods its expenditure is concentrated will 
no doubt be benefited. But this will be at the 
expense of those whose goods are no longer pur- 
chased because they are beyond the consumer's 
means. If a country is considered as self-con- 
tained, high prices redistribute profits and acti- 
vities, but do not increase them. If, however, 
they are realized from foreign consumers, they 
may be an actual gain to the country of export, 
for the counterbalancing retrenchment of pur- 
chases in the importing country may affect goods 
which the country of export does not supply. 
High prices may, accordingly, stimulate certain 
industries at the expense of others ; and, if the 
industries that suffer are in foreign lands, high 
prices may increase the total wealth of an ex- 
porting country. But they do not produce the 
effect of low prices in increasing the wealth of the 
world as a whole. 

If we look back to the early stages of human 
society we shall find that the first step in increasing 
the wealth of a community was the diversion of 
labour from domestic employ, or feudal service, 
to the more productive occupation of making 
things. The ultimate fact upon which industrial 
development is based is that a cultivator's labour 
produces more than suffices for his support. He 
has rarely been permitted to retain the surplus. 
It has been taken from him as rent, and in days of 
simplicity is mainly spent in the maintenance of 
relatives, dependants, and retinues of servants. 
Manufacture is limited to primitive conveniences, 
and the craftsmen are commonly paid in produce. 


DEVELOPMENT OF MANUFACTURE 299 


These conditions are still typical of India, as 
they were of Europe in mediaeval days. When 
landlords conceived a desire for manufactured 
luxuries they gratified it by reducing their 
personal establishments. Labour was diverted to 
handicrafts, and the industrial era began. 

Industry stimulates industry. The making of 
shoes incites men to buy them, and to make other 
things in order to produce funds for the purchase. 
Each new handicraft, then, created others. This 
interaction is an accumulating force, and rapidly 
extended the field of industry. 

Handicrafts gave place to machinery. By 
harnessing the energy of coal with himself, man 
augmented immensely the effectiveness of his 
labour. With the assistance of a machine, a few 
factory hands are as effective as scores of handi- 
craftsmen. Not only was the output largely 
increased. Prices were lowered, and cheapness, 
as we have seen, has a potent effect in increasing 
demand. With each diminution of price the 
market widened : by lowering prices a factory 
encouraged the establishment of other factories. 
The economic conditions of the present day are 
based almost wholly upon the use of machines. 

There followed the organization of factory 
industry, and a development of skill in manage- 
ment, engineering, prospecting, and in reading 
the market, without which production on a large 
scale would be impossible. A growing alertness 
guided invention, and secured the prompt utiliza- 
tion of its discoveries. And labour became more 
effective as, with the spread of knowledge, it 
became more intelligent. 

Manufacture is supported by purchases, and 
purchases are vastly stimulated by temptation. 
Our eyes are everywhere assailed by advertise- 
ments, which have indeed become a feature not 


300 


MODERN ECONOMICS 


only of town but oi country scenery. Some of us 
are not moved by their importunity, may indeed 
resent it. But their general seductiveness may be 
inferred from the fact that it pays to spend so 
lavishly upon them. Customers are tempted by 
the attractive display of shop windows, by the 
blandishments of salesmen and even by appeals 
to the gambling spirit. In some measure these 
efforts merely divert purchasers from one firm 
to another. But they also draw into the vortex 
of trade money that might otherwise be hoarded, 
or spent in procuring, not things, but services. 

We must remember, however, that, failing the 
security of property which is given by a strong 
and trustworthy government, none of these 
forces could have come into play. From an 
economic standpoint one may easily comprehend 
why the community is disposed to judge offences 
against property more severely than brutal 
assaults. They strike at the foundations of the 
industrial fabric. We cannot, then, deny a high 
industrial value to the State employees, whose 
business it is to protect the community and to 
preserve peace. So also with many other kinds 
of professional service, and particularly with the 
efforts of medical and sanitary experts. Health is 
a necessary condition for effective labour. 

§ 

So far, we have been considering a nation's 
production of wealth by efforts which are confined 
within the limits of its own territory. These 
efforts are, however, gradually yielding in im- 
portance to commercial and financial transactions 
with other nations, by which the wealth-streams 
of particular countries are becoming merged into 
a wealth-stream for the world as a whole. The 
advantages that result are in some cases one- 


INTERNATIONAL TRADE 


301 


sided, one country gaining at the expense of 
another. In other cases the advantages are 
mutual and increase the total resources of the 
world. Generally, international trade has this 
result. The merchants who conduct it make 
their profits by appropriating wealth from which- 
ever country is most in need of the exchange. 
But, profits apart, the effect of both exporting 
and importing is to increase the effectiveness of 
industry. The export trade brings new markets 
within reach and expands the demand : the 
import trade assists manufacture by introducing 
supplies of raw material, and lowers prices by 
bringing goods and food upon the market more 
cheaply than they could be produced at home. 
Since a fall in prices stimulates production and 
increases wealth, proposals to check importation 
by the imposition of a protective tariff must jus- 
tify themselves by their effect either in enabling 
the country to enrich itself at the expense of 
others, or in promoting developments which have 
a social or political as opposed to an economic 
effect. A protective tariff which raises prices, may 
check the stream of foreign investment by increas- 
ing the profits of some home factories; and it may 
be that, by inducing capitalists to invest at home, 
the wealth-stream would be swelled more abun- 
dantly than by the expenditure of the interest 
which foreign investments would yield. It may 
be desirable for social reasons to encourage manu- 
facture as opposed to agriculture ; or it may seem 
politic to foster agriculture at the expense of 
manufacture in order to secure that the country 
should not become entirely dependent upon 
others for its food supply. Or, stress may be laid 
upon the advantage which results from the 
power of retaliation in penal tariffs in compelling 
other nations to moderate their customs demands. 


302 


MODERN ECONOMICS 


But, apart from such reasons, any measures 
which would raise the prices of imports should 
apparently be deprecated, whatever be the cus- 
toms policy of other nations. 

By investing money in other countries a 
community alienates a means of increasing its 
own productiveness ; but, by the interest that it 
exacts, it levies a tax upon the resources of the 
borrowing country which, if spent within its 
own limits, may add very greatly to its w T ealth. 
Moreover, if the loan is remitted in the form of 
goods, its grant will at least benefit the lending 
country by the single turnover of its amount. 
And if the borrowing country is undeveloped, 
and yields very liberally to the outlay of capital, 
not only may the lending country make larger 
profits than it could obtain from a home invest- 
ment, but the riches of the world as a whole will 
be increased. By her enormous foreign invest- 
ments England levies a percentage upon the 
produce of many countries. The Canadian farmer, 
the Italian metayer of Argentina, the Indian ryot, 
all render her a share of their crops. 

The receipt of a loan by one country from 
another increases its w r ealth-stream, and stimu- 
lates the demand for local manufactures. If 
received in the form of goods it is of course a 
direct accession to resources. On the other hand, 
there is interest to be paid, which involves a 
transfer of resources to the lending country. 
But borrowed money is exceedingly profitable 
to lands that are undeveloped. Canada and 
South America owe their astonishing progress 
very largely to the assistance of English and 
American capital, and it is not surprising that 
they should leave nothing untried to advertise 
their advantages to the investing public. 

A war indemnity is in effect a loan without 


DISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH 


303 


interest, and, whatever be urged by the advocates 
of peace, must augment the resources of the 
nation which exacts it. This is also the case 
with tributes and subsidies, and money which 
is expended by foreign travellers. The Swiss 
have, indeed, built up their prosperity with the 
money which has been attracted by the scenery 
of their land. The wealth which England ob- 
tained from her tropical dominions — especially 
from India and Jamaica — was the stepping-stone 
to her present riches and commanding commer- 
cial position. How many families have been 
founded, how many noble mansions built, with 
the profits of indigo, tea, and sugar ! From the 
whole world she levies contributions by her 
earnings in the ocean carrying trade. 

§ 

We turn now to the distribution of wealth — 
to the influences which determine its appropria- 
tion by individuals, and result in the distinction 
between rich and poor. The simplest and most 
ancient of these influences is force. The criminal 
classes still employ it. The levy of taxes by the 
State, and, in many cases, the exaction of rent 
by a landlord are ultimately secured by force. 
A community settled upon land which it was the 
first to colonize, would hardly appreciate the 
meaning of rent : each cultivator would expect 
to keep the whole of his produce. But, when 
conquered by invaders, they would be forcibly 
taught that the profits of agriculture leave some- 
thing for a landlord to exact ; and that, indeed, 
under the rule of force, the cultivator may con- 
fidently expect to retain only so much of the 
produce as will keep him from starvation. Rents 
are now commonly regulated by competition, by 
custom, by kindness, or by law, and their just 


304 


MODERN ECONOMICS 


amount is calculated by scientific formulae. But 
originally they were as large as the landlord could 
demand without fear of rebellion or of the death 
of the tenant. Similar is the history of a manufac- 
turer's profits. 1 They were originally so much of 
the produce of a slave's industry as were not 
required to keep him alive. They are now the 
difference betw r een the selling value of an article 
and the price which is paid for it — in the form of 
wages — to the workmen who make it. But they 
no longer simply express the extorting power of 
an employer. They include charges for skill 
in superintendence, and for depreciation of 
material, which are part of the necessary cost 
of producing the output. They also include 
interest charges on the capital cost of buildings 
and machinery, and on the money advanced 
in purchasing raw materials and in paying 
wages. Those who believe in the possibility 
of " collective ownership 55 will not admit that 
these charges for interest are unavoidable, and 
will view them as appropriating, and not as 
producing wealth. But if, as may well be believed, 
the community would be unable to raise the 
necessary capital without borrowing at interest, 
the capitalist may claim that his charges for 
interest — at the market rate — are a necessary 
condition for the effectiveness of labour, and are 
part and parcel of the cost of production. No 
such claim can, however, be made on behalf of 
profits that are obtained by means of a ring, a 
trust, or a monopoly. These simply represent 
wealth that is appropriated from other members 
of the community by the possession of a peculiar 
artificial advantage. 

Trade enriches the world by circulating the 
produce of industry. But it retains a very large 

1 Gross profits, 


DISTRIBUTING CHARGES 


305 


share of the produce for itself — far more than it 
could claim as the cost of its services. In some 
cases its profits may actually double the price 
of an article. There is nothing more remarkable 
in our modern economic conditions than the extra- 
ordinarily large number of retail shops. Their 
multiplicity may be of assistance in inducing the 
public to spend its money. But they are main- 
tained very largely by the habits of their cus- 
tomers, who, in defiance of the axioms of political 
economy, support certain shops, not because 
they expect better goods or lower prices than 
elsewhere, but because they have contracted a 
habit of dealing with them. When so many are 
selling, individual profits cannot exceed a low 
average : there is keen competition : this is apt 
to deaden the appreciation of high morality ; 
and trade may degenerate into a method of 
" getting hold of other people's money without 
getting taken up by the police." 

The rendering of services — of satisfactions, that 
is to say, which do not take a material form — are 
the most obvious of the influences that enable 
some individuals to appropriate money from 
others. These are not included in a nation's 
wealth ; but they comprise nearly all of its higher 
activities — the utilities which we derive from 
letters, science and art, from religious and secular 
instruction, from medical assistance — everything, 
in short, which raises life above sensuous enjoy- 
ment or a struggle for gain. Lawyers and politi- 
cians may complicate affairs which might be 
simply transacted, may earn money and credit 
by appealing to impulses that are not amongst the 
proudest attributes of humanity ; but it is hardly 
conceivable that a civilized community could 
make shift without them. We must be rapidly 
carried in railways and tramcars to maintain the 


306 


MODERN ECONOMICS 


stress of modern conditions. Amusements satisfy 
an impulse for change which gives joy to life and 
lightens the weight of advancing years. We owe 
to domestic servants the comfort and orderliness 
of our houses. 

No shiftings of wealth that are confined to the 
members of a community can lessen the com- 
munity's total wealth, however disadvantageous 
they may be from the moral or philanthropic 
standpoint. The extravagance of the rich in the 
end provides honest folk with food and lodging, 
however unworthy be the hands to which the 
money is first scattered. Expenditure upon 
armaments is frequently deplored as a waste of 
national resources ; but it passes on the wealth 
current and provides subsistence for thousands 
of men as effectively as expenditure upon school- 
houses or motor-cars. The enormous cost of the 
Panama Canal is no net loss to the United States : 
the outlay has in the main passed through Ameri- 
can hands, and is, so far, merely a transfer of 
wealth from the body of tax-payers to some of its 
members. 

§ 

The wealth-stream flow 7 s past everyone's door. 
Some receive profuse supplies from it : others 
may scarcely enjoy a few drops. Industry may 
help itself from the stream, but only by pannikins : 
the plodding workman, the careful seamstress, 
seldom earn more than a bare subsistence. If we 
desire a more liberal measure we must obtain it 
by influencing others — by inducing them, so to 
speak, to lower a bucket and draw for us — if we, 
in return, will satisfy an impulse which they 
cannot conveniently satisfy themselves. So we 
draw for shop-keepers in return for comforts and 


THE GAINING OF WEALTH 307 


luxuries, for doctors in fear of ill-health, for 
railway companies and theatres to gain change . 
and variety, for charities to satisfy the kindliness 
of our hearts. To satisfy feelings of cruelty we 
may patronize very barbarous entertainments. 
What will men not pay for titles, for steps on the 
social ladder which gratify their ambition or 
vanity ! There are baser instincts which may be 
worked upon by those who can exploit the depths 
• of human nature. So wealth is appropriated, and 
men grow rich, by successful appeals to the desires 
of others. But it does not follow that societj^ is 
corrupt. Excepting the passion for cruelty, there 
is no class of impulses which are harmful in them- 
selves : any injury which they may cause to 
individuals, or to society, proceeds from the means 
that are adopted fortheir satisfaction. We may rea- 
sonably sympathize with a desire for variety whilst 
strongly deprecating its satisfaction by drink. 

Riches are, then, gained by the possession of 
some special advantage which enables us to satisfy 
the impulses of others. Industry itself is no such 
advantage : it is possessed by thousands of work- 
men who are, individually, of no particular value 
to their employer, and are thus unable to demand 
from him a full share of the proceeds of their 
labour. In these days the greatest advantage is 
wealth, and a cynic may take a gloomy view of our 
relationships. For wealth attracts wealth, and 
social inequalities must tend to increase unless 
the process is checked by law. There are, of 
course, other advantages. Skill and intelligence 
will enable a workman to demand higher w^ages. 
Birth gives advantages : less in the present time 
than formerly. Talent is of service : so also are 
high educational qualifications, but these are 
obtained by the expenditure of money, and have 
generally been unattainable except by the rich. 

x 


308 


MODERN ECONOMICS 


Beauty may find a rich husband : strength and 
activity give a money value to a professional 
football player. The possession of land is a far- 
reaching advantage : it may enable a landlord 
to impose his own terms on his tenants and 
labourers by threatening them with banishment 
from their homes. But it generally goes with the 
possession of money. Riches are the all-important 
advantage. Through them satisfaction may be 
offered to almost every impulse of humanity, and * 
money may be collected as if by magnetic 
attraction. The poor have one advantage of their 
own : they form by far the most numerous class 
of the community. By a strike they can obtain 
the advantage of a monopoly. And by their 
voting power they can limit the tyranny of wealth 
through protective labour laws. 

But this despondent conclusion does not take 
into account all the impulses of mankind. There 
remain the promptings of kindness and self- 
restraint, which are authoritatively impressed 
upon us by religious teaching. These moderate 
the fierceness of the struggle for life amongst 
human beings. Their power is show r n in the 
liberal amounts subscribed in charity. They may 
soften the relations between employer and em- 
ployed, between landlord and tenant, uniting 
interests which are naturally divergent, and sub- 
stituting mutual consideration for mutual distrust. 
The sympathy of Parliament has undoubtedly 
been stimulated, in some measure, by the political 
power of the masses. But kindly feelings have 
also been effective : the richer classes show little 
resentment when required by the law to contri- 
bute to the assistance of the poor. Society ulti- 
mately relies upon these feelings to preserve it 
from being torn by dissension : and amongst the 
habits of mind which should be pressed upon the 


RICHES AND POVERTY 309 


young none are of more importance to the com- 
munity than kindness and consideration for those 
around them. The discipline to which boy-scouts 
submit themselves has no more admirable 
feature than the helpfulness with which they 
learn to meet the needs of others. 

The accumulation of riches may have benefits 
in its train. It stimulates the aptitudes of man- 
kind. The wealthy can afford to pay high prices 
for meritorious industrial or artistic work. It may 
be urged that genius is its own incentive : that 
inventiveness or art do not need to be excited by 
money rewards. This is true in a measure. But 
we cannot trust the creative spirit always to urge 
genius to exert itself. Judging by the anxiety of 
inventors to protect their ideas by patents, their 
originality is stimulated by hopes of gain. And 
artists of eminence expect liberal fees if they are 
to rise to the utmost height of their talents. 

§ 

Are poverty and riches essential results of our 
industrial civilization ? Could not the State, or 
community, reconstruct society so as to maintain 
the effectiveness of industry, while directing the 
distribution of its fruits according to principles of 
equity and kindness ? By labour legislation the 
State is successfully checking the rich from 
pressing to the utmost the advantages of their 
wealth : moreover, it is taking a practical hand 
in the economic life of the community, and man- 
ages to distribute letters, to carry passengers, 
efficiently and economically, while assuring to 
its employees a living wage. But the aspirations 
of Socialism soar far beyond this. The com- 
munity, it is claimed, should itself undertake to 
produce wealth and to distribute it ; or, at least, 
should imperatively regulate its distribution so 


3io 


MODERN ECONOMICS 


that no one should possess more than an equitable 
share. That is to say, wealth should be distri- 
buted without reference to the differences of 
character and strength that exist between the 
impulses of different individuals. One man 
requires much, another little, to make him happy : 
to one ambition is more than art, to another both 
these are less than change : one finds change in 
travel, another in games, a third in a novel. 
Under a socialistic regime these varieties of taste 
could not be considered in fixing the share of each 
individual : passions would be eliminated as con- 
tributory industrial forces, and industry would 
need to be its own reward. The community 
undoubtedly includes a large number of indivi- 
duals in whom the industrial impulse is so strongly 
developed as to urge them to work irrespective of 
personal advantage. But, judging from the facts 
of common experience, the greater proportion 
will not work unless this impulse is reinforced by 
selfish considerations, and there are not a few 
who will not work except under the stress of 
necessity or compulsion. A hive of bees displays 
unselfish industry : but they are moved by 
directive instinct, whereas the behaviour of man 
is the product of a multiplicity of impulses. Can 
we believe that his relations with other men might 
be arranged so as to rest upon one of them only ? 
In exceptional cases such a fabric can be built up : 
the monastic system is based upon the ascetic 
impulse : the Indians of Paraguay were discip- 
lined in the minutest details of life by their 
reverence for their Jesuit masters. But the con- 
struction is essentially unstable, and cannot endure 
unless human nature is, so to speak, emasculated. 
Our hopes for the future must fall short of Utopia, 
and we must be content with the less heroic 
prospects of lessening evil and increasing good. 


CHAPTER XVI 


MODERN POLITICS 

The vicissitudes of politics interest us so keenly 
because they give play to so great a variety of 
impulses. We admire our political leaders : were 
an impulse to admire or respect not innate in us, 
social life would have no centres around which to 
gravitate. We are moved by the success or 
failure of the party to which we have attached 
ourselves, because, having identified ourselves 
with it, we are excited by the feelings of emulation 
which set man to race against man, horse against 
horse, dog against dog. The daily changes in the 
political barometer gratify our passion for variety. 
We may be interested in the programme of under- 
takings to which our party commits itself, because 
it enlists the provident impulses that stimulate 
us to use our reason to ameliorate the conditions 
of the future : moreover, our kindly feelings may 
be appeased by the assurance that these under- 
takings will give happiness to persons or classes 
that have attracted our sympathy. The bitterness 
which is permissible in party politics affords a 
canalized outlet for our unkindly feelings. Finally, 
our self-conscious pride is soothed by the reflection 
that, in however moderate a degree, we can assist 
our party and its objects by our vote, and that 
we are actors, and not merely spectators, in the 
drama which each morning's newspaper unfolds 
before us. 

311 


312 


MODERN POLITICS 


In early days the politics of the State afforded 
no such variety of entertainment to its citizens. 
Every herd must have a leader ; and the tyranny 
of a chief, respected, it may be, for his age, his 
strength, or his ill-nature, was no doubt the 
primordial political institution of mankind, and 
endured until it was confronted by the interests 
of the family. With the development of the 
patriarchal family the leader's absolute authority 
was limited by the influence of the heads of 
families, and in many cases was subverted by a 
council of elders, or grandfathers, the prototype of 
the senates of historical times. There are not a 
few tribes of the present day whose government 
is still in this stage of evolution. It is sometimes 
figured as a democracy, but incorrectly, since it 
allows no voice in public affairs to the mass of the 
people, and is, in fact, the rule of age, experience 
and long-standing custom. But, generally, amidst 
the surges of war, the authority of a senate has 
been overwhelmed by the prestige ot a general : 
he has seized control as dictator or king, and the 
form of government has reverted to the monarchi- 
cal type. 

The fortunes of kingship have depended upon 
the temperament of the people. In the Baltic 
races the impulse of veneration is constantly 
assailed by a robust desire for freedom of indi- 
vidual action and for change. Most other 
races appear to need — and will only obey — an 
authority that they can admire : they are im- 
pressed by the irresponsibility ot absolute power, 
which harmonizes with their conception of the 
Divine ; and, since there are feelings in human 
nature to which cruelty may appeal, a ruler may 
actually gain admiration by the capricious in- 
fliction of death or torture. " Accordingly, over 
the greater portion of the globe kingship has been 


MONARCHY AND ARISTOCRACY 313 


invested with very arbitrary prerogatives. So 
long as the ruling classes of Greece and Rome 
retained some drops of northern blood, the in- 
fluence of the general was limited by the subdi- 
vision of his functions, and the senate could 
maintain itself as the directing authority of the 
State in every province of activity except upon 
the battlefield. But with the passing of time the 
dictator overshadowed the senate, and Rome and 
Constantinople alike submitted to an oriental 
despotism. In northern Europe, on the other 
hand, kings have always been pressed to defend 
their authority against encroachment. They have 
been powerfully assisted by the influence of 
religious feelings. A king who was deified was in 
theory irresistible ; and no arguments for limiting 
his authority could withstand a belief that he held 
his office by Divine right. Indeed, it was very 
probably the influence of religion that exalted 
the successful general into a hereditary king. 
Divinity which was instinct in the father would 
naturally descend to his son. 

But religion has not always contented itself 
with the upholding of monarchy. The visioned 
ideas to which it appeals may affect men as 
strongly as the most serious or attractive of life's 
practical contingencies, and may be as awe- 
inspiring as the most absolute tyranny. When, at 
the fall of the Roman empire, men lost confidence 
in monarchy, the Church of Rome stepped into the 
breach, and during many centuries attracted 
more veneration than was accorded to the most 
august of sovereigns. Its influence was least 
impressive amongst the Scandinavian and Teu- 
tonic peoples : the ideas of their preference were 
practical, and it was first among them that 
religion, unable to maintain its autocratic pre- 
tensions, fell back to become a guard for the 


314 


MODERN POLITICS 


king's palace. But it has been unable to defend 
monarchic authority against attacks that were 
delivered, at the outset, by the independent 
ambitions of the aristocratic families which were 
represented by the senate, and, later on, by 
the aspirations of the common people. It 
may be argued that the commanding influence 
of the German Emperor effectually contradicts 
the assumption that the Teutonic peoples have 
been consistently moved by a desire to limit 
kingly prerogatives. But the conditions of Ger- 
many are peculiar : threatened upon one flank 
by the spirit of revenge, and on the other by 
the vague overshadowings of Slav ambition, she 
imperatively needs a War Lord, and must subor- 
dinate her aspirations to this necessity. And by 
exceptional forcefulness of character a king can 
always revive the respectful feelings to which the 
institution of kingship owes its origin. 

The Army and the Family, then, stand for 
influences by which monarchy and aristocracy 
have, respectively, been upraised. In Europe 
these influences have been in perpetual conflict, 
one or the other gaining strength as foreign or 
domestic interests became most pressing. Before 
the Eastern despot family authority has respect- 
fully retreated within the circle of its own affairs, 
and has rarely ventured to contest with him the 
control of public business. We can hardly dignify 
with the name of " senates " the oriental councils 
(or darbars) that rather feed a prince's vanity 
than moderate his caprices. In the West the 
struggles of the political arena have been compli- 
cated by a new force : the undistinguished masses 
have appeared at its gates and have demanded 
a part in the tournament. They might respect 
a king ; and in the placid continuity of country 
life loyalty might persist towards land-holding 


THE COMING OF DEMOCRACY 315 


families. But in towns, populated in great 
measure by those who had cut themselves adrift 
from home and tradition, respect for the aris- 
tocracy could hardly survive. Men to whom 
family connections were a matter of indifference, 
could not be expected to understand that dis- 
tinctions of family were in themselves sufficient 
to support the authority of a senate. Between 
aristocracy and democracy a struggle commenced, 
in which the king assisted sometimes one side, 
sometimes the other, and was gradually shorn of 
his authority by both antagonists. 

§ 

The masses that now became a power in the 
State generally represented a subject people that 
had been conquered by the ancestors of the king 
and the aristocracy. In southern Europe their 
blood has been mainly that of a short-statured, 
dark complexioned race 1 of keen sensibility and 
high artistic talent which has been settled along 
the northern shores of the Mediterranean since 
the earliest days that the archaeologist's spade 
has revealed to us. But in all probability they 
also possessed some admixture of northern blood, 
derived from waves of invasion which from time 
immemorial had flowed over them. The ruling 
classes which had established themselves in most 
parts of Greece and in Upper Italy at the com- 
mencement of classical history represented the 
last of these invasions. The Dorians of Sparta, 
and the patricians of Rome held in close subjec- 
tion the helots and the plebeians; and early Roman 
history is in great part occupied with the struggle 
of the plebeians to secure social and political en- 
franchisement. The characteristics of the French, 

1 Known in classical times as Pelasgian in Greece, as Ligurian 
in Italy and the south of France, and as Iberian in Spain.; 


3i6 


MODERN POLITICS 


the Welsh and the Irish afford us reason for 
believing that these Mediterranean peoples ex- 
tended up the west of Europe to the British Isles. 
But here the admixture of northern — or Baltic — 
blood was larger ; indeed it appears that in 
England at the time of the Norman Conquest the 
dark complexioned inhabitants had been dis- 
placed very extensively indeed by Danes an,d 
Saxons. With us, then, the conflict between the 
people and the aristocracy (which has recently 
eventuated in the withdrawal of the veto from 
the House of Lords) has not been of so racial a 
character or so bitter as, for instance, in France. 
The nobles and the people have been in great 
measure blood relations, and the classes who were 
conquered have not been insulted by the physical 
contempt which would have denied them the 
right of intermarriage with the aristocracy. The 
enfranchisement of the masses has accordingly 
come about through gradual and peaceful stages. 
In France it was obtained by an outpouring of the 
hate of a rancorous helotage. The subject popu- 
lations of Wales and Ireland have been unable to 
accomplish so drastic a revolution. But they 
have, nevertheless, been enfranchised, and have, 
naturally, turned their votes to abate the pre- 
tensions of their alien conquerors. 

We must not, however, figure the advance of 
democracy as the spreading of a slow, resistless 
flood. When a people has become accustomed to 
subjection, they accept their chains as the bonds 
of habit, and will not rise to throw them off unless 
they are encouraged by a popular leader. They 
have become used to tyranny, they take no 
interest in State affairs, and, if gross injustice 
arouses them to spasmodic rioting, they are easily 
quieted by disciplined forces. Leaders of energy 
and intelligence are required, and they have very 


POPULAR LEADERS 


317 


frequently come to them from the ruling classes. 
The motive of these revolutionaries may have 
been in some cases sympathy for the oppressed. 
But the student of character may not unfairly 
conclude that it has more often been a desire for 
personal distinction, or the imperious longing for 
change which dominates some men — especially 
those whom the routine of industry has not 
broken into habit. The Roman poor were 
championed by members of the Roman nobility, 
such as the Gracchi and Catiline. We may indeed 
surmise that the French revolution would never 
have come about had revolt not been led by birth 
and intelligence — by the fire of Mirabeau, the 
vanity of Orleans, and the cultured philosophy of 
the Girondins. A lawyer headed the League 
which heartened the English working classes in 
their struggle for the suffrage. The natives of 
Ireland made their first successful move towards 
independance under the Anglo-Saxon leadership 
of Parnell. It is possible to be too cynical. In 
some cases reformers have been sincerely im- 
pressed with the justice of their ideas, and ready 
to sacrifice themselves for their principles. But 
they have found that argument is of no avail with 
the conservatism of a king or an aristocracy; 
and when they have not been killed, banished or 
imprisoned, they have been ignored. It was 
necessary to secure some external support, and 
they might find this in the numbers of the masses 
could these be roused into activity. For this 
something more was required than well-balanced 
reasoning : dispassionate exhortations would not 
draw the poorer classes in their multitudes to 
demonstiSitive meetings which could be used to 
coerce the authorities. They could be electrified 
only by appeals to their passions, and especially 
to their jealousy or their self-esteem ; and the 


3i8 


MODERN POLITICS 


harangues of a demagogue must be frothy to be 
convincing, however solid may be the convictions 
that he cherishes in the background. And, 
success being won by dramatic powers, not by 
sincerity, it is no matter for surprise that many 
demagogues have been simply actors, without any 
earnestness of purpose behind their volubility. 
But, whether inspired by principle or by ambition, 
their success has been marvellous. Authority 
which will not listen to argument will give way 
before a mob, or a string of demonstrative out- 
rages ; and in the end kings and aristocracies have 
conceded to the common people a voting power 
which outbalances their influence, and is, in 
effect, transferring the government of the country 
from the hands of the conquerors to those of the 
conquered. Such a revolution would have thrown 
the community into a state of never-ceasing 
discord were it not confirmed by the impulse of 
deference 1 to the majority. This may offer to a 
democracy as strong a guarantee as may be 
obtained by a monarchy or aristocracy from the 
impulse of reverence. In many cases it has been 
intrinsically too w^eak to give this security, and 
republics have reverted to despotism — in fact if 
not in name. 

§ 

But, it will be said, this is a sketch in mono- 
chrome which inadequately pictures the struggle 
for freedom : the triumphs by which liberty has 
been won have been coloured by many phases 
of activity : their history is not comprised in the 

1 It is extraordinary, when one comes to think of^it, that five 
persons should acquiesce in conduct of which they disapprove, 
because there are six persons who approve of it. Some peoples, 
those of India for instance, appear to lack this instinctive respect 
for number. But we may find traces of it in the earliest Germanic 
institutions which history reveals to us. 


DEMOCRACY AND VOTING 


vision of a mob howling at the gates of a palace or 
senate-house. This is true if we take into account 
the gradual emancipation of particular classes — 
the securing of privileges by crafts or trades 
guilds, of charters by the principal residents of 
a town, of parliamentary assemblages of their 
own by the clergy, or by such of the well-to-do 
classes as lay just below the ranks of the aris- 
tocracy. These have been obtained by many 
" expedients, by the granting or withholding of 
money, by the influence of religion, and by the use 
of armed force. But these communities were all of 
the nature of aristocracies. Their privileges were 
peculiar, and were maintained by a jealous con- 
servatism. There is, indeed, little analogy between 
the protection of a craft, or of a class, from arbi- 
trary interference, and the concession of manhood 
suffrage to the people as a whole. The one was 
desired for definite practical objects and was 
appreciated by reason of its fruits : the other 
fulfilled aspirations which were indefinite and 
emotional, representing conceptions, not of 
material improvement, but of human dignity. 
We should, then, readily understand why women 
who can emancipate themselves from the chains 
of habit are now clamorously demanding the 
suffrage. They share men's confident ideas of 
personal importance, and they conceive that, if 
these ideas are gratified for one sex, they may 
reasonably be gratified for the other sex also. 

The suffrage having been won by the stimula- 
ting effect of an appeal to self-conscious vanity, 
the possession of a vote is of value in itself, quite 
apart fro#i the political opportunities which it 
affords. It has, consequently, been a striking 
feature of democracy that the people, having 
secured the right to vote, can with difficulty be 
persuaded to exercise it. A political issue, of how- 


320 


MODERN POLITICS 


ever great importance, if put to them in cold blood, 
will not move large numbers of them to record 
their opinions. Even in the democratic atmo- 
sphere of the United States a referendum may not 
elicit responses from four-fifths of the voters ; and 
at English elections the voting power of the. con- 
stituency must be galvanized into activity by 
emotional appeals to other impulses than that of 
reasoning providence, and by the dignified con- 
veyance of voters to the polls. The provident 
impulse is, in fact, an inadequate stimulus, and it 
is necessary to awaken other instincts. Many lie 
at hand in the recesses of human nature, and skill 
in selecting and in arousing them is the talent of 
the successful politician. Admiration— may be 
enlisted by appeals to loyalty, and by such organ- 
izations as that of the Primrose League : religious 
prejudice is a declining force, but it may still turn 
elections elsewhere than in Wales and Ireland : 
jealousy can usually be aroused by denunciations 
of the rich, and the orator can always fire the 
sympathies of his audience by eloquence that 
invokes the dignity of man. But the most potent 
of these extraneous impulses is that of emulation. 
This is the mainspring of the party spirit. Men 
who care little for Liberal or Conservative princi- 
ples are roused by the contest between blue and 
buff. 

Party spirit is indeed the driving force of present 
day democracy. It was aroused on the day when 
first a question was decided by voting, and it has 
accordingly swayed the judgment of senates as 
well as of popular assemblies. But it is by no 
means peculiar to the political arena— Gibbon 
with his remorseless pen has described the bloody 
antagonisms which, aroused by a liking for one 
or other of two companies of chariot drivers, or 
for one or other of two benches of bishops, divided 


PARTY FEELING 


321 


Constantinople into Green and Blue, into Ortho- 
dox or Arian. These were Mediterranean fruits 
of the emulative impulse that in present day 
England gives life to games, and makes football 
matches so immensely attractive. Political 
parties generally assume that their differences 
represent some questions of importance: there 
is, indeed, a natural rivalry between those who 
possess and those who wish to possess ; and a 
philosopher may distinguish Conservatives and 
Liberals as actuated, respectively, by devotion to 
habit and by the spirit of change. But party 
feeling needs no solid nourishment. In Latin 
countries the politicians who are in and who are 
out of oj^ce have rarely represented anything but 
themselves : it would distract most Americans 
to define the difference between Republican and 
Democrat : if Ireland secures Home Rule, the 
Unionist party will change its name but not lose 
its adherents. 

But party feeling is not hastily to be con- 
demned because its energizing impulses are profit- 
less in themselves. It is of advantage to the 
State that the ministry in office should work in the 
light of jealous criticism. Periodical oscillations 
in the drift of policy keep alive a healthy spirit 
of change, afford hopeful prospects for those who 
are discontented, and are an invaluable safeguard 
against violent revolutions. It may, moreover, 
be held that the emulative spirit, as the driving 
force of a nation's development, has less harmful 
possibilities than the spirit of self-interest which 
would take its place were the voters enrolled, not 
in one o£ other of two large political parties, but 
amongst a number of groups, each of which 
represented a separate class of the community. 
It must, however, be admitted that for the procur- 
ing of changes in social or political conditions — as 


322 


MODERN POLITICS 


opposed to the maintenance of a respectable 
regularity — the group system is the more effective 
of the two. The leaders of political groups move 
along lines that, prescribed by self-interest, are 
clear and definite. A group will generally be too 
small to dominate of itself the political situation ; 
but it can make terms with other groups, bar- 
gaining for mutual assistance ; and the simplicity 
of its purpose is of great advantage when opposed 
to the kaleidoscopic ambitions of- a political 
party. So the group of Irish Nationalists has 
brought Home Rule almost within their grasp, 
the Welsh group has shaken the Established 
Church in Wales to its foundations, and the 
Labour group has forced legislation giving trades 
unions such privileges as are enjoyed by ho other 
associations. 

Political forecasts are very uncertain, and there 
are peculiarities in the English character that 
may divert our political evolution from the lines 
that have been pursued by other nations. But 
it seems probable that the two historical parties 
will gradually be disintegrated out of existence by 
a growing cleavage of the electorate into class 
groups. As the working classes advance in in- 
telligence and lose traditional habits of mind, they 
will appreciate their wants with greater clearness, 
and become less disposed to entrust their interests 
to politicians who regard them merely as pieces — 
of more or less value — to be played in the game of 
party politics. Legislation will be urged frankly 
by considerations of personal advantage — that is 
to say, in the interests of the class, instead of those 
of the political party — and it is probable Jthat this 
will infuse a bitterer note into political antagonism. 
We must hope for a palliative in a growing respect 
for public opinion, in increasing obedience to 
that social impulse which leads us to defer to the 


WORKING-CLASS INFLUENCES 


majority. No strike has been able to withstand 
the rising waves of popular resentment. Nor does 
it appear too optimistic to expect that the clash 
of divergent interests will be softened by the 
broadening influence of the spirit of kindliness. 
If these peacemakers fail, society may be dis- 
tracted by troubles for which an autocratic 
dictatorship may be a welcome alternative. 

So far, however, in England, the interests of the 
group, although they may temporarily obscure 
those of the party, have been unable to eclipse 
them. The achievements of political groups 
generally fall very far short of expectations, and, 
with a revulsion of feeling, disappointed voters 
have disregarded the promises held out to them 
by their* class leaders for the more exciting 
prospects of a party contest. This tendency is 
clearly to be observed in the fortunes of the 
British Labour party. Did the voters segregate 
themselves in groups according to their personal 
interests every democratic country would be 
ruled by a Labour ministry. For the working 
classes by their preponderating numbers hold the 
issues of the elections in their hands. 

Their influence has, unfortunately, so far 
prevailed as to infuse an unpatriotic note into 
British politics. The national flag may not wave 
over our school houses to symbolize to the young 
the claims of their country. In extraordinary 
contrast the citizens of the United States, and the 
Canadians, lose no opportunity of displaying, and 
saluting, their national emblem. They are not 
divided by the ideas of class exclusiveness which 
have come down to us from mediaeval days, and 
lead thef^British working man to believe that 
patriotism is a form of respect for the aristocracy. 
But suspicion of the national flag does not imply 
indifference to national pride ; when this is 


Y 


324 


MODERN POLITICS 


aroused the working classes forget all other 
considerations and will vote for the political side 
which voices most clearly their feelings of aggres- 
siveness or indignation. 

Generally the Liberal programme of changes — 
however indefinite — should naturally be more 
attractive to the poorer classes than the Con- 
servative attitude of " let well alone. 55 But both 
parties represent wealth, and the privileges of 
wealth, and that either of them should be vic- 
torious indicates that the atmosphere of elections 
has, so far, been charged by party spirit, by the 
emulative impulse, rather than by hopes of 
personal benefit. One class stands apart — those 
who are fired by an ardent desire to improve the 
condition of their fellows, who view pontics, not 
as a play, but as a purposeful effort to raise ideals 
and succour distress. These may give their 
votes to whichever party promises them assis- 
tance. But they are comparatively few in 
number, and their influence is very much less 
than their zeal. 

Party government has merits of its own as a 
system for administering home affairs. But in the 
conduct of foreign affairs and in the control of 
dependent peoples, it suffers from a great dis- 
advantage. A State is conciliated or obeyed 
according to the respect with which it is regarded. 
It requires, however, a mind steeped in democratic 
sympathies to feel respect for a government which 
periodically appeals to the public not to turn it out 
of office, and solicits the opinions of the masses 
upon questions of State policy. In Europe 
democratic sentiment is growing apace, and our 
Foreign Secretary 5 s difficulties are sympathetically 
regarded by foreign ministers, few of them free 
from similar difficulties of their own. No such 
allowances may, however, be expected from depen- 


DEMOCRACY AND EMPIRE 325 


dent nationalities : they are bound to the 
Imperial Government, not by democratic feelings 
but by respect, and if this be lost, their allegiance 
is lost also, unless a motive can be found for it in 
some other impulse. Germany possesses a stable 
government, and it is possible to imagine Berlin 
as the effective head of a large colonial empire. 
For London no such prospect was conceivable, and 
the British over-sea dominions have accordingly 
-been entirely emancipated from control. In 
effect they are united to the British Isles by 
nothing more substantial than an alliance, 
warmed no doubt by sentimental and patriotic 
ideas, but cemented by the advantages which 
they derive from the investment of British 
capital and the protection of the British fleet. 
Since long time past the Irish have lost all 
respect for the British Parliament : its vacilla- 
tions of policy, which to Englishmen appear 
natural, to them appear absurd, and they have 
turned for discipline to the Church, to despotic 
societies, or to autocratic leaders of their own 
selection. There is a serious danger that India 
may also lose all respect for British rule if its 
vision, with growing acuteness, should pierce 
through the ranks of the officials who have so far 
represented consistency of purpose in the State 
authority. 

§ 

Political convictions are in great measure based 
upon habit, and it is a matter for some surprise 
that a party which is once secure in office should 
ever be driven from it by a change of views that 
cuts aw^y its majority. Educated men, when 
past the enthusiasms of youth, rarely shift their 
allegiance : conversion is hardly respectable. 
Indeed we take it for granted that Liberalism 
and Conservatism run in families, and our 

Y 2 


326 


MODERN POLITICS 


curiosity is aroused if brothers differ widely in 
their politics. The transfer of votes which turns 
out a government occurs for the most part amongst 
the working classes, and in greatest measure, it 
may be suspected, amongst the least intelligent of 
their ranks. To these men party rivalries are of no 
serious interest. It^pleases them to be on the 
winning side, and they will vote for the party 
which is shown by the trend of the contest to have 
the best chance of victory. Moreover, they are - 
apt to be misled by an incorrect connection of 
happenings as cause and effect, in the light of 
which the party in office appears to blame for 
anything that disturbs the regularity of life, 
whether it be a rainy summer or a rise in prices. 
There is, further, an instinctive desire f oF change 
which gradually undermines the credit of a 
government with those who are not bound to 
it by feelings of allegiance. Accordingly, from 
the day on which a ministry takes office a muti- 
nous spirit begins to show itself amongst such of 
its supporters as are not pledged to it by family 
habit or by sentimental loyalty ; and these 
people, when a general election comes round, are 
ready to lay hold of any handle against it, unless 
their affections have been reattached by definite 
promises of personal advantage or by such a 
passionate interest as is excited by any question 
of national prestige. It follows then, that the com- 
plexion of the British Government is determined 
by the least intelligent of British citizens. No 
system could be worse in theory. Yet in practice 
it works passably well. 

§ 

It is, then, a complicated assortment of 
impulses which determines the voting of a par- 
liamentary constituency. There is the respect 


HOPEFUL POSSIBILITIES 327 


which men feel for their political leaders, the 
impulse of emulation, the desire for change, the 
hope of personal advantage, and, with much 
feebler influence, some aspiration for the public 
good. The balance of these forces may be en- 
tirely overset by such a passionate interest in 
national credit as was aroused, for instance, 
during the South African War. To the mind of 
a philosophical theorist the only one of these 
impulses which can worthily determine the course 
of government is that of provident anxiety for 
the public welfare. If he finds that this is of no 
great account amongst the mass of the voters, he 
may console himself with the reflection that it 
has. generally weighed heavily with the leaders 
of both parties. They have often been exceedingly 
wrong in their views — indeed, if there be such a 
thing as a right decision, one of the two parties 
must be wrong in cases where their opinions are 
diametrically opposite. But they have as a rule 
meant well for the State, and have not permitted 
their private ambitions to eclipse altogether the 
good of the public ; and this has enabled the 
party system to bring forth fruit out of intrinsic 
barrenness. 

So long, however, as democracy is only a 
means for enlisting in politics the combativeness, 
jealousy, vanity or selfishness of the public, it 
will give us but little of the fruit which it is 
capable of bearing. The chief of its potential 
merits is that it enables the community to profit 
by the energy and talents of such of its members 
as have a provident and kindly interest in the 
fortunes of their fellow-citizens. So far, it enlists 
these capacities very imperfectly indeed. Men 
of this stamp are, and probably will always be, 
an inconsiderable proportion of the electorate, 
although they are increasing in numbers and in 


3^8 


MODERN POLITICS 


signs of activity. Few of them can gain entry to 
Parliament : and there are comparatively few 
members of Parliament who share their know- 
ledge and enthusiasm. Nor are their views 
satisfactorily represented in parliamentary dis- 
cussions. One of the greatest evils of the party 
system is that it closes the lips of those who, while 
generally supporting the ministry in office, would 
like to criticize measures which have been drafted 
in the privacy of the Cabinet : they must vote 
for them in tongue-tied silence. The Press does 
not offer an adequate outlet for discussion, in as 
much as most newspapers are controlled by in- 
terests that are solidly committed to one party 
or the other. These enthusiasts can, then, only 
express themselves by the formation of societies 
with active propagandas, which, if successful, may 
compel the attention of the Government. The 
many-sidedness and activity of these private 
reformers may be inferred from the astonishingly 
large number of societies that are on foot, with 
optimistic programmes of the utmost diversity — 
from the feeding of school children to the pre- 
servation of open spaces, from the closing down 
of the liquor trade to the stopping of vaccination. 
Their aims are sometimes admirable, sometimes 
absurd ; but their upspringing is a genuine sign 
of democratic vitality : they are unknown in 
countries where the government is democratic 
only in name. There is no place for them in the 
party system. By vigorous canvassing they may 
induce a Cabinet to adopt an idea. But their 
influence is from outside : it is rather that of an 
advocate than an adviser. 

We may, however, assume with some reason that 
they may gain a more direct influence in political 
councils. If, as appears probable, we may read our 
own future in the political conditions at which the 
United States, untrammelled by precedent, have 


PHILANTHROPIC PROPAGANDA 


already arrived, we may conclude that eventu- 
ally the legislative programme of each party, 
or group, will be settled more or less definitely 
in unofficial convention, and that it will not 
be open to political leaders to spring upon the 
country measures which have been designed in 
the secrecy of the Cabinet. When they enter 
upon office the adopted programme will impera- 
tively guide and limit their activities. Such a 
. system would give infinitely more importance to 
philanthropic societies than they enjoy at present. 
They would have access to the preliminary 
conventions of groups or parties ; they could 
urge their views at moments when politicians 
were concerned, not with polemic activity or 
destructive criticism, but with the construction 
of a programme that would satisfy their con- 
stituents, and might not infrequently be persuaded 
to add 1 a new banner to their equipment of poli- 
tical emblems. So assisted, enthusiastic idealists 
may march to triumph in alliance with interests 
that have no organic connection with their own. 

This, it may be urged, is not a pleasing pros- 
pect : it threatens us with the eccentricities of a 
government by faddists. But we may condemn 
as a fad a most useful ideal until we appreciate the 
full scope of its importance. What aim can a 
State possess that is finer or more fruitful than 
to promote the healthfulness, intelligence, and 
morality of the coming generation ? In the 
United States this is a dominating political cult, 
to which all vested interests must pay obeisance. 
It ordains the ruthless elimination of city slums, 
and the careful purification of popular enter- 
tainments. Two generations ago it would have 
seemed to English statesmen the vision of a 
sentimental dream. In these days it has its 

1 So the Labour Party has adopted the cries of " Votes for 
Women " and " Justice for India." 


330 


MODERN POLITICS 


votaries, needless to say, in the British Parlia- 
ment. But it is a persuasive not an imperative 
force, and is often excluded from the balanced 
considerations of practical politics. 

With the increasing influence of unofficial 
propaganda the status of politicians must in- 
evitably decline. They will no longer be figured as 
the anointed champions of the public ; they will 
be its salaried employees. Across the Atlantic 
this transformation is almost completed : with 
us it has begun. In these circumstances the 
public will not expect great nicety of manners in 
its representatives, or be too curious as to the 
sincerity of their convictions, so long as they 
faithfully carry out its mandates. It may not 
be greatly scandalized if they add indirectly" to 
their emoluments. In the Houses of Represen- 
tatives at Washington and Ottawa the standard 
of morality is lower than in the House of Commons. 
We need not, however, assume that this laxity 
of conduct is inevitable. It is hardly to be ob- 
served in Australia and New Zealand. 

But philanthropy is cold stuff to set before the 
electorate : at present the issues which it raises 
would not tempt the great majority of us to walk 
to the polling station. If it is to awaken any 
enthusiasm it must be served up with party rivalry 
to season it. Is it, however, of profit to the State 
that political issues should be dressed up in 
meretricious colours in order that men who feel 
no real interest in public affairs should be induced 
to take a hand in them ? Our true concern is only 
with the electors who wish for improvement, and 
will take trouble to secure it, and these need no 
party allurements to record their votes. We need 
not fear that their efforts will be fruitless. The 
comforts and conveniences which we owe to Town 
and County Councils have been elaborated by 
energies, that, outside London, have not been 


POLITICS CHANGED BY CHANGING IMPULSES 331 


spurred by party rivalry. We refer, somewhat 
slightingly, to the efforts of these bodies as merely 
concerned with local government. But there are 
few Acts of Parliament which affect our lives 
more nearly than do their multitudinous activi- 
ties. Their proceedings, it will be said, need no 
party furbishing to attract attention because they 
lie so near to the people's interests. This is true. 
Our interest in public affairs depends upon the 
closeness of our concern with them. This is 
assuredly a good argument for the multiplication 
of parliaments. Issues which affect forty -five 
millions of people are stretched too widely to be 
pointed. 

§ . 

In fhS drama of political development the 
action has been sustained by a changing company 
of impulses, each of which, strengthened by indul- 
gence, has become, in its turn, a habit of mind or 
leading idea. Reverence, paid to a king, a priest- 
hood, or an aristocracy, is the primordial feeling 
which consolidates a State. It is a conservative, 
not a vivifying, force and tends to stereotype not 
only the politics but the usages and ideas of those 
who are affected by it. The individualistic 
impulse of self-interest may compete with it ; and, 
when reverential feelings are not naturally very 
strong, may gradually undermine the allegiance 
of the more intelligent and well-to-do classes, 
prompting them to struggle for the establishment 
of representative institutions which may secure 
them from the caprices of despotic authority. 
By appeals to self-respect, or to vanity, the masses 
are led to assert their individuality : so democracy 
is ushered on to the stage, and may hope to 
remain there in cases where the impulse of 
deference 1 to the majority is naturally so strong as 

1 This impulse may be cultivated by the young — at all events by 
those of Anglo-Saxon parentage. Upon this fact are based some 
novel departures in Reformatory organization, 


332 


MODERN POLITICS 


to be educated into an ideal of political life. But 
the impulses which urged the masses to demand 
the privilege of voting do not effectively incite 
them to exercise it. Interest may be stimulated 
by selfishness ; but, so far, the emulative spirit, 
evoked by the antagonism of political parties, has 
been the most effective agency for bringing voters 
to the polls. Of recent years a new impulse has 
come into the drama — that of a provident desire 
for human benefit. As yet it has secured but a „ 
subordinate part ; but the future of civic develop- 
ment depends upon its success in winning a place 
in the foreground. 

In these scenes of transformation what have 
been the forces which have driven a dominant 
impulse into retirement and brought another to 
the front in its place ? Are we to attribute these 
changes to the pressure of circumstances ? Has 
monarchy been subverted, for instance, by ex- 
perience of the injustice of kings, or of the failure 
of heredity to transmit kingly qualities ? This 
we may hardly affirm, seeing that in many parts 
of the world monarchy still commands the whole- 
hearted allegiance of intelligent men. Circum- 
stances, beyond a doubt, contribute to change : 
such are the increasing density of population, the 
accumulation of wealth and of knowledge, the 
extension of commerce, of manufacture and of 
travel. But their bearings must be appreciated 
to become effective, and, for this, certain peculari- 
ties of disposition are needed, which are not 
inherent in all men. Reform is impossible unless 
there is a disposition towards change : freedom 
is withered if the glow of reverence remains un- 
dimmed : democracy cannot survive *> unless 
fostered by ingrained notions of deference to the 
majority : popular aspirations are nerveless unless 
a growing self-consciousness supports them. When 
these qualities are possessed by a people, and 


POLITICS AND RACIAL CHARACTER 333 


circumstances call for their exercise, their develop- 
ment still awaits the words and examples of 
forceful leaders. If reformers can be suppressed, 
the impulses to which they appeal will remain 
undeveloped. If they are permitted liberty of 
action, they may conjure dormant impulses into 
habits of mind, or ideals, which will profoundly 
affect the outlook and behaviour of their followers. 
Thus Rousseau's doctrine of the equality of man- 
kind found responsive echoes in the individualistic 
impulses, and, reinforced by convictions of in- 
justice and suffering, it produced a new ideal 
which overpowered traditional notions of rever- 
ence and loyalty. In the East, where these 
notions are radically stronger, his creed would 
have"*oe^n scouted as abhorrent to common sense. 
In France its effect was shortlived, and the people 
soon realized that they were unable to obey 
a government which they could not admire. 
Amongst Anglo-Saxons convictions of equality 
have taken deeper root, although cultivated with 
less logical fervour. We may conclude that the 
evolution of political life is conditioned, with 
much strictness, by racial character. 

We must not, however, ignore the power of the 
imitative impulse. This may lead nations to copy 
the institutions of other nations whom they 
admire ; but, ii we look below the surface of 
their politics, we shall find that, unless their 
imitation is supported by other impulses, their 
government abounds with inconsistencies, and is of 
of such imperfect stability as to be shaken by trifles. 

It is to be added that the exchanging of one 
impulse for another as the basis of government 
— the substitution of one ideal for another — must 
be a gradual process, attended with much mental 
uncertainty, unrest, 1 and it may be, with such a 

1 Such as is now disturbing India, where the impulse of 
veneration has begun to fail as a motive for submission to British 
authority. 


334 


MODERN POLITICS 


moral decline as was suffered by England during 
the eighteenth century, and by Europe when it 
was shifting its allegiance from the Church of 
Rome to national sovereigns. In this fact we 
may find some explanation of the rising and falling 
tides which history discloses in the fortunes of 
nations. 

§ 

The history of politics is an epitome of the 
history of man. He is launched upon the sea of 
life along with all other living creatures. Their 
barks are fitted with sails and equipped with 
rudders, so set as to carry them undeviatingly 
across to the opposite coast. But man is cast 
adrift in a rudderless boat, without mast o^sgjls. 
He painfully collects pieces of drift woodr awk- 
wardly fashions oars for himself, and slowly 
progresses with uncertain course, aware that he 
can obtain guidance from the stars, but ignorant 
of the stars which can properly direct him. He 
learns through the perils of storms and shipwrecks 
some points of the heavens which should draw his 
attention, and boldly directs his prow towards the 
open sea. The hope of the Promised Land is 
before him. He may never arrive ; but in his 
wanderings he passes amongst such isles of en- 
chantment as other living creatures may not 
behold. He may be tempted by the Sirens, and 
linger with Calypso : he may fall a prisoner in the 
hands of the Cyclops : he may be blown past 
Scylla in the terror of death : he may even draw 
near that mysterious shore to which the spirits of 
his dead have been transported. But each new 
adventure teaches him fresh lessons in what to 
avoid, and strengthens his heart against ^future 
perils. 


INDEX 


Action — Ideo-motor, 55, 56, 95, 114, 
130. 

Instinctive, n-13, 54, 56, 58, 63, 
66, 68, 70, 94-8, 164, 230. 

Reflex, 17, 55, 65, 66. 
Acquired peculiarities, Heritableness 

. ? f . ? 36, 37, 213-9. 
Acquisitiveness, 81, 256, 269, 294. 
Admiration, 78. 
Adornment, 84, 264, 265. 
-Advertisements, 125, 299, 300. 
^Esthetic impulses, 84-6, 88, 185, 237. 
Affection, 84, 277. 
Age, Respect for, 78, 274. 
Agriculture, 210, 259-61. 
Ambition, 77. 
Anger, 77. _ ^ 
Anomalies — of instinct, 89. 

in-^Lif^s functioning, 20-2, 167. 
Approbation, Ijesire for, 78. 
Aptitudes, 97, 9S, 164, 251. 
Aristocracy — Fortunes of, 313-4, 318, 
319. 

Origin of, 312. 
Art, Origin of, 84-6, 237, 243, 244. 

Baltic civilization, 269-71. 

traits, 185, 189. 
Beauty, Sense of, 84. 
Behaviour, Inconsistencies of, 3, 90-3. 
Birth-rate and culture, 248, 249. 

and environment, 212, 213, 225, 
226. 
Blushes, 74. 
Brotherhood, 280. 

Causation — Conception of, 99, 100, 
140, 143-6, 148, 149, 168-70, 
232-6. 

Erroneous ideas of, 143-6, 168, 
230,233.234. 
Celibacy, 7, 87, 237. 
Cell-sympathy, 130, 131. 
Change, 24-45. 

of mood, 24, 25, 4-1-5. 
of physical constitution, 25, 26. 
o>f social constitution, 26-9. 
of specks, 29-41. 
Changefulness — A human impulse, 24, 
25, 41-5, 186, 238-41, 325, 326. 
A vital impulse, 18, 34, 35. 
affecting culture, 211, 212. 
deadened by habit, 116-8, 201, 

202, 238, 239. 
Origin of evolution, 26-9, 35, 163, 
190. 


Character, Innate, 115, 179-89, 198, 
202, 221-4, 246-8, 292. 
in politics, 312, 313, 314, 316, 

3 22 > 333- 
modified by environment, 198-202, 
221-4. 

unmodified by culture, 115, 246-8, 
251, 292. 
Charity, 83, 84, 286. 
Chastity, 86. 

Cheapness, Effect of, 297-9, 301. 
Chivalry, 188. 

Choice — by free-will, 55, 152, 155. 
Christian conversion, 183, 248. 

ideals, 7, 175, 176, 245, 288. 
Climate, Effect of, 221-3. 
Colour, Protective and attractive, 34, 

35, 126, 169. 
Commerce, 267, 268, 296. 

Foreign, 300-3. 
Complexion, 219, 220. 
Comradeship, 279. 
Conception, 137, 138. 
Conscience — Origin, 146. 
Consciousness, 128-49. 

Errors resulting from, 141-6. 

Effect upon action, 130, 133, 136, 
139. 

Effect upon impulses, 134,. 139, 
140. 

Effect upon reason, 137, 140, 164, 
165. 

focussed by language, 138, 139. 

Origin, 13,' 14, 58-60, 128, 131. 

Unhappiness caused by, 146-9. 
Constructiveness, 81, 255, 256, 263. 
Courage, 86, 91. 

Credit — Effect upon industry, 293, 
297. 

Cruelty, 82, 83, 187, 237, 273, 286. 
Culture, 229-52. 

and character, 246-8. 

and language, 230-1. 

and imitation, 238-43, 273. 

and impulse, 236, 237, 243. 

and fertility, 248-52. 

and reason, 232-6. 

and writing, 231, 232. 

Effect of circumstances upon, 244. 
Curiosity, 77. 

Dancing, 85, 88, 237. 
Darwinism, 31-4, 38. 
Death, 19, 162. 
Deference, 78. 

to a majority, 318, 332. 

5 


336 


INDEX 


Democracy — Actualities of, 319-27. 
Its possibilities, 327-31. 
.Origin, 315, 31S. 
Design, Evidence of, 3S, 39, 62, 75, 

76, 163, 168-70. 
Despair, 81, in. 
Determinism, 15, 16, 151-5. 
Directive instinct, 11, 12, 56-8, 66, 67, 
§4-7, 164, 230. 
in internal organs, 12, 56, 95, 97, 
164. 

Survival in aptitudes, 97, 98. 
Domestication of animals, 83, 258, 259. 
Dramatic art — Origin, 237. 
Dreams, 105. 
Dress — Fashion in, 240. 

Origin, 84, 264, 265. 
Drunkenness, Pleasure of, 45. 
Duality of Life's impulses, 170, 173-6. 

Economics, Modern, 293-3 ic. 
Ecstasy, 86. 

Education — Effects of, 172, 173, 287, 
288. 

Form of imitation, 123, 242. 
Emotions — Arousing of, 60, 69, 70. 

Evidence of impulses, 69-71, 164. 

Expression of. 73, 74. 

pleasurable and painful, 60-2. 
Emulation, 77, 311, 320-5, 330. 
Empire for trade, 283. 
Employment, 296, 297. 
Environment, 205-28. 

and character, 206, 221-4. 

and fertility, 212, 213, 224-6. 

and habits, 206, 207-12, 223, 224, 
244. 

and individuals, 206-13. 

and physical development, rqo, 

206, 207, 212-21, 223. 
and the race, 189, 190,* 213-28. 
Change of in evolution, 22, 30. 
Effect in spreading new species, 

39-4°. 

Man's antagonism to, 6, 7. 

stimulates variation, 35, 37, 163, 
214, 217, 218. 
Ethical impulses, 86-8, 185, 237. 
Eugenics, 252. 

Evolution — and environment, 37, 163, 

190, 214, 217, 218. 
and habits,^ 120-3, 163, 246-8. 
and imitation, 39-41, 126, 127, 

163. 

Course of, 29-41. 
Design in, 38, 39, 62, 75, 76, 
168-70. 

of impulses, 58, 163, 221-4. 
proves Life's originality, 22, 23, 34 


Evolution— Result of changefulness, 

.26-9, 35 163, 190. 
Experience — essential for inference, 
101. 

Family, Cult of, 235. 
Family life, Origin, 276-8. 
Fashions — due to sympathy, 242, 243. 
Fear, 77. 

Feeling — An attribute of Life, 58-60. 
Fertility and culture, 248-52. 

and environment, 212, 213, 225, 
226. 

Filial regression, Law of, 191. 
Fire, Domestication of, 257. 
Fetishism, 144, 172, 236. 
Fluctuations, Darwinic, 31. 
Food — Effect upon race, 214, 215, 221. 
Foresight, 80. 

Free-will — its existence, 15, 16, 150-5. 
Future, Conception of, 80. 

Gambling, Pleasure in, 4^ ^ 
Games, Pleasure in, 4 J. 
Generosity, 84. 

Genius, Men of, 79, 154, 172, 238, 252. 
Gratitude, 84. 

Greeks, Northern blood in, 198-200. 

Habit, 16, 104, 1 13-23. 

A pleasurable impulse, 116, 117. 
Arepetitiveinfluence,i6, 104, 113. 
contrasted with instinct, 119, 120, 

128, 164, 165, 258. 
how acquired, 124, 125, 156. 
influenced by pleasure and pain, 

62,71,115. 
Its effects upon behaviour, 43, 

1 14-6, 118, 122, 123, 229, 246, 

247. 

Its effects upon impulses, 70, 114, 

115, 118, 119, 165-7, I?', 173, 

246, 247, 292, 333. 
Its tyranny, 117-8, 239. 
Origin of instincts, 120-3, 163. 
Root of culture, 229, 246, 292. 
Habits of mind (ideals), 114, 117, 175, 

288,291,292,333. 
Happiness and unhappiness, 71, 72, 

1 67. 

expressions of, 73, 74. * 
Happiness and poverty, ^90, 291. 
Hate, 77, 84. 
Helotage, 282. 

Heredity (acquired characters), 36, 37, 

213-9. 
Honesty, 86. 
Hope, 81, in. 
Hunger and thirst, 76. 


INDEX 


337 


Hunting impulse, 76. 
Hypnotism, 59-60, 13 1-3. 

Ideals, 117, 175, 245,279. 

Material, 271, 272. 
Ideas, New, 238, 239. 
Ideo-motor action, 55, 56, 95, 1 14, 130. 
Imagination, 108- 1 1 . 
Imitation, 104, 123-7. 

Effect in spreading new species, 
39-41, 126, 127, 163. 

Effect upon impulses, 245. 

in politics, 333. 
^ Its stimuli, 125. 

Stimulus to action, 68. 

spreads culture, 239-46, 273, 292. 

Origin, 16, 104. 

Origin of habits, 124. 
Impulses — Antagonism of, 7, 90, 93, 

94, 173, 174- 
Anomalies of, 88, 89. 
^Esihetic, 84-6, 88, 185, 237. 
and Philosophy, 93, 94. 
aroused by imitation, 68. 

by recollections, 18, 63, 64. 

by sensations, 17, 54-6,63,68, 

6 9' . 

periodically, 68, 69. 
Cruel, 82, 83, 187, 273, 286. 
Effect upon culture, 236, 237, 

241-4. 
Ethical, 86-8, 185, 237. 
in politics, 311, 320, 331-4. 
Individualistic, 76,77,279, 282-3. 
influencing reason, 140, 236, 237, 

244. 

Kindly, 83, 84, 285-7, 3° 8 , 3°9- 

Origin of action, 63-6. 

Origin of organs and features, 
161-2, 188. 

Provident, 80, 81, 88, 255, 294. 

Reproductive, 79, 80, 255, 274-8. 

Social, 77-9, 278-82, 318. 
Impulsive instincts, 13,55, 65-7, 76-92. 
Individualistic impulses, 76, 77, 279, 
282-3. 

Effect upon society, 282-3. 
Industrial evolution — Impulses assist- 
ing, 294, 295. 

Historv, 298-300. 
Industrial impulse — needs reinforce- 
ment, 294, 295,310. 
Inference, 99-103, 164, 165. 

in adjusting sensations, 51. 
Infertility — Racial effect, 196". 
Ingenuity, 81. 
Injustice, 148, 149. 
Insanity, 108, 147. 
Instincts, 11-13, 64-103. 


Instincts — Antagonism of, 7, 90, 93, 

94,173^74- 
Directive, 8-12, 56-8, 66, 164. 

over internal organs, 56, 95. 
Impulsive, 12, 13, 55, 65-7, 76-92, 
164, 165. 
Intoxication, Pleasure of, 45. 
Introspection, 129, 130, 132-6, 164. 
Inventions, 139, 154, 237, 238. 
Investments, Foreign, 302. 

Jealousy, 77, 84, 273. 
Justice, 86, 148, 149. 

Kindness, 83, 84, 135, 147, 273, 285-7, 

308, 309. 
Kingship, Fortunes of, 312-5. 

Origin, 274, 281, 312. 
Knowledge, in, 172. 

Language, 78, 103. 138, 139, 230, 231. 
Laughter, 44, 73. 

Libertv, Extension of, 170, 171, 272, 
'284, 285. 

Meaning of, 284, 285. 
Life — its anomalies, 20-2. 

its attributes, 9-19. 

its distinction from Matter, 16, 
20-3, 154, 167, 174, 175. 

its energy, 9^ 

its imperceptibility, 8. 

its purposes, 22. 
Litigation, Pleasure in, 44, 45. 
Love — Maternal, 79, 277. 

Romantic, 79, 80. 

Sexual, 79, 80. 
Loyalty, 239, 241, 242, 272, 281. 
Ludicrous, Pleasure of, 24, 43, 44. 
Lust, 79, 8o, 187, 220. 

Machines, Effect of, 263, 264, 299. 
Magic, 144, 172, 236. 
Marriage — Age, 220^249, 250. 

checks eccentricity, 191, 192, 252. 

consolidates racial traits, 193. 

Origin, 262, 274-6. 
Material progress, 255-273. 
Maternal love, 79, 277. 
Matriarchate, 275, 276. 
Matter — antagonistic to Life, 16, 20-3, 

154, 167, 174, 175- 
Mediterranean traits, 185-9. 
Memories — Stimuli to action, 63, 64, 

67, 68. 
Memory, 104-113. 

and personality, 105, ro6. 

by contiguity and association, 
107, 108. 

in sensory adjustment, 52, 53. 


338 


INDEX 


Memory, Subconscious, 105-7, no. 

Origin, 16, 52, 53. 
Mendehsm, 28, 33, 34, 38, 192. 
Mercy, 84. 

Migration — Aryans into India, 197, 
202. 

Effect upon race, 194-6. 

Northern into Mediterranean, 43, 
198-202. 

Southern to North, 202, 203. 

spreads culture, 268. 
Migratory impulse, 42, 43. 
Mimicry, 41. 

Protective, 34, 35, 126, 169. 
Monarchy — Fortunes of, 312-5. 

Origin, 274, 281, 312. 
Money, 294-296. 
Monogamy, 277, 278. 
Morality, Origin, 86-8, 236, 238. 
Music, 85, 237. 

Mutations — of impulse, 58, 163, 223, 
224, 258. 
Physical, 3 1, 37, 58, 163, 189,217, 
218, 221. 

Nationality, Ideas of, 171, 282. 
Natural selection, 32, 35, 169, 214. 
Nitrogen — Assimilation from air, ro, 
261. 

Connection with Life, 10, 20. 

Obedience, 78. 
Oratory, 85. 

Parliaments — Origin, 318, 319. 
Patience, 86. 

Patriarchate — Origin, 275, 276. 
Patriotism, 281, 323. 
Party spirit. 320-5. 
Perception, 51, 52. 

Periodicity — Stimulus to Action, 68, 

69, 166. 
Personality, 135, 136. 
Philanthropy, 134, 285-7, 324, 327-31. 
Playfulness, 77. 

Pleasure and pain, 60-2, 71, 72, 115, 
166, 167. 

Expressions of, 73, 74. 

form habits, 62, 72, 115. 

not original stimuli, 62, 72. 
Political evolution, 331-4. 
Politicians — Influence of, 316-8, 327, 

333- 
Status of, 330. 
Politics — Impulses affecting, 311, 320, 

326,327,331-4. 
Influence of deference to majority, 

318,332. 
Influence of imitation, 333. 


Politics — Influen ce of leaders, 311,316. 

317,320,333. 
Influence of race, 312, 313, 314, 

3i6, 33 2 , 333- 
Influence of reverence, 312, 324, 

325. 

Modern, 31 1-24. 

Provident impulse in, 324, 327-31. 

Self-interest in, 321, 322. 

The party pendulum, 325, 326. 
Polyandry, 274. 
Polygamy l 236, 243. 
Poverty — its compensations, 291. 

its causes, 288-90, 306-8. 

its extent, 289-91. 
Private property — Origin, 261, 262, 
274. 

Properties — Discernment of, 99, 100, 

103, 137, 138. 
Practical effect of discerning, 130. 
Protective mimicry and colouring, 34, 
a' 35, 126, 169. 
prostration, 85, 237. - <• 

rotoplasm, 20, 161. 
Puberty, Age of, 187, 220. 
Pugnacity, 77. 
Purity, 86. ' 

Race, 179-204. 

Racial traits — affected by environ- 
ment, 189, 190, 206, 219-24. 
Baltic and Mediterranean, 185-9, 

226-8. 
Eastern, 188, 189. 
Illustrations of, 181, 183-9. 
Persistence of, 180-2, 190, 226-8. 
Reason, 99-103, 164. 

Assisted by consciousness, 137, 

138. 

Erroneous, 100, 141-6, 171, 172, 
230-6, 244. m 

influenced by impulses, 236, 237. 
Recollections, Direct, in. 

Symbolic, in, 112. 
Reflex action, 17, 55, 65, 66. 
Reformers — their influence, 79, 154, 

172, 252,284, 2S5, 292, 333. 
Religion — early developments, 79, 
141-6, 171, 172, 208, 233-7. 

m politics, 313, 314* 

its ideals, 174-6. 

Social effect, 281. 
Reproduction, Sexual, 21, 26-9. 
Reproductive impulses, 79, 80. 

Social effect, 274-8. 
Revengefulness, 77, 84. 
Reverence, 78, 241, 242. 

in politics, 312, 313, 324, 325, 331. 

promotes culture, 241. 


INDEX 


339 


Riches — how acquired, 306-9. 
Roman Empire — Cause of fall, 201, 
202. 

Romans — Northern blood, 198, 200, 
201. 

Romantic love, 80, 188. 

Secretiveness, 77. 
Self-abandoning impulses, 84-6. 
Self-abandonment — A relief, 86, 148. 
Self-conceit, 77. 

Self-consciousness, 129, 132-6, 186. 

its growing influence, 171, 173, 
240, 292, 333. 
-> Selfish impulses, 76, 77. 

Social effect, 282-3. 
Selfishness, 77, 279. 
Self-preservation, 76. 
Self-restraining impulses, 86-9. 
Senates — Origin, 312. 
Sensation, 46-62. 

and perception, 51, 52, 112. 

Instinctive reaction to, 17, 18, 54, 

.55* * 

without organs, 49, 161, 162. 

Sensations, Fallibility of, 8, 17, 50, 168. 

of ourselves, 53. 
Senses, 47. 

Sensory impressions — Stimuli to ac- 
tion, 67, 68. 
Sensory organs, 48, 49. 
Service — Status of, 283. 
Sexual generation, 26-29, 192, 193. 

instincts, 79, 80, 187, 188, 197, 
200, 271. 

reproduction, 26-29. 
anomalies in, 21, 28. 

selection, 32, 35, 169. 
Singing, 85. 
Slavery, 236, 243, 282. 
Social impulses, 77-79, 278-82, 318. 

focussed by loyalty, 281. 
by propinquity, 278-81. 
by religion, 28 1. 
Social institutions — Origin, 274-83. 
Social progress, 274-92. 
Socialism, 309, 310. 
Soul, Idea of, 142, 143. 
Species — newly arisen, 41. 

Origin of, 31-7, 163, 217. 

Spread q£-new, 37-41, 126, 127. 
Spontaneity. 150-5. 

in the lower animals, 158-60. 

limited to choice, 155, 156. 

Rudiments of, 14, 15, 158-60. 

Origin of, 157, 158. 
Sports, 31, 37, 58, 217, 189, 258. 


Subconsciousness, 60, 105, 129. 
Suffrage — Exercise of, 319, 32c. 

Grant of, 318. 

Women's, 319. 
Suggestion, 150-5. 
Symbols, 53, 112, 138, 168. 
Sympathy, 78, 242, 243. 

Stimuli of, 279-82. 

Talent, Men of, 98, 251. 

Tears, 75. 

Telepathy, 131. 

Temptation, 92, 155, 156, 165. 

Tools, Invention of, 139, 263, 264. 

Trade, Foreign, 300-3. 

spreads culture, 267, 268. 

Origin, 243. 

Retail, 305. 
Truth, 86. 

Unemployment, 289, 296, 297. 
Unhappiness, 71, 72, 146-9. 
Unselfishness, 79. 
Utilitarianism, 94. 

Utility, in evolution, 34, 3 5, 75, 76, 1 26. 
Vanity, 77. 

Variations, in character, 58, 163, 223, 
224, 258. 

Physical, 31,37, 58, 163, 189, 217, 
218-21. 
Visualization, in, 233, 234. 
Volition, 150-60, 165. 

Choice of impulses, 155-7. 

Choice of methods, 155. 

in lower animals, 158-60. 

its rudiments, 13-15, 157-60. 

limited to choice, 155, 156. 

War — Effect upon race, 194-6. 

for trade, 283. 

Origin of kingship, 281. 

Origin of marriage and property, 
262, 275. 

spreads culture, 243, 268. 
Wealth — defined, 293. 

distribution of, 303-9. 

Impulses producing, 297. 

Respect for, 272. 

spreads culture, 272. 
Wealth-stream, 296, 297, 306-9. 

Swelling of, 296-303. 
Will, 150-60. 

its reinforcement, 156, 157. 

the origin of Conscience, 146. 
Woman, Status of, 187, 188, 197, 199, 

200, 220, 271, 273, 276. 
Worship — Its beginnings, 235, 236. 
Writing, 231, 232, 265-7. 


GARDEN CITY PRESS LIMITED, PRINTERS, LETCH WORTH. 


