OU_1 58702 > 

co 



OSMANU UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 

al)No /4/>3 "/^ II. ^ Accession No. / 5 
Author X3^A^ /M/'. 



Tide / A K uMO1 I \ 




\f * / j\ m 

This book should be returned on or befe ttfe date last marked b 



fe date last marked below. 



LOGIC 

BERNARD BOSANQUET 



HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 

PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 

LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK 

TORONTO AND MELBOURNE 



LOGIC 

OR THE MORPHOLOGY OF 
KNOWLEDGE 



BY 



BERNARD BOSANQUET 

M.A., LL.D., D.C.L.; FELLOW OF THE BRITISH ACADEMY 



IN TWO VOLUMES: VOL. II 



SECOND EDITION 



OXFORD 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
1911 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
BOOK II. INFERENCE 

CHAPTER I 

THH NATURE OF INFERENCE 

PAGE 

1. The Ksseiice of Inference ...... I 

2. Some Accidents of Inference ...-- 4 

i. Mental transition in Time ..... 4 

II. Discovery or novelty ..-** 
in. Omission of relevant matter . .... 8 
iv. Selection, and omiss%gy>f ^jyj|w^p' matter ? . . 12 

v. Three terms ? . . . .12 

3. The lower limit of Inference . . . - - *4 

i. The reproduction of Ideas . . - - *4 

n. General necessity of Judgment . . *5 

in. Specific necessity of Judgment . . . .17 

iv The true immediate Inferences . . - 19 

a. Comparison . - 1 9 

0. Abstraction ....... 20 

7. Recognition . . . * .22 

. Discrimination, etc. ...- 24 

t. Inferential character of above processes . . 25 

f. Comparative Science . . - * .25 

4. Species of Inference which have been erroneously identified with 

its principle ......-- 27 

i. Inference from particulars to particulars ... 27 

11. Subsumption .,..- 2 ^ 

III. Calculation and equation ..... 29 

u. Calculation proper ....- 3 

6. The Equational Logic . - - 3 1 
iv. Construction . . - - - - 33 

. Physical ....-- 34 

(i. Imaginative . . . - - - -35 

7. Intellectual, 111 geometry and mechanics . . 36 
5. Intellectual, without limitation to geometry and 

mechanics ....-- 37 

Scheme ot types ol Inference ...... 39 

APPKNDIX ON SYMLJOLIC I^OGIC 
l*he contrast of Formal or Mathematical Logic (Russell) with 

Philosophical Logic .....- 4O 

i. The point of divergence between the two ... 40 
a. As indicated above in this work (taking Quantity 

as characteristic of Mathematics) ... 40 
H. Taking pure Mathematics as^ Formal Logic (as 

study of implications) . 42 



vi Table of Contents 

PAGE 

The contrast of Formal or Mathematical Logic etc. (continued) 

2. Precise nature of the divergence .... * 45 

Contrast of Modes of Formal Deduction with ideal of 

Logical Stability. . . . . . -45 

a. Meaning of Logical Stability ... 45 
#. Formal Logic cares more for forms of Deduction 46 



CHAPTER II 

ENUMERATIVE INDUCTION AND MATHEMATICAL REASONING 

1. Enumerative Induction . . . . . . 50 

a. Syllogism in fig. 3 . . . . -5 

j9. Divergent tendencies . . . . .52 

7. The Individual Judgment in Induction Lotze . 53 

2. Mathematical Reasoning . . . . . . 55 

i. Number and Analogy Divergence . . -55 

a. Complete Enumeration as false Ideal. Syllogism 

and Induction . . . . . -55 

0. Enumeration as Arithmetical computation . 58 

7. Calculation compared with argument . . 60 

11. Applications of Calculation ..... 62 

o. Substitutive Inference ..... 62 

(#. Apprehension of Connections in Space and Time) 64 
7. Calculation applied to Geometrical Reasoning. The 

Constitutive Equation ..... 68 

5. Calculation applied to disparates. Proportion . 73 

(1) Homogeneous Terms . . . - 73 

(2) ' a and a ' series ..... 74 
. Proportion, Analogy, and the Hypothetical Judg- 
ment ........ 77 

C. Consciousness and Conservation of energy . . 79 
iii. The mechanical aspect of Knowledge . . .81 



CHAPTER III 

ANALOGY 

1. Analogy and Enumerative Induction. Examples . . 86 

2. Logical criticism of the Analogical argument ... 90 

i. Fig. 2. Undistributed middle, Import of this defect 90 

ii. Real value of Analogical argument . . , . 92 

iii. No ratio of Identities to Differences . . .100 

iv. Concurrent Analogies. Negative confirmation . .104 

v. Divergent tendencies in Analogy .... 107 



Table of Contents vii 



CHAPTER IV 
SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION BY PERCEPTIVE ANALYSIS 

PAGE 

1. Negative Inference . . . . . . . .109 

i. Its nature and conditions . . . . .109 

ii. No conclusion from two negatives . . . .112 

iii. The negative instance . . . . . .115 

2. Scientific Induction . . . . . . . .117 

i. Induction and other Inference . . . 117 

ii. Induction as Perceptive Analysis . . . .122 

a. Symbolic expression of the problem . . 122 

j3. Establishment of ordinary Hypothetical Judgment 124 

y. Establishment of reciprocal Hypothetical Judgment 127 

fi. Conversion or Generalisation . . . .129 

iii. Logical character of Perceptive Induction . * . 131 

a. Its essence as Inference . . . . .132 

. Theoretical purpose of representation by symbols 134 

y. Part played by number of instances . .134 

(1) In Perceptive Analysis proper . . 135 

(2) In assigning known effects to classes of un- 

known conditions . . . . 135 

iv. Observation and Experiment . . . . .141 

a. Natural Experiment . . . . .141 

0. Observation with accurate instruments . . 142 

y. Experiment expressed in logical symbols . .143 

5. Experiment with the Siren analysed . .147 

CHAPTER V 
SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION BY HYPOTHESIS. GENERALISATION 

1. Hypothesis and Postulate . . . . . .151 

i. Hypothesis falls outside Postulate . . . 151 

ii. But not if Hypothesis alleges Vera causa . .154 

2. Phases of Hypothesis . . . . . . .155 

i. Rudimentary Hypothesis . . . . .155 

ii. Mediate Hypothesis . . . . . .156 

o. Hypothetical nature of Induction . . .156 

. Example of fusion between Hypothesis and data 157 

3. Generalisation . . . . . . . .163 

^ i. ' From, many to all ' exploded . . . .163 

ii. By mere determination . . . . . .163 

iii. Material or Analogical Generalisation . . .165 

4. General view of Induction . , . . . .169 

i. Difference from Jevons . . . . . .169 

ii. Ultimate nature of Induction . . . . .170 

iii. On a Defective Formulation of the Inductive Principle 174 



viii Table of Contents 

PAGE 

4. General view of Induction (continued) 

iii. On a Defective Formulation etc. (continued) 

Inference and Repetition. . . . * .174 

a. ' Same Cause Same Effect ' . . . .174 

0. A Tautology . . . . . . .176 

y. The true Principle . . . . . .181 

5. Developing the Nexus . . . . . . .182 

CHAPTER VI 

CONCRETE SYSTEMATIC INFERENCE 

1. Philosophical Subsumption . . . . . .185 

i. Logical content of these Inferences * . .190 

a. Real system . . . . . . .190 

. Apodeictic sequence . . . . .191 

ii. Their form, Syllogism in fig. i . , . .192 

2. Disjunctive reasoning ....... 194 

3. The judgment of value . . . . . . .199 

i. Real Teleology . . . . - * . 199 

ii. Mediation . . . . . - - J 99 

4. Recapitulation of the main characteristics of Inference . 200 

i. No antecedent scheme of Inference . . .201 

ii. Conditions of Inference . . . . . .203 

iii. Relation of Syllogism to these conditions . . 204 

a. The traditional syllogism .... 204 

#. The syllogism as reasoned judgment . . 206 

CHAPTER VII 

THE RELATION OF KNOWLEDGE TO ITS POSTULATES 

1. The formal postulates of Knowledge .... 208 

i. The Law of Identity . . . . , .210 

ii. The Law of Contradiction . . . . .211 

iii. The Law of Excluded Middle . . . . .213 

iv. The Law of Sufficient Reason and Law of Causation 215 

2. The material postulates of Knowledge . . . .216 

i. The maintenance of life . . . . . .218 

ii. The reality of values . . . . . .221 

3. The ultimate nature of Necessity . . . . .223 

i. A priori necessity and mediation . . . .223 

a. Mediate nature of necessity forgotten in controversy 2^24 
#. Organised and unorganised experience, with am- 
biguity of test by Conception . . .226 
ii. Rehabilitation of formal distinctions in Logic . .230 
iii. Criticism of * Aesthetic' necessity .... 233 
a. Aesthetic necessity as a contradiction in terms . 233 
j8. Aesthetic necessity as a mere case of logical necessity 234 



Table of Contents ix 

PAGE 

Genetic Theory and Imitation . . . . . .238 

i. Reason as an Adaptation ..... 239 

ii. Imitation plus Selection ? ..... 240 

iii. Meaning of Imitation . . . . . .241 

a. Imitation dist. Response . . . 241 

/3. Imitation why held a Vera causa ? . . .241 

7. False separation of Imitator and Inventor . 242 

iv. Truth or Belief due to Evolution ? . . . .243 

a. Limits of Genetic account . . . .243 

. The 'making of Truth' . . . . 246 



CHAPTER VIII 

THE ABOVE THEORY OF JUDGMENT IN RELATION TO 
ABSOLUTISM 

1. Our theory treated as prejudiced. Answers to objections . 251 

i. No finite real self -existent . . . . .252 

ii. Degrees of Individuality . . . . .253 

iii. Experience of self fatal to doctrine of substances . . 255 
iv. Difficulty arising from conception of class-inclusion. 

This conception foreign to S P judgment as such . 255 

v. Imperfect Individual can be conditional Predicate . 257 

vi. Absolutism rests 011 its own substantial grounds . 259 

2. Freedom of expression in Judgment on this theory . . 259 

i. Traditional S P analysis rejected by it . . .259 

ii. Individuality said to demand Designation as opposed 

to Definition the reverse of the truth . .260 

iii. Doctrine of ultimate ' subject ' leaves philosophical theory 

free, taking shape from the latter . . . 262 



CHAPTER IX 

TRUTH AND COHERENCE 

i. Disclaimer of Correspondence Theory .... 263 

i. An expression which might be misleading . . 264 

ii. The Criterion immanent . . . . .265 

iii. Truth its own test ...... 266 

iv. Not all correspondence means copying . . . 267 

The Logical world to-day ...... 268 

i. * Life/ ' Practice/ ' Feeling,' forms of Immediacy . 268 
ii. The misconception which governs the movement . 268 
iii. Fallacies of Genetic Logic according to a recent exposition, 

Dualism, Occasionalism, Adaptationism . . 270 

iv. How Psychology passes into Logic . . . .274 

v. Summary defects of the new attitude . , -275 



x Table of Contents 

PAGE 

3. Realism a complementary form of Immediacy . .276 

. The world of related simple things . . . .277 

Rejection of ' internal ' (relevant) relations . . 277 

(1) Relations relevant to kinds . . . .277 

(2) The meaning of terms relevant to their grouping -278 

(3) Relations express behaviour of terms in groups. 

' Sense * of relations . . . . .278 

b. Relations not asserted to be adjectives . . .279 

c. Truth and Error not absolute, because things not simple . 280 

d. The illusion of simple fact . . . . .281 

(1) Stating what is f a fact' may be telling a lie . 282 

(2) or may be an error (' true ' conclusion from false 

premisses) . . . . . . .283 

(3) How we come by ' simple ' facts . . . 284 

(4) The facts are more not less than simple realities . 285 

(5) In the 'reality* the 'simple facts' are lost . 285 

(6) The ' full facts ' or ' reality J are comprehensive 

systems ........ 287 

4. Coherence is defective, like all theory, but not in a way that 

implies correspondence as its standard .... 288 

i. Coherence does not fall back on Correspondence . 289 

ii. No ' approximation ' to an original . . . 290 

5. Our quasi-solid world ....... 292 

6. Does Truth copy this world ? No, it is plastic . . 294 



CHAPTER X 

THE RELATION OF MENTAL STATES TO JUDGMENT AND TO 

REALITY 

The Mental States in question ...... 295 

1. Doctrine of the present work ..... 295 

a. All sense-content significant, and any of it may become 

a ' state of mind * . . . , . 295 

0. The ' use ' of contents as ideas . . . .298 

2. The Real not arrived at by subtraction . . .301 

. Knowledge involves mental states. . . . 302 

(1) Reality lies ahead, not behind . . . 302 

(2) Truth in ' Mind can only apprehend itself ' . 303 

(3) What explanation means, viz. complete thinking 30^ 

(4) Fallacy that ' independent of ' = ' apart from ' 305 

(5) A simple real must duplicate mental being . 307 

(6) If ' independent ' = 'apart from', different phy- 

sical objects are the same for apprehension . 307 

(7) The object of perception is conditionally, i. e. 

for me . . . , . , , . 310 



Table of Contents xi 

PACK 

2. The Real not arrived at by subtraction (continued) 

0. Subjective Idealism insists on vital continuity of universe 311 
y. * Sustaining ' and ' constructing ' the world. Answer to 

criticisms . . . . . . . 313 

(1) Judgment involves a world, and one world . 314 

(2) Both realists and pragmatists put mind outside 

reality . . . . . . . .317 

(3) Nature of object of cognition strictly we neither 

' apprehend ' nor ' create ' it. We are organs 
within the universe for * eliciting ' its reality in the 
form of truth. The true driving force of Idealism 318 



ABBREVIATIONS 

Bradley's Appearance = Bradley's Appearance and Reality, ed. 2. 
Somienschein, 1897. 

Bradley's Logic = Bradley's Principles of Logic. Kegan Paul, 
Trench & Co., 1883. 

Keynes = Keynes's Formal Logic, ed. 4. Macmillan, 1906. 

Prichard = H. A. Pricharcl's Kant's Theory of Knowledge. Clarendon 
Press, 1909. 

Essentials = Bosanquet's Essentials of Logic. Macmillan, 1895. 

Sigwart = Logik, von Dr. Christoph Sigwart. 2nd edition. Freiburg, 
1889. 



BOOK II 
OF INFERENCE 

CHAPTER I 

THE NATURE OF INFERENCE 

i. INFERENCE shares the essence of Judgment, but, at The 
least qua explicit Inference, has in addition a differentia of 
its own. The essence of Judgment is the reference of an ideal ence. 
content to Reality ; the differentia of Inference affects the 
mode of this reference, and consists in Mediation. Inference 
then is the mediate reference of an ideal content to Reality. 
If I affirm that I spoke to you in the street yesterday simply 
because I find it in my memory that I did so speak to you, 
that is, apart from refinements of analysis, simply a judgment. 
If, as against your denial of the fact, I corroborate my recollec- 
tion by pointing out that I must have spoken to you, because 
you afterwards acted upon something that I then told you, 
then I am reasserting the content of my original judgment, 
but with an addition and modification that turns it into an 
Inference. I then refer an ideal content to Reality, not as 
directly given in memory or in perception, but on the strength 
of a content distinguishable from the former content, bearing 
a certain relation to it, and itself referred directly to reality. 

By speaking of ' mediate ' reference to reality we have 
mentioned the differentia of Inference, but have not ex- 
plained it. Direct affirmation appears to explain itself ; but 
mediate affirmation is even at first sight somewhat mysterious. 
We are at once met with the old question, ' How are synthetic 
judgments a priori possible ? ' The qualification a priori 
adds nothing to the qualification ' true * which is claimed 
by all judgment as such. The question therefore is in plain 

1337-2 B 



2 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

English, ' How can one content claim to be true of Reality 
on the strength of another content distinct from the first ? ' 
' How can any synthetic judgment qua synthetic i. e. going 
from content to content and not simply accepting either a 
mere occurrence or a mere conjunction how can such a judg- 
ment conceivably be justified ? ' The answer to this difficulty, 
like all answers in philosophy, is at first sight a mere restate- 
ment of it. Whether such a restatement is an explanation 
depends on its congruity and coherence with reason and with 
experience. It is possible so the answer must run to proceed 
in knowledge from content to content, because the world as 
known consists of universals exhibited in differences, and the 
contents from which and to which we proceed are not shut 
up within their respective selves, but depend on a pervading 
identical character or universal of which they are the differ- 
ences. ' Of which they are the differences ' a for here is the 
objection which meets us on the threshold. Suppose that I 
find in a room a hundred different objects books, guns, 
china all marked with the same label, say with the owner's 
name. Well then, it may be said, here is your ' identical 
character ' or ' universal ', but what can you infer from it 
beyond itself ? It tells you nothing of the object to which 
it is attached. You may go on for fifty cases affirming that 
a having the label x is a book, b having the label x is a book and 
so on, but you cannot tell in the least what the fifty-first 
object that has the label will be, whether a sporting rifle 
or a china teapot. There is an identity throughout all the 
objects, but they are not, or seem not to be, its differences. 
They simply contain it, and are in no way leavened by it. 
You cannot in any way determine their predicates on the 
basis furnished by this pervading identity. 

The whole of our previous and subsequent discussion 
really deals with this radical difficulty. Logic is little more 
than an account of the forms and modes in which a uni- 
versal does or does not affect the differences through wfiich 
it persists. I can only point out that all turns on the dis- 
tinction between the abstract or powerless and the concrete 
or dominant universal. To interpret the latter by the former, 
* Cf. vol. i., p. 45 note. 



CHAP, i] Abstract and Concrete Universal 3 

to reduce all universals to marks, i. e. to the level of the exam- 
ple just mentioned, is a fatal tendency of popular logic. A 
very elementary example of a relatively concrete universal 
may be found in the nature of a geometrical figure, say of 
the circle or the triangle. Given an arc of a circle, we have 
the radius and centre, and can lay down the whole circum- 
ference. The given arc is not simply repeated, it is continued 
according to a universal nature which controls its parts, and 
with a result which though involved in the given arc is yet 
outwardly and as an actual content distinct from it. This is 
clearer if instead of a circle we take an ellipse, in which the 
given fragment of the curve cannot in any sense be said to 
be simply repeated without change in constructing the re- 
mainder. There is something in the curve as given which is 
capable of dictating a continuation and completion of its 
outline distinguishable from the given arc or fragment itself. 
Just so with a triangle given two sides and an angle, we can 
find the third side and remaining two angles. 

And we can now see that in the first example, which 
seemed so hopeless, the same relation would be traceable as- 
suming the label to have any meaning at all. A mere mark, 
which conveys nothing, is not even a mark, for what is it a 
mark of ? But supposing the label to indicate A's ownership 
of the things, then we could infer all sorts of legal consequences 
about them from this ownership ; and these consequences 
would not be the same for all the objects, but would be 
modified by their nature ; e. g. it is probable that some of 
the things would be liable to seizure by a judgment creditor 
and some would not. Thus here too the universal would be 
an identity pervading different manifestations. 

The universal in its differences is then the basis of mediate 
judgment or inference. But it is also the basis, as we have 
amply seen, of judgment as such, i. e. what would usually 
b2 called immediate judgment. The above examples, however, 
furnish the further distinction to which we shall find it 
convenient on the whole to adhere. Mediate judgment or 
inference is the indirect reference to reality of differences 
within a universal by means of the exhibition of this universal 
in differences directly referred to reality. The differences 

B2 



4 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

indirectly referred to reality may fall outside, or include, or 
even consist exclusively of, the differences directly referred to 
reality. Immediate judgment, according to its idea, would 
be the mere reference to reality of differences as united 
within the identity or universal. It might be more intel- 
ligible if we were to substitute ' parts ' and ' whole ' for 
' differences ' and ' universal ' ; but then it would have to 
be borne in mind that we are not speaking of quantitative 
parts, i. e. that the kind of whole in question is not necessarily 
the sum of its parts. Subject to this reservation, I have no 
objection to defining Inference as the indirect reference to 
reality of parts within a whole on the strength of the nature 
of that whole as revealed in parts directly referred to Reality. 
And the definition of Judgment would bear a corresponding 
modification. Of course I do not mean that all the forms 
which have already been discussed under the head of Judg- 
ment are substantially confined within the definition of Judg- 
ment and excluded from that of Inference. But for the present, 
in order to obtain a clear view prtma facie, we are considering 
only explicit Inference and excluding all that takes the out- 
ward shape of mere Judgment. 

Some 2. The above account of the essence of Inference will be 

o/Infer- S best illustrated by considering some accidents of inference 
ence. which I have endeavoured to exclude from the definition. 
Mental i. First among these comes the attribute of mental transi- 
tionin' ** on * n ti me > w ^h which that of an advance from known to 
Time. unknown may in one sense be identified. 

The account given above * of the Judgment in time applies 
also to Inference as a mental process in Time. The first and 
most fatal error as regards both Judgment and Inference is 
to introduce the idea of an actual and instantaneous transition 
from content to content. This idea combines the error of 
denying that inference, as a mental process, has duration in 
time, with that of denying that as intellectual insight its 
parts are inward to each other and exempt from temporal 
succession. The universal itself, or intellectual synthesis 01 
differences, is not a fact in time ; and throughout the interval 
which inference occupies as a psychical process the operation 
1 Bk. I. chap. i. 



CHAP, i] Real Advance in Time 5 

of the universal as a growing insight is traceable in every 
point of time, but is not shut up within any atomic moment. 
But apart from the idea of instantaneous transition, there 
is an idea of advance in time which has great appearance 
of truth and which is indeed in one sense true. It is unques- 
tionable that in inference we start from data, from facts 
thrown down before us, it may be in chaotic disorder and 
with no suggestion of a result. 1 We go to work upon these 
facts, and after the labour of hours, of days, or of a lifetime, 2 
we light upon a conclusion which issues from them' and to 
which they are related as premises ; i.e. which exhibits them 
as differences in a universal. How is it possible to deny that 
we have here an advance in time from data without con- 
clusion, at any rate to data plus conclusion, and, if we go 
by the old syllogism, to conclusion minus a large part of the 
data ? The difficulty which I find in stating the above 
antithesis is a first indication of its fallaciousness. It was 
impossible to write simply ' from data without conclusion to 
conclusion without data '. A conclusion without data is an 
obvious contradiction in terms, and if even part of the data 
are dropped (as the middle term in the syllogism) the con- 
clusion sinks pro tanto into a on rather than a 8io'u a fact 
instead of an inference. No doubt we are apt to pluck off 
our conclusion like a fruit from a plant and carry it away 
for consumption. Practical life requires this procedure. But 
we must remember that from the moment of severance death 
has begun, and that the intellectual product can bear isolation 
far less than the material. The idea of an actual transition 
from data to result, so far as it is founded on this habit, is in 
science simply a pernicious blunder. The case in which the 
result is a systematic insight that includes the premises in 
a transmuted form does not of course fall under this censure. 
But this case is not as a rule contemplated by the traditional 
forms of inference. 

1 I put the case at its extreme against myself. We must however 
remember that we can only see in the facts what we are ready to see 
there, what we bring with us. So however disorderly in fact, the data 
are really from the beginning theorised upon by our apprehension, 
because it can only apprehend them on the strength of its own existing 
content. * See the famous preface to the ' Origin of Species '. 



6 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

And of course it might be correlatively maintained that 
facts are not data, except by virtue of a result ; or if this is 
not true of data but only of premises, then that inference 
does not start from data but only from premises. 1 At first 
sight such a contention seems to blink the difficulty. The 
conclusion, it seems, may be removed by a week's work from 
the data or premises ; and granting that they are not rightly 
called data or premises till the week's end when the conclusion 
is won, still the facts concerned were present and active at 
the beginning of the week and certainly entered into the 
advance that has been made. 

Two things are here to be distinguished, viz. mere repro- 
duction and inferential reproduction. The universal active 
in the mind is not apparent as a whole within the mere 
psychical facts of the transition. Its operation is extended 
throughout a series of the fugitive psychical facts or ideas, 
and although in logical thinking its operation is conscious, 
i.e. selects and modifies within the content of these ideas, 
yet it is hot in itself necessarily a conscious activity. It 
acts in consciousness, but need not be conscious of its own 
principle of action. In rudimentary reproduction we see 
a man far off, and a name comes into our mind, apparently 
as a detached fact, without any reason that we can assign 
or think of trying to assign. It is only later, when we clearly 
recognise the man, that we become aware either that we 
recognise him, or how and why we recognise him. Logical 
thinking consists of making this process conscious ; but 
essentially and fundamentally the intellectual tendency which 
controls reproduction need not be present as a distinct content 
operating in reproduction. So far the psychical process 
might in theory begin with data alone and then go on leaving 
them behind to result alone, not carrying throughout the 
transition any conscious unity or continuity of content. 

But in explicit inference, at any rate, this is not the case. 
The essence of inference is to drag into consciousness the 
operation of the active universal as a pervading unity ot 
content on which inference depends. The conscious operation 
of the active universal in inference is what we have to dis- 

1 But then it would seem the data must be premises of the premises. 



CHAP, i] Unity of Inference 7 

tinguish from the mere implicit action of the universal in 
rudimentary reproduction. Therefore when we speak not of 
mere reproduction, but of inferential reproduction or passage 
from data to conclusion, then it is true that you can no more 
have data or premises without conclusion than conclusion 
without data or premises. The appearance to the contrary, 
which I have admitted to exist, arises from our fixing our 
attention exclusively on the conclusion par excellence in which 
and not before it we happen to rest. This conclusion, though 
it may close a stage of science or set at rest a longing of 
our hearts, is in no way different in logical character from 
the first steps of preparatory activity with which reason 
penetrates the facts laid before it. We meet the data with 
a judgment when they are laid before us, and we modify 
this judgment continuously throughout our inference. Any 
section taken, so to speak, across the interval of intellectual 
activity which elapses from first data to ultimate conclusion 
would lay bare the whole structure of an inference, just as 
a section across the time during which a chord is sounding 
on the organ would exhibit the whole harmonic structure of 
the compound tone. Of course we may draw partial con- 
clusions, discard their data, and work with these conclusions 
as with fresh data, and so far we make an advance from 
content to content, discarding the old in favour of the new. 
But this process, though necessary in practice, comes under 
the observation made above upon a conclusion severed 
from its proof, and is not typical of inference, but of its 
limitations. 

Transition in time from content to content as between data 
and conclusion in inference is not really possible. But it is 
true that the process of inference, though continuous and 
bound together by a conscious unity, is extended in time and 
includes considerable modifications of the judgments from 
which it starts. The appearance of a transition arises from 
discarding data, which is unjustifiable, from transforming 
data, which is right but is no transition, or from comparing 
ultimate conclusions and primary data while neglecting the 
intermediate phases which constitute the continuous and 
not transitional but inclusive inferential evolution* It is in 



8 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

this character of transition without conscious continuity that 
rudimentary reproduction differs from explicit Inference. 

(Thus our definition of Inference did not say that the differ- 
ences which form the data are previously affirmed of reality, 
although it is only from them as affirmed of reality that the 
reality of the inferred differences can flow. 

Disco- ii. Secondly, it follows from the above considerations that 
discovery is an accident and not an essential of inference. 
Inference is not essentially passage in time whether instan- 
taneous or extended. Therefore it is not the case that a 
conclusion ceases to be an inference the moment that it 
becomes tamiliar, the moment, that is, that it ceases to be 
a discovery. On the contrary, discovery without proof is 
conjecture ; an element of proof is needed to constitute 
inference, and indeed to constitute discovery. The activity 
of inference cannot be identified with the perception of some- 
thing new. It is quite a normal occurrence that the elements 
which are indirectly referred to reality should also be directly 
referred to reality. Whenever, indeed, as the ideal of inference 
requires, the original data themselves are transformed and 
freshly elucidated, this happens as a matter of course. When 
the working of a machine is about to be explained we see 
a wheel or piston to be there as a fact, and we ask what it 
does. The answer tells us why there must be such a wheel 
or piston, and this is not superfluous though we knew before- 
hand that it was there. The part in question then becomes 
to us an element or difference in the pervading identity or 
universal which is the working of the machine. And if we 
live fifty years and see the machine every day, understanding 
it thoroughly, still the use of any one of its parts, considered 
as necessitated by the nature of any other actual part or -set 
of parts combined with the working of the whole machine, 
remains to us an inference and never becomes a mere fact. 
Thus novelty or discovery is an accident of Inference. 
Omission iii. Thirdly, it follows from the above considerations that 
vant 16 omission in the conclusion of contents employed in the pre- 
matter. mises is an accident of inference. Inference is confined 
neither to what is novel nor to what happens to interest us. 
The appearance of a necessity of omission arises from various 



CHAP, i] Omission in Inference g 

causes. The transformation of data is an ideal which is 
likely to be misunderstood. It resumes the old data in a new 
expression. Again, it is usual and in complicated matters 
unavoidable to confine ourselves in dealing with any universal 
to some aspect determined by context or by curiosity. And 
the habitual omission of the middle term in the Aristotelian 
syllogism is perhaps due in part to the above causes, and in 
part to the vicious habit of severing the conclusion from the 
premises which the rhetorical associations of early logic tended 
to foster. 1 But the entire content of the universal, 'so far as 
recognised in the necessity that unites its differences, is the 
true content of every inference, and there is no logical reason 
for neglecting to make explicit any portion of truth which our 
perception of it generates. 

A question arises on the margin of this subject of omission 
with reference to the systematic realities of which we spoke 
under the head of the hypothetical and disjunctive judgments. 
If I directly affirm the reality of a complex system, such as 
a railway, or a government, or a mind, and include in my 
affirmation a mention of many parts and properties as sys- 
tematically interrelated, am I in doing so rightly said to be 
inferring ? It rather seems here as if the absence of omission 
destroyed all semblance of a conclusion, and how can there 
be inference without a conclusion ? * Cannon Street railway 
station has interlocking points and signals. 1 To any one who 
understands the subject it is unnecessary to complete this by 
the further explanation (which even if inserted may of course 
be a mere qualification, not a fresh judgment), ' such that 
opening any one line ipso facto needs the signals to be at 
danger for all the lines that cross it.' In such a judgment, 
regarding it, as we have every right to do, in the light of 
a single affirmation, I am obviously embodying matter which 
has an inferential character. But whether I am actually 
inferring or not depends not, as one might be tempted to 
say, on the novelty of the conclusion implied, but on the 
degree of insight with which the judgment is made. It is in 

1 Because the rhetorician only wants to prove, not to understand. 
If he reaches his conclusion, the steps by which he reached it cease to 
interest him or his audience. 



io The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

short either an inference, or the allegation as a fact of relations 
that must have formed the conclusion of an inference, although 
the inferential connection may now be lost. If however we 
go into such detail as proves that we have an insight into 
the why and wherefore of the system, then we have no choice 
but to say that we are inferring but are stating our inference 
confusedly. The confusion is in not distinguishing data from 
conclusion how much is immediately affirmed of reality, and 
how much is mediate. The judgment is a mediate judgment 
simulating an immediate character. 1 

An ordinary hypothetical judgment is really an analogous 
case to the above (which might be represented by a disjunctive 
judgment). Inferential matter, a relation or nexus, seems to 
be affirmed of reality ; but yet the omission, which would 
leave as affirmed what seems to be the conclusion, cannot be 
made. The ground per se is not affirmed of Reality, and so 
the consequent per se is not affirmed to be true. The moment 
that ' If ' passes into ' Because ' you can omit the ground 
and affirm the consequent per se. But retaining the 'If we 
cannot affirm the consequent. We cannot affirm upon mere 
supposition, nor can we infer without affirming. Yet cer- 
tainly, as in the last paragraph, we seem to have before us an 
inferential activity. ' In four-dimensional space (i. e. sup- 
posing such space) a knot can be tied in a string whose ends 
are held/ In this judgment the nexus between four-dimen- 
sional space and tying a knot is undoubtedly inferential. 
The moment we affirm the reality of the ground, we also 
affirm the real possibility of the consequent. But the hypo- 
thetical judgment as such affirms neither the one nor the 
other. The entire judgment is no doubt itself a consequence 
of an underlying reality, the affirmation of which it implies, 
and on the ground of which a ground asserted to be real 
the whole complex content of the hypothetical judgment is 
asserted to be real, subject to its own inherent reservation 

1 The existence of these ambiguous inferences half inference and half 
memory or authority favours in appearance the restriction of inference 
to what has novelty. When an inference is just made, then, if ever, it 
has definite data. When an inference is familiar, it is too likely to rest 
on the ground that it is remembered to have been approved of. Never- 
theless, not novelty, but systematic necessity, is the true differentia. 



CHAP, i] Hypothetical Inference n 

embodied in its own further ground. But this does not help 
us to determine the presence or absence of inference within 
the hypothetical judgment itself. 

The fact seems to be that hypothetical affirmation is a 
contradiction in terms, and so too is hypothetical inference. 
The whole process, apart from any categorical meaning 
which it may make explicit, which is a matter of degree, is 
a mere make-believe. You choose to treat as real in one 
sense what you do not affirm to be really real, 1 and you 
record the groove of necessity which manifests itself when 
the artificial reality is considered as though forming part of 
the real reality. Of the differences within the universal 
which determine the remaining differences (in this case the 
consequent) part (the hypothetical ground) are only sham 
reality, and therefore although we seem to exert inferential 
activity, yet we cannot affirm the conclusion of the inference. 
Here then we have the two degrees of impropriety in omis- 
sion. Even when the ground of inference is affirmed, as 
with ordinary premises, the reality of the conclusion is 
restricted to the precise sense imposed by that ground, and 
it is therefore theoretically unsafe to affirm the conclusion 
apart from the ground. But when part of the ground of in- 
ference is not affirmed, then we have really the case of the 
problematic judgment, and if the consequent is affirmed with 
omission of the supposed ground it can only be affirmed 
problematically, i. e. cannot be affirmed as true, or in the 
proper sense affirmed at all. The reference to reality is then 
incompletely mediated. But on a pure supposition no inference 
can be erected. The element of supposed reality is the 
element of reservation, and the element of real reality is the 
element of affirmation. A pure supposition would be all reser- 
vation and no affirmation. If I suppose that over a certain 
spot of ground gravity ceases to operate, I can form some kind 

1 This process has many degrees. The content of supposition may be 
real all but some very minute relation. The conclusion from the 
supposition can then be affirmed subject to a very minute reservation. 
The main content of the conclusion may depend on what is absolute 
fact. ' If that picture were in. to the left it would hang symmetrically 
with that other picture ' gives the conclusion. The picture A hangs 
Symmetrically to i in. with the picture B. 



12 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

of conception of the consequence. I affirm the present state 
of things with reservation for the modification introduced by 
the limited absence of gravity. But if I suppose that there is 
to be no gravity at all in the world, the reservation gets the 
upper hand, and nothing, I presume, is left for me to affirm 
not even, as when part of the conditions only is affirmed, 
a problematic conclusion. 

Omission in inference is thus accidental and hazardous in 
various degrees. It is, as we saw, in one form (as omission 
of the condition or reservation in judgment) the mark of 
problematic judging. Omission however as here discussed 
is omission of matter relevant to the inference, or, which is 
the same thing, falling within the conclusion. In this sense, 
as within the relevant content, selection is the converse of 
omission, and is equally an accident of Inference. If you 
select, you omit ; and if you omit, you select. But you need 
not do either. 

Omission iv. On the other hand, actual data must always present 
ofirrele- irrelevancies, and must be exhibited as transformed not 
matter, necessarily be transformed de novo by an act of discovery 
in the inferential operation. Otherwise there could not be 
the circuit through the universal which we have taken to 
be the differentia of inference. It is natural therefore to 
think of Omission and Selection with reference to the actual 
data on which, as referred to reality in their crude form, a 
given inference depends. Within these actual data Selec- 
tion is of the essence of Inference, but Omission depends on 
the existence of irrelevancies in the data, and although in 
theory these disguises and superfluities cannot be wanting, 
yet they may be reduced to an almost inappreciable margin, 
and the element of omission in that case becomes inappre- 
ciable also. There is then, apparently, selection without 
omission ; there can never be omission without selection. 
Three v - It has been maintained that the presence of three 

terms. terms ', as required by the Aristotelian syllogism, is an 
accident of inference and does not touch its essence. I must 
leave this question, which is largely verbal, to decide itself 
in detail from our whole account of the subject. Here I will 
merely indicate the distinction on which in my opinion the 



CHAP, i] Three Terms 13 

answer to it depends. Of course an inference is constantly 
drawn by the combination of very numerous facts and con- 
ceptions. Aristotle's l or Lotze's Inductive syllogism, or a 
Sorites, or a Euclidean construction, are familiar examples of 
inference so drawn. The only question is whether these 
numerous facts or conceptions correspond to phases or elements 
in the logical act of Inference, and whether, if they do not, 
they can claim the title of logical ' terms '. Must there not 
always be (i) differences or parts directly referred to reality, 
(ii) the universal nature or continuous identity which binds 
these differences or parts into a whole, pregnant with a capacity 
of accepting and arranging further differences or parts, and 
(iii) further differences, identified as parts within the pregnant 
whole which controls the inference, and, on the strength of 
this identity, referred to reality ? It may be observed that 
this last ' term ', moment or element of inference, may 
and ought to include the two former. But it contains them 
in another sense than that in which they appear as isolated 
elements of inference, and therefore is not superfluous nor 
tautologous. We may have a thousand observations of the 
places of a moving heavenly body, but these thousand data are 
not a thousand terms. The thousand observed places fuse 
into the law of the orbit, and the law of the orbit dictates 
the remaining places which form the path that the body 
traverses. Or, as the above instance really verges upon 
geometrical construction, we may take an example more 
cognate to what is commonly meant by Induction, though 
it is hard to find a good example of a process which does 
not exist. If typhoid fever attends a certain milk-supply 
through a large portion of its ins and outs, including many 
dozens of cases, then we shall no doubt be apt to suspect 
that danger attaches to that milk supply as a whole, and 
consequently menaces any localities as yet unexamined to 

1 TO KaQ' tKaarov is a term in both premises of the" Aristotelian Induc- 
tive Syllogism. Obviously this means that each premise would be 
a conjunction of judgments, or a conjunctive judgment. Such a group 
of judgments would correspond to the so-called premises in Lotze's 
Inductive Syllogism, which ' premises ' are really only a single premise, 
out of which Lotze takes his conclusion per saltum. If the other premise 
were filled in, his inference would show three terms. 



14 The Nature of Inference [Booxii 

which this same supply extends its operations. Here again 
the three elements of Inference are conspicuous, though, as 
we shall see, they are in any such statement exceedingly 
ill-defined and their connection ill-warranted. 

The 3. I have thus far been speaking of explicit Inference, that 

J? we . r f is to say, of inference in which three or more ' terms ' or 

Infer- intellectual elements are consciously distinguished and com- 

ence. bined. And it is true, as I said above, that the nature and 

phases of implicit Inference must really be gathered from the 

whole theory of judgment which I have stated in Book I to 

the best of my power. But a few remarks and a few examples 

may be useful in throwing light on the modifications which 

have to be traced. 

The function of which I have attempted, in the theory of 
judgment, to write the later history, is the activity of the 
universal in the mind, or in other words, of the mind as the 
universal. 

The re- i. I have at present neither space nor competence to enter 
tunfof " u P on psychological controversy with reference to the so-called 
Ideas. Association of Ideas. But it is necessary to define my position 
by explaining that in as far as any doctrine of Association 
involves the hypothesis of reproduction by other ideas of ideas 
as separate particular units, i. e. the denial of real identity or 
of the active universal, I am unable to reconcile such a doctrine 
with logical phenomena. And logical phenomena, if we include 
in them the judgment from its very beginning, take in by far 
the larger part of the known phenomena of mind. I cannot 
suppose a discontinuity in my opinion moreover wholly 
unmotived by experience between distinctly logical pheno- 
mena and the quasi-intellectual activities of primitive and 
animal soul-life. And therefore I shall treat the fundamental 
activity of thought as the same throughout and as always 
consisting in the reproduction by a universal or a real identity, 
presented in a content, of contents distinguishable from the 
presented content, which also are differences of the same 
universal. 

It may be that in early soul-life this reproduction is uncon- 
scious, and that its results, the images which it brings before 
the mind, are not used as ideas, i.e. are not distinguished 



CHAP, i] Continuity of Soul-Life 15 

from fact or known to be symbolic of a content other than 
themselves. The results of experience may be made available 
for the guidance of action in an animal through suggestion 
effected by reproduction, but not distinguished as suggestion 
from any presented reality. In this process we have some- 
thing that does the work of judgment and inference, and that 
has the same fundamental nature with them. But it is not 
judgment, because the images which it causes to succeed one 
another in the mind, not being distinguished from any reality, 
as a mere meaning necessarily is, 1 cannot be affirmed in quali- 
fication of reality.* And a fortiori such early thought is not 
inference, because it is not judgment. Inference as we saw 
involves assertion. 

To begin with, then, we may set down the lower limit of 
inference as at any rate not prior to the beginnings of judgment. 
Yet even this prima facie boundary is drawn subject to a large 
reservation on account of the primitive reproduction or 
redintegration to which I have just alluded. The unconscious 
extension of a sensation by reproduction fulfils some functions 
of inference. 

ii. And when we come to judgment in the strict sense, the General 
task of drawing a line between implicit inference and what of 
is not inference at all becomes an impossible one. Fortunately ment. 
it is also, in this rigid form, an idle one. What we have to 
say upon it amounts to this. All Judgment, we are told 2 
with emphasis, claims necessity. That is to say, every one who 
makes an assertion, 3 though of course he has, as a rule, never 
heard of logic or of a ground, yet believes that he cannot 
think otherwise than as he asserts. In full-blown Inference he 
backs up this belief by a distinct allegation of separate but 
connected matters which he takes to justify his conviction. 
In implicit Inference we must distinguish the feeling that there 

1 When psychical images come to be employed for the sake of 
a meaning which they convey, they ex hypothesi are not treated as fact. 
And their meaning is not itself a psychical fact, but is an intellectual 
activity which can only enter into fact by being used to qualify reality. 

* On the nature of an implicit idea, which is a mere qualification of 
sensation or perception, see Bradley, Appearance, ed. 2, 606. 

8 Sigwart, vol. i. p. 237. E. Trans, i. 182, 

8 A conscious lie is only a sham assertion, except in as far as the 
hearer is induced to judge it true* 



16 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

is a justification from the incipient selection of definite 
matters as forming the justification. It is probable that, as 
Sigwart implies, the feeling of justification is in one form or 
another essential to judgment. An uneducated man or a 
child, if his perception or his memory is doubted, will some- 
times merely reiterate his assertion. This reiteration implies 
on the one hand that he cannot formulate any inferential 
support for his original judgment ; he does not know how to 
travel outside the content of his assertion in order to invoke 
external aid. Such a phase of the judging activity is well 
illustrated by the impersonal judgment, in which the place of 
the significant subject which develops into the pregnant genus- 
idea, or ground, or condition, is devoid of all content. Yet 
on the other hand such reiteration implies an effort and failure 
on the part of the speaker to get beyond the original content, 
and a consequent return to that content, which is the germ 
of the motived inability to think otherwise that constitutes 
the necessity of inference. In such a mind, we may suppose, 
imagination and conception do not fall apart, and his think- 
ing satisfies the criterion of necessary truth which Mill 
criticised as defectively explained by Whewell, in that he 
cannot even imagine (not to speak of conceiving) the matter 
to be otherwise than as he asserts it to be. 

An educated man makes a similar justification explicit 
when he tells us that he relies on the evidence of his senses. 
The phrase is perhaps primarily intended to be ironical, as 
implying that the senses give the fact and not mere evidence 
of the fact, but its irony fails because it is strictly true. Sense, 
though it is a fact, cannot give the fact, and is strictly, as the 
supposed speaker calls it, evidence circumstantial evidence 
or datum, not ' testimony ' l which implies assertion. The 
phrase ' evidence of the Senses ' then, if taken seriously, 
conveys the consciousness that sense-perception has an 
inferential character, and rests on a necessity arising out of 
combinations of elements among which sensation is but 
a part or datum. When this consciousness, which experi- 

1 Evidence in this application may have originally meant obviousness 
or intuitiveness, ' Evidentia/ ' Evidenz,' and would then have no close 
connection with the common meaning of ' evidence ' as * ' testimony/ 



CHAP, i] Direct and Indirect Affirmation 17 

ence of illusions soon forces on reflecting men, is thoroughly 
attained, then the perceptive judgment is known to need 
justification, but it is not known in what this justification 
consists nor that it may lie in a connection of content appa- 
rently going beyond the observed conjunction. Attentive 
observation and precise interrogation of the memory are the 
engines which suggest themselves as securing the necessity 
of judgment at this stage. Of course these processes imply 
a reliance on certain principles. But the inference is so far 
formal and geneial, not material and specific. It is rather a 
general conviction that perception can be relied on, than an 
individual inference that this particular perception is rightly 
construed to give this particular content. And therefore 
the inference falls apart from the judgment as such, and cannot 
be taken as an element within it. When we pass this point, 
we come to something much more like Inference proper. 

iii. Prior to Judgment, as we saw reason to suppose, the Specific 
operation of the universal or the real identity which governs JJ| j C udg 
reproduction is unconscious. Of course it has a result in meat, 
consciousness, but the mind is not aware of the limits and 
pervading ground of the process from which this result 
emanates. I cannot say on what definite stimulus my friend's 
name rises to my mind when I see him at a distance, not 
being yet aware that I have recognised him, nor what is the 
operative content which makes a certain room recall a long 
past incident which occurred elsewhere. In the phase of 
judgment which has just been alluded to this real identity 
emerges into consciousness as the meaning of sentences and 
as the active guide of perception and memory. In this 
capacity it is attended by a necessity at first actual and then 
perceived, which at least reveals itself (when men talk of 
the evidence of their senses) as a partly intellectual necessity. 
But up to this point the real identity or meaning has simply 
been suggested and affirmed, as this or that ideal content, to 
be true of reality, and has not within itself displayed any 
articulated or selective character. It has shown no systematic 
organisation to which thought could appeal as a definite 
individual compulsion prescribing the nature of the ideal con- 
tent which it reproduced. The matters affirmed have simply 

1337*2 C 



i8 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

been conjoined within a unity or identity, as philosophy and 
self-conceit may be conjoined in the same man. They have 
not been shown to cohere as parts in an intelligible whole, 
not, that is, as the third angle of a triangle coheres with two 
given angles and a given side, or as personal liberty in England 
coheres with the supremacy of law. 1 

But a further principle makes its appearance, as we saw, 
with the judgments of individual character, of ideal measure- 
ment or of ideal enumeration. Here the universal takes on 
the character of a system, which governs its parts on the 
basis of its pervading nature. From this point onwards we 
have in fact the full essentials of Inference, and it is very 
much a question of convenience whether the inference takes 
implicit or explicit form. So long as we retain the form of 
direct synthesis our definition forbids us the title of explicit 
inference. For the identification of the subject-idea with 
reality is presupposed and not affirmed, and the qualification 
of reality by the predicated content is therefore direct in form, 
though indirect to a large extent in substance. ' To a large 
extent ' only, for according to the view which I take of judg- 
ment the affirmation in all the more genuine and natural forms 
of assertion is both direct and indirect even in substance. 
If I affirm ' The Czar of Russia can throw Europe into a blaze 
by lifting his finger ' I am judging both categorically of the 
historical individual, and necessarily or inferentially of the 
wielder of enormous forces. And the same holds good in some 
degree if I speak of the British Constitution, or of the force 
of gravity. The educated mind sees an argument in judg- 
ments dealing with these matters even without the help of 
vocal accent and inflexion which can be used to drive home 
the inference. From the individual judgment then, through 
the generic, as far as the pure hypothetical which has already 
been discussed in this context, we have implicit inference 
which verges upon explicitness in proportion as the operative 
ground or reason is more clearly set out in the subject-idea. 

1 See Dicey on the Law of the Constitution. I may venture to 
remark that works of this class are a valuable study for logicians, 
because they illustrate forms of necessary connection which are not 
dependent on geometrical perception. 



CHAP, ii Cross-reference 19 

The generic judgment shows the union of the two types in 
its fullest significance. The individual content here claims 
to be a presupposed qualification of reality, and therefore, 
as reality, has the predicated content directly identified with 
it ; while the very same self-complete organisation which 
entitles the subject-content to be taken as real, also enables it 
to demand the predicated content as a necessary consequence, 
and to act as a middle term attaching this content indirectly 
to reality. ' Poetry is a form of art which employs ideas as 
the medium of representation/ Here we are at once qualifying 
a reality and drawing an inference. 

t iv. These principles may advantageously be elucidated by The true 
the example of what might be called the true immediate dUit* e e j n . 
inferences, which may properly be mentioned here on the ferences. 
threshold of Inference. I refer to such processes as Recogni- 
tion, Abstraction, Comparison, Identification, Discrimination. 
All these titles are obviously drawn from characteristics 
which in a certain sense no judgment or inference is without, 
and which reciprocally imply one another. 1 But they also 
can be and are used as names of processes, of cases of the 
judging activity, in which one or other of its aspects asserts 
itself par excellence. They are cross divisions to the progressive 
stages of judgment which were described in Book I, and 
might be spoken of, though not with equal appropriateness, as 
present in all these stages short of disjunction. They are 
separated from one another and from other forms of judgment 
rather by practical and methodological than by strictly logical 
distinctions. 

a. Comparison is a good example. The Comparative Compari- 
Judgment, as described in Book I, fills an important place son * 
in logical evolution. The variations of a common quality 
between more and less are the simplest explicit case of identity 
in difference. But the reflective comparison of common life 
*>oth stops short of and goes beyond what I have called the 
comparative judgment. Comparison in the ordinary sense 
is a name applied to the intentional cross-reference of two or 
more given contents, in order to establish, between those 
contents as given, a general or special identity, (difference, 

1 See Introduction, sect. 5. 
C2 



2O The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

or partial identity (likeness). And with the establishment of 
a relation of equality, or of quantitative difference which im- 
plies equality (a > b implies a = b + x), popular comparison 
diverges into equation, in which the cross-reference is retained 
throughout. The equation is essentially comparative. You 
cannot say ' a is equal ' any more than you can say ' a is the 
same '. l In Comparison, identity &c. is stated as a result, or else 
very strongly implied, in an abstract form. If it were made 
concrete and definite the cross-reference to the contents as given 
would be superfluous or impossible, other and profounder 
standards being introduced and the contents having no longer 
their original shape. The result required in comparison is such 
as ' A is like B '. If we say ' A and B are both red ', this too is 
comparison in virtue of the cross-reference implied in ' both *. 
But if we say ' A is red and B is green ' we are passing out 
of the process popularly called comparison into ordinary 
investigation, aimed not at a particular cross-reference, but 
at developing the facts which may come to hand. And if 
we go to ' All a (including a and b) are coloured surfaces ', 
the original data have disappeared, and comparison in the 
popular sense has become impossible. When the process has 
justified in the concrete the abstract idea which guided it, 
it has put an end to its own raison d'&tre and passes into the 
normal operations of knowledge. 

Abstrao /3. Abstraction, again, affords an example worth con- 
tlon * sidering. Abstraction in general is the necessary conse- 
quence of definite thought, and indeed of all definite activity. 
All activity has its restrictions and limitations, selects and 
omits, and is so far abstract. But though all thought is abstract, 
yet all thought need not be abstraction as a special process. 
Abstraction in this sense is a methodic activity guided by 
a special reflective idea, the idea of obtaining the part out of 
the whole by omission of other parts. The whole is theoreti- 
cally always, and practically often, more knowable than tlje 
part. It is easier to say that 99 x 5 = five hundreds minus 
five units, i.e. 495, than to multiply out ninety-nine by five. 
Subtraction may be regarded as the specific term for abstrac- 
tion when the latter deals with the parts of a homogeneous or 

1 Cf. Sigwart, i. p. 85 ; E. Trans, i. p. 69. 



CHAP, i] Inference from Abstraction 21 

quantitative whole. The hydrostatic explanation of the cup 
which retains the juice in a fruit-tart is an example of abstrac- 
tion l which obtains knowledge of one aspect of a hetero- 
geneous whole by omitting all the rest. But the examinee 
who added that for the atmosphere to sustain the liquid within 
the cup it was necessary that the cup should not be more than 
thirty feet high had passed from mere abstraction within the 
given whole to independent consideration of the hydrostatic 
relation involved in the example. 

Abstraction, then, like Comparison, when considered as a 
method par excellence, is one of the processes by which Reason, 
armed with reflective ideas, breaks into concrete data in 
search of the unity of the universal. The reflective idea which 
guides it is the equivalent in general knowledge of the mathe- 
matical axiom that if equals are taken from equals the re- 
mainders are equal. Withdraw a known relation from a known 
system of relations, and the relations which remain are known. 
It is plain that if the whole and its internal relations are really 
known so as to justify such a process, the withdrawal is a 
mere intellectual or ideal distinction. This is so even in 
mathematics. To know the difference between two quantities 
is the same as to know the greater as the sum of the lesser 
and the difference. An algebraical sum treats subtraction 
and addition as on a level. Abstraction would thus seem 
primarily to restrict itself to instances where, as in mere 
numerical conceptions, the withdrawal of a part leaves the 
other parts unaffected. But as this is never within any real 
whole theoretically the case, although by compensation or 
in loose-knit wholes it may seem to be so, the instances 
envisaged by abstraction occupy in truth no separate region 
from those which form the matter of all definite knowledge. 
Thus the guiding idea of abstraction is only a provisional idea. 
It amounts to no more than this, that within known wholes 

1 In saying this, I do not mean that the system of laws which an 
investigation, beginning with such an abstraction, ultimately brings 
to light, must be more abstract than the example which is the datum. 
The semi-logical and almost arbitrary character of these methodic pro- 
cesses as popularly limited is illustrated by the fact that abstraction, as 
in the case before us, so easily slides into systematic construction which 
leaves the example behind. 



22 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

known changes may appear to leave remainders known as 
unchanged. For to say, as we said above, simply ' known 
remainders ', really lets in all that positive knowledge can tell 
us of the positive effects produced by the change on what 
remains. In this we go beyond abstraction. The supposed 
unchanged remainder, then, is predicated of the whole as 
modified by the withdrawal of some parts. 

But really of course the abstraction is not what operates. 
Neither real nor ideal abstraction can help except by con- 
ferring or illustrating knowledge of the real whole in question. 
' The Parnellites are chief men in Ireland, and Were Ireland 
separated from England would be chief men still.' But 
would they ? The abstraction puts the question, but does 
not answer it. The answer depends on our knowledge of 
Ireland. ' He has lost his wife and yet goes on much as before, 
therefore her loss has made no great change in him.' But 
perhaps in removing one motive to his habitual acts the loss 
supplied another. The inference even from this actual abstrac- 
tion is utterly baseless except as a conclusion from our know- 
ledge of the whole man, to which of course the new fact created 
by the actual abstraction must contribute. But had we had 
such knowledge before, we could have gone to the conclusion 
without the actual abstraction ; and apart from such know- 
ledge we cannot go to the conclusion on the basis of the actual 
abstraction. 

From the difficulty of bearing in mind the necessity, 
often extremely obscure, of this circuitous route through the 
nature of the whole, and the inapplicability of mere subtraction 
in the complicated relations of non-mathematical reality, 
abstraction is perhaps the most fruitful in mistakes of all 
methods of knowledge. Knowledge in fact is one, and any 
method which consists in the exaggeration of a mere charac- 
teristic of knowledge is ipso facto hazardous. 

Recog- y . Recognition 1 is another of these curiously limited pro- 

nition. ' 

1 I restrict recognition to the elementary meaning of knowing again. 
The ' recognition ' of a right or a principle, i.e. the admission of it, has 
interesting connections with the former case both in Logic and in 
Philology, and illustrates the ease with which these ' processes ' pass 
beyond their normal sphere into knowledge in general. But it is truer 
to usage to regard this latter import as metaphorical. 



CHAP, i] Limits of Recognition 23 

cesses. In its complete form it appears to be reflecitive re- 
production under the influence of an idea of identity, followed 
by comparison and identification of the content reproducing 
with the content reproduced. Recognition differs from Per- 
ception and from Inference as such both by dealing with 
a reproduced content, and by always ending in a direct 
comparison of contents. We do not speak of recognition 
either where there is no reproductive process, or wheie the 
process, though it may establish identity, does not end in 
direct comparison. When we meet a friend whom we see 
every day, there is no process of reproduction ; the extension 
of the sensations is given along with them and the apprehension 
of his identity is a datum of perception. For true recognition 
to take place, it would be necessary that the first datum 
should create a second, on which two data the further process 
would operate. But in Inference the two data may just as 
well be given ; and this is also the case of course with mere 
Comparison. On the other hand, if I ask for a tune of which 
I know the name, but fail to recognise it when it is played, 
then I have inferential identification without recognition. For 
of course I know, supposing that I am confident in my recollec- 
tion of the name and in the pianist's knowledge, that it is 
the same tune which I asked for ; but, when played, it fails to 
reproduce the desired effect in my mind, and either there is 
nothing to compare, or if I compare the tune I hear with my 
idea of the tune I wanted, the result is distinction and not 
identification. Thus recognition is absent, though inferential 
identification is present. Inferential identification, however, 
though ever so circuitous, may set up a direct comparison 
ending in identification, and if so, then we have recognition. 
This is too common an experience to need illustration. 

The reflective influence of the idea of identity may be 
active in recognition to very different degrees, and the idea 
itself may be suggested in very various ways. Probably these 
ways may all be included under imperfect reproduction. An 
interest in identification is necessary to make the idea work ; 
but an interest can only operate in logical thought by attaching 
to a suggested content. Our interest in recollecting a man's 
name operates through the natural but unsuccessful efforts at 



24 The Nature of Inference [BOOKII 

reproduction, in which a prominent syllable of the name, or 
the like, occuis to us. And like the rest of these methodic 
processes, recognition loses its differentia when the abstract 
relation between the special contents in question ceases to 
interest. It is recognition to say ' That is the man who was 
with me in the train yesterday '. It may or may not be 
recognition to say ' That is Professor Huxley ', for this is a 
matter of fact which I may infer otherwise than by direct 
comparison, and which may not at all be meant to indicate 
an identity with a special content reproduced in my mind. 
And when I go deeper into knowledge and say ' Professor 
Huxley is one of the leaders of scientific thought in Europe ' 
I have altogether got beyond recognition pure and simple, 
because the interest is no longer that of mere identification 
but of concrete description. 

Discrimi- 6. Discrimination and Identification, and many other 
& Cf ' methods or processes, might be analysed in the same way. 
All of them are in one sense characteristics of Inference or 
Judgment as such, and therefore enter into each other and 
into the various processes which have just been described. 
But each of them may also be regarded as a special though 
transitional method, guided by a more or less reflective idea 
of the result to be obtained, and subsuming under this reflective 
idea all matters in the content which are favourable to its 
purpose. Discrimination or Distinction is present in all judg- 
ment, in all inference, in all comparison, and in all recognition. 
But it would be pedantry to deny that we constantly set to 
work upon a presented content or two contents as yet un- 
examined, with the clearly envisaged purpose of making out 
a contrast or difference which we expect to find between them. 
Two Acts of Parliament on the same subject ought to deal 
with different aspects of it, and we may fairly set ourselves 
to distinguish the purpose and provisions of the one from the 
purpose and provisions of the other. What we have to keep 
clearly in mind is that the name Distinction is a title drawn 
from a merely dominant and not exclusive characteristic, that 
it therefore is not a desirable basis of logical discussion ; and 
that the process of Distinction itself is transitory, because it 
can only continue as such so long as the result is abstract, and 



CHAP, i] Sciences of Cross-reference 25 

so long as our interest attaches rather to this abstraction than 
to concrete and material content. 

6. There are thus two principles which limit the inferen- Inference 
tial and non-inferential character of the practical processes! 
which we have been considering. As processes guided by 
reflective ideas, they must necessarily involve grounded selec- 
tion * resting either on presupposed subsumption 2 or on general 
connection of content. And when we have grounded selection, 
we have, as we saw, the essentials of inference we have at 
least a suggested distinction between direct and indirect refer- 
ence to Reality. On the other hand, the abstract and therefore 
accidental character of the controlling ideas renders it impos- 
sible that explicit inference should form the essence of these 
processes. The moment we really found our argument on 
an explicit ground going deep into the nature of the subject 
we get a conclusion that must go beyond mere identity, like- 
ness, or distinctness, which with one modification or another, 
but always in more or less abstract form, are the guiding ideas 
and interests of these subordinate methods of knowledge. 

f, If the above processes, including Comparison, are Compara- 
arbitrary and vanishing phases of knowledge, how do we come sdence. 
to speak of Comparative science ? 

The Comparative sciences are the sciences of organic and 
intellectual evolution through its varied series and ramifica- 
tions. Their data are thus, in the first place, actual, inde- 
pendently of the operations of the science, and in the second 
place are essentially types relative to definite functions, and 

1 For the guiding idea operates through a selection within the content. 

2 When I recall a man's name on seeing him, this recognition is not 
based on a necessary connection of content. But the accepted identi- 
fication or subsumption of the man under his name in which I rest when 
the name is reproduced is as good ad hoc as such a connection. The 
reflective idea of identity guides me to select characteristic marks in 
the presented content, which I subsume under that idea. ' That gait, 
voice, gesture, is surely a help to his identity.' Then if I succeed in 
reproducing anything not present, this reproduced content goes up to 
fill up the idea of identity. 

' That face of his I do remember well ; 

But when I saw it last it was besmeared 

As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war,' 

and then a whole history comes up and mere identity gives place to 
description of character. 



26 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

so not as a rule capable of being illustrated by the results of 
direct 1 interference. Hence it follows that the sciences in 
question (i) begin with cross-references between their actual 
data the method of ordinary comparison and (ii) retain 
their data untransformed in these cross-references a leading 
peculiarity of ordinary comparison. 

On the other hand, the abstract ideas of identity, difference, 
&c. which guide ordinary comparison could not form the 
content of any science ; and the comparative sciences go 
beyond ' comparison ' by seeking for definite concrete princi- 
ples of evolution and affiliation between the types with which 
they deal. 

All science, of course, compares ; but chemistry, for example, 
is not ' comparative ' in the above sense. It does not begin 
by cross-references of mercury to carbon and of carbon to gold, 
as philology does with Latin and Greek, and Greek and San- 
skrit. Chemistry has to create its regular series of phenomena 
by experiment before it can lay down principles that connect 
them, and each series at first concerns the nature of a single 
group of substances only. The data, as data of science, are 
not actual. And chemistry does not in its generalisations 
retain its data untransformed. The underlying principle, the 
molecular or atomic hypothesis, is the essence, the element of 
rationality and of interest. In its results, as at its starting- 
point, it would be sheer distortion to call chemistry a com- 
parative science of elements and their compounds. It is an 
analytic enquiry into the fabric and behaviour of matter. 
The elements and their compounds have no individual or 
characteristic value like that of a language, or a polity, or a 
group of myths. In short, in the sciences which are analytic 
par excellence the rationality and interest are on the side of 
the underlying principle, while in comparative science the 
underlying principle serves rather to connect and illustrate 
realities which have independent functional importance. 
Science is one, and these distinctions are matters of degree. 
But even should chemistry ever succeed in representing its 
data as evolutionary products of an intelligible process and 

1 Variations of animals under domestication are hardly for this pur- 
pose to be set down to direct interference. 



CHAP, i] The Identity in Induction 27 

so as thenceforward challenging comparison ab initio, still this 
will be an ultimate achievement and not a method pursued 
throughout. Geometry, as we saw in treating of the quasi- 
generic judgment, mimics evolutionary procedure with some 
success. But its data in their pure form are really made, not 
given as realities of independent significance. 

4. I will now attempt to exhibit in their true light some Species of 
species of Inference, each of which has in turn been erroneously ^ f f c " nce 
identified with its principle. have 

i. Induction in Mill's sense of the term, i. e. Induction by treated 
incomplete enumeration, or inference from particulars to as its 
particulars, is obviously to be identified with the species of P rmci P le ' 
inference in which a confused or implicit universal, indicated particu- 

by a common name, is the ground in mediate assertion re- , *> 

, . . , t . , _ , . particu- 

spectmg concrete things or events. I do not mean to examine lars. 

here the case of Induction by complete enumeration, which 
has in fact been sufficiently illustrated by the analysis of 
enumeration in Book I. 1 It is enough to remark that if this 
Induction really relies on the completeness of its enumeration, 
it ceases ex hypothesi to be Inference. If, again, it relies on 
some discovery made during the enumeration, then the 
completeness of the process is without influence on the result. 
In the Induction by incomplete enumeration, or inference 
from particulars to particulars, in which Mill finds the 
fundamental process of inference as such, there is apt to be 
at first sight nothing at all which binds these particulars 
together. The pervading identity or universal, which we 
affirm to be the operative power in inference, often appears 
in popular practice as in Mill's theory, to be simply non- 
existent. That is to say, it either creeps in under the shelter 
of a mere common name, or may even be absolutely ignored 
in the expression of our inference, because the common name 
which would express it is presupposed, or perhaps is not 
known or does not occur to us. ' Why do you think A likely 
to be a good scholar ? ' ' Well, because B and C and D are 
good scholars.' Here it is plain that something known to both 
speakers is presupposed and not expressed; perhaps for 
example the fact that A, B, C, and D were educated at the 
1 See Bk. I. chap. iv. 



28 The Nature of Inference [BOOK 11 

same school. But often the operative identity is left unex- 
pressed not because it is clearly understood, but because we 
do not think it definitely at all. ' Why do you think that 
picture is by Mantegna ? ' ' Because it reminds me of some 
pictures of his in the National Gallery/ Here the words 
' reminds me ' appeal to a merely psychical fact,* and express 
in doing so my inability to produce a distinct formulation of 
the ground on which I have gone. 

Thus we are presented with something like an antinomy. 
Identity is necessary to Inference, but some Inference takes 
place without Identity. 

The explanation of this contradiction, as distinguished from 
the logical justification of Inference from particulars to 
particulars, is afforded by what has been said about the 
ultimate nature of Inference. The ' particulars ' are not par- 
ticulars, but differences in a universal. The universal, however, 
which in elementary reproduction operates unconsciously, may 
in elementary inference be very far from explicit in thought ; 
or, and this is by far the commoner case, there may be an 
obvious deep-seated identity in the nature of the concrete 
instances, which is not in its entirety relevant to the attribute 
about which we draw our conclusion. Then, in accordance with 
the principle of analogy, we follow the dominating identity, 
and come to a result the precise or relevant ground of which 
we are unable to ascertain. The conception of inference from 
particulars to particulars is thus an illusion arising from the 
activity in inference of presupposed, superficial, or unanalysed 
universals. 

Subsump- ii. Subsumption is the complement of inference from par- 
ticulars to particulars. I speak here as above of the natural and 
normal process, and not of the process by completed enumera- 
tion, which is devoid of inferential character. Subsumption is 
based on the conjunction of attributes in the actual concrete 
nature of a subject or subjects. The identity of nature which 
is implicit in inference ' from particulars to particulars ' is 
here made explicit in the content of an individual or indi- 

* I suppose it may be either a psychical fact or an indefinite meaning 
either a mood of mind, or a something in the actual painting which 
I see but cannot express in words. 



CHAP, i] Subsumption and Calculation 29 

viduality. But this identity, though seldom wholly destitute 
of inferential significance, is in respect of the conjunction of 
attributes within it a confused and not a scientific concrete. 
The connection of the attributes is proved by it not as a 
principle but only as a fact. Of course, however, an inference 
which is really matter of principle may borrow the shape of 
subsumption, and in doing so may or may not continue to 
imply a principle that really goes beyond subsumption. The 
relation between inference from particulars to particulars and 
its complement subsumption is thoroughly illustrated by 
Mill's discussion of the subsumptive syllogism. Putting aside 
the notion of a petitio principii, which only applies when the 
major premise in Barbara is regarded as a complete enumera- 
tion, we find that the major premise consists in an explicit 
enunciation of the common nature which really warrants the 
conclusion. Mill regards this enunciation only in the light 
of a summary of particulars, and as we have seen, the facts 
of rudimentary reproduction and even of elementary inference 
bear him out in the view that it is not indispensable. The 
point however is, that though the enunciation itself is not 
indispensable, yet the operation of that identity which the 
enunciation formulates is indispensable. It is this which, in 
the form of an ideal content considered as a subject qualified 
by attributes, is the point of union in subsumptive inference. 
Here again the nature of the active universal determines the 
inferential form, 

iii. Calculation is a divergent form of subsumption, in Calcula- 
which, by passing through the stage of complete enumeration, 
the universal operative in the inference has been transformed 
from an ideal content existing in individuals to a totality 
where parts are units. The concrete individuality, i. e. the 
common generic nature of the individuals, has faded away 
by abstraction into a mere denomination of units, and the 
. attributes which were conjoined within the generic content 
have also become denominations of the numerical wholes. 
These numerical wholes which have arisen out of the ' extension ' 
of the ideal content by means of enumeration are related to 
each other as measurable parts and wholes in the system of 
number. Thus the subsumptive syllogism, ' All Englishmen 



30 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

are Europeans, all Londoners are Englishmen, therefore all 
Londoners are Europeans/ may be seriously taken in the 
aspect of extension, which through the affinity between the 
individual and the unit is always closely allied to the aspect of 
number. But to carry this aspect to a genuine result we must 
not simply say ' Englishmen = English Europeans ', &c. &c., 
for the insertion of ' English ' in the predicate makes the sign = , 
which implies restriction to the aspect of number, superfluous 
and meaningless. And if we do not use =, but retain the 
copula ' are ', then the repetition in the predicate goes a long 
way to destroy the meaning of the judgment by reducing it 
to a tautology. 

Calcula- a j| we ser i ous iy intend to draw a conclusion from the 
proper, relation of individuals as units, i. e. apart from their content 
except in so far as it distinguishes them into groups, we must 
first constitute each of our wholes into a numerical whole by 
complete enumeration, and then refer these wholes to one 
another in respect of their measurable identity or want of 
identity, i. e. equality or inequality, which latter, as we saw 
above, being assignable as an exact difference, involves the 
former. Then we should get something like Englishmen = ^o 
Europeans, Londoners = ~ Englishmen. That is to say, 
Londoners, numerically considered, are a part that repeats 
itself four times in the numerical whole of Englishmen, and 
Englishmen numerically considered are a part that repeats 
itself twenty times in the numerical whole of Europeans. 
Thus the same numerical whole presents itself as thoroughly 
identical with itself in its differences or different relations, 
whether as the number of Englishmen, obtained by simple 
enumeration, or as four times the number of Londoners, a 
relation obtained by comparison of enumerations and analysis 
of a sum into its parts, or as a twentieth part of the number 
of Europeans, a relation obtained in the same way as the last 
mentioned. The quantitative universal, which is the same 
in kind throughout all its different aspects not distinguish- 
able as a subject controlling attributes and as attributes that 
severally do not exhaust the subject is thus an embodiment 
of the rule, ' Things which are equal to the same thing are 
equal to each other. 1 Calculation is mediate judgment, in 



CHAP, i] Calculus at second-hand 31 

which, from the nature of the whole that operates, there is no 
distinction between subject and predicate. 

It is obvious therefore that Calculation cannot be applied 
to wholes that consist of heterogeneous or non-quantitative 
parts, or at least, if so applied, can only deal with them in 
their aspect, probably a subordinate one, of homogeneity. 
If the number of lines in Macbeth is ^th of the number of 
lines contained in all Shakespeare's plays together, what 
then ? The relation of Macbeth to the other works of Shake- 
speare's mind must be expressed by other universals than this. 
There have always been logicians whose gaze has been fasci- 
nated by the simplicity and certainty of calculative processes ; 
but it is idle to place the ideal of argument in a type which 
depends on the relations of identical units. The tendency 
to acquiesce in this ideal has no doubt been strengthened by 
the absolute reciprocity of the equational judgment, which 
has been explained above. This reciprocity anticipates, 
though at a long interval, a prominent attribute of notional 
definition or of any complete and concrete knowledge ; and 
this anticipation of a characteristic which is rightly ascribed 
to the logical ideal has increased the attractiveness of corn- 
putative or quasi -comput at ive processes as types of logical 
method. 

p. The importance of the Equational logic is so great Equa- 
that I will return for a moment to its principle, which has 
been cursorily alluded to on the previous page. The point of 
logical interest in regard to it is that it is not at first hand a 
calculus at all, though it is a calculus, and a very effective one, 
at second hand. In this respect it is of the same grade as 
the calculus of chances, with which it is closely allied. By 
saying that the logical calculus is not a calculus at first 
hand, I mean that the judgments with which is deals are not 
judgments that embody numerical or quantitative relations 
as such, and therefore, as was shown above, have no fair 
claim to the sign = as copula. This is absolutely clear of the 
judgments which Jevons calls Partial Identities, in which the 
employment of the sign = is not in accordance with usage. 
It is not intelligible to say x that Iron = a metal, or that 
1 Principles of Science, p. 40. 



32 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

Diatomaceae = a class of plants, or that Mammalia = a class of 
vertebrates. These judgments are obviously subsumptive 
judgments, intended to express the conjunction of certain 
attributes in certain individuals, or else the identity of 
certain sets of individuals under certain different aspects or 
descriptions. But the sign = does not express this conjunction 
of attributes or identity of individuals, except as the attributes 
or identity of a quantitative whole, and as on the other hand 
the judgment suggests no obvious quantitative aspect, weight 
or number or value, in which identity can be asserted, it 
follows that the form of the judgment simply contradicts its 
content, i.e. the judgment is not intelligible. 

With Simple Identities the case is somewhat different. It 
is not indeed intelligible to say that ' Lord Salisbury = 
the Prime Minister of England ', or that ' St. Mary's Church 
at Oxford = the University Church'. 1 But it is intelligible 
I now take Jevons' examples of simple identities that 
' The smell of a rotten egg = that of hydrogen sulphide ; ' and 
that ' The colour of the Pacific Ocean = the colour of the 
Atlantic Ocean*. And the reason why it is intelligible is this. 
It is possible to interpret these judgments as establishing 
identity of degree 2 in a quality capable of variations ; i.e. 
quantitative identity or an equation of colours or of smells. 
And by a metaphorical usage based on this fact identical 
conceptions, though not strictly quantitative, are sometimes 
said to be eqttivalent, and this equivalence is rudely symbolised 
by the sign of equality. But the point to note is that equiva- 
lence cannot be affirmed on the ground of individual identity. 
It means equal amount and kind of intension, and does not 

1 Unless we meant to affirm that Lord Salisbury when Prime Minister 
retains, for example, his normal height and weight ; or that St. Mary's 
when considered as the University Church suffers no diminution of size. 
It might be urged that this is worth considering, for of Merton Chapel, 
if I remember right, a parallel assertion would be untrue, the choir 
being a college chapel, and the church as a whole a parish church. 

* Jevons does not in the least distinguish true intensive equation, 
as in a colour match, from identification of individuals or classes oi 
things in a sense quite beyond quantity. He falls to distinguish Quality 
from Kind or Individuality. Hence ' Deal Landing-place of Caesar*' 
is to him a * simple Identity ', no less than ' Colour of Pacific Ocean = 
Colour of Atlantic Ocean '. 



AP. i] Equational Logic is subsumptive 33 

Lean identity of component individuals. Thus it is simply 
ilse that * Exogens = Dicotyledons ', for the meanings are 
ot equivalent, though the individuals designated by the 
ames are, exceptis excipiendis, the same. 

In the first instance, therefore, the judgment as formulated 
y the Equational logic is not an equation, because it does 
ot restrict itself to a quantitative aspect, but predicates 
[dividual identity. Although you say that Diatomaceae = a 
[ass of plants, you may not go on to say that this class of 
Lants = another class x (meaning that the two are equal in 
umber), and that therefore the Diatomaceae = the class x. 
he original judgment might indeed happen to justify this 
dculation, but in passing through it would have entirely 
>st its peculiar import. 

The office of computation in the Calculus is not to compare 
uantitative attributes of objects, but to secure complete 
numeration of possible judgments. In this office of secondary 
nport it somewhat resembles the translation of a material 
isjunctive judgment into a numerical statement of chances. 
Jut the statement of chances gives a numerical result, whereas 
he logical calculus, after protecting itself by a computation 
f combinations, returns to a result in the shape of identifica- 
ion or identifications. Working as it does solely by the 
lentification of individuals under different aspects, i. e. as con- 
oining in themselves different attributes, the equational logic 
5 obviously a species of subsumption, and rests ultimately on 
he subsumptive principle that attributes conjoined in the 
ame individual are conjoined with each other. Thus in regard 
o the nature of the universal which is operative in inference 
hrough the calculus, there is little to say beyond what has 
Iready been said in dealing with subsumption. The only 
>eculiarity of this species of subsumption is that in it the 
indefined capacities of subsumption as such for conveying 
Connections of principles are cut down to the most abstract 
expression of individual unity, without being allowed to 
levelope in the direction which such abstract unity naturally 
iuggests, viz. that of participation in a numerical whole, 
iv. ' Construction ' * is a term frequently applied to a method 

* Cp. ii. 3 19 note below on the relation of this passage to vol. i, p. 42 ff . 
1337-2 D 



34 The Nature of Inference [BOOKII 

Construe- or element of inference, a. It primarily indicates an auxiliary 
Physical, process employed in geometrical or mechanical reasoning. 
This process consists in making accessible to perception a 
geometrical or mechanical complex of relations which embodies 
a problem or theorem that is under consideration. The actual 
physical construction a diagram on paper or a model or 
experimental machine 1 though not ideal, but an object of 
sense, is nevertheless abstract in its sensuousness, being pur- 
posely cleared of the irrelevancies which encumber our 
ordinary perceptions. And further, the nature of space is so 
closely related to sense-perception, that ideal spatial relations 
can be adequately symbolised by actual figures presented to 
perception, although the ideal relation underlying a theorem 
is always both more and less than the visible or tangible lines 
and points. ' More/ because the visible lines can be but 
a case of the ideal relation ; ' less/ because the perceptible 
lines, though reduced to black on white, still include errors 
and irrelevancies which the mind in working with them 
disregards. The case of a working model or machine made 
to experiment with is at first sight different from that of a 
mere diagram. But the difference is only in degree. Both 
the diagram and the machine are really in pari materia with 
that which they represent to the mind ; the diagram with 
ordinary perception, the machine with ordinary physical 
causation. But it is harder to say where the line is to be drawn 
between fact and representative of fact in the case of the 
machine, which shades off gradually into the ordinary opera- 
tions of nature. Such a thing however as a working model 2 
that illustrates the lever action of the limbs shows how 
the machine as such stands between natural process and 
abstract mechanics. It is the abstract physical expression for 

1 An excellent example of construction in this sense, the solution of 
a problem in actual physical embodiment, is the machine for drawing 
sound curves of any shape by actual pendular oscillations. There is 
such a machine, I think, with actual pendulums, which thus does not 
merely mimic the curves (as the machine with cog-wheels may be said 
to do), but actually constructs them in terms of the theory. 

8 A complete model of the ear or eye may seem not to be abstract, 
but only magnified ; it is however abstract by its isolation from other 
parts, its fixity, and its capability of being taken to pieces. 



CHAP, i] Construction aids Abstraction 35 

a natural activity, and paves the way for its abstract ideal 
expression. 

Construction in this first and simplest sense is not even a 
case or species of Inference. The production of a visible 
material figure or object does not even, strictly speaking, 
enter into the essence of the inferential process. It is however 
a peculiar auxiliary method which depends upon and throws 
into relief the characteristic nature of the universal the 
abstraction of sense with which Inference is concerned in 
Geometry or abstract mechanics. The lines drawn on paper, 
though peculiarly adequate symbols, are nevertheless only 
symbols of the lines with which geometry actually works. And 
of course we do not draw the lines on paper at random, and 
they would be of no use if we did. We only draw them in 
accordance with the requirements of the universal operative in 
the inference, so far as these requirements are already known 
and can guide us from moment to moment. The aim is to aid 
intellectual reflection in fixing and following connections which 
suggest themselves within that universal ; and as we have 
seen, the material lines or even cords, pulleys, levers, &c. 
represent an intellectual work already partly accomplished 
in the exclusion of irrelevant elements. But the material or 
physical construction is not the active element in the accom- 
plishment of this work. This construction in the sense of actual 
drawing or model-making is a process characteristic of geo- 
metrical or mechanical inference, but not identical therewith 

j3. But this brings us to a secondary sense of construction imagina- 
secondary not in logical value, but, as I think, in usage and tlve * 
the growth of meaning. Of course actual lines on paper are 
not essential to simple geometrical inference in which we can 

carry the figure in our heads ', and if so, the visible external 
figure cannot in theory be essential to any such inference. 
Professor Clifford, it would appear, was almost independent 
Of external aids to realisation in considering geometrical or 
physical problems. But when we work with ideas of lines, 
and combine spatial elements in our imagination, and not on 
paper, is not this still construction, and yet is it not now of 
the essence of inference ? 

I fear that at this point a further refinement cannot be 

D2 



36 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

avoided. It seems to me obvious that the imaginative experi- 
ment is a different thing from the intellectual perception of 
unity. The imaginative experiment may be misdirected and 
void of result, as a line drawn on paper in addition to an actual 
diagram may be irrelevant and meaningless. The imaginary 
line projected on imaginary paper, though necessary perhaps 
to the intellectual apprehension, is it seems to me purely on 
a level with the external line perceived through sense. But 
when any line either given on paper or suggested in imagination 
has been intellectually grasped as symbolic of a relation 
relevant to the universal which we are developing, then it is 
taken up into the inference and has passed from a step in 
physical or imaginative construction to an element in necessary 
apprehension. In looking for that point in an ellipse in which 
the sun had to be placed in order that the ellipse might 
represent a planetary orbit according to the theory of gravita- 
tion it is easy either in imagination or on paper to select the 
middle point of the longer axis. The question as to the nature 
of the process is not whether I draw or only imagine, but 
whether in doing either one or the other I am guided by 
insight into the connection of the data and into the con- 
ditions of the problem. If I seem to myself to have such 
an insight, but am, as in the case above-mentioned, mistaken 
in the connection which I fancy that I detect, then I infer, but 
wrongly. If however, or in as far as, I put the sun in the 
wrong place or in the right place by an isolated act of sensuous 
fancy, then I may be constructing, but I am not inferring. 
Intellect- y. The organised or articulated intellectual perception 
Geometry ** se ^> * n con trast with the physical or imaginative experi- 
and ment or rather taken as including this experiment, for the 
Mechan- sensuous i^eas cannot be dispensed with affords a third 
meaning which may be put upon construction. Of course 
this perception has the effect of a synthesis, of a putting 
together as well as of a distinguishing. And especially when 
the relations thus put together as having their unity in one 
universal are spatial relations, readily symbolised by imagina- 
tive pictures, there is a plausibility in translating the Greek 
term ' synthesis ', which in technical logic expresses the unity 
of differences inherent in all intelligible judgment, into the 



CHAP, i] Intention in Inference 37 

term of Latin origin ' construction ', which may be held to 
express this same idea with the additional implication of 
intentional operation in time, by which elements of intellectual 
perception are put together like the parts of a machine. 

Construction in this third sense, a sense largely insisted 
on by Kant, is a hybrid idea. I cannot doubt that it designates 
a true species of inference inference dealing with the abstrac- 
tions of sense by a title actually drawn from and implying 
an accident of inference, viz. intentional combination, successive 
in time, of visible or imagined forms. Now the intention, 
except in as far as it is a general intention to infer correctly, 
falls outside inference. In inference nothing can guide us 
but inferential necessity ; and a special intention, such as 
that of drawing a line on a slate or on paper, or of constructing 
a model of a joint, arises in some motive external to the 
inference proper. And as with the intention, so with the fact 
of material construction. It is a mere accident of inference. 
Therefore the intentional combination of perceptible or 
imaginable elements falls outside inference proper except in 
so far as it is guided by inferential grounds. But it is true 
that, especially wherever we have novelty or discovery in in- 
ference, 1 imaginative or perceptive construction is an indis- 
pensable auxiliary to thought. 

5. And finally, by insisting on the ideas of synthesis, of Intellect- 
intention, and of the value of imagination in inference, we ollt f ]mu^~ 
arrive at a fourth meaning of Construction, 2 in which it is tation to 
alleged to be an essential element or even the essence of all 
inference, as an intellectual combinative process, not confined 
to the region of geometrical or mechanical abstractions. Thus 
understood, Construction becomes a convenient expression for 
the distinct realisation in inference even of universals which 
are not numerical or geometrical, if they are more than 
subsumptive. Transferring a spatial metaphor to such uni- 
.versals, it appears to explain the definite necessity which unites 
their differences, by reference to the precise and unambiguous 
coherence which belongs to geometrical relations. But we 
have seen that even as applied to geometrical inferences 

1 See p. 8, supra. 

8 Bradley's Principles of Logic, p. 235, and passim. 



38 The Nature of Inference [BOOK n 

construction is to a great extent a metaphor drawn from an 
accident of those inferences, and when we deal with universals 
which are not at all sensuous the simplicity of the expression 
becomes actually deceptive. It is easy to say, for example, 
that we intellectually ' construct ' such a whole as the British 
Constitution out of isolated facts, principles, and accepted 
ideas, and then proceed to perceive its nature. But it is plain 
that anything valuable in the ' construction ' is coincident 
with and guided by the growing insight into the nature of 
the content before us which constitutes the inference itself. 
We must distinguish from this usage that by which we speak 
of constructing a Utopia. Here of course we are ostensibly 
not inferring, though we have really to use inference. We 
are playing, employing the imagination according to arbitrary 
interests and motives, and not under intellectual guidance, 
until we begin to draw consequences from what we have said. 
And the root of the whole usage which we have examined is 
that in all inference, so far as it has novelty or is a process 
modifying itself in time, there is an arbitrary and external 
element which supplies guidance to the attention until the 
true principle and the relevant details have been disentangled, 
and operates throughout the inference by the side of the true 
principle which gradually displaces and finally ousts it. This 
arbitrary element may indeed be regarded as the universal 
itself in an imperfect form, but for this very reason it contains 
much in the way of suggestion or experiment l much tentative 
synthesis that has to be dropped and erased before the infer- 
ence can assume its true and final form. And the name 
construction depends largely on the elements which, having 
been intentionally and therefore tentatively inserted, are 
ultimately dropped. 

The outcome of our account of Construction then is this. 
Construction is a term drawn from moral, physical, and 
psychological adjuncts of inference. In the case of geometrical 
and mechanical inference these adjuncts are so far akin to 
the matter of the universal, that the term ' Construction ' 
drawn from them may be held a fair designation of such 

1 Cp. the case above cited in which the focus of the ellipse was the point 
required, but the middle of the longer axis was the first point selected. 



CHAP, i] Construction not essential 39 

inferential processes, e. g. of Kant's account of matter on the 
basis of attraction and repulsion. In the case of other and 
less sensuous universals this is not so, and Construction as 
applied to them is a mere metaphor and not even a case of 
Inference. Thus Construction should never be assigned as 
the essence or as an essential element of Inferential activity. 
The above account of four main cases 1 of Inference may serve 
as an anticipatory sketch of the course which our discussion 
will pursue in the following chapters. (See scheme annexed.) 

SCHEME ILLUSTRATING AFFILIATION OF ARGUMENTS AS 
DESCRIBED IN BOOK II. 

Subsumptive Series. Constructive or Relational 

Series. 

Incomplete Enumerative Apprehension of connections 

Induction in Space and Time : 

(Syllog. Fig. 3). ' Construction.' 



Complete Enumeration 
Arithmetical Science. 



Analogy (Syllog. Fig. 2), Geometrical and Mechanical 

(Natural Classification). ' Construction '. 

i 

Scientific Induction. 8 



Explanatory Theory. 



i 

Notional Subsumption 
(Syllog. Fig. i). 

Disjunction. 
Judgment of Value. 

1 Or five, counting among them the process which Construction in its 
fourth sense is abusively applied to designate. 

a Scientific Induction is treated as a transition by which Explanatory 
Theory may be reached from the side of Analogy. The scheme is 
intended to represent each type of inference as a combination of that 
vertically above it with that with which it is connected by a horizontal 
line. This does not apply to the relation between Explanatory Theory 
and Complete Enumeration, which stand where they do merely as being 
intermediate forms. 



40 On Symbolic Logic [Booxii 



APPENDIX TO CHAPTER I 

ON THE RELATION OF SYMBOLIC LOGIC TO THE THEORY 
OF THE PRESENT WORK. 

I CANNOT pretend to give an adequate account of Symbolic 
Logic in its present development. But there is a matter 
connected with it which readers of this work may rightly 
demand some attempt to explain ; and on which, moreover, 
the co-operation of students working from the side of philo- 
sophy (or, if this is held a question-begging phrase, from the 
side of a monistic philosophy) and from the side of Formal 
Logic respectively is highly desirable. I mean the ascertain- 
ment of the precise point of divergence at which Formal 
Logic, construed as including pure Mathematics, parts com- 
pany from the sort of Philosophical Logic that is aimed at 
by the present work, attempting to follow the tradition that 
is one on the whole with that of Aristotle and Plato. 

The problem thus arising in the first place (i) on a certain 

point puts the theory of the present work on its defence, while 

in the second place (2) as it involves the conditions under which 

the divergence comes to pass, the answer to it would determine 

the reservation or no-reservation subject to which Formal 

Logic can be held from the monistic point of view to be true. 

Formal i. I will first say something about the theory of the present 

Phiio- wor k as it concerns the point of divergence of Formal Logic (in 

sophic Mr. Russell's sense indicating Symbolic Logic and pure Mathe- 

Loglc ' matics) from Philosophical Logic in my sense of the term. 

Point of a. The point of divergence in question, according to my 

gence im- ac ^ount given above, is where quality passes into quantity 

plied m by the transformation of the judgment into the equation. 

Here begins, according to that account, the transformation of 

the wide and plastic logical idea of system and members, 1 

into the narrow and rigid idea of quantitative whole and parts, 

passing through which it reaches the last abstraction in the 

shape of denomination and numerical units. The denomination 

appeared to be a last abstraction of the whole or system, 

1 Not yet explicit at the point in question becoming in fact explicit 
by contrast with the formal framework then brought to light. 



CHAP, i] Mathematics and Quantity 41 

the units, of the parts or members. The numerical series 
seemed to be an ideal scheme of the relations of members 
within systems * from a certain limited point of view ; that is, 
when distinguished only by a logical order of progression 
assigning every unit a place in relation to every other. b 

Mathematics, then, seemed to be especially connected with 
quantity, and to be characterised accordingly by the homo- 
geneousness of the wholes space, time, and number with 
which especially it appeared to deal, their actual characteristics 
being idealised to a point which made the nexus of their 
relations a matter for almost purely hypothetical judgments. 
Absolutely pure hypothetical judgment, an assertion of im- 
plications following upon a supposition which is in no way 
attached to an underlying real system, I do pot believe to 
have a meaning. 

The Logic which had the same origin as Mathematics when 
thus conceived, was then familiar as Equational Logic, 
founded upon the same transformation of the Judgment 
which gave rise to Mathematics itself. This transformation, 
when applied to Logic in general, was open to serious criticism 
because of the inadequacy of the equational form, which 
ought to indicate a purely quantitative relation, to the meaning 
of a true logical judgment. It seemed to be neither Logic nor 
Mathematics. d 

a e.g. i. 168. 

b I think I am entitled to repudiate any "suggestion (if really directed 
against my doctrine ; see Russell, Principles, 114) that my view was 
satisfied with the psychological conception of counting the acts of 
counting. Number was for me always a relation of ordered series, 
which we became aware of by counting. Cp. i . 168, 1 70. And I should 
be wanting in courage were I not to admit, in spite of the authority 
against me, that though every class has a number, yet the connotation 
of every number seems to me to be determined by relations to a whole 
independent of the class which has the number. 

See Russell, Principles, p. 14. This observation affects, I should 
suppose, Mr. Russell's extreme use of the hypothetical proposition in 
llustrating the meaning of implications. You cannot say, I should 
urge, ' If a donkey is Plato, it is a great philosopher/ The hypothesis 
scatters your underlying reality to the winds, and what I should call the 
basis of implication is gone. In a real system, S qualifies P as well as P, S. 

d Cp. Bradley 's Logic, p. 24 ff . with Mr. Keynes's defence and reinter- 
pretation of the equational form, pp. 189 90. 



On Symbolic Logic 



[BOOK II 



Point of 
diver- 
gence 
on Mr. 



/3 The conception of pure Mathematics has now, as I 
understand, freed itself from all special relation to quantity, 
and the view is affirmed that the science to which it applies 
Russell's cons j[ s ts wholly in logical deduction from logical principles. 
Thus its point of divergence from what is here treated as 
Philosophical Logic is not that assigned in the account that 
was summarised in the previous paragraph, but is rather 
that to which my description finally traced the abstraction. 
It deals, I gather, not at all with existents, actual space, actual 
time, or actual characters of totalities represented by number, 
but with the formal essence of propositions not with facts, 
but with the mutual implications of propositions, and these 
propositions containing none but logical constants. It is, in 
strict principle, to be defined as one with Symbolic Logic, 
which again is one with Formal Logic.* 

The path which its conception traverses in attaining this 
point may be illustrated by a quotation from Mr. Russell. b 

' Whenever two sets of terms have mutual relations of the same 
type, the same forms of deduction will apply to both* For 
example, the mutual relations of points in a Euclidean plane 
are of the same type as those of the complex numbers ; hence 
plane geometry, considered as a type of pure mathematics, 
ought not to decide whether its variables are points or complex 
numbers or some other set of entities having the same type of 
mutual relations. Speaking generally, we ought to deal, in 
every branch of mathematics, with any class of entities whose 
mutual relations are of a specified type ; thus the class, as 
well as the particular term considered, becomes a variable, 
and the only true constants are the types of relations and 
what they involve. Now a type d of relations is to mean, 6 in 
this discussion, a class of relations characterised by the above 
formal identity of the deductions e possible in regard to the 
various members of the class ; and hence a type of relations, 
as will appear more fully hereafter, if not already evident, is 
always a class definable in terms of logical constants.*' We 
may therefore define a type of relations as a class of relations 
defined by some property definable in terms of logical relations 
alone.' 

ft Russell, Principles, p. 9. b Ibid., pp. 7-8. c My italics. 

d Mr. Russell's italics. e My italics. 

f [Mr. Russell's note]. ' One-one, many-one, transitive, symmetrical, 
are instances of types of relations with which we shall be often con- 
cerned '. 



CHAP, i] Quantity not implied 43 

Am I presumptuous in observing that we see here the 
progress towards homogeneousness of the subject-matter and 
pure logical implication much as it was set out in the account 
to which the previous paragraph referred ? If two sets of 
terms have mutual relations of the same type, the same forms 
of deduction will apply to both ; but to be of the same type, 
if I understand the passages rightly, has no other meaning 
than to be such that the same forms of deduction will apply. 
So, am I wrong in suggesting that very great and serious 
differences between two sets of terms may be neglected (such 
as differences between points in a Euclidean plane and 
complex numbers) if only a common set of formal deductions 
can be found which apply to them ? This is the course that 
was described above, in pointing out the increasing homo- 
geneousness of the subject-matter of Mathematics as the 
characteristic differences e. g. of space and time come to be 
neglected. The science has a right, I should say, to define 
the same type of relations as it finds convenient. But in its 
claim to truth the amount of difference which it has omitted 
will have to be taken into consideration. 

I gather, then, that any reference to quantity or to any form 
of actual existence is now to be taken as excluded, and that 
pure Mathematics is to consist, as we said, in logical deductions 
from logical principles. And the province of Symbolic Logic 
is practically the same. It claims, as I understand, to have 
thrown off the limitation which offended us in the Equational 
Logic, and is now prepared to deal with any type of relation 
whatever, in no way implying a preference for statements 
framed in quantitative form. And it is noticeable that the 
Symbolic shape is treated as accidental and unessential. This 
is more important than it seems. For the idea of a perfectly 
and purely Formal Logic is necessarily, I presume, as we see 
in the simple case of conversion, to deal with its terms as if they 
were units unmodifiable except in position, expressions to be 
combined or transposed as wholes, and without intrinsic 
modification.* But the present symbolism is in itself more 

a I am aware that in the most formal logic, when expressed in 
ordinary language, grammar will hardly permit this rule to be carried 
out. But there is no doubt, I think, that purely formal procedure 



44 On Symbolic Logic [BOOKII 

adaptable, as is shown for instance by its admitting a differ- 
ence of ' sense ' a between a relation and its converse ; and 
also, as we saw, the symbolism as a whole, which must always 
be a check on the change induced in terms by change of 
combination and inter-connection, b is considered unessential. 
Therefore the intrinsic modification of terms, demanded by 
a sound theory of inference, though discouraged, as I think, 
by the habitual use of a conventional symbolism, is not in 
principle excluded. 

Thus the point of divergence between Symbolic Logic, 
including pure Mathematics, on the one hand, and what I 
call Philosophical Logic on the other, is, if the views just 
stated are to be held decisive, at the end and not at the 
beginning of the quantitative development of the judgment. 
The ultimate divergence would appear to take place at the 
point where the theory of the hypothetical judgment has 
been explicitly laid down, exhibiting for the first time an 
embodiment of implication as distinct from mere subsumptive 
conjunction. And it would consist in isolating the relation 
of implication in such a judgment from the limitation 
imposed on it and the extensions ascribed to it owing to the 
doctrine that every hypothetical presupposes and depends 
upon a systematic whole taken to be real. Thus the limitation 
on illegitimate hypothesis, which forbids such an implication as 
' if the number 2 were Socrates, it would be a great philosopher* d 
is swept away ; and with it the suggestion that in a pure 
hypothetical the implication is reciprocal. I give this latter 

becomes uncertain in so far as a term is modified by its place in a 
context. The preference for predication by ' is ' with a noun, over 
a concrete verb, is a simple case. You cannot readily ' convert ' a 
verbal predication. 

a ' sens ', direction. 

b Cp. my remarks, p. 202, on the changes inevitable within a syste- 
matic argument, where the meaning of the term develops. I therefore 
deny that * the syllogism in all its figures belongs to Symbolic Logic ' 
Principles, p. 10. In my view it contains a principle of life and growth 
which cannot be symbolically represented. 

In my scheme the meeting-point of abstract relation of Space, Time, 
and Number, with the pure Hypothetical Judgment, and the develop- 
ment of the latter as an expression of sheer relativity or implication. 
See vol. i, pp. 86 and 233-4. 

d Principles, p. 14. 



CHAP, i] Implication v. Stability 45 

merely as an instance of a loss which seems to me to arise 
from a non-philosophical interpretation of the proposition in 
accordance with colloquial usage.* 

This then is the acknowledged point of divergence ; not 
the establishment of the quantitative judgment, but the 
admitted emergence of implication as a relation between 
propositions. If this view is to be taken as decisive, the account 
of quantitative judgment in the present work shows first the 
steps antecedent to the divergence, and next the full nature of 
the divergence, rather than traces the divergence forward from 
its critical point. To do this on the present basis would mean 
to give an account of Symbolic Logic, which I admit myself 
unable to offer. 

2. In what, then, precisely does the divergence consist ? The di- 
Surely in this, that Symbolic Logic b is interested in the 
of mutual implication between propositions the modes of 
formal Deduction while Philosophical Logic is interested in 
the conditions of logical stability. 

a. I will first say what I mean by this latter conception. Logi- 
I understand Truth to be that characteristic of a system of btuty^x 
propositions which makes it free from self-contradiction and plained, 
from contradiction with the rest of experience. This charac- 
teristic (which I take to be what Plato means by aArjfota 
* trueness ') may be technically described as logical stability d 
(Plato's /SejSaioYrjs). It involves the conception that every 
judgment is at once determined as to its meaning, and 
criticised as to its non-liability to contradiction, by its place 

a Even if the proposition is taken as itself non-mental, the assignment 
of its import may be, and in Mr. Russell's case I think is, drawn from 
colloquial usage. See below, p. 48. I do not feel sure whether the 
statement that only judgment or belief, involving mind, can be true or 
false, is an abandonment of the above position, or a concession to 
popular phraseology. Cp. Principles, p. ix, and Philosophical Essays, 
pp. 172-3. I think the difference is unimportant for my point, which 
lies in the isolation of that, whatever it may be, which is true or false. 

b I omit henceforward, for brevity's sake, to add ' and pure mathe- 
matics ', which I understand to be implied throughout. 

The sharp ruling out of Inductive Inference from the subject-matter 
of Symbolic Logic is very significant (see Russell, Principles, p. n) 
To me, for example, it means that the ultimate principles which underlie 
alike Formal and Informal Inferences, are ignored. 

d See e. er. Reo. V and VI and notes in mv ComDanion. 



46 On Symbolic Logic [BOOKII 

in the whole system of judgments which represents our 
organised experience. Its degree of non-liability to contra- 
diction, internal or external, is its degree of logical sta- 
bility, and I take it to be the main interest of philosophical 
logic, as I indicated from the beginning,* to analyse the forms 
which are generated by the impulse towards such stability or 
satisfactoriness, with reference to the various degrees in which 
they embody its achievement. The rules of inference come 
in rather as the modes of passing from grade to grade of logical 
stability than as expressive of relations between this and that 
or these and those propositions. How and under what reserva- 
tions premisses yield a conclusion, for example, is the study of 
the formation of a whole of relatively higher stability than its 
isolated data, not a mere playing a game under given rules. 

Now this conception at once brings the consequence that 
there can be no unproved premisses or prior foundations b of 
knowledge. For the proof of every judgment is ultimately in 
the system as a whole ; and there can be no indefinables nor 
colloquial interpretation of propositions in any sense of the 
latter term, for every proposition and every judgment takes 
its meaning as well as its certainty from the system. And 
there can be no implication as a relation between isolated 
propositions, for the only implication is that which at any 
point is necessary to the avoidance of contradiction in the 
system. If we intend to set out without reservations or pre- 
suppositions, and investigate what is meant by the presence 
of trueness or satisfactoriness in the forms of thought, this, 
I suggest, is the only way to go about it. We start, in this 
case, not from unproved premisses, but from minima of 
experience, which are found to lead both in truth and certainty 
beyond themselves, and possess, until they have so led, no 
more than a provisional meaning and certainty. 

ft. Symbolic Logic diverges from Logic as thus conceived by 
omitting the conception of logical stability. It takes the 
proposition primarily as an isolated unit not mental but 
recognises the mutual implication of propositions. Its 
interest lies in the study of the various general types of 
deduction, or ' the general rules by which inferences are 
ft Vol. i, p. 3. b Below, p. 266, 



CHAP, i] Unproved Premisses 47 

made ' ; that is, I presume, the rules by which you can 
assert or deny a proposition of one general type when assum- 
ing one or more propositions of the same or some other type. 
It is recognised that true and false propositions respectively 
have different relations of implication as regards all pro- 
positions ; but I do not gather that these implications are 
capable of degree, so that a proposition could be more or less 
true because of being more or less supported by other pro- 
positions. Its truth or falsehood I understand to be self- 
contained, a private affair of its own, not lying in its coherence 
or incoherence with a system. a 

In a word, the resulting difference is twofold. As the 
foundation of the science you get a number of indefinables 
and of unproved premisses, assumed really for reasons of 
convenience that is to say, with a view to leading proofs 
from them in the simplest and neatest way. b And as the 
goal of the science you get an enormous command over the 
forms of deductions applicable to propositions which them- 
selves, though always general, are unchangeable units. You 
have no such phenomenon as a system operating within 
propositions c so that their ideal shape and certainty is always 
ahead of their given form, and makes itself felt as an impulse 
to self-transformation and completion in other forms. On 
Mr. Russell's philosophy, I presume that a proposition would 
not be an entity capable of embodying such an impulse (not 
being in any way mental). But, as I admitted just now, 
I do not know whether Mr. Russell's philosophy is generally 
held essential to the logical doctrine which he shares with 
others. d In any case, whether the proposition is mental or 
not, and whether or no we subscribe to pluralism, the pro- 
position for Formal Logic is a fixture, in relation with others, 

a I regret that, owing to want of acquaintance with the general 
literature of Symbolic Logic, I am unable to say whether Mr. Russell's 
philosophy is accepted by the principal authorities who agree with him 
about Logic. His logic and his philosophy appear very precisely adapted 
to each other, and he thinks them essentially connected (p. viii). It is 
certainly not easy to discuss them apart. But I presume that his 
logical doctrine might be hsld on logical ground only, by way of abstrac- 
tion and not as final truth. 

b See e.g. Russell, Principles, p. 17. c See p. 266 below. 

d He holds that it is so. Principles, pp. viii and 24. 



48 On Symbolic Logic [BOOKII 

but alike in truth and in import* independent of them. 
Thus there is no idea of developing a system, or indeed any- 
thing whatever, from a single point. The logician takes, as 
it seems to me, whatever he wants in the way of first principles 
without considering their relation to any single system, and 
he makes usage and convenience, not systematic necessity, 
govern the interpretation of single propositions. For example, 
' by help of the first nine principles out of ten axioms/' we 
can prove the law of contradiction/ And again, he does not 
raise, as a matter of principle, such questions, dependent for 
us on the ideal of judgment, as the reciprocity of the hypo- 
thetical or the exclusiveness of the disjunction, and he appears 
to me wholly to leave out of account the problem of a cate- 
gorical basis for the hypothetical and the disjunctive. 
In other words, he takes implication as a bare and ultimate 
fact, an indefinable. d 

I am not arguing against all this. It seems to me to be 
natural, if we either deny, or choose to abstract from, the 
idea of systematic coherence, about which I shall argue 
below. And I do not see why, if we find these assumptions 
work in a special science, we should not make use of them 
as a matter of ' taste and convenience ' (I extend the applica- 
tion of Mr. Russell's phrase on p. 17 but I judge that it does 
represent what with him is a great influence in the shaping 
of his science) whatever our doctrine of Reality may be. 

Only, to those who hold a different philosophy, the assump- 
tion that you may go forward without the idea of system 
will always appear a reservation or special postulate, affecting 
the truth or ultimate logical stability of sciences which need 
it for their foundation. 

This is the point at which controversy might arise. It would 

a We must not say ' in meaning ', for Mr. Russell's proposition does 
not have the meaning, but is it. b Principles, pp. 16-17. 

See above, p. 273, on illegitimate hypothesis. 

d Principles, p. 14. Cp. Mr. Russell's explanation, Mind, 75, 375. 
My only point here is that implication is taken as a relation between 
two propositions, just as it is felt or found. We are not allowed, for 
instance, to argue, from the nature of the system involved, on the 
question whether if p really implies q, q must imply p. I think Mr. 
Russell would accept this statement. e Cp. c. ix. 



CHAP, i] Truth of Mathematics 49 

be foolish and hopeless for an outsider to criticise the procedure 
of these sciences on their own ground. What he not only 
has a right to do, but is bound to do, is to attempt to indicate 
the difference of attitude and presuppositions between them 
and what he conceives to be Philosophical Logic. And this 
attempt, however modest, must in the end lead to a different 
opinion, or an opinion differently formulated, about the truth 
of Formal Logic in the large sense here in question. 

I say, an opinion differently formulated. For though Mr. 
Russell holds that it is a merit of his philosophy to maintain 
the complete truth of mathematics, yet he is too widely 
experienced in all regions of culture not to admit the immense 
prima facie difference between the kind of truth aimed at by 
mathematics and that aimed at, say, by biology or by political 
philosophy a or the philosophy of religion. He must, I imagine, 
have his own account to give of the relation between a science 
which stretches so far as his general science of inference in one 
way, and sciences which include so very much more in another 
way. I should call it the difference between a very highly 
conditional system of propositions, dependent for their truth 
on enormous reservations, and systems of propositions which 
approximate very much more to categorical truth about 
reality. But however this may be, every student must see 
the problem, and it is not for me to conjecture the solution 
which other students may propose. 

tt I hope the reader will treat it as irrelevant that I have myself 
attempted to write about political philosophy. I am referring to the 
place of the science as such in a hierarchy of sciences like that sketched 
by Plato. Plato's reservations on the truth of mathematics are note- 
worthy. 



1337-2 



CHAPTER II 

ENUMERATIVE INDUCTION AND MATHEMATICAL 
REASONING 

IN tracing the evolution and affiliation of the forms of 
explicit inference, we begin with a more developed phase of 
consciousness than that to which we went back in describing 
the rudiments of judgment. The judgment-form in which 
the universal first reveals itself as the simple unity of differences 
must have given place to the articulate perception of things, 
events, and relations, before we can grasp it as a system 
whose parts are in necessary connection. In other words, 
we have no longer to deal with the simplest judgments of 
perception the impersonal and the elementary comparative 
judgment but may go at once to the world of things with their 
characteristic identity, and to the abstract relations of number, 
space and time in which that world is constructed by the 
mind. 

Enumer- T. On the basis of a world of things and occurrences, which 
ativeln- i nvo i ves a language, i.e. a more or less systematised nomen- 
clature, 1 the articulate universal presents itself in the form of 
individual objects having characteristic identity, in which 
identity general attributes coexist. Language forces such 
coexistence on our attention through its natural classifications, 
and the first suggestions of inductive enumeration issue from 
language which has in fact gained its significance by the 
same process conducted naturally and without explicit inten- 
tion. Such suggestions are operative, as we saw, in the so- 
called inference from Particulars to Particulars, of which 
Incomplete Enumerative Induction is a form that has been 
made superficially rational. 

Syllogism a. Throwing this inference into the shape naturally pre- 
in Fig. 3. scr jbed by the tendency of the concrete individual thing to 

1 Cp. Introduction, sect. 4. 



CHAP, ii] Modal Conclusion 51 

become the subject in judgment, 1 and making use, as Aristotle 
also did, of the conjunctive judgment as representing a single 
step in inference, we obtain an inference analogous to the 
Aristotelian syllogism in the third figure : 

a, b, c> d, are rational ; 

a, b, c, d, are men ; 

. . Are all men rational ? or, Men may be rational. 
The ground of argument being the characteristic unity of 
the unanalysed individual object or event, naturally takes the 
place of the subject in judgment of the concrete individual 
which is taken as real and therefore gives rise to that 
syllogistic form in which the middle term is the subject of 
both premises. 

Experience bears out the view that some such type as this 
represents the simplest operation of mediate inference. All 
that is said for example by Stuart Mill about inference from 
Particulars to Particulars must really be taken as applying 
to inference of this type ; for it is impossible to state an 
inference in a shape that will even appear to be convincing, 
unless we supply by a second premise the element of unity 
between the particulars, always operative in the mind, which 
is necessary to bind the particular differences into the differences 
of a universal. The use of symbolic letters brings to light 
this formal necessity, which significant names satisfy without 
acknowledging. From ' a, b, c, d are good books 'to ' e is 
a good book ' no sort or kind of inference holds or is in any 
way suggested. The gulf between mere d and mere e is beyond 
the leaping powers* of the boldest conjecture. These symbols 
are true particulars, and we can see from them how far true 
particulars will carry us in inference. But from ' Ivanhoe, 
Waverley, and Rob Roy are good books ' to ' Guy Mannering 
is a good book ' there is a self-evident passage by means of 
the identity of authorship, which is too obvious to be expressed, 
but which would form a premise in any explicit statement 
o! the inference. That this same ground would justify the 
conclusion ' The Surgeon's Daughter is a good book ' is an 
illustration of Bacon's remark that enumerative Induction 

1 See on categorical and hypothetical elements in judging, Bk. I, 
chap. i. 

E2 



52 Enumeration and Mathematics [BOOKII 

1 precarie concludit, et periculo exponitur ab instantia con- 
tradictoria'. 

Speaking generally, the coincidence of several attributes 
in one or more objects, or of several relations in one or more 
events, is the usual starting-point of conscious conjecture 
and investigation. And this starting-point is all that the 
present form of inference embodies. Conjecture or pure 'dis- 
covery ' differs only in degree from proof. Thus the conclusion 
may be fairly represented by a question or a modal affirmation : 
A, B, and C are great lawyers and had a classical education /. 
Has a classical education something to do with making great 
lawyers ? l or ' A classical education may have something 
to do with making great lawyers.' In the case of events, 
which are designated more analytically, i.e. more with a view 
to an intended inference, than individuals can be, a single 
judgment is the natural form for elementary arguments of 
this kind. 'He killed his bird every shot/ i.e. 'Such and 
such times he fired ; all those times he killed /. When he fires, 
he is likely to kill.' But in careful reasoning or experiment 
' such and such ' becomes an elaborate identification by 
marks. 

Diver- ft. In this argument by incomplete Enumeration we find 
a un * on ^ divergent tendencies. Plainly, it has no major 
premise ; but no less plainly, the principle on which it primarily 
relies is the principle of subsumption. Its conclusion is 
therefore particular or modal, and affirms that in instances 
or under conditions which we are not in a position to assign 
explicitly, the attributes x and y are or would be united. 
For the premises neither express precise conditions nor furnish 
the basis of a complete inference by subsumption. In order 
to assigning precise conditions, the form of subsumption, i.e. 
of identification in unanalysed subjects, must be surrendered. 
In order to furnish a complete subsumptive inference, the 
universal must appear in the form of Allness, i.e. in the form 
of a totality of examples enumerated up to a limit which its 
nature prescribes. Such an enumeration, or an allegation 
equivalent to such an enumeration the allegation might be 

1 The disjunctive import of this question, as is natural with a rudi- 
mentary type of inference, is simply Yes or No. 



CHAP, ii] Which Figure suits Induction ? 53 

of mediate origin would be the major premise in a pure 
subsumptive syllogism. In the present argument as it stands 
we simply formulate the first impression made by this 
discovery of an articulate 1 identity in difference, and the 
first suggestion towards completing the articulation of the 
universal thus indicated. This suggestion is most naturally 
to be taken, in accordance with the type of the inference, as 
quite abstract and superficial, consisting as it does in a single 
pervading attribute, chosen, so far as we are told, at random. 

y. It is obvious that the study of inference must retraverse, Indivi- 
in part at least, the path taken by the study of judgment. j^* 
In the present form of inference the mind is at the same ment in 
critical point at which it stands when in the Proportional 
Judgment it has become familiar with the identity of things 
beneath their attributes. Only in the study of Inference we 
see the actual process by which the judgment-forms pass into 
one another in this case, in the sphere of enumeration, by 
the natural pressure of their own recurrence. Incomplete 
Enumerative Induction is an obvious result of recurrent 
individual Judgments, which accentuate the common dis- 
tinguishable aspects prevalent in things and in their indi- 
vidualities i. e. in their characteristic natures. 

In Lotze's representation of an argument akin to this, he 
has set out the recurrent individual judgments as so many 
premises of the syllogism ; 2 and, rightly recognising that the 
number of such premises is not limited, he has thereby cut 
the knot of the question whether inference essentially proceeds 
through three terms. It is not worth while to dispute about 
a matter of symbolic representation. So I have only to 
explain the relation of his scheme of the argument to that 
here given, by pointing out that his entire set of premises cor- 
responds to either one of the two which I lay down, while the 

^ See distinction between explicit and implicit inference, in last 
chapter. 

4 Lotze, Logik, Eng. Tr., p. 100 : ' Now it often happens that the 
same predicate occurs or does not occur not only in two but very many 
diiferent subjects, P, S, T, V, W, and the question is what consequence 
can be drawn from the premisses PM, SM, TM, VM, .... which belong 

in form to the second figure of Aristotle Our conclusion runs as 

follows, " All 5 are M." ' 



54 Enumeration and Mathematics [BOOKII 

relation of the individuals P, S, T, &c. to the common attribute 
2 forms the other of the two premises essential to the inference. 
The use of a conjunctive judgment in inference of this type is in 
accordance with the principles laid down in Book 1 1 as regards 
the unity of the judgment, and with Aristotle's practice in 
his Inductive Syllogism, though not in the ordinary Syllogism 
in figure 3 which I have treated as the inductive syllogism. 
By using the individuals, not in a conjunctive judgment, but 
as subjects to several premises, Lotze has forced his inference 
into the second instead of the third syllogistic figure, the only 
common term being the common predicate, which therefore 
must formally serve as middle term though it does not operate 
as such. His transition from P, S, T, to 2 is effected without 
an explicit judgment, and the whole process is more akin to 
the colligation of a conjunctive judgment into a singular or 
generic judgment as described in Book I, 2 than to a process 
of Mediate Inference. It is obviously more convenient to 
use the third syllogistic figure, in which a common subject is 
the middle term, for Induction, and to reserve the second, 
in which a common predicate is middle term, for Analogy. 
This was the scheme followed by Hegel, and I venture to think 
that the deviation from this scheme, 3 like other modifications 
which Lotze has introduced into a logic largely resting on 
Hegel's ideas, is far from being an improvement. 

The critical point which is involved in the inference before 
us is the point of divergence between the concrete and the 
abstract forms of the universal. This is fundamentally one 
with the divergence between subsumptive inference and 
the inference which depends on the systematic necessity of 
abstract relations. That these two types of inference unite 
again in the systematic and definite concretes of the higher 
sciences and of philosophy is obvious from the interconnection 
of the hypothetical and the disjunctive judgment. But for 
the greater part of their evolution they are distinct, though not 
fundamentally discrepant. 

1 See Bk. I, chap, i, sect. i. iii. 2 1. c. 

8 See Hegel's Wissenschaft der Logik, ii, pp. 131, 148-9. Hegel, 
following the order which he finds convenient, calls Aristotle's figure 3 
' figure 2 ', and Aristotle's figure 2 ' figure 3 '. Is it possible that Lotze 
was misled by this ? 



CHAP, ii] Numerical Totality 55 

The abstract universal operates in all systems or totali- 
ties that can be regarded as aggregates of homogeneous parts, 
although this very word homogeneous indicates that the 
whole has a nature which is also the nature of the parts. All 
strictly mechanical science all science, that is, which regards 
its objects in the light of number, space, matter and motion, 
is due to the operation of the abstract universal. And in a 
certain sense, as we shall see, there is nothing which does not 
in some degree correspond to these abstract relations ; nothing, 
at all events, which in its analysis presents features discrepant 
with their abstract necessity. 

The concrete universal follows the track of the individual 
totality, and displays itself, first, imperfectly, in analogical 
inference, and then in the teleological conceptions which 
govern the higher evolutionary sciences ; especially in those 
sciences which have for their object-matter the achievements 
and the intellect of man. 

2. To assign the directions of this divergence in terms of Mathe- 
traditional logic is not so easy as to describe their real nature. 
Logic has been compelled to adapt its types of inference ing. 
to the false directions in which it has looked for them. Thus 
in diverging towards the abstract universal we are leaving 
the track of true subsumption, but yet we are following the 
path on which Formal and Quantifying Logic have taught 
us to seek the perfectly regular subsumptive syllogism. 
Whereas by following the fortunes of true subsumption we 
lose all hope ot attaining the genuine syllogism of Allness, 
and yet we go forward through syllogistic types the second 
and third figures which we have been taught to regard as 
only demonstrable by reference to that syllogism. 

i. The lines of advance really suggested by Incomplete Number 
Enumerative Induction lead to Analogy on the one hand {J^^j^. 
and to complete Enumeration on the other. In the remainder vergence. 
of the present chapter I shall follow out the latter with its 
affiliated types of inference, and return in the following 
chapter with the discussion of Analogy to the central line of 
concrete inference which will take us to the end of our subject. 

a. It is unnecessary to repeat the analysis of the Enumera- Complete 
tive process which was given in Book I. It is sufficient if 



56 Enumeration and Mathematits [BOOKII 

as false we bear in mind that complete Enumeration is the establish- 
ideal. m ent of the universal as a numerical totality or aggregate of 
homogeneous parts, and therefore necessarily depresses the 
pervading nature or identity of the universal into a denomina- 
tion, and its differences into units. By an extreme of abstraction 
all connection between the parts, beyond the fact that they 
are units in an aggregate, is done away with, so far the nu- 
merical point of view prevails and the universal takes on the 
uniform attributes and modes of synthesis which belong to 
a numerical totality as such. It has been said by Mr. Ruskin l 
that two and two do not in fact necessarily make four, but 
more often make five. So of course they often may and do, 
but not by the process of enumeration, nor by calculation, 
which is a mere abridgment of enumeration. Nearly all 
fallacies and paradoxes depend upon a confusion of categories. 
It is well to be reminded by a man of genius that there are 
other spheres of knowledge besides calculation ; but it would 
be wrong to take the paradox for a truth, and to impute to 
the system of number what is a simple omission of our own. 
Calculation is quite equal to the task of equating 2 + 2 with 5, 
if it is allowed to indicate the generation of an additional unit 
somewhere among the 2 and 2. 

Complete Enumeration has been operative as a false ideal 
both in the doctrine of Induction and in the doctrine of the 
syllogism. Incomplete Enumeration naturally suggests an 
extension of itself up to Complete Enumeration. It is readily 
seen indeed that in dealing inductively with the ordinary 
objects of perception completeness of the process can never 
be attained, because the universal nature of an object is not 
comparable with nor reducible to an enumeration of indi- 
viduals. Therefore such enumeration must fall into the Infinite 
series. And it is no less plain that if we interpret the univer- 
sality of the syllogistic major premise in Barbara as depending 
on a complete enumeration, the inference is at once reduced 
to a petitio principii by the direct affirmation of the conclusion 
in the major premise. Yet though both these shortcomings 
are obvious, still the mere aggregation of instances always 

1 I quote from memory, merely for the sake of illustration. I have 
no serious quarrel with the statement. 



CHAP, ii] Computation 57 

tends to obtrude itself as a feature of certainty in Induction ; 
and syllogistic reasoning always tends to assume the shape 
in which mere extension, i.e. mere identity of individual units, 
is the bond of union between the predicated attributes. 
Instances of this tendency are to be found in the diagrammatic 
representations of inferences whether by circles included 
within larger circles, or by straight lines of varying thickness, 1 
in the quantification of the predicate, in De Morgan's numeri- 
cally definite syllogism, and in the logical calculus. All of these 
treatments are founded on a view of reasoning which diverges 
from concrete determination by attributes, but stops short 
except in the case of the numerically definite syllogism, 
which is simply calculation of arithmetical inference by true 
numerical relations. All of these processes work well up to 
a certain point, being, technically, examples of quasi-sub- 
sumption subsumption introduced into a sphere in which 
its concreteness is lost. All of them, finally, are cases of the 
tendency, so fatal in popular science, to accentuate at the 
expense of everything else any aspect of any content which 
affords the slightest prospect of reduction to a mechanical, 
i. e. to a calculative procedure. For calculation goes by 
fixed rules and according to regular series, and is in that sense 2 
an easy process, whereas concrete enquiry into actual and 
material conditions or connections is inventive and creative 
the very travail of the mind. 

The real ground on which number of instances may be a 
source of certainty in Induction will appear when we treat 
of that process in its scientific aspect. No doubt the influence 
of Complete Enumeration as an ideal has operated in part 
through association with the Calculus of Probabilities. This 
calculus however is not the true warrant of Induction, and indeed 

1 See Sir William Hamilton's Lectures on Logic, vol. ii, Appendix. 

z I am not so silly as to maintain that abstruse calculation is easy in 
the ordinary sense of the word. But I take it that its difficulties, though 
insuperable to untrained minds, are not of the same order as those 
presented by original investigation of actual conditions, in which the 
intellect is thrown entirely on its own guidance, and can gain but little 
aid from general rules. And it is not merely the logician but also the 
physicist who may complain of calculation from assumptions being 
substituted for investigation into them. 



58 Enumeration and Mathematics BOOKII 

in the case of an infinite series, which for the above-mentioned 
reason must always be the ultimate nature of mere enumera- 
tion of instances, the calculus can have no application. 
Enu- ft. But Complete Enumeration in its strict and proper sense 

JwArith" l ea( * s U P t Arithmetical Computation, and in due course to 
metical the generalised or symbolic forms of computation which are 
f un ded upon arithmetic. The judgment which corresponds 
to this form of argument is, as we saw in Book I, 1 the equation ; 
a type of judgment in which the predominance of the whole 
as determining the parts relatively to itself is no longer 
visible, conformably to the fact that we have left the field 
of subsumption, and are now dealing with combinations of 
connections devoid of subsumptive character. The nature of 
inference, which is common to such combinations and to sub- 
sumptive reasoning, has been explained in general terms in 
discussing the Essence of Inference, and will be more par- 
ticularly examined when we have looked carefully at the type 
of Inference now before us. 

In addition to what was said in the last chapter on the 
nature of Calculation, some more special remarks may be 
added here. Though Calculation may take the most varied 
forms, yet it must always depend in the last resort on the 
conception of a whole which is the sum of its parts. Enu- 
meration is the synthesis of this sum out of, or its analysis 
into, the homogeneous parts or units themselves, through 
the correlative and all but identical processes of addition 
and subtraction. It is represented by such an equation as 
3 = 1 + 1 + 1. The changes of sides and signs in an equa- 
tion exhibit the true relation of addition and subtraction. 
Multiplication and division are similarly correlative, and repre- 
sent synthesis or analysis not by help of the ordinary unit, but 
by help of an artificial unit. The equation 100 =. 10 x 10 
represents multiplication and division alike, being simply 
an analysis or synthesis by means of a compound unit. 
Thus multiplication and division are more powerful than 
addition and subtraction, but less widely applicable, because 
the compound unit must be uniform. If you have ninety 
fives, the numerical system gives you the total in a moment 
1 Bk. I, chap. iv. 



CHAP, ii] Developments of Calculation 59 

as 450 ; but if you have such a succession of figures as 4, 5, 3, 
7> 9> yu have no identical compound unit, and must therefore 
proceed by the simple one, i.e. by addition. 

In multiplying and dividing powers by help of their 'indices, 
the procedure (which governs I presume the use of logarithms) 
reverts to the form of addition and subtraction, that is, to 
the apparent enumeration of simple units instead of compound 
units. Thus the relation of 8 to 32 comes to be represented 
not by the ratio i : 4 (eight taken once compared with eight 
taken four times), but by the difference between 2 3 and 2 6 . 
Multiplication proper was the construction of a quantity out 
of or its analysis into an identical compound unit repeated 
so many times. Involution is the construction of a quantity 
out of, or its analysis into, a simple enumeration of the employ- 
ments of a certain compound unit in multiplication by itself ; 
that is to say in repetition of itself, or of a quantity generated 
by repetition of itself (the given compound unit), its own 
number of times. It is plain that as each step enumerated 
is a multiplication, or an employment of a factor in multi- 
plication, 1 in order to multiply or unmultiply (divide) one 
power by another we do not multiply or divide index by 
index, but simply count on or count off the number of acts 
of multiplication designated by one of the indices. Thus in 
dividing 2 6 by 2 3 we do not take 2 2 as the result, but 2 3 the 
difference of the two indices. In dropping from 2 6 to 2 3 we 
have counted off three multiplications by 2, and have thus 
reduced 64 successively to 32, 16, and 8. So far we are 
dealing with simple enumeration applied to a complex process. 

It is possible of course to trace the same development 
further, and did the author's knowledge admit of his attempt- 
ing the task, an interesting scheme of continuity in calcula- 
tive processes might be obtained. When we come to powers 
of powers and roots of powers we are dealing with com- 
plex enumeration applied to steps consisting of complex 

1 To say ' each step is a multiplication ' would prima facie mean that 
4 should = 2 l instead of 2\ But yet it is not wholly false, for of course 
the difference between, say, 2* and 2 7 consists of two acts of multiplication 
by two, not of only one. In short, multiplication involves two factors, 
and would not be represented by enumerating only one to start with. 
In every further step the previous result is one factor in the process. 



6o Enumeration and Mathematics [BOOKII 

processes. If the index of 2 6 is divided by the index of 2 3 , 
the result 2 2 is obviously the cube root of 2 6 ; and if the 
index of 2 6 is multiplied by the index of 2 3 , the product 2 ld 
is obviously the cube of 2 6 . Here we are constructing by 
multiplication (complex enumeration) a quantity (18), the 
compound units 6 and 3 employed in the multiplication being 
themselves representative of simple enumerations of repeated 
processes of multiplication (complex enumeration). 

Simple enumeration may of course itself be represented as 
the chronicle of a process, i. e. as consisting of units equal in 
number to the number of times the process has been repeated. 
Only in it, in arithmetical progression, the process, though 
applied to its own results, does not obtain the power of creating 
a progressive difference. 

Caicula- y All arithmetical calculation, and therefore in the last 

tion com- re sort all calculation whatever, may thus be reduced, I 

withar- imagine, to enumeration, or, in some form, to enumeration 

gument. o f enumerations. And thus the entire method rests on the 

conception of the whole which is the sum of its parts the 

universal whose differences, though distinguishable, are taken 

as equal and homogeneous. From the nature of this universal, 

in which the whole does not present itself as a concrete 

system, it is almost futile to enquire into the types and shapes 

which it assumes in inference. Is an Equation correlative 

to Judgment or to explicit inference ? Is a combination of 

Equations necessary to explicit calculation, as a combination 

of Judgments is necessary to explicit Inference ? 

The equation, it must be remembered, is a comparison of 
numerable relations in the abstract, and therefore corresponds 
not to any form of Singular or Perceptive Judgment, which 
are correlative to the simple Judgments of Enumeration, 
but only to a universal Judgment, and more especially to 
the pure Hypothetical. This is enough to show that the 
Equation is essentially of a synthetic or inferential character. 
And there is also a special reason why this character is more 
emphatically marked in an Equation than in a generic or 
hypothetical judgment. Every judgment using the expres- 
sion in the narrower sense in which it excludes equation is 
liable if driven home to be accused of a fallacy a dicto secundum 



CHAP, ii] Equation and Judgment 61 

quid ad dictum simpliciter, for the concrete significance of the 
subject dwarfs and renders trivial the conditions under which 
alone the attribute can really attach, and some at least of 
these conditions are habitually omitted, or, if we prefer to 
say so, presupposed. But in the equation the whole content 
is homogeneous, and no one part can dwarf any other. We 
may not say that 99,999 = 100,000. We must put in the 
condition, however trivial in real life, represented by -f I on 
the left of this equation, or I on the right. Therefore 
every equation, even the simplest, is not only hypothetical, 
but it is hypothetical on the basis of an explicit intellectual 
process or synthesis of differences. There is in this sphere 
no such thing as massing facts together, and leaving you to 
choose how you infer, or whether you really and conscientiously 
infer at all. To simply equate the whole with itself as a whole, 
as true Judgment, dealing with differences of attributes, 
may appear to do, must give tautology, and so nonsense, in 
Equation. Being debarred from even the appearance of such 
judgments as ' All Exogens are Dicotyledons ', the equation 
must always have on the one side or on the other an explicit 
synthesis of differences. It is therefore in itself a step nearer 
to explicit inference than the hypothetical judgment. 

The Equation then exhibits an inferential connection more 
clearly than an ordinary hypothetical judgment. In respect 
however of not being a categorical assertion it is on the 
same level with that judgment, and only qualifies reality in 
virtue of the real element which underlies its hypothesis ; i.e. 
pure arithmetical computation qualifies reality in as far as it 
expresses the properties of the system of number. 7 + 5 = 12 
means // five is added to seven we get twelve, and is 
categorical in as far as it involves the assertion, ' The system 
of number is such that " if five is added to seven ", &c.' 
And as all prerogatives of a subject are absent (as is also 
the case with pure hypothetical judgments) no difference is 
more especially referred to Reality than the others. All are 
referred indirectly (i.e. through the system of number), and 
without priority. 

The combination of equations bears the same relation to 
the single equation as the combination of judgments in 



62 Enumeration and Mathematics [BOOKII 

explicit inference to the single judgment. In each case it is 
impossible to draw the line between the single act and the 
combination. An equation may be taken as involving any 
number of equational steps, just as a judgment may be taken 
as involving any number of intermediate judgments. In 
short, an equation, like a judgment, is the form of conclusion 
as well as the form of premise, and in ultimate analysis 
always partakes of both characters. But for this very reason 
there is no difference of principle between the single form 
and the combination, and it is sufficient in discussing infer- 
ence to treat of the latter which has the advantage oi being 
explicit. It may here be pointed out that as the equation 
is non-subsumptive, so the varieties and peculiarities of 
syllogistic figure disappear in the combination of equations. 
In every equated term or expression the whole is present in 
its entirety, and no form of it has any such peculiarity as 
we understand by the Universal, Particular, or Individual, 
the subjects and predicates of the syllogism. This in- 
difference corresponds to the nature of the numerical whole 
and renders arrangement and, apparently, number, of terms, 
in calculation a mere matter of practical convenience. But 
in every system of equations, if bona fide treated as a single 
inference, the three terms may be detected. Our insight 
develops along the chain of equation, and does not simply 
drop one term out and replace it by another. 

Applica- ii. Lotze has treated of equational inference, i. e. of calcu- 

calcula- l a tion, under the titles of substitutive and proportional infer- 

tion. ence, and of inference from the constitutive equation. I will 

comment briefly on the first of these forms at present, and 

will return to the others when something has been said of 

the matter to which they apply. 

Substitu- a . The point of substitutive inference which is described 
ference. as a species of syllogism and as possessed of a major premise 
consists in substituting in the conclusion for the middle 
term M the developed content of M as assigned in the major 
premise, under the operation of a condition s representing 
the peculiar modification attaching to the minor term S. 
The argument is thus written in symbolic form l 
1 Lotze, Logik, E. Tr., sect. 109. 



CHAP, ii] Equational Identification 63 

Major Premise M = a + bx + ex 2 ... 

Minor Premise S = s M. 

Conclusion S = s (a + bx + ex 2 . . . ) . 
This argument, in which a, 6, c &c. represent any marks 
within a concept, becomes efficient, as Lotze observes, only 
when reducible to quantitative terms, because in other cases 
the particular change effected by s in a or b is simply taken 
from experience and is not really drawn from the form of 
the argument, which might therefore just as well have been 
thrown into an ordinary syllogism. But on the othe* hand 
it is worth observing that if, in constructing such an inference, 
we remain within the sphere of the quantitative universal, 
then the relation of subsumption and the prerogative of the 
major premise necessarily disappear. We have then simply 
two equational connections, related to an identical whole, 
and therefore capable of giving rise to a further connection. 
But M is not in that case generic, nor is S specific, nor is the 
connection of S with s (a + bx &c.) known through their con- 
junction in and subordination to a concrete individuality M. 
M is no doubt here the assigned meeting-point of the relations, 
a form of the quantitative universal which pervades the 
equational connection before us, but S is no more a case of 
M than M of S. And indeed, having once been led to 
observe the connection of S with its development s (a &c.), 
we no longer judge this true on the mere ground of con- 
junction in M, but on the ground of a systematic necessity 
revealed through M. S or s M, if it is or has a true quanti- 
tative relation to M, cannot be bona fide a case under M, an 
element in a concrete individuality or case of a generic nature 
M, and with this relation the whole idea of subsumption 
vanishes. 

And the favourite and catching phrase ' substitution ' must 
be similarly treated. Substitution is a consequence and not 
a principle of inferential relation. It arises from the identity 
of the whole with itself in all its forms, the discernment of 
which identity is the task of calculation. We may infer, to 
take a very elementary example, from 24 = 12 x 2, and 8 = - 3 - , 
that 8 = " 2 3 - -. We here ' substitute ' 12 X 2 for 24, because 
we possess the connection which tells us that the former is a 



64 Enumeration and Mathematics [BOOKII 

synthesis identical with the whole 24. To 'substitute' is 
simply to treat a whole as identical with itself. 

This ' substitutive ' inference then, in its mathematical 
shape, has no syllogistic character, no major premise, and 
no real dependence on a principle of substitution. It might 
fairly be spoken of as an inference by equational identifica- 
tion. It must include, so far as I can see, the entire range of 
strictly arithmetical computation, whether in algebraical or 
in arithmetical form, as contrasted with computation applied 
to geometry, mechanics, and physics. It establishes a ratio, 
for, logically at least, ratio is a genus of which equality is a 
species, but it does not ostensibly compare ratios, and there- 
fore does not explicitly challenge problems in concurrent 
but heterogeneous series. But we must remember that any 
calculation which does not merely develop the properties of 
number depends for its meaning on some differences of real 
aspect correlative to the differences of numerical aspect. 
'The shelf -space M of this shelf = the shelf-space required by 
thirty octavos.' ' I can have shelf-space which = 100 M, /. I 
can have shelf-space which = the space needed by 100 x 30 
octavos.' Here no doubt we are dealing with homogeneous 
quantity feet and inches all through ; but the wholes 
which are compared are differently motived, and these 
differences of motive books compared with shelves, and one 
shelf with a library are what give the inference its point. 
The next step is that these differences of motive affect the 
actual denominations of the units themselves. We come to 
deal in short not with simple equality identity of number 
of the same units but with equality of ratios, i. e. with 
identity of the ratio between the several quantities of a set, 
with that between the several quantities of another set or 
other sets. The unit of enumeration, in this case, must not 
be identical. 

Connec- /3. We must now break off somewhat abruptly to consider 

Sace in ^ e a PP re ^ ens i n * Connections in space and time, which 

and Time, must be treated for our present purpose as an independent 

root of knowledge, and must be investigated before we can 

proceed further with the analysis of calculation. Primarily 

no doubt the apprehension of these connections is an offshoot 



CHAP, ii] Construction 65 

of the rudimentary judgment, which as we saw in Book I l 
must construct its world of Things largely under the influence 
of growing spatial and temporal discrimination. But starting 
as we have done in explicit inference with the developed 
concrete perception of the world of things, we have no choice 
but to assume also the developed abstract perception of 
relations in space and time. We reason from these relations 
or connections before we have subjected their elements to 
accurate enumeration or measurement, and it is the nature 
or non-numerical inferences from such relations that I now 
propose to consider. 2 ' A is to the right of B, B is to the right 
of C, /. A is to the right of C ; ' ' A is prior to B in time, and 
B to C, therefore A to C.' In such inferences as these, 
Mr. Bradley has told us, we first construct, and then perceive. 
I have expressed at length in another work, and briefly in 
the preceding chapter, my objections to employing the term 
construction as if it were a self-explaining account of an 
intellectual process. But I have conceded that when restricted 
to the sense of intellectual construction, neither imaginative 
nor physical, it affords an apt description of the peculiar 
work of inferential apprehension in the field of space, time, 
and motion. a At all events we must, I think, agree with 
Mr. Bradley that in examples like those just given there is 
no bona fide major premise, and therefore no syllogism. The 
form ' A is to right of B, B to right of C, .*. A to right of C ' is 
so obviously the natural shape of the inference thus expressed, 
that we may be surprised at being reminded that, qua syllo- 
gism, it has the defect of four terms. To fulfil the syllogistic 
requirements we must set down as a major premise ' What 
is to the right of B is to the right of C ', or even ' What is to 
the right of B is to the right of that which B is to the right 
of '. In the latter case the entire content of the argument 
recurs in the minor premise ' A is to the right of B and B to 
the right of C '. Plainly this minor premise would carry the 
conclusion without a major. 

It was the author's experience, when engaged in teaching 

1 Bk. I, chap. ii. 

8 See Bradley 's Principles of Logic, p. 225 ff., which on this point 
I have followed very closely. a See p. 33 above, note a. 

1337-2 F 



66 Enumeration and Mathematics 

elementary logic, that pupils had an invincible tendency to 
construct ' syllogisms ' in one of these two types, the former 
of which is defective as a syllogism, and the latter unreal and 
ineffectual. In using the former, 4 A to right of B, B to right 
of C, therefore &c.,' their instinct was just, so far as the 
argument to be expressed was not truly subsumptive. An 
extension of this just practice to subsumptive inference 
in which it becomes erroneous was no doubt the cause of 
Dr. Thomas Brown's remarkable view as described by Mill in 
an interesting passage. 1 The complementary error, to which 
also pupils are prone, is, in constructing a syllogism, to sur- 
render the whole task of articulating the steps of the argument 
by simply putting as the major premise some syllogistic canon, 
in analogical argument some principle of analogy, or in 
'constructive 1 argument such a general principleof construction 
as ' Whatever is to the right of B is to the right of that which 
B is to the right of 1 . It thus becomes necessary to mass the 
whole content of the particular inference in hand within the 
minor premise. Wherever a syllogistic canon is taken as the 
ultimate major premise of inference, this error is committed. 
The error consists in taking out the active form of the inference 
the intellectual function which the syllogistic or constructive 
arrangement expresses and making this a mere portion of 
the content from which the inference is drawn. In drawing the 
inference the intellectual function is inevitably active, and the 
principle expressed in the major is no justification of the 
activity of this function, but merely a content on which it 
operates as it would on any other content, so that the explicit 
major really adds nothing to the argument. 2 This case, of 
subsumption under the principle of subsumption, needs itself 
to be subsumed under the same principle or another, and 
so on ad infinitum. Take ' A mark of a mark is a mark of 
the thing marked, growth is a mark of organic nature which 
is a mark of life, .. growth is a mark of life'. Here we have an 
act of subsumption under a principle of subsumption, which 

1 Brown thought the major premise always superfluous. See Mill's 
Logic, i, p. 225, sixth edition. 

2 See Bradley's Principles of Logic, p. 475 ; Hegel, Wiss. der Logik, 
ii, p. 151 ; and the Author's Knowledge and Reality, p. 275. 



CHAP, iii Added Determinants 67 

act itself falls outside the principle itself and needs justifica- 
tion in a prior syllogism, if the minor premise and conclusion 
needed justification in this. 

On the other hand, subsumption does not allow the subject 
to be merely treated as a point of attachment, as is the case 
with abstract series in space or in time. If we tried to infer 
thus in concrete matter we should get something like Jevons' 
Added Determinants, which is an excellent example of infer- 
ence that is almost necessarily fallacious, owing to the dispro- 
portioned effect of the same added determinant on two concrete 
conceptions. ' A child is a human being, A. B. is a big child, 
/. A. B. is a big human being ; ' ' Pericles rules Athens, 
Aspasia rules Pericles, .*. Aspasia rules Athens/ The concrete 
subject in subsumption takes up the determinants into itself 
and transforms them in a way which we cannot predict. 
A woman's rule over her lover is not in pan materia with a 
statesman's rule over a commonwealth, and a big child may 
be a very small human being. We must not try to read off 
conclusions from series in subsumptive matter as we can in 
space, time or number. Construction or abstract connection, 
on the other hand, deals with relations which bear on each 
other with systematic necessity, and which are not affected, 
or are assumed to be affected only within known limits, by 
the idiosyncrasies of the points of attachment. In ' A to 
right ' &c. we take A to be a point or body in space ; if not, 
the inference is unmeaning. Therefore in this sphere no pre- 
mise has a prerogative, and the reciprocal modification of 
relations is constructed Jin the argument and not presupposed 
in the nature of the Subject. This characteristic of ' con- 
struction ' applies to number, space and time, and to the 
mechanics of abstract matter. 

The apprehension of relations in time needs no separate 
treatment in logic from that of relations in space. Apart from 
measurement, connections in time are not capable of any great 
complexity, seeing that they contain nothing that corresponds 
to a curve or angle in space. Mere succession is the relation 
of one set of changes to a permanent subject ; but in this there 
is implicit from the first the idea of duration, which involves 
the elementary comparison by the permanent subject of two 

F2 



68 Enumeration and Mathematics [BOOKII 

distinguishable sets of changes, each of which is prima facie 
the measure of the other. There is no science of time in the 
sense in which geometry is the science of space. From this 
point of view it has been said that time is one degree more 
ideal than space; i.e. its essential character of successiveness 
falls outside the actual contact of events with sensation and 
exists for the most part in the ideal medium of memory. It is 
true however that the present has duration, and does not 
exclude succession. But in thus possessing duration, in spite 
of the fugitive character of actual sensation, the present of 
course displays an ideal nature which makes it continuous 
with temporal succession, a succession which pervades even 
the present itself. 

The intelligence in bringing order into the feelings begins 
by apprehending space or time and constructing its perceived 
world in these forms. By developing them, however, into 
scientific characteristics of this material world, it further pro- 
ceeds to idealise them into laws and proportions, and thus to 
take away their immediate and perceived character. The first 
step in this idealisation is the conception of absolute, standard, 
or uniform space and time, a conception which guides the 
process of measurement, but which is strictly speaking, in its 
common-sense form, an abstraction to which no real thing nor 
process corresponds. Constancy of ratio throughout the per- 
ceptible world is, as we saw, 1 all that measurement can give 
us, and is what we really mean to assume. Uniform space 
or time, as embodied in a single series and not in a com- 
parison, is a contradiction in terms. 

Calcula- y. The apprehension of connections even of explicitly 
pUecrto me <liate connections in space and time does not necessarily 
Geometri- involve the enumeration of parts with a view to precise 
measurement. Such apprehension begins, as we saw in Book I, 2 
with the perceptions indicated by ' Here ' and ' There f , ' right ' 
and ' left ', ' nearer ' and ' further ', f now ' and ' then ', 
' future ' and ' past '. 

But all these expressions involve a continuous series, and 
such a series is the beginning of measurement. The spatial 
elements however, the straight line, angle and arc, are not 
1 Bk. I, chap. iv. 2 See Bk. I, chap. i. - 



CHAP, nj Pure Geometrical Reasoning 69 

constructed by measurement but are given spatial relations, 
although the discovery of their properties cannot be effected 
apart from the comparison of quantities. I am not prepared 
to say that the identification of corresponding geometrical 
relations might not (in spite of the etymology of the word 
' geometry ') be prior to intentional quantitative comparison. 
Vertical angles, or right angles, or the triangles into which 
a rectangle is divided by the diagonal, 1 might be seen to be 
the same, before numerical comparison was applied to sides, 
angular distances, and areas. 

Apart however from definite history, nothing can tell us 
when an implicit character becomes explicit. It is certain that 
all developed consciousness of spatial and temporal connection 
must operate through quantitative comparison. 

Geometrical and strictly mechanical reasoning is the endow- 
ment of the quantitative universal with control over the com- 
bination of homogeneous parts in space, or in space and time 
together. In this type of reasoning, though essentially ' con- 
structive ', we are often reminded of subsumption by the 
peculiar working of the quasi-generic judgment. 

The square and the cube are elementary and striking in- 
stances of the power of enumeration, i.e. of arithmetical ideas, 
to represent or to describe generically a purely geometrical 
relation. The ' square ' of a number is not a square surface, 
nor does it, so far as I can see, display in itself the difference 
between the superficial and the linear unit. But such a num- 
ber, or rather such a numerical relation, does indicate definite 
combinations of parts by which a square surface may be recog- 
nised or constructed, and therefore the numerical relation may 
for many purposes be regarded as equivalent to the surface. 
The purely homogeneous universal, qua homogeneous, already 
at this stage fails to grasp the nature of the content as such, 
whose structure is to be represented by the differences of the 

1 In elementary schools it is now the practice to familiarise young 
children with such relations as this, e.g. by folding square pieces of 
paper, first along a line dividing them into equal rectangles, and then 
along the diagonal, thus exhibiting the equality of a right-angled 
triangle to a rectangle of the same height and half the base, both being 
halves of the same square. This is an equation and so a measurement, 
but rudimentary in as far as unanalysed. 



70 Enumeration and Mathematics [BOOKII 

universal, but succeeds in a way unknown outside mathematics 
in presenting an adequate key to this nature. 

I presume that the marvellous processes by which curves 
of all types have been subjected to the dominion of theequation 
must ultimately be regarded by logic in the same light as the 
relation of the square upon a line to the square of a number. 
These processes do not, as I understand, exhaust the nature of 
the curves, but they exhaust a combination of directions and 
distances, referred to an assumed point, which can be given 
any required degree of accuracy in representing the curves. 
Hence, though numerical relations have not in themselves the 
aesthetic or mechanical attributes of the particular curves 
which correspond to them, yet the nature of space permits 
a curve to be adequately and unerringly constructed by putting 
together homogeneous parts, viz. distances, in accordance with 
these numerical relations. It is obvious therefore that by 
experience, if not otherwise, both aesthetic and mechanical 
attributes may come to appear as if directly legible in certain 
numerical relations considered as controlling spatial elements. 
In the case of curves these numerical relations or attributes 
are expressed in constitutive equations, and form by far the 
most striking examples of a transition from and through the 
homogeneous to the heterogeneous. But strictly speaking all 
the simple proportions which characterise e.g. the triangle or 
the square are examples of the same principle. 

We spoke in Book I of this whole class of truths as ' quasi- 
generic judgments ', and insisted on the peculiar reversion 
which they display towards the type of concrete or organic 
totality. Never again in knowledge do we meet with such 
simple abstract and mechanical construction so unerringly 
analysing an individual and characteristic content. For this 
reason we are tempted to take the constitutive equation as the 
ideal of knowledge, and indeed exceptis excipiendis we are right 
in doing so. But the excipienda are serious. When we pass 
from abstractions like space, time and matter to the concrete 
evolution of the real world, to organisms, to political societies, 
and to human intelligences, not only is mechanical construc- 
tion infinitely more difficult, but it is infinitely less adequate. 
A curve after all is a line in space, though it is not a straight 



CHAP, ii] Adequacy of Construction 71 

line ; so that it can be no such enormous leap to constitute a 
curve out of spatial elements. But a plant is hardly in the 
strict sense a phenomenon in space at all, and although a 
mechanical view of it, in a sense to be explained below, must 
certainly be aimed at by science, yet there will remain in it 
much to be understood which cannot be constructed, not a part 
of its actions, but the whole result. 

If the constitutive equation is the type of quasi-generic 
judgment, it follows that Inference from the constitutive equa- 
tion is the type of quasi-subsumptive inf ei ence. Such inference 
has two aspects. On the one hand it is pure calculation or 
combination of connections, like any mediate equation which 
has no meaning beyond the numerical system. It combines 
with a proportion between two changing quantities some parti- 
cular values of these quantities, and follows out the modifica- 
tions which result from this combination. This process is in 
itself, though more complex, yet not a whit more subsumptive 
or less purely calculative than to equate 2 a with 3#, and 
supplying any number as the value of a to fill in the number 
demanded by the proportion as the value of x t In such an ex- 
pression a and x are merely generalised numbers, or numerical 
relations, or, if we like, names for a problem. There is no 
true major premise, but in its place there is the generalised 
description of an identical numerical whole in the two cases 
of being constructed with a factor 2 and with a factor 3, and 
the inference consists in exhibiting the construction of any 
such whole on the basis of these factors respectively. 

If a and x represent distances in space defined by some 
further relations (e. g. perpendicular to each other or the like), 
and the whole expression has the effect of characterising a 
definite figure in space, then we have the germ of what I have 
called quasi-subsumption. The inference is still constructive 
in the narrow sense ; it proceeds by enumeration of indifferent 
parts as in the case first considered. But it combines with this 
aspect another and a different one. It exhibits a particular 
portion of a particular curve in the light of a characteristic 
modification of a generic type. The curve may be closed or 
open, quick or slow, symmetrical or unsymmetrical. And these 
attributes, although they result from the construction, are not 



72 Induction and Reasoning [BOOKII 

given within the construction. The spatial nature of the type 
of curve in question is the quasi-rgeneric content through which 
the subsumption is made. It is not pure subsumption ; for the 
construction would suffice in theory to draw out the particular 
curve before us and discover its properties, without ever giving 
it a generic name or observing that we are analysing the pro- 
perties of something like a .natural kind. And in fact, I pre- 
sume, this is the usual order of procedure. Observations are 
obtained, upon which as data the curve is constructed, and its 
general nature is found only by means of this construction. 
But on the other hand, the mere fact that we know how to 
pass from an equational combination of numbers to a spatial 
figure shows that we are proceeding on a principle involved in 
the characteristic nature of such figures. The scheme of the 
argument is 

A spatial figure constructed on such proportions has such 
and such an outline ; 

This is a spatial figure constructed on this case of the above 
proportions ; 

.*. This has this particular outline. 

The element of subsumption consists in the impossibility of 
passing from the ratio, which is only a generalised relation of 
numbers, to the markedly individual figure in space, except 
by identifying the subject in which the numerical relation and 
the characteristic curve-properties are conjoined as the nature 
of space, or, more closely, of a curve in space. 

It only remains to mention that when we take in the unit 
of time, and thereby are able to represent motion as a length, 
and when we further erect the abstractions force and mass as 
correlative points of view from which motion is regarded as 
affecting bodies, we have all the organa of what may be called 
pure mechanism, or abstract constructive science a complex 
and elaborate system, founded ultimately on the combination 
of three abstractions, space, time, and number. This abstract 
mode of consideration is true in so far as it applies to the 
Characteristics of real things, but its application is obviously 
limited, The human body, for instance, is of course a case 
in which the geometrical and mechanical laws of space and 



CHAP, ii] Abstract constructive science 73 

laws in their purely abstract form have nothing to say. I 
proceed to discuss how and in what sense mechanism, and 
mediately, even pure mechanism, has a wider application. 

.. Lotze has spoken of inference from proportion as a limit Calcula- 
of knowledge, and as assuming a type which from his descrip- p\^ l a b?e 
tion appears to be subsumptive, although he does not give it to Dis- 
this name. 

(i) I am unable to see that we have in proportion either 
subsumptive inference or a limit of knowledge, so long as the Homo- 
four terms of the proportion are either of the nature of abstract 8? eneoils 
number, or are in pan materid, i.e. of the same denomination 
with one another. Numbers by themselves, it may be said, 
prove nothing, and computation in the abstract is not inference. 
But it seems obvious that the properties of the numerical 
system as such are worth establishing for their own sake. 
2 : 4 : : 3 : x .-. % = 6 is not a worthless type of inference, 
although the example is one which has no interest. It depends 
on a relation within the numerical system, and is in itself, apart 
from its elementary character, as well worth establishing as any 
other consequence of an isolated abstract relation. 

Or again, if we want to make a picture-frame of the same 
proportions with one that we have, but of different size, then 
all the numbers represent lengths, and we have, say, i6 in - : 
24 in - : : x : y ; x = 32'"- ; .. y = 48. In this example, how- 
ever, the limit of which Lotze speaks is just beginning to make 
itself felt. All the numbers do no doubt in one sense stand for 
lengths in space ; but they are lengths peculiarly related, in 
a way which falls outside the statement of proportion. In the 
object to be constructed this is the very reason for which we 
compare them the one spatial length is to be at right angles 
to the other ; or, in popular language, they are respectively 
length and breadth. Thus 16 and 24, and their correlatives 
x and y, are in one sense of one denomination, but in another 
sense of different denominations ; and it is because they are 
of different denominations or dimensions that we have an 
interest in comparing them. Here moreover, as in geometrical 
reasoning, we come upon a trace of subsumption, because the 
essential identity which is the foundation of the inference con- 
sists in the nature of an object which has length and breadth, 



74 Induction and Reasoning [BOOKII 

under which generic nature, as characterised by a certain ratio, 
we subsume a specific case of the same nature and of the same 
ratio. The meeting-point of the relations is a concrete and 
not an abstract, and this is the differentia of subsumption* 

It would be easy to fill up many gradations of the appearance 
of heterogeneity in the terms of a proportion. First, the two 
seis compared cease to be measurable by any identical unit 
whereas in the last examples both sides of the proportion are 
measurable as distances in space. Such are the proportions of 
times to distances and to areas, or of force to distance or to 
mass. And secondly, the several terms, either in one set or in 
both, cease to be strictly measurable by identical units. While 
this is the case with one side only, some sort of proportion may 
be supposed to exist, especially as the other side may present 
variations of a quantitative character, though not exhaustible 
by repetition of an identical unit. But when neither side 
presents a true ratio, i. e. when on neither side are the several 
terms measurable by an identical unit, then proportion is gone, 
and we are referred back or across to Analogy or Subsumption. 
1 a and a (2) Leaving the intermediate portion of these gradations for 
senes. ^j le rea( j er { o gji U p^ j p ass g-j. once t o a c j ass O f proportions 

which prevail in a certain sense throughout the entire world 
of knowledge. I speak of related series of contents which might 
appropriately be designated ' a and a ' series. The examples 
which spring at once into the mind are the perceptions or 
sensations of light and sound, with their respective physical 
stimuli. It is true that in the connection of such series as 
these we come upon a ' limit of knowledge ' ; but it admits of 
question how far even in the most favourable instances of 
them we can be said to have proportional inference. 1 Perhaps 

1 i suppose that ' irrational ' in mathematical language designates 
a relation which cannot be expressed as a ratio, viz. as a relation between 
two numbers. It would seem then that ' incommensurable ratios ' must 
be a contradiction in terms. The convenience of the expression in 
mathematics would not necessarily be interfered with by its self-contra- 
dictory character. Many conceptions which involve a more or less 
latent contradiction are employed in special sciences quantitative 
infinity,* or involuntary contracts, are well-known instances. It is 
interesting to notice that the reason of one science may be the unreason 
of another. Hegel complains that mathematicians call everything 

a See i. 163. 



CHAP, ii] Applications of Proportion 75 

the relation of angle to arc, which Lotze gives as an example, 
is about the extreme instance of true quantitative proportion 
which, although quantitative, includes heterogeneous matter. 

When we look at the relation of musical sound to stimulus 
we find an ascertained parallelism between changes in the 
rapidity of periodic vibrations that reach the ear, and changes 
in pitch of the musical note which they generate in conscious- 
ness. And further, the changes in pitch are a continuous 
variation of a pervading quality and therefore are quantitative ; 
and these are commonly measured by certain intervals of 
change taken to be equal in the sense of sharing certain attri- 
butes and capacities which remain the same for corresponding 
intervals in all parts of the scale. If we attempt to make out 
a proportional statement of these relations we may get some 
such result as a vibrations in second : 2 a vibrations in second : : 
note a : its octave aj ; a relation which admits of the quasi- 
subsumptive inference # = i6 /. a = a certain note x, and 
ctj a certain note y. 

But this inference is by no means purely mathematical or 
quantitative. 

First, we must notice the presupposed limitations, which do 
not exist in any purely mechanical or purely geometrical law. 
The vibrations must affect a hearing ear, and to affect a hearing 
ear they must be within certain limitations both of rapidity 
and amplitude, which from a mathematical point of view are 
wholly arbitrary. 

Secondly, we must observe that not only, as in true cases 
of proportion such as that between the angle and the arc, are 
the two sets of terms incommensurable with one another, but 
also it is very doubtful whether the two terms represented by 
a and a L can be strictly called commensurable. In a sense no 
doubt the tones of the scale are units and serve as measures. 
But if we ask which note is ' twice ' another, we are perplexed 
between the octave, which corresponds to twice the stimulus 
of the octave below, and the note, whatever it may be, which 

irrational in which reason begins to intrude i. e. in which systematic 
heterogeneity begins to appear, e. g. in the relation between straight line 
and curve. Ratio is the reason of mathematics, and other systematic 
relations may be irrational in this sphere ; just as ratio may be an 
irrational relation outside mathematics, e. g. in political science. 



76 Induction and Reasoning [BOOKII 

is next above the lowest audible note. For two of any identical 
unit ought to be twice one. But just as the zero of the common 
thermometer is not a zero of heat, 1 so there is no sense in 
making the lowest pitch, or the point where pitch passes into 
separate sounds, a zero of pitch from which all its grades can 
be constructed by mere multiplication or superimposition. We 
may say, if we like, that the quantity is intensive, i. e. that the 
grades by which the greater is separated from the lesser 
amount do not persist in a distinguishable form beside or 
within the greater amount when it is attained. This, however, 
is only to say in other words that we are passing beyond a true 
quantitative relation. All true measurable quantity is exten- 
sive. In as far as it is merely intensive it is unanalysed, not 
referred to parts, and so not quantitative. Here we are be- 
tween the two ; we have degrees which are not parts, and of 
which the whole is in no strict sense a multiple, but which not 
only exhibit an advance in themselves but correspond to parts 
of which their whole is a true multiple. 

Then, thirdly, we are confronted here with something like 
a genuine subsumption. The correspondence of 33 vibration 
per second to a note % rests on a concrete relation, which we 
find but cannot construct, between an impact on the living 
person through the ear and a reaction in the soul of that person. 
It is by subsumption under this characteristic individuality 
that we justify the conjunction, not otherwise necessary, of 
periodic vibration and musical sound. 

It should be noticed, too, as bearing on the concreteness 
of the operation which we are now considering, that loudness 
is a quantitative attribute of musical sound, and corresponds 
to a distinct feature of the sonorous vibrations, viz. to their 
amplitude, which I presume must on the whole diminish with 
increasing pitch. This ratio, and other analysable character- 
istics, fall within the same series of contents as that to which 
the correspondence between pitch and rapidity applies. We 
are thus in such a case far from being able to obtain a simple 
proportion between contents as wholes. 

1 The idea of an absolute zero of heat does not matter for the present 
purpose, which is merely to illustrate the nature of a series which is not 
in a true ratio. See Mill's Logic, i, pp. 441 and 446. 



CHAP, ii] Proportion and Analogy 77 

When we come to the colour-sensations, the individuality or 
disparateness of the a terms increases, and the quantitative 
relation, still traceable in sound, heat or pressure, becomes 
much more obscure if it does not disappear. Not to speak 
of the dark heat rays and the dark chemical rays, which mark 
differences in the action of the ether corresponding to no saltus 
in the ratio of vibrations, the transitions from colour to colour 
defy all attempt at quantitative expression. No one could 
mean anything by saying that central violet is twice or three 
times or five times central red, except in so far as colours may 
be characterised by an intensity of illumination which is a 
different thing from the peculiarity of their hue. It is needless 
to go into detail on this head. It is plain that while the 
variations in the mechanical stimulus, the a series, are still 
strictly numerable, the terms of the a series are altogether 
ceasing to present commensurable and therefore numerable 
differences in respect of their distinctive individuality, although 
various numerable differences may be traceable within their 
content. Then proportion in the strict sense wholly ceases to 
apply, because there is a ratio on one side only, and not on the 
other ; and there cannot be equality of ratios unless we have 
two sets of matters with a ratio between the members of 
each set. 

Nevertheless, there is in the colour series a uniform relation 
of a proportional character. ' Wave-length x : wave-length y : : 
violet : red ' means not that red is such and such a multiple of 
violet, but yet that in a series in which wave-length x gives 
violet we can be sure that wave-length y will give red. And 
though these colours are not producible as multiples of one 
another, yet they are identifiable, on the assumption of corre- 
spondence to stimuli, by the process of colour-equation. Given 
the means for producing true spectral red, a problematic red 
colour can be equated with it, and the difference between the 
two stated in terms of the stimulus. 

e. We have here, it might be said, passed from Proportion Propor- 
to Analogy, which abandoning its original meaning of propor- 



tion has come to signify an inexact comparison of relations. Hypo- 
But Analogy in the logical sense is not really an inexact form j u dg- 
of proportion, but depends on other than quantitative con- ment - 



78 Induction and Reasoning [BOOKII 

siderations, as we shall see in the next chapter. And though 
we are now passing out of the region where equality of ratios 
would grasp and penetrate the whole essence of the subject- 
matter, yet there is no need to leave behind us either precision 
in the designation of relations, or such numerical attributes as 
accompany though without exhausting the individuality of 
contents. For these reasons it is better not to consider that 
we are here returning to Analogy, but rather that we are 
approaching, from the side of exact science, the hypothetical 
judgment, which forms the meeting-point between the concrete 
and abstract forms of inference. And the hypothetical 
judgment, especially when retaining a partially quantitative 
content, represents what may be called the wider or the 
philosophical sense in which mechanism prevails throughout 
the knowable world. In many regions it is not much that this 
view of things gives us ; but it is always something. 

It is needless to pursue this hypothetical judgment through 
all the gradations in which it embodies the idea of proportion 
throughout the sciences. Everywhere we have in the back- 
ground the strictly numerable relations of space, time and 
mass. The exhibition of connected groups of contents as a and 
a series, in both of which the terms are as nearly as possible 
commensurable, is the ideal of natural science, or of physical 
science in the strict sense. How far in detail chemistry or 
biology may be reducible in this sense for there is no other 
sense in which they can be to molecular physics, is a question 
of fact and practice. At present it must often seem as if 
instead of a and a series we had rather a and x series, i. e. corre- 
spondences in which even the more quantitative series has hardly 
a true ratio between its terms, while the less quantitative 
series has no ratio at all. I have in my mind such correspon- 
dences as those between changes of temperature and allotropic 
phenomena in chemical agents, or again between changes of 
temperature and degrees of irritability in organic beings. But 
the changes of temperature themselves, considered as an 
a series, have behind them as a true a series their mechanical 
equivalents in the way of mass and motion (footpounds), and 
thus the whole phenomena, even those of allotropism, have 
ultimately a true correspondence with a genuine a series* Such 



CHAP, iii Work and Consciousness 79 

a correspondence would form the content of a hypothetical 
judgment, under which quasi-subsumptive inference would be 
possible. 

It is under this modification of ' a and a series ' that we Con- 
ought to consider such a question as the relation of the physical sclous - 
changes in the human organism to the activities of conscious- Conserva- 
ness, I am not now dealing with the sheer question of fact, 
whether in the human or other organism, considered as a 
machine, the production of work can be experimentally proved 
to be limited by the supply of mechanical energy. We know 
too well from daily experience that the output of work has 
gradations and a limit a limit related at any rate inter alia 
to the supply of food. That this limit is prescribed by con- 
ditions precisely analogous to those which are embodied in the 
working of every machine, viz. by the constancy of energy, 
seems to be the natural assumption so long as no other principle 
of gradation and of limit is convincingly demonstrated. 

But we now come upon a second difficulty. We assume that 
molecular change and muscular contractions in the organism 
must be taken as theoretically subject to the constancy of 
energy, i. e. that life or the soul so far as operative in or through 
the organism cannot create energy out of nothing. 1 These 
changes and contractions either are, or are reducible to, 
mechanical equivalents in motion and mass, and between them 
and the supply of energy a true a and a proportion might, if 
our knowledge permitted, be established. 

But between either these organic changes or the expenditure 
of energy, on the one hand, and the states of consciousness 
which sometimes attend these changes on the other, no possible 
proportion could hold good. Here we have then a pair of series 
o and x (organic changes and consciousness) on the basis of 
a pair a and a (expenditure of energy and organic changes). 

1 I cannot think that Wundt, Logik, ii, p. 507, really means to deny 
this, though his expressions are bewildering; ' Hier (in the spiritual 
development) gilt vielmehr (as against the law of constancy of energy) 
ein Gesetz unbegrenzter Neuschopfung geistiger Energie.' To judge 
from the Physiologische Psych, ii. pp. 461-3, he thinks that ' Geist ' is 
operative throughout nature, and its ' creation of energy ' must be 
a question merely of new forms of action. But I cannot thoroughly 
understand his view. 



8o Induction and Reasoning [BOOKII 

It does not matter for our purpose here whether consciousness 
is independent work performed by the organism, or is an un- 
accountable attendant upon such work which is not represented 
in its cost, or lastly, a consequence, or ' effect ' if we like, of 
certain peculiar organic work, represented in the mechanical 
cost of such work, and inseparable from such work except by 
an utterly unmotived abstraction. In all of these cases we 
have, whether directly or through organic activities known to 
accompany consciousness, what may be called an a and a rela- 
tion, or more truly an a and x relation mediated through a, 
between mechanical work and consciousness. But on the side 
of consciousness of course no ratio can be established, and 
therefore there is no proportion. We cannot safely say that 
to learn twenty lines of Virgil demands twice the expenditure 
of work that is needed to learn ten. We cannot say that to 
write the same letter requires the same exertion on one day 
and on another. We must however be on guard here. Inter- 
ruption, a different state of memory, obstacles in the content, 
impair the reliability of what might seem a unit of mental work. 
But mere weariness of the organism which may lengthen the 
time taken and the apparent exertion demanded, seems only 
to affect the proportional and not the absolute work needed. 
What we have under such circumstances is merely a case of 
a weak machine doing slowly what a strong one does at one 
blow. The weak machine may however be destroyed by 
application to work too heavy for it, and in this sense even 
an identical unit of work has not always the same total effect. 
If a unit cannot be obtained for the # or a series, what can 
our would-be proportion do for us ? It enables us to say 
generally, though not precisely, that amount of even intellec- 
tual activity varies as expenditure of mechanical energy and 
is limited by the sources from which that energy is drawn ; 
and further, to say precisely, though only as a hypothetical 
judgment of which the condition can never be entirely fulfilled, 
that if we could equate two amounts of intellectual activity, 
or if we could have the same intellectual activity repeated under 
the same conditions, we should find it had absorbed or had 
been accompanied by the same amount of mechanical work. 
There is, that is to say, a formal and constant correspondence 



CHAP, ii] The Thinking Being 81 

between amount of mechanical energy and amount of intel- 
lectual work ; but mechanical equivalence is so subordinate 
an aspect of such work that this constant relation tells us 
nothing by way of calculation, and only embodies in an abstract 
principle what we knew before if he does not eat, neither can 
he think. 

It may be objected that intellectual activity apart from 
molecular change, which latter is not intellectual, absorbs no 
work at all. But when any one can show us thought apart 
from an organism it will be time enough to speak of thought 
as an activity not dependent upon organic changes. Prima 
facie the complex molecular changes which accompany thought 
have thought for their natural outcome and consequence, and 
owe their high mechanical cost to this characteristic. That no 
mechanical expenditure goes directly to thought, but all goes 
to molecular change which is in some cases accompanied by 
thought, is only what we should naturally expect supposing 
thought to be conditioned by the activity of a physical organ- 
ism. In any other case, i.e. supposing a contingent of energy 
to disappear into the thought-process and be unaccounted for 
in the balance-sheet of the body, we should have a propor- 
tionate amount of thought unaccompanied by material change, , 
which is unknown in our entire experience and contrary to the 
whole analogy of that experience. All that we can say is that 
the thinking being, as we know him, is thus and thus con- 
ditioned. We cannot safely separate in theory what can never, 
to our experience, be separated in fact. 

iii. Mechanism in the widest or ultimate sense is thus com- The Me* 
patible with the disappearance of the ratio in both of the c ^anica 
corresponding series. The principle of ' mechanism ' is by this Know- 
curtailment reduced to the law of Sufficient Reason, and simply ledge ' 
expresses the point of view from which the scientific under- 
standing necessarily and inevitably regards the world. This 
point of view is not a tyranny to be avoided, but a claim which 
must be satisfied. The Understanding is a necessary moment 
in the Reason. Instead of precise proportion, enabling us to 
construct or to predict by a formal process, we have in 
mechanical determination thus understood a conception which 
confronts us with a material problem. A man's character 

1837-2 G 



82 Induction and Reasoning [BOOKII 

deteriorates, or the prosperity of a nation decays. The con- 
ception of mechanism or of sufficient reason entitles us to treat 
these phenomena as problems demanding explanation. They 
must not be miraculous, i. e. not isolated, ' cut off with an axe ' 
from the system of knowledge. We express this demand by 
saying that every change or more generally, every modifica- 
tion has its reason. It is only our tendency to illustrate the 
universal by the plural that makes us state the principle as 
if it necessarily applied to a number of examples in which the 
same ground has the same consequence. What we really mean 
is that every content is a consequent, and that every conse- 
quent has a ground. That the connection of ground and 
consequent is necessary, and therefore if the one is repeated 
without modifying circumstances then the other is repeated 
without modifying circumstances, is involved in the point of 
view from which we speak of ground and consequent at all. 
But what we primarily mean is objectivity, not uniformity. 

Some uniformity, however, is for us a corollary from objec- 
tivity, The ultimate fact of knowledge, on which the objective 
relation of ground and consequent depends, is the existence of 
systematic connections. Now a system is a whole, a universal, 
an identity in difference. From the very beginning this is 
what we meant by something objective, something by which 
intelligence could agree with itself in the world of meanings. 
But such a system or identity, however heterogeneous the 
parts that enter into it, of course pervades all these parts as 
a common character. As we saw in the last chapter, if a, &, c 
are mere particulars, there is no bridge from the one to the 
other. A connecting quality there must be, although it need 
by no means take the shape of an immediate and simple 
quality. Thus in highly complicated matters we go back again 
to an earlier function of knowledge, and substitute equational 
comparison for exact enumeration. But the comparison is not 
here the ground of inference ; the contents have the partly 
quantitative relation, which admits of such comparison, as a 
consequence of their systematic connection, but the grounds 
of inference lie in the systematic connection itself. Let the 
a series be the phases of the artistic individuality of a painter, 
and let the a series be a chronologically arranged series of 



CHAP, ii] Abstract Hypothesis 83 

pictures in which these phases display their effects. In such 
series we shall always have, among other processes of judgment 
and inference, a comparison by way of equation applied to 
pervading qualities as between phase and phase, and between 
picture and picture. No one would doubt that Turner 's water- 
colour picture of Durham painted in 1836 has more of certain 
striking qualities commonly associated with Turner's art than 
that painted in 1802. But of course there would be no sense 
in saying that the one is twice or three times as ' Turneresque ' 
as the other. 

In series like these we have subsumption or abstract hypo- 
thesis which latter is the bridge from mechanical construction 
to concrete systematic inference according to the nature 
of the subject-matter. In tracing the phases of an artist's 
genius we have properly subsumption, the unity which operates 
being concrete and self-contained. But yet as regarded in the 
light of causal ideas the phase of mind may be distinguished 
from the picture produced, and the one regarded as the cause 
or ground from which, on the latent basis of a real individuality, 
the other necessarily issues. From this relative point of view 
the connection would be expressed by abstract hypothesis, 
' If a# then a 2 .' In this aspect everything in the universe may 
be referred to conditions outside itself, and nothing is free, 
complete, or self-contained. For to regard things thus is 
simply a phase or moment of knowledge, the phase which 
consists in determining every x in terms of some correlated y. 
Cause and condition, reason and ground, are only species of the 
generic idea which presides over thought of this type. But in 
ground we have as we saw l a conception in which the correlated 
terms tend to fall together, and to pass from being parts related 
within a system to being the system itself. The whole con- 
ception which we are discussing the conception of { sufficient 
reason ' is simply a corollary of or aspect in the ultimate 
nature of the universal, which is in other words the ultimate 
nature of thought itself. We have constantly reiterated that 
every universal is an identity in difference ; and it is only the 
converse of this to say that every difference has a distinct and 
assignable place among the differences of a universal. 
1 Cp Book I, chap. vi. 
G2 



84 Induction and Reasoning [BOOKII 

The statement of the principle of sufficient reason which 
was laid down above, 'There is no difference 1 without its 
reason/ may be illustrated by the formula in which Lotze 2 
embodies it, A 4- B = C. This formula is intended to mean 
that a real subject A can only pass into a specific phase C 
under an assignable condition B. The ' proof ' or analysis of 
the principle must be reserved for a later chapter. Here 
I am only dealing with its import. And we see its import 
reduced to the most abstract type when we are in a stage 
beyond proportion and yet have not returned to true sub- 
sumption, i.e. when we are dealing with the pure hypothetical 
judgment. For we have at this stage a de facto correspondence 
of which the ultimate ground is more or less latent, between 
the terms a and a, b and /3, and so forth. What then do we 
mean by correspondence ? We could not say that a and a 
correspond if a and a were respectively isolated occurrences of 
their kind. For what could possibly justify us in picking them 
out of the myriad complications of reality and attaching them 
together to the exclusion of other events and relations ? 
Correspondence involves the recognition of a universal which 
fixes the relations of the terms that correspond. If the series 
a, b f c is to correspond to the series a, /3, y, then both series, 
simply in order to the possibility of selecting them, must be 
capable of being regarded as a a , a l9 a c and a a , a^, a y . If in a 
combination of musical sounds a slight harshness a is raised 
to a discord 6, then the consequent feeling of pleasurable excite- 
ment a passes into a feeling of pain /3. In virtue of being phases 
of the same combination the two sounds may be represented 
as a a and a b respectively ; and the two phases of emotion, in 
virtue at any rate of relation to the same series of sounds, may 
be represented by a a and a^ respectively. But neither sounds 
nor feelings, of course, are terms between which a ratio sub- 
sists. What we can infer is, by a process which is half -sub- 
sumption and half-hypothetical judgment, ' In a pair of series 
where the sound a a causes the feeling a a , the sound a b will 

1 p. 82, above. It is commonly worded ' there is no change ', &c., but 
I have attempted to show in Book I, chap, i, that change is simply a case 
of difference and needs no separate logical treatment. 

8 Logik, sect. 63. 



CHAP, ii] The Understanding 85 

cause the feeling a/3.' When we develope any such doctrine 
as that the source of pain is intermittent irritation of sense, 
of which musical discord is a species, we pass into subsumption 
of the higher kind, which has absorbed into itself what can be 
done by mechanical construction. 

The point of view which we have been considering that 
of reflection and relativity is the point of view which has 
been distinguished by Kant and Hegel as the standpoint of 
the understanding. It is not separable in kind from the 
mode of consideration which the same thinkers have desig- 
nated by the term Reason. Nor is it an intelligible conten- 
tion, even if favoured by the language of Kant in dealing 
with practical philosophy, that Reason could be actual and 
operative otherwise than as completing and containing the 
understanding. That the understanding must have its rights 
is one of the cardinal principles of Hegel, which Lotze has 
but laboriously and ingeniously illustrated in his analysis of 
the pervading mechanical aspect of the world. The real 
prophet of the understanding, however, was Schopenhauer. 
His treatment of the principle of sufficient reason as at once 
the fundamental axiom of human science and the innate source 
of its illusions, forms an ultimate and irreversible criticism 
on the aspect of intelligence which consists, to sum up its 
nature in a popular but not inaccurate phrase, in explaining 
everything by something else a process which taken by 
itself is necessarily unending and unsatisfying. 

In returning from the consideration of abstract necessary 
relations to that of concrete real totalities, we must remark 
that ideally speaking every concrete real totality can be 
analysed into a complex of abstract necessary relations. 
Were this not so, as it is Wundt's and Lotze's great achieve- 
ment to have shown in detail, teleology itself would vanish. 
For adaptation disappears if the end can dispense with means, 
and a universe which had no necessary connections between 
its parts could have jio definite or significant structure as a 
whole. In the remainder of the present Book I shall attempt 
to put these relations in a clearer light. 



CHAPTER III 

ANALOGY 

WE now take up the thread from the end of sect. I of 
the last chapter, and returning into the track of concrete 
inference, we have to ask ourselves how we go forward in 
inference from a simple enumerative Induction when we do 
not accept the task of completing the enumeration. In this 
case we no longer count the examples, but we weigh them. 
We turn the focus of attention upon the concrete content 
which as subject of both premises, as a real thing or things, 
formed the middle term of Induction, and endeavour to deepen 
it by observation, and to define its relations by analysis. 
The first effect of this procedure is to transform the content 
in question from a subject into a predicate, as no longer a 
qualification tacitly presupposed of reality, but as an attribute 
explicitly referred to it and under process of definition and 
extension. 

nalogy i. As regards the relation between Analogy and Enumera- 
idEnu- ti ve induction, we have to remember that Induction only 
iduc- gave us a problem or suggestion ; and consequently we can- 
on * not arrange the two types of inference in a simple conca- 
tenation by taking the Inductive conclusion as the analogical 
premise. Rather we have in Analogy to go back upon the 
suggestive process of Induction, and repeat it with the 
requisite difference. Suppose that the Inductive Inference or 
grounded conjecture has been 
The poor people a b c d are pauperised % ; 
The poor people abed are constantly cared for by charitable 

persons y ; 
.*. Being cared for by charitable persons y may have to do 

with their being pauperised %. 

If now we desire, as we ought, further to examine this 
suggestion on the basis of the direct experience which gene- 
rated it, we shall still make this experience the cases a, 6, c, d 



CHAP, in] From Induction to Analogy 87 

the middle term or ground of inference, but we shall divert 
our attention from the number of the examples to their nature, 
and shall therefore put their nature as an attribute in the 
place of a predicate common to both judgments. Thus we 
obtain an argument having a form akin to that of the Aris- 
totelian second figure. And the premises are now no longer 
conjunctive individual judgments, but are passing into generic 
judgments. 

In the pauperised type x, what strikes us on further ex- 
amining the cases is the loss of independence (A as 
common content of a b c d) \ 

In the charitably-cared-for type y, what strikes us on 
further examining the cases is the loss of independence 
(A as common content of a b c d) ; 

.*. The type y has a fundamental feature A akin to the type 
x and the two are thus closely coherent. 

We are apt to think that in analogy we must conclude 
from old instances to new instances. But analogy is essen- 
tially an argument about the significance of a type, or of 
what in botany are called characters. Of course however this 
inference, like all others, has the aspect of discovery as well 
as the aspect of proof. The deeper theoretical need is to find 
the link and limit of connection between the characters x and 
y sometimes observed in conjunction, i. e. to prove the one 
of the other. But the reality of the distinction between x and 
y which gives interest to the inference makes it practically 
certain that in some examples we shall be first struck by y 
and in some first by #, and that we shall often need to make 
the circuit through the identical nature A before we can even 
detect or have ground to believe in the remaining character 
x or y. This is the aspect of discovery. Proof overcomes 
logical disconnection, discovery overcomes apparent presented 
disconnection. Thus our account of Analogy can really satisfy 
the popular idea that inference is, here as in Induction, from 
particulars to particulars. 

I subjoin one or two simple examples, in order to illustrate 
the connection of proof and discovery, and the working of the 
process. 

Enumerative Induction (or observation in single instance). 



88 Analogy [BOOKII 

Almost all animals have some power of self-movement f 
Almost all animals have some degree of sentience ; 
/. Sentience may be intimately connected with self-move- 
ment. 

Analogical Enquiry, 

Self -moving creatures are creatures in need of special nourish- 
ment and protection (qua living creatures) ; 
Sentient creatures are in need of special nourishment and 

protection (qua living creatures) ; 
.*. Sentience is connected (by the requirements of animal 

life) with self-movement. 

I may give another instance which shows the transition 
frorii Induction to Analogy just not made. Newton guessed l 
that a diamond was combustible, because of its high refractive 
index relatively to its density, a feature which he had observed 
in many combustible bodies. 
Enumerative Induction. 
Oil, Canada balsam, &c. are combustible ; 
Oil, Canada balsam, &c. have a high refractive index 

relatively to density ; 

.*. High refractive index may be connected with com- 
bustibility. 

In the case of the diamond the combustibility had not 
been observed, so that when applied to it the conclusion was 
a prediction or discovery. But the essential import of the 
conclusion would have been just the same if no new case 
had been in question. 
The next step would have been to say 
1 Combustibility has to do with such and such attributes 

of oil, Canada balsam, &c. 

High refractive index has to do with these same attributes. 
/.High refractive index is fundamentally connected with 

combustibility.' 

But this step, which would have constituted an analogical 
inference, has not, as I understand from the passage in Mill, 
been taken. 

1 See Mill's Logic, ii, p. 88, I write merely on the faith of the place 
in Mill. The instances by which I illustrate Newton's guess are there- 
fore of my own invention. 



CHAP, mi The First Suggestion 89 

We may now look at an instance drawn from the relation 
of natural kinds. 
Enumerative Induction. 
The exotic Pelargonia have a peculiar herring-bone structure 

in the petals } 
The exotic Pelargonia have the same kind of seed-vessels 

as our wild geraniums ; 

/. In flowers with the peculiar seed-vessels of our wild 
geraniums it is worth while to look for the herring-bone 
structure in the petals. 
Analogy. 
The herring-bone structure is conjoined in the Pelargonia 

with the characters of Geranieae ; 
The flowers with such seed-vessels as our wild geraniums 

have the characters of Geranieae ; 

.*. That these flowers, e.g. our wild geraniums, should 
have the peculiar herring-bone structure * is exceedingly 
probable. 

Botanical classification might almost be said to rest wholly 
on analogy. The above guess, like a thousand and one such 
guesses which every field botanist is continually making, 
is verified in fact. The eye that can detect the dominant 
habit of a natural genus or order in an unfamiliar species is 
constantly inferring in analogical form, on the ground of 
generic identity, to hundreds of details, which as a rule 
confirm its diagnosis on more minute inspection. And the 
term diagnosis, logically applicable, but not customarily 
applied, to botanical science, reminds us of another great 
province of knowledge in which analogical inference is our 
guide and counsellor. As in the normal so in the abnormal 
activities the diseases of the organic world, it is analogy 
that is the chief clue to what is taking place and to what we 
must anticipate, j Diagnosis is to symptoms what classification 
is to characters. And finally we may here mention the class 
of examples to which we shall shortly return as throwing the 

1 As a matter of fact, all the Geranieae which I have examined possess 
this structure. I might have mentioned this verification immediately 
after the Induction ; but this would really take us into mere enumera- 
tion of instances. It is the coherence with the properties of a natural 
kind that alone gives any help towards a general conclusion. 



go Analogy [BOOK n 

strongest light upon the true rationale of analogy, although 
or because they tend ultimately to pass beyond its province. 
I mean our judgment of the actual use or even of the inten- 
tional object of mechanical adaptations of every kind, whether 
in nature or in the work of man. Thus we may infer by 
Analogy, 

Cutting-tools have edges, and places for handles ; 
These flints have edges and places for handles ; 
/. These flints are cutting tools. 

Here we go at once to analogy, without passing through 

the observation of conjunctions as a first suggestion. It is 

not simply from seeing handles and edges conjoined in knives 

or chisels that we know a cutting-tool must have a handle 

and an edge. We know this from extraneous considerations, 

especially from the texture and use of the human hand. 

But nevertheless we might never have discussed the coherence 

of these attributes if we had never seen them in conjunction ; 

and further, in the new instance of the flints, we have had 

to go through a process of observation which told us that 

here too there were both edges and handles or places for 

handles. Thus the present example illustrates at once the 

true nature of analogy, and the ground and degree of its 

dependence on Induction. The observation ' Flint tools have 

edges, flint tools have handles ', does not linger in the stage 

of induction, simply because we are not dependent on the 

nature of flint tools to tell us the connection in use between 

a handle and an edge. We leap at once to this notion of 

cutting-tools, and compare the flints with them in respect of 

the conjoined attributes which we try to deepen and define. 

Logical 2. The logical nature of analogy may be analysed as follows. 

of l ana S - m * ^ s a ^ orma ^ syllogism in the second figure, having an 

logy. affirmative conclusion, the analogical argument has the fallacy 

Undistri- o f undistributed middle. We need not indeed trouble our- 

middlein selves at this stage with questions of distribution involving 

fi g- 2 * the extension of the judgment* Nevertheless a fault in the 

extensional relations of an argument infallibly indicates 

something which is prima facie a fault in its connection of 

content. In the present case the fault is this that what is 

materially the ground of Knowledge, the content which 



CHAP, iii] No Major Premise 91 

underlies and links together the two matters which demand 
explanation, is, qua predicate or characteristic, in its wrong 
place, the place of a consequent. Now according to the 
ordinary interpretation of the judgment, of which we have 
frequently spoken and which holds good for our present 
level, 1 the same consequent may have any number of inde- 
pendent grounds. There is therefore no formal necessity 
whatever for the two grounds or antecedents which in this 
case possess the same consequent to have any connection with 
each other beyond the fact that they do possess it. 

But on the same ordinary interpretation of the judgment 
if we deny the formal consequent of either of the grounds 
while affirming it of the other, we can then deny that the 
two grounds in question are connected through the universal 
suggested in the premises before us. Thus the negative 
argument escapes the formal defect which attaches to the 
affirmative. About any further or other connection that 
they may or may not have the denial tells us nothing, and 
therefore it is really a denial not of all or any connection, but 
of a particular connection through a particular middle term. 
The customary omission in the conclusion to specify the 
excluded connection is a fallacy a dicto secundum quid ad 
dictum simpliciter. It may be said that the denial takes 
on the absoluteness of the assertion on which it rests. ' Every 
Tory is a good man ; He is not a good man ; .-. He is not 
a Tory.' If the major is true without reserve the conclusion 
is true without reserve, and in logic we are to suppose our 
premises true. But still we must consider what the judgment 
means, i. e. what it really is. And no judgment is absolutely 
meant. The conclusion does not really represent the inference 
as a concrete thought unless we repeat in the conclusion, ' He 
is not a Tory, so far as his not being a good man prevents his 
being one/ This refinement has no exclusive relation to 
analogical argument or to fig. 2, for the negative argument 
falls into fig. i as readily as into fig. 2, the ground and con- 
sequent in negation being reciprocal. In order to give the 
criticism a peculiar relation to analogy we must say, ' He is 

1 For the judgment is not purged of irrelevancy till it has passed 
through scientific induction. 



92 Analogy [BOOK n 

not a Tory, so far as the peculiar way in which he is not 
a good man prevents his being one.' This positive way is 
variable. 

Except then for the purpose of negative inference, which 
is not purely analogical, the form of analogical argument in 
fig. 2 is at variance with its matter, and represents no infer- 
ential necessity at all. Inferential necessity is either sub- 
sumptive or constructive. In order to obtain subsumptive 
necessity one of the premises would have to be converted 
and become a major premise. And this conversion would 
have to be material, not merely formal ; for a formal con- 
version of an affirmative generic judgment would destroy its 
generic character and make it incapable of standing as a major 
premise. The Analogical inference as it stands shares with 
enumerative Induction the peculiarity of being a subsumptive 
inference without a major premise an argument from a 
concrete content without the assertion that this content is 
absolutely dominant for the purpose of the argument. Again, 
in order to obtain constructive or abstract necessity the 
relations of the contents must be reduced into abstract and 
mechanical relations akin to the universals embodied in the 
pure hypothetical judgment or in the equation. The formal 
defect of analogy as it stands is expressed by the ' probably ' 
inserted in the conclusion, which indicates a coherence under 
conditions not precisely known. 



Real ii. Seeing that the form of analogical argument is 

Analog!- f ac inconclusive, on what does its value really depend ? It 

cal Argu- represents, we said, the phase of thought in which we no 

men ' longer count but weigh the examples. It might be said 

therefore that analogy is a material and not a formal infer- 

ence. This is so far true that the value of analogy depends 

not on a formal conjunction of attributes in a subject, but 

on the material governing power or essentiality of a predicate. 

Everything turns on the ' importance ' of the character which 

forms the common predicate, and this ' importance ' is closely 

bound up with completeness of definition. I will return 

directly to the question of the importance of characters ; 

but it is necessary first to point out that an inference without 

assignable form is no inference at all, and that therefore it is 



CHAP, in] Logical ' Importance ' 93 

not correct to say that analogy is a material and not a formal 
inference. Every inference has a form, in the sense of a 
definite relation between the differences of the universal which 
the inference exhibits. I do not however mean to say that 
such a form can be laid down antecedently for every inference. 
It is this relation, as we have seen, which varies with the 
nature of the universal, and which by its variations dictates 
the main types both of judgment and of inference. We need 
not here take refuge in the form of complete subsumption 
through the conversion of one judgment. When that is 
possible and no doubt analogy is on the road to it we are 
already beyond analogy, But the form of analogical argu- 
ment is to be found in the neglected aspect of the ordinary 
judgment, its strong implication of a value in the predicate. 
If all judgments were taken as reciprocal, analogy would be 
ipso facto an argument from ground to consequent, besides 
being as it is now from consequent to ground. ' Two grounds 
that have the same consequent ought to cohere/ is the form 
as it stands. ' Two grounds that have the same consequent 
are consequents of the same ground, therefore must cohere/ 
is the implied form, or, as we said above, the matter of the 
inference. This form might be identified with fig. 3, and so 
take us back to Enumerative Induction. But the content 
being changed from instances into their defined nature, we 
are rather taken forward into the hypothetical judgment as 
used in constructive inference, or to complete subsumption 
in fig. i. With reciprocal judgments the syllogistic form 
becomes indifferent ; and the premises of analogy are im- 
plicitly reciprocal. 1 That their reciprocity is implicit and not 
explicit is in accordance with the nature of analogy, which is 
as we have agreed only a method of problematic conclusion, 
not a method of absolute and precise determination. 
1 The explicit form is A is B ; The implicit form is B is A ; 
C is B ; B is C ; 

.. Cis A. .-. Cis A. 

But the implicit form deals not with mere instances as in Induction, 
but with that B which was found to be essential in A and C. Therefore 
the whole implied argument is 

If B, then A (which is also a sign of B) ; 

If B, then C (which is also a sign of B) ; 
*. If C, then B and therefore A. 



94 Analogy [BOOKII 

I now return to the question of the material ' importance ' 
of characters, the attribute on which the implicit form of 
analogical inference depends. It is possible, and is verified 
in daily experience, that a character or group of characters 
from which the remaining properties of an object cannot at 
present be derived by mechanical analysis may either amount 
for inferential purposes to a ground, or at least may serve 
as an unerring index of the qualities of the object. Such 
a character or group of characters, and I may add such a 
symptom or group of symptoms, has logical ' importance '. 

I will commit myself at once to the opinion that this im- 
portance rests in every case on a presumption drawn from 
what I may call morphology, or from teleology ; these two 
ideas being regarded as secondary and primary forms of the 
same conception. In all objects or institutions made for 
a purpose by man, at least while their nature corresponds 
to the intention embodied in their structure, there is true 
teleology. In all organisms, parts of organisms, objects or 
structures that live a life or have in any way a being that is 
to our eyes individual and distinctive, there is morphology or 
de facto teleology. I am aware that a de facto teleology is 
a contradiction in terms. Purpose implies more than actual 
result. But as a description of a result in language borrowed 
from a result of another class from human operation the 
phrase though contradictory may pass ; and it is in this 
sense alone that I employ it. If there is a peculiar principle 
underneath this ambiguous class of results, it is at least not, 
within our knowledge, a principle of intentional adaptation by 
a foreseeing consciousness. But I repeat that every universal, 
every persistent identity in difference, just because it is 
a synthesis of differences in a universal, may be regarded 
as a concentration of means in a distinguishable result. How 
far such a view is * subjective ' or in what sense it renders 
a real aspect of the nature of things is a question to which 
I shall return. 

It is on this characteristic of all universals that anticipation 
by analogy rests. Where we have a constitutive equation, 
i. e. an absolute rule for the synthesis of the differences, we 
can construct without teleology and without analogy. If, 



CHAP, in] Analogy and Teleology 95 

again, according to Bacon's dream, science could arrive at 
* forms ' or underlying qualities, capable of doing the work 
of constitutive equations for every natural attribute and 
every natural object, then in presence of such a form we should 
not need analogy. Or where complete concrete subsumption 
prevails, where we have actual conscious teleology, e.g. in the 
philosophical analysis of laws, institutions, opinions, logical 
activities, we should never need analogy but for the all- 
important fact that all these contents are determined by 
growth and history in a way of which those who make and 
use them are not aware, and which they cannot control. 
Hence all such matters have an organic and almost a mechan- 
ical side, and can be treated by comparative science analogy, 
as well as by philosophy analysis. No actual law or institu- 
tion or idea has its form exclusively determined by its explicit 
purpose. All of them are loaded with inherited matter which 
may in part be an incumbrance, but in large part serves 
purposes wider and not less essential than the purpose which 
consciousness is able to recognise. And in human affairs 
there is a bridge between the unconscious and the conscious 
function ; for the latent purpose which as latent is not a 
purpose at all is actually one side of the explicit purpose 
and is continually emerging into explicit consciousness, so 
that the de facto operation of human energy in one stage 
characterises the explicit purpose of that stage itself and 
enters into the explicit purpose of the next. Thus philosophy 
can deal with even latent or unconscious significance partly 
as an aspect and partly as a condition precedent of conscious 
significance. The history of religion or of any achievement 
of man's intelligence is inexhaustible in illustrations of this 
principle. Precise knowledge, however, whether affirmative 
or negative, whether constructive or subsumptive, excludes 
anticipation by analogy, for analogy is a stage on the road 
to precise knowledge. 1 This condition satisfies the popular 
requirement 2 that in Analogy we must know neither necessary 
connection nor necessary exclusion. 

To explain the connection of Analogy with Teleology, I will 
at once take the strongest class of examples. 

1 Compare however p, 217, supra. z Mill's Logic, ii, p. 88. 



g6 Analogy [BOOKII 

We are on the border between analogy and a higher form 
of inference when we argue from a presumed genuine teleology 
to the conjunction of qualities in the content that it governs. 
We are so far already outside analogy that the argument must 
consist largely of judgments upon actual mechanical adapta- 
tions, the de facto use of which is a matter of precise know- 
ledge and not of presumption. We are not wholly outside 
analogy, because the de facto nature of these adaptations is 
not enough, in the case supposed, to carry our conclusion, 
which needs the actual and intentional purpose. This, in 
inferences of the type supposed, can only rest upon pre- 
sumption. If we find, near a known seat of stone-age inhabi- 
tants, some flints of peculiar shape and make, it is a mere 
judgment on a matter of fact to say whether they are adapted 
for use as knives or as hatchets ; but to say what they were 
meant for, and so actually used for, and therefore whether 
we may expect to find near them chips of wood or bones of 
animals, is a question for analogical inference based on the 
nature of the country, on the known or supposed habits of 
the people, and on any convergent indications in the adapta- 
tions of the flint tools themselves. Any character in such 
a connected group of characters, that gives the key to the 
pervading purpose of the whole content under examination, 
is an * important ' character. ' Importance ' is relation to the 
purpose or pervading nature, the ' import ', of any system. 
If both qualities to whose coherence we conclude are directly 
derivable from the presumed purpose, then we are so far 
beyond analogy, but the element of presumption which con- 
sists in ascribing true intention or purpose is still analogical. 
If one or both of the qualities to whose coherence we conclude 
are not derivable from the pervading purpose, then we are 
more completely or quite completely in the region of analogy, 
and the inference will simply be that identity of purpose 
is probably both a ground and also a consequent of uniform 
structure. 

In the former case, both properties being derivable, we 
have : 

The flint knives are adapted for cutting wood ; 

Cut logs and chips are connected with cutting wood ; 



CHAP, iii] Known and Unknown Connections 97 

.*. Cut logs and chips 1 will probably be found near the 
knives (i. e. if the adaptation which we observe in the 
knives is a true index of the use for which they were 
really made, and to which & further presumption they 
were actually put. 
Or again : 
A telescope with the eye-piece at one side of the tube is 

probably a reflector ; 
Lord Rosse's telescope is a reflector ; 
/. Lord Rosse's telescope probably has the eye-piece at 

one side of the tube. 

In the latter case we have, one or both properties being 
not directly derivable from the presumed purpose, 
A clock with a watch-movement is a carriage-clock ; 
A clock with plate-glass sides is a carriage-clock. 
.-.A clock with plate-glass sides is probably a clock with 

a watch-movement. 

There are pendulum clocks with plate-glass sides, so the 
analogy is not made out. There is a reason why a clock with 
a watch-movement should be a carriage clock, viz. that it 
is a mechanism which the motion of the carriage will not 
disturb. But there is no reason that I know of for the second 
premise, which rests on mere custom and turns out to be a 
precarious basis of argument. 
Or again : 
A horseshoe-stand is a common shape of French micro* 

scope-stands ; 

A very simple stage is common in French microscope- 
stands ; 

.'. With a very simple stage one may expect a horseshoe- 
stand. 

The horseshoe shape is not the best for securing steadiness, 
so that there is no direct connection between the two pro- 
perties of which the conclusion alleges the conjunction, and 
the purpose indicated by the name microscope-stand. And 
I have purposely introduced a limitation referring to the 
character of the conditions under which the purpose is carried 

1 I omit, merely for brevity, to say anything about the possibility of 
the chips &c. having been removed. 
1337-2 H 



98 Analogy [BOOKII 

out, ' French microscope-stand/ in order to illustrate the 
boundary-line between genuine conscious teleology and mere 
characteristic individuality. Probably in this example the 
two join hands ; French makers must have, or have had, an 
idea that the horseshoe shape and the simple stage best secured 
the purposes of the microscope. 

The former set of examples, with both properties derivable 
from the purpose, illustrate the general type of analogical 
inference affecting attributes connected with self-preservation 
in the organic world chief or fundamental attributes. The 
latter, with one property or neither derivable, gives the general 
type of analogical inference affecting attributes which are not 
vital, but which have in heredity or otherwise their own degree 
of constancy. But these examples, though illustrative of 
organic relations, are by their connection with conscious 
teleology upon a higher level than those relations. 

A further class of inferences, to which the last example 
prepared a transition, is intermediate between conscious and 
merely organic teleology. I allude to the enormous class 
of daily inferences relating to time or locality of origin or 
to authorship, in the case of literary, artistic, or mechanical 
productions. Obviously the conception of the presumed 
period, place, or person, as significant of peculiar charac- 
teristics, may itself be the presumed ground of inference in 
virtue of which the coherence of certain properties is analo- 
gically expected ; or the individual characteristics stated 
explicitly may be the ground, and the name may be inferred 
by analogy. Supposing a single conjunction (Inductive in 
its nature) to have furnished the suggestion ' This design 
which is beautiful is by A. B,' * then analogical enquiry will 
infer in the form ' The beauty of this design is drawn from 
nature yet original and full of thought ; A. B.'s designs are 
drawn from nature yet original and full of thought ; .-. The 
beauty of this design is probably the beauty of one of A. B.'s 
designs/ The reader can construct further variations of this 
very common type of argument for himself. 

The common analogical inferences which run throughout 
our treatment of organic and even of inorganic nature rest 

1 In the form : ' This design is beautiful. This design is by A. B.' 



CHAP, in] ' De facto ' teleology 99 

practically on the existence of natural kinds, that is to say, 
on morphology or on de facto teleology. I may explain the 
distinction of degree which I attach to the two expressions 
by reference to the general conception of self-maintenanqe or 
self-preservation. Where self-maintenance means simply any 
reaction of a distinguishable agent against or upon an influence 
approaching it from without, I should speak of the distinguish- 
able individuality of that agent as morphological, i. e. as con- 
sisting simply of a formal or recognisable self whose unity is 
charged with no especial interest. Where on the contrary there 
is a self maintained or preserved which exhibits the attributes 
of life, or, however partially, of consciousness, I should say 
that the facts, and not our own choice, demand that we should 
apply the paradoxical idea of an actual purpose, or de facto 
teleology. It is obvious that the conception is one varying in 
degree and not limited by any despotic necessity to the range 
of the organic world. After all, it is a plain fact that elements 
combine in processes ; and the moment we single out part 
of a process as a result a we introduce the conception of de 
facto co-operation on the part of means towards an end. 
Every distinguishable persistent content may thus formally 
be regarded as an end, without, of course, any implication 
whatever of an aim pre-existing in a foreseeing consciousness. 
That from a purely mechanical or analytic point of view such 
constituent relations are absolutely indifferent to the whole 
which they co-operate in constituting is a necessary conse- 
quence of regarding such relations in their isolation. But 
without the further aspect supplied by an interest in the whole 
as such, not merely ethical and aesthetic judgment, but 
scientific judgment itself, loses all power of discrimination, 
and therefore all objectivity. Even to name, as we saw in 
the Introduction, is to select and to identify. 

Analogy then rests on the ' importance ' or significance of 
attributes, an idea well illustrated by systems of true conscious 

a This singling out a part as the ' end ' is essential to teleology, but 
must ultimately be determined by the nature of the ' whole '. Thus 
teleology strictly speaking is a partial conception, and less ultimate 
than the idea of the whole. See e. g. McTaggart's Commentary on 
Hegel's Logic, sect. 255. I hope to deal more fully with this point in 
a forthcoming work. 

H2 



ioo Analogy [BOOK n 

teleology which happen to be but partially known to us, 
but really dominant throughout the various grades of actual 
self-maintenance and individuality presented by the organic 
and inorganic world. Analogy is never demonstration. A 
thorough mechanical nexus and a subordination to a conscious 
purpose in an intelligent being or rational system both pro 
tanto exclude it. 

No ratio iii. The obvious truth that ceteris paribus the predicate 
tiesto 1 * 1 " w ^ more meaning has a deeper grasp of the import of the 
Differ- reality which it qualifies, and so is the safer ground of inference 
ences. respecting that reality, has introduced the fatal fascination 
of the ratio into the doctrine of analogy. I quote from Mill * 
a complete account of the idea so generated : ' Since the value 
of an analogical argument inferring one resemblance from other 
resemblances without any antecedent evidence of a connection 
between them depends on the extent of ascertained resem- 
blance, compared first with the amount of ascertained difference 
and next with the extent of the unexplored region of unascer- 
tained properties ; it follows that where the resemblance is 
very great, the ascertained difference very small, and our 
knowledge of the subject-matter tolerably extensive, the 
argument from analogy may approach in strength very 
near to a valid induction. If, after much observation of B, 
we find that it agrees with A in nine out of ten of its known 
properties, we may conclude with a probability of nine to 
one that it will possess any given derivative property of A. 
If we discover, for example, an unknown animal or plant, 
resembling closely some known one in the greater number 
of the properties we observe in it, but differing in some few, 
we may reasonably expect to find in the unobserved re- 
mainder of its properties a general agreement with those of 
the former ; but also a difference corresponding propor- 
tionately to the amount of observed diversity/ 

This passage gives us the valuable suggestion of negative 
analogy, to which I shall return below. But as to the idea 
of ratio, we must be faithful to our principle that in analogy 
the examples or the properties, it matters not which are 
to be weighed and not to be counted. Mill's idea is in fact 
1 Mill's Logic, ii, p. 90. 



, iii] Number of Resemblances loi 

that by counting the properties you weigh the examples. 
And every one must be struck by the verisimilitude of the 
view which the above passage propounds. But on pressing 
the matter home we see that at least the form which it gives 
to the right idea of insisting on the depth of the common 
predicate is a wholly unreal form, and takes us into the wrong 
track. There is no ratio without a unit ; and, to begin with, 
a ' resemblance ' (a point of identity) is not as such a content 
that can be employed as a unit. It is impossible to say what 
is a point of identity and what amounts to many such points. 
Identity is systematic through and through, and its ' points ' 
derive their value from their relation to a system. It is im- 
possible to break up such a system into numerable parts and 
points without prejudging the very question the question 
of their respective values as index-qualities which the 
enumeration is supposed to be a straightforward method of 
solving. 

It is worth while to illustrate this point. Suppose that 
we are asked to compare two given plants of different species 
in order to determine their botanical affinity on analogical 
evidence on the evidence of observed resemblances or points 
of identity matched against observed differences. In order 
to meet the retort that affinity in botany is what we like to 
make it, by the arbitrary value which we attach to the charac- 
ters, I will assign to affinity the definite meaning of relation- 
ship by descent as indicated through the accepted natural 
classification. Thus the actual fact to be discovered by 
analogy, put at its lowest value, is how the plants in question 
are classified in the accepted natural classification, and put 
at its highest value is how the two are related by descent. 
Let one of these two given plants be a shrub six feet high, 
with branches and stalked leaves, with its inflorescence in 
branching masses, without any ' bract ' or small leaf at the 
base of each mass, with white flowers, with nearly black fruit, 
and when young having its leaves covered with silky hairs. 
Let the other plant be herbaceous, six inches high, not 
branched, with no stalks to its leaves, its flowers in heads 
which do not branch, but which have four conspicuous 
yellowish ' bracts ' at the base ; the flowers are purple, the 



IO2 Analogy [BOOK n 

fruit red, and the leaves have only a few hairs on them. Add 
to these differences that the general look and habit of the plants 
are very different. Now set against the above differences 
such points of identity as number of parts of the flower, 
structure of the flower (polypetalous with inferior ovary and 
epigynous stamens and petals), the structure of the fruit, 
the partly identical growth of the head of flowers (an ' umbel ' 
in the small plant, and a ' cyme ' in the large one), and certain 
peculiarities of the leaf surface, such hairs as there are being 
closely appressed, and the nerves having a peculiar prominence. 
Perhaps it is rather easier to make out a long list of identities 
between the two plants than to make out a long list of differ- 
ences. But we might really lengthen either list to infinity 
by subdividing in detail characters which have been mentioned 
in the abstract. I have little doubt however that in micro- 
scopic structure of petals, pollen-grains, &c. there would be 
some striking identities, hardly compensated by differences. 
Still we can see at once that no ratio between number of 
identities and number of differences can be constructed 
which will tell us anything the number on each side is 
almost purely arbitrary. The value or importance is what 
we have to consider. 

In what does the value of characters consist as a basis of 
natural classification or as a proof of common descent ? 
Largely no doubt in their connection with the number and 
general arrangement of parts. Evolution only accounts for 
essential changes and their consequences, and though it 
may modify the number of parts and their arrangement, at 
first superficially and in course of generations more pro- 
foundly, yet an older general arrangement survives long 
beneath the modification and can as a rule be traced there. 1 
The arrangement of those four or five whorls of leaves on a 
shortened stalk, which we call the flower, is thus one dominant 
feature in the analogical estimate of a plant's affinities. Its 
inferential value is the same whether we call it one point of 

1 See Darwin's beautiful verification of the modifications of the 
orchid-blossom by following the spiral vessels which indicate the position 
of the original petals in the modified corolla ; Fertilisation of Orchids, 
p. 289 ff. Homology is an analogical conception in the logical sense. 



CHAP, iii] Enumeration and Knowledge 103 

identity, or five, or twenty. It will be observed that in 
considering a plant in the light of evolution we have a com- 
bination of the higher and lower forms of teleology, i elated 
negatively to each other. Just as in the example employed 
above of the ' French microscope-stand ', we have here 
within the basis of analogy both a definite purpose suggesting 
definite means, and the mere tendency of individual or racial 
characteristics to perpetuate themselves. The local manu- 
facturers' custom is gradually modified towards the better 
mechanical adaptation, as the organism is gradually modified 
towards the better mechanical adaptation. At any moment 
a manufacture or an organism is a compound of recent useful 
change, and of survival, some of which survival is obsolete, 
and some, the major part probably, has never ceased to be 
useful. 

Thus, in the establishment of common descent, there is a 
special value in what recent evolutionary modification is likely 
to have spared This would include both underlying arrange- 
ments which evolution would take very long to touch, and 
trifling details which it would have no reason for touching. 

The account which I gave of the differences between the 
plants in question is the account of a common observer ; the 
account of their identities is the account of a botanist. This, 
it may be said, is enough to vitiate the argument against a 
ratio, for of course knowledge and judgment are to be used 
in making the enumerations. But the idea of enumeration 
gives us no right to employ botanical knowledge. It is only 
the idea of a presumption resting negatively or positively on 
teleology that enables knowledge to operate in assigning value 
to index-characters. Thus in judging of the plants in question 
we have to distinguish the element of heredity, or self-main- 
tenance in the lower sense including the deeper and also the 
more trivial survivals, from self-preservation in the higher 
sense (though even here not involving conscious intention) in 
the set of recent differentiations introduced by evolution. 
Even thus we omit much that is most interesting and impor- 
tant. Evolution can for example assimilate plants of different 
origin as well as differentiate plants of the same descent, and 
we ought properly to show that any identities on which we 



IO4 Analogy [BOOKII 

rely cannot have been initiated by such assimilation. 1 We have 
so far anticipated this demand by requiring the identities to 
refer to matters with which evolution is not likely to have 
recently interfered. 

The plants of which I have been speaking are Cornus 
sanguinea, common dogwood, and Cornus suecica, the Swedish 
or dwarf cornel. They are in fact species of the same genus. 
But the four yellowish bracts round the flower-heads of the 
dwarf cornel have the appearance of petals and form a striking 
superficial difference between the two plants, not to mention 
the enormous disparity in size. And now, possessing the 
names of the two plants, and having thus opened to us what 
is known of their local distribution, we can confirm our ana- 
logical estimate based on passive self-preservation or heredity, 
by a presumption drawn from the coherence of the modifica- 
tions which that estimate ascribes to active self-preservation, 
i.e. to evolution since the divergence of the species. The 
smaller plant is sub-Alpine and Arctic ; the larger belongs to 
southern England and to temperate climates. This fact 
suggests that the smaller plant, whether driven northwards 
by a change of climate, or simply maintaining a portion of its 
old habitat, has been dwarfed or has not grown larger, and has 
compensated for its smallness by the brilliant simulated flower. 
Its distinctive leaf-growth and flower-growth may be summed 
up as a dwarfed or at least as a miniature growth, stalks and 
branchings having disappeared or not appeared. How the con- 
trast between the inconspicuous small dark purple flower of the 
small plant and the larger white flower of the large plant is to 
be explained I am unable to suggest. But it is hard to sup- 
pose that the petal-like bracts of the small plant are not in some 
way a compensation for the inconspicuousness of its flower. 
Concur- iv. Before reducing this example to regular form it is worth 
[ 5n i t es Ajia ~ while to remark that, by assuming the two plants to be given 
Negative us t compare, we presuppose the work of enumerative induc- 
Confirma- tion to be done to our hand. And in fact, where a subject- 
matter falls under an existing science, we are already in general 

1 Such identities are called in biological language ' homoplastic ', as 
opposed to ' homogenetic '. The daisy, for example, is a head of flowers 
that mimics the appearance of a single flower. 



CHAP, inj Comparison in Special Science 105 

beyond the stage of Enumerative Induction, though it may 
of course operate in particular unfamiliar instances. But 
Speaking generally, the abstract ideas which guide Comparison 
are active in every special science as precepts filled with 
a content capable of guiding elementary observations. We 
approach an element, or a plant, or a part of speech, just as 
the state approaches a taxpayer, with a schedule in which the 
heads of our requirements are already jotted down, forming an 
abstract analysis of the predicates with which, in the class of 
cases in question, we are concerned. But if, supposing our- 
selves unfurnished with such a schedule, we construct a 
conjunctive Induction for the case before us, it would run in 
some such fashion as this : 
These two plants * have similar berries ; 
These two plants have similar leaf-nerves ; 
/. The conjunction of similar leaf-nerves and similar berries 

may not be an accident. 2 

Then the Analogical argument would fall into some such 
shape as 

Having similar berries is conjoined in these plants with a 
pervading identity of underlying (and so long inherited) 
structure ; 
Having similar leaf -nerves is conjoined in these plants, 

&c., &c. ; 

,\ Having these similar berries is connected by an under- 
lying (and so long inherited) structure with having these 
leaf-nerves. 

And, as we saw, two further analogies would confirm 
this : 

The resemblance in the berries is conjoined in these plants 

with trivial identities of structure (e.g. closely appressed 

hairs on the leaves) not likely to be modified by evolution ; 

The resemblance in the leaf-nerves is conjoined in these 

plants with trivial identities, &c., &c. ; 

1 ' Plant ' here -species. This equivalence itself rests on analogical 
argument, which however is presupposed in any highly developed 
language, though not for all classes of objects. See above on Individual 
Judgment, and Lotze, Logik, sect. 14, on ' first universals '. 

2 In strict form, ' Similar leaf -nerves perhaps are (involve) similar 
berries. 1 



io6 Analogy IBOOKII 

These attributes are connected with each other by attri- 
outes probably hereditary. 

And contra-positively, giving affirmative content to the 
negations, but leaving them their negative value in inference : 
What is not identical in the fruit-growth (e.g. the clustering 
and the isolation of the fruit) is not a property likely to 
be remotely hereditary (because obviously modified by 
alteration of length of the stalks, i.e. by dwarfing) ; 
What is not identical in the flower-growth (e.g. the presence 
and absence of the four white bracts) is not a property 
likely to be remotely hereditary (because obviously related 
to the inconspicuous flower, i. e. to dwarfing) ; 
. What is not identical in the flower-growth of these plants 
is united with what is not identical in the fruit-structure 
as parts in a set of properties not likely to be remotely 
hereditary. 

The true relation of these arguments to each other would be 
that they should form a single analogical inference, in which 
each positive premise and the positive conclusion should be 
materially defined and limited by the corresponding negative 
judgment. When this reciprocal adjustment was completed, 
we should have analysed each of the plants into two related 
systems, in respect of one of which systems the two plants 
would coincide, and in respect of the other of which they 
would differ. The one system would point to the construction 
of a common ancestor ; the other would point to the evolu- 
tional history of the species since their divergence. As their 
boundaries would precisely fit each other we should, in arguing 
on the basis of either, be supported by the defining influence 
of the other ; that is to say, every judgment A is B would be 
supported by its converses Not-A is not-B, and Not-B is not-A. 
But though such negative relation of positive contents is 
valuable in analogy as elsewhere, yet to be fully effective it 
presupposes great accuracy and exhaustiveness of analysis, 
which is not usually to be obtained where analogy flourishes, 
and which, if obtained, takes us beyond analogy. By its 
negative aspect such inference leans over to Scientific Induc- 
tion, while by its appeal to the coherent nature of a system 
it tends to pass into definite or philosophical subsumption, 



CHAP, iii] Induction and Subsumption 107 

v. Analogy, like Enumerative Induction, is a critical point Divcr- 
from which two tracks of knowledge diverge. In assigning the denciesV 
coherence of attributes within a system we cannot but be con- analogy, 
fronted with negative relations, which are the conditions of all 
precise determination and of all causal or necessary inference. 
This feature of deepening analogical consideration points 
forward to scientific induction the analysis of the teleological 
whole, or, a fortiori, of the unformed datum of perception, into 
its definite and necessary constituent relations. The goal of 
this path is the abstract Hypothetical judgment which forms, 
as we have seen, the point of transition between inference by 
combination of abstract relations and inference through the 
nature of concrete subjects. 

On the other hand, if we continue to regard the concrete 
subject from the point of view of its totality, which has begun 
to dawn upon us in analogical inference, our principle of 
inference tends to assume the shape of a concrete whole, under- 
stood as a synthesis of abstract relations. Such a subject 
combines within itself, in perfect equilibrium, the two aspects 
of the universal which have occupied us throughout the 
aspect of concrete reality and that of abstract interconnection. 
Inference based upon contents of this nature may take the 
shape of the complete subsumptive syllogism in fig. i, or, 
when more adequately expressed, of inference under a dis- 
junction, or finally of the explicitly teleological inference 
respecting beauty or goodness. 

It is plain that to employ in inference such a subject notion 
as I have just indicated presupposes a detailed mastery of 
the abstract relations which enter into it, and therefore pre- 
supposes the advance, which was above described as a diver- 
gence taking the direction of the hypothetical judgment. The 
subject can be known as an embodied purpose only by inference 
based on its necessary constituent relations. Why then should 
we regard the abstract hypothetical judgment as belonging to 
a track that diverges from the direct high-road of concrete 
knowledge ? The reason is simply that in the formation and 
combination of Hypothetical judgments we sacrifice reality for 
the sake of necessity, and lose an element which was present 
in Analogy. In other words, the Hypothetical judgment with 



io8 Analogy 

the combining inference that belongs to it is itself an apex 
or climax of one whole tendency of knowledge of the median* 
ical view of the world which considers necessity apart from 
reality, and to which disease is as orderly a sequence as health. 
This is the view of the eye of purely physical science, which 
in a catastrophe that should extinguish life on the surface of 
the globe might see ' no more disorder than in the sabbatical 
peace of a summer sea '. l This aspect of knowledge has been 
sufficiently analysed and discussed in our treatment of mathe- 
matical inference which is its purest form. My excuse for 
constantly recurring to it must be that a thorough understand- 
ing of its range and consequences is the primary condition of 
any clear thinking on the subject of the reign of law, which, 
as thus isolated, is absolutely indifferent to the purposes and 
interests that give reality its relation to mankind. The appar- 
ently self-dependent completeness of this analytic view of the 
universe gives it a right to an independent development, 
although this right of independence which it claims may also 
be regarded as a limitation to which it submits. Science, pro- 
fessing to be purely physical, has, as we have partly seen and 
shall more fully see, in our own day at least occupied itself 
with ideas which fall outside the categories of abstract neces- 
sity. And this was hardly avoidable ; for we have seen over 
and over again that necessity must rest upon reality, and that 
therefore the self-completeness of the mechanical view of 
things is in this ultimate instance merely apparent. 

1 Professor Huxley in Contemp. Review, Feb. 1887. For a further 
consideration of this point of view, see chap, vii, below. 



CHAPTER IV 

SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION BY ANALYSIS 

THE moment we begin to demand precise definition of rela- 
tions and to attempt analysis, we are, as the <jlevelopment of 
analogy proved to us, face to face with inference from negations. 

i. I will now speak shortly of the nature of this inference, and Negative 
will then attempt to explain its function in inductive analysis. ^ r " 

i. All inference depends on the relation of differences within its ge ne- 
a universal ; and negative inference, in its fundamental nature, l nature 
does not deviate from this principle. It may be laid down at ditions. 
once that the ideal of negative inference is to be looked for in 
Inference under Disjunction, as the ideal of negative Judg- 
ment is to be looked for in negation under Disjunction. Our 
discussion on the connection between bare negation and signi- 
ficant negation will have prepared us for this conception. 

But negative inference in this sense is not a peculiar or 
separable form of reasoning. Negation and Affirmation in 
disjunctive or precise thinking are respectively double-edged ; 
and though this character which thought acquires from being 
imbued with negation is pre-eminently distinctive of thought 
that has reached the stage in question, yet it does not admit 
of being ascribed to negation as contrasted in the abstract 
with affirmation. It is for this reason that in treating of 
calculation and of geometrical reasoning it has been unneces* 
sary to devote special attention to negative inference. Nega- 
tion appears no doubt in mathematical principles and theorems, 
e.g. in the definition of parallel straight lines, or in the theorem 
that if two circles cut one another they shall not have the same 
centre. But as a general rule I will not venture to say univer- 
sally it is easy to substitute for a negative expression of this 
kind a definite though not thoroughly particularised positive 
expression, which possibility goes to show that the negative 
expression was adopted rather for some rhetorical convenience 
e.g. for brevity than because a positive expression was 
unattainable. Often, as in the second of the above examples, 



no Scientific Induction by Analysis [BOOKII 

the negative form of a conclusion arises from the employment 
of an indirect proof. And an indirect proof can only operate 
under a disjunction. True, in the present example the dis- 
junction seems to be merely formal, i. e. to consist simply in 
a positive judgment and bare negation ; ' have the same 
centre/ ' have not the same centre.' But ' have not the same 
centre ' in case of circles means ' have different centres ', the 
relations of which are easily seen in general from the content 
of the indirect proof itself. In mathematical or pure mechan- 
ical reasoning there is no room for anything approximating to 
bare negation the excluding motive must be definitely 
demonstrable, and contains the idea, though not necessarily 
the particulars, of an assignable quantitative difference between 
the excluding and the excluded content. 1 Incommensurable 
quantities are, so far as incommensurable, not quantities at all. 
Throughout this region of inference therefore negation and 
affirmation have as a rule their ideal complementary position, 
and no ground is given for a special and separate treatment 
of negative inference. For this same reason, however, where 
and in as far as negative inference formally occurs within this 
sphere, it formally falls outside the character required of com- 
bining inference, and must be technically referred, not indeed 
to subsumption, but to a special genus which also includes 
any negative reasoning that may arise within the limits proper 
to subsumption. 

But when we turn from calculation with precise scales of 
difference to the traditional form of the subsumptive syllogism, 
the inherent paradox of negative inference immediately stands 
in our path. The syllogistic rules undoubtedly contemplate 
inference from bare negation, and also, so far as they are 
concerned, inference that has bare negation for its con- 
clusion. But all inference, we have been insisting, rests on 
an identical nature or a pervading universal, which prescribes 
a relation, whether definite or indefinite, between its differ- 
ences. How can a universal prescribe a relation between 
itself and a content which falls wholly outside it, and is 
absolutely disparate and alien to its nature ? 

1 So that we need not say ' is ' or Ms not ', but ' differ by a yard ', ' the 
same to a yard '. 



CHAP, iv] The Negative Syllogism in 

We were met by this difficulty in the discussion of the 
negatively infinite judgment, and of the ultimate indemon- 
strability of the negative as such. Where there is absolutely 
no connection it is impossible for denial to be intelligible ; and 
what is not intelligible cannot convey a truth. , Denials which 
though frivolous seem true have some shade of assignable 
meaning beneath them. 1 Therefore the only true meaning of 
an inference in Celarent is e. g. 

To be a man excludes being a monkey (in virtue of a certain 
universal nature which including both assigns an intelligible 
difference between the two) ; 

Socrates is a man ; 

.-. Socrates is not a monkey. 

But the ordinary graphical representations of the extensive 
syllogism slur over this difference, and leave us to suppose that 
fiom an utter absence of connection together with an assignable 
connection we can infer an absence of connection, which is to 
introduce the infinite judgment into inference It is worth 
pointing out, however, that even the true reasoning in Celarent, 
considered as starting with its conclusion as a suggestion to 
be proved, 2 begins with something nearer a bare denial, and 
ends with an intelligibly motived exclusion. ' Socrates is not 
a monkey ; ' ' Socrates having the nature of a man, cannot be 
a monkey.' 

Thus in syllogistic negative inference we find (i) the errone- 
ous idea that negation is utter disconnection, and that negation 
in this sense, bare negation, can be intelligibly asserted and 
inferred. And we have (2) the true idea that negation in order 
to be significant must fall within a controlling identity, 
although its ultimate shape is indemonstrable, and qua inde- 
monstrable or irrational falls into a genus by itself, and outside 
both subsumption and construction. And as a testimony to 
the inevitable power of formalism in any symbolic scheme of 
inference, we may point out (3) that the accepted syllogistic 

1 For examples, see Book I, chap. vii. 

* I am confident that this is as a rule the most instructive point of 
view from which to analyse inference, corresponding best to the vital 
process of thought. The essential question is, what difference is there 
in the conclusion as a judgment, before and after, or in and out of the 
inference. 



ii2 Scientific Induction by Analysis [BOOKII 

rule that there can be no inference from two negative premises 

is really an offshoot of the idea of bare negation. 

No con- ii. If we have two bare negations or mere disconnections 

fromtwo 'negatively infinite judgments nothing follows, because 

negatives, nothing is said. And as two negations will always present the 

external appearance of two mere disconnections, and will be 

ambiguous in interpretation, concealing their positive aspect, 

it is well to maintain this rule in a symbolic scheme of inference. 

Once at least in every inference, the rule says, you must show 

your hand, and develope your universal in terms of its positive 

content. Then, with one positive relation of content before 

us, we shall not be far out, it is implied, in interpreting the 

denial which is subjoined to it. 

Nevertheless, it must be maintained that the negative 
syllogism acquires scientific value just in the degree in which 
this rule is disregarded and in which the syllogism is conse- 
quently informal. If negative inference has any value it is 
the establishment ot exact and self-consistent boundaries 
between the species of any genus, or the modifications of any 
principle. 

The rule that two negatives give no conclusion has been 
impeached by good authorities * in respect of the third figure 
the figure which we followed in our account of Enumerative 
Induction. This figure is obviously adapted for the expression 
of a positive instance, 01 of an exception of an instance which 
comes under the condition of a rule but of which the consequent 
annexed by the rule to its condition does not hold good. 2 Why 
should it not also express a true negative instance, i. e. a negation 
which does not conflict with but corroborates the rule by 
coming neither under the condition nor undei the consequent ? 
In insisting on such a principle as ' Whatever gravitates is 
matter ' we may often find ourselves relying on such instances 
as ' Light is not matter ; Light does not gravitate ; .'. Some- 
thing which is not matter does not gravitate ', or vice versa, 

1 Lotze, Logic, sect. 89 ; Bradley, Principles of Logic, p. 254, quoting 
Jevons. 

9 Or in case of a reciprocal judgment, also vice versa. Even in a rule 
which is not reciprocal, a great extension of the consequent beyond the 
condition is always suspicious. 



CHAP, iv] Limiting Systems 113 

making in favour ot the contra-positive converse either of 
' Whatever gravitates is matter ' or of its reciprocal * Whatever 
is matter gravitates '. 

It has been objected against this case of a conclusion from 
two negations that either the argument has four terms or one 
of the premises is affirmative. If the two premises are mere 
denials, then neither of them can furnish the negative predicate 
required to be subject of the conclusion. For this subject 
must be a positive content merely determined in one aspect 
by a negation. A bare negation cannot be subject in any 
judgment. If on the contrary in one premise such a positive 
content negatively determined is the predicate, and the fallacy 
of four terms is thus avoided, then that premise is affirmative 
in form and the conclusion is not drawn from two negatives. 

This objection is not only sound in form, but has substantial 
justification. It is well known that to attach the negative 
closely to the predicated content has a tendency to transform 
the idea so negated from an excluded content into a positive 
opposite. A form like ' not-moral ' cannot maintain itself in 
living thought. It must advance to ' immoral ' or fall back 
to ' what is not moral '. And if we admit that in the third 
syllogistic figure the same judgment can be both affirmative 
and negative for accepting the above case of inference 
amounts to accepting this it is hard to say why the same 
double character should not be adopted, and conclusions from 
two negatives introduced, in the remaining figures as well. 
In the second figure we should be tempted actually to take an 
affirmative conclusion from two negative premises ; but as the 
ambiguous term is here the middle term, and not the subject 
of the conclusion, we cannot do this without treating both 
premises as affirmative (to secure an identical middle) and 
thereby reducing our conclusion to a problematic judgment, 1 
thus, 

Good workmen do not complain of their tools ; 

My pupils do not complain of their tools ; 

/. My pupils are probably good workmen. 

1 Both premises must be taken in the same way, though both may 
be taken as either negative or affirmative. It is only the contrast of 
exclusion with assertion that can give a certain result in the figure. 

1337-2 I 



ii4 Scientific Induction by Analysis [BOOKII 

Or again, 

Not good workmen are not satisfied with their tools ; 

Not-my-pupils are not satisfied with their tools ; 

.'. Not-my-pupils are probably not good workmen. 
Our treatment of analogy would also be illustrated by the 
case in which Not-A and Not-B join in a positive C, But as 
both premises would then be formally affirmative, the case 
does not come under the present head, 

It is impossible to deny that arguments like the above may 
have material weight, Their value rests on the possibility of 
gathering up the phenomena just bordering on a system we 
are investigating into a system of their own, a, ft, y, limiting 
and limited by the former A, B, C at every point. We nearly 
achieved this rudely of course in our comparison of Cornus 
sanguinea and Cornus suecica. We then obtained two systems, 
A, B, C and a, ft, y, such that A, B, C were respectively not-a, 
not-/3, and not-y, while a, ft, and y were respectively not-A, 
not-B, and not-C, B and ft, the two dominant or middle terms, 
stood, it will be remembered, for ' inherited from before diver- 
gence of the species ' and ' modified by recent evolution ' 
respectively ; and the object was to attach all the peculiarities 
of the two plants systematically to one or other of these con- 
ceptions. Obviously in such a case it depends merely on our 
point of view whether we take as premises * Not-A and Not-C 
are Not-B ', or ' a and y are Not-B ', or ' Not-A and Not-C 
are ft ', which are the various forms suggested above. 
In the same way it might be argued in fig. I that 

No mere animal has language; 

A deaf mute is no mere animal ; 

/, A deaf mute has language. 

Horrible as these arguments must appear to any one conversant 
with syllogistic rules, I do not see how they are to be kept out 
if the argument from two negations in fig. 3 is admitted. 

There is however an indispensable condition on which alone 
any value can be ascribed to these inferences. This is that 
the negation of a content should in all cases be merely an 
aspect of a positive content l which is really in question, and 

1 There is a puzzling inconsistency in this identification, because the 
treatment of ' man is not-mortal ' as an affirmative judgment, which 



CHAP, iv] Scheme of Negative Instance 

this we know to be the case in all significant negation, although 
not reckoned upon in the technical rules of the syllogism. 
Moreover, we have seen, that we are not bound to omit in the 
conclusion of inference any relevant matter given in the pre- 
mises. But if not, we can in any case secure the positive 
significance of the denial of a content by supplying in the 
conclusion the middle term of which it is denied. Thus in one 
of the above examples we may conclude ' Light is something 
which does not gravitate, and is not material ', 

iii. We have now obtained the logical formulation of the The 
Negative Instance. Like the Exception, it begins in Enu- 
merative Induction, and is capable of development through 
Analogy. I shall assume throughout my examination of its 
working, in order to avoid uninstructive complications, that 
the rule or law suggested by Enum^rative Induction, of which 
the negative instance is confirmatory, has come to begin witli 
from affirmative instances, and is expressed in an affirmative 
judgment. Then we may formulate the cases supplied by 
mere Enumerative Induction, with their sequels in Analogy, 
as follows : 



I AFFIRMATIVE INSTANCE EXCEPTION NEGATIVE INSTANCE 

I suggesting against confirming 

the pnma facie rule that B is probably C. 



Symbolic 
scheme oi 
Instances. 



A is C ; 
AisB; 
.'. B is oi may bo C. 


A is not C ; 
AisB; 
.*. B may not be C. 


a is not C ; 
a is not B ; 
.-. Not-B may be 
Not-C. 


Enumer- 
ative In- 
duction. 


C is x y z R 1 ; 
B is x y z R 1 ; 
.*. B is for good 
reasons likely to be C. 


C is not x y z R ! 
i. e. is x i y^ * t R, 8 ) ; 
B is x y z Rl ; 
.*. B is not exactly C. 


Not-C is Xi y\ i R!" ; 
Not-B is x l y l z R, 2 ; 
.-. Not-B is Not-C 
i. e. C is B). 


Analogy. 



I have regarded as making ' not-mortal ' a positive or significant content, 
was historically, as reference to a class ' not-mortal ', the origin of the 
' infinite judgment ' which is the very type of bare negation. The inter- 
pretation employed in the text regards ' not-mortal ' not as a fictitious 
class but as a positive attribute excluding mortality. 

1 Analysis of A. 

8 The analysis of a, which is not- A, i. e. not x y z R. 

12 



n6 Scientific Induction by Analysis [BOOKII 



Example AFFIRMATIVE INSTANCE EXCEPTION L NEGATIVE INSTANCE 


of In- suggesting against confirming 


stances. 


the flower-structure in these two plants probably 




is characteristic of a common descent shown 




also in the leaf-structure. 


Enunier- 


In these two plants 


In these two plants 


In some aspects of 


ative In- there is similar leaf- 


there is not wholly 


these two plants there ; 


duction. structure ; 


identical leaf-struc- 


is a difference, e. g. of , 


In these two plants 


ture ; 


leaf -stalk ; 




there is similar flower- 


In these two plants 


In some aspects of 




structure ; 


there is wholly identi- 


these two plants there 




.*. The flower-struc- 


cal flower-structure ; 


is a difference, e. g. of 




ture may be an ele- 


.'. Flower-structure 


flower-stalk (umbels 




ment in an inherited 


seems not to be gene- 


v. cymes) ; 




group of qualities to 


rically connected with 


.*. The difference of 




which the leaf-struc- 


leaf-structure. 


leaf-stalk may be con- 




ture also belongs (or, 




nected through those 




in brief, may be at 




aspects of the two i 




bottom one with the 




plants) with the dif- ' 




leaf -structure). 




ference of flower- 








stalk. 


Analogy. 


The leaf-structure 


Leaves have not the 


The difference of 




in these two plants can 


same stalk-arrange- 


leaf -stalk belongs to 




be connected with a 


ment (i. e. are sessile in 


a connected set of as- 




whole set of identical 


one case and stalked in 


pects 2 of these two 




generic properties ; 


the other) ; 


plants not concerned 




The flower-structure 


Flowers have the 


with their remote 




in these two plants in- 


same stalk - arrange- 


hereditary properties; 




cludes a whole set of 


ment in both plants 


The difference of 




identical generic pro- 


(i.e. are stalked in 


flower-stalk belongs 




perties ; 


both) ; 


to a connected set of 




.*. The flower-struc- 


.'. Flower-structure 


aspects 2 of these two 




ture in these two 


does not follow varia- 


plants not concerned 




plants probably is cha- 


tions of leaf-structure 


with their remote 




racteristic of a com- 


(in these two plants, 


hereditary properties; 




mon descent shown 


i.e. species). 


.-.The difference of 




also in the leaf-struc- 




leaf -stalk is connected 




ture. 




with the difference of 








flower-stalk by a rela- 








tion not concerned 








with their remote 








hereditary properties. 



1 The Exception of course cannot be made successful if the Negative 
Instance is to be so. I have therefore treated the Exception as a mis- 
taken interpretation of the facts which the Negative Instance interprets 
rightly. a Viz., the recent dwarfing of one plant. 



CHAP, iv] Systematic Necessity 117 

2. The object of Scientific Induction is, given a suggested Scientific 
coherence, ' B may be (probably is) C,' which has become tk 
through analogy a hypothesis in germ represented by an 
' importance ' attached to the mediating content % y z R, to 
bring such a coherence into the form of one or many pure 
Hypothetical judgments. The outward and visible side of this 
process is to modify the rule, i. e. the contents B and C with 
their connecting content x y z R, so that there shall be no 
exceptions ' B is not quite C ', and that the two contrapositive 
converses ' Not-C is not-B ' and ' Not-B is not-C ' l shall be 
true when filled up with positive contents precisely excluding 
B and C respectively. The inward and intellectual side of the 
process however simply consists in grasping a necessary relation 
based upon some fundamental reality. This essential activity 
of the scientific spirit can only be characterised beforehand in 
respect of its most general attributes, which are embodied in 
the external process to be described as Scientific Induction. 
We can affirm from the known nature of the logical universal 
that it must be purified by exceptions and finally limited by 
negations. But as all data presented to us are thoroughly 
concrete, it follows that there is an endless possibility of erro- 
neous abstraction and construction in all adjustment of contents 
to one another, so that the outward and visible side of induc- 
tion, though knowable in respect of certain essential phases, 
can never assume the character of a mechanical method or 
royal road to knowledge. In the same way the ultimate 
necessity of the law or principle at which we arrive can be 
guaranteed by no general considerations. It depends in 
general, we know, on the systematic necessity of the negations, 
which, representing its relation to the reality within which it 
falls, hedge it in on every side and exhibit it as no longer itself, 
but as transformed, whenever and in as far as their limits are 
passed. But the specific necessity of individual truths cannot 
be assigned by any general theory of science. 

i. Induction then in its most general sense consists in satis- Induction 
fying the principle of sufficient reason by an analysis of 

ence. 

1 The contrapositive converse of C is B, which affirmative judgment, 
and therefore its contrapositive converse, must be true if B is C is to be 
a pure or reciprocal judgment. 



n8 Scientific Induction by Analysis [BOOKII 

experience, directed to revealing the true coherence of differ- 
ences within universals. But as soon as this is stated, a 
difficulty arises in distinguishing Induction from Inference as 
such, which has precisely the same object. And this difficulty 
has, historically speaking, prevented the range of Induction 
from being consistently defined. As in Jevons* theory of 
Induction, the most recent and, so far as I know, the most 
thorough and appreciative account of the operation, so in 
Mill's famous analysis of the four methods of experimental 
enquiry, we are dealing with processes essentially deductive. 
On the other hand, if we try to confine ourselves to what has 
been termed ' Inference from particulars to particulars ' we 
cannot meet the requirements of Scientific Induction. The 
name Scientific Induction is indeed something of a contra- 
diction in terms. Induction is meant to mean the treatment 
of instances. In this meaning the idea of enumeration and 
even of the calculus of chances is confused with the idea of 
an analysis of observations a confusion all the harder to 
disentangle, because number of observations does as a rule 
assist analysis and contribute to eliminating error. Scientific 
analysis as such, however, does not deal with instances, but 
only with contents. When we speak of a scientific treatment 
of instances, we mean a precise determination and skilful 
resolution of their content. 

Therefore the distinction between Induction and other forms 
of Inference, erroneously described as the distinction between 
Induction and Deduction, is chiefly a distinction of aspects, 
largely based on a confused idea of Induction, but yet in some 
degree justified. I have just spoken of the confused idea in 
virtue of which Induction is regarded as a treatment of in- 
stances pure and simple . I need only add that a semi-numerical 
content may often have to be added to an inductive analysis 
of causes, where our knowledge of conditions falls short. 
Here we really fall back on number, on ratio of instances to 
instances. If a self -fertilised flower is fertilised 90 times in 
100 cases, and an insect-fertilised flower only 20 times in loo 
cases, then the number of cases strengthens the unlikelihood 
of any exceptional variety and relevancy of unknown con- 
ditions, and we take self-fertilisation to be the more effective 



CHAP, ivi Induction and Discovery ng 

process, because there are fewer unknown conditions which 
stop it, or more which assist it. This helps the confusion which 
regards Induction in contrast to Deduction as an affair of 
number of instances. 

Again, Induction does not exclude Deductive processes, All 
Induction whatever is guided by principles ; and Induction 
as considered in Jevons' theory essentially consists in processes 
of mediate Inference, which he explicitly calls Deduction, and 
which operate by deriving data deductively from hypothetical 
premises. And usage bears him out. The verification of 
hypothesis has been considered from Bacon downward as an 
integral part of scientific induction. And nothing can be more 
deductive than the connection of a hypothesis with the con- 
sequences by which it is verified. 

But the distinction, as one of aspects, is justified. It is 
nearly akin to, but not identical with, the distinction between 
discovery and proof. This distinction indeed we refused to 
recognise, because what is not proved is not really discovered. 
Nor does Induction coincide with discovery. For discovery 
may include as in mathematical science construction and proof, 
which no one would call inductive. 1 

But in a deeper form an analogous distinction to that meant 
to be drawn between discovery and proof does hold good 
between Induction and Deduction. We may take Induction 
as Inference viewed from the side of the differences, Deduction 
as Inference viewed from the side of the universal. In Induc- 
tion par excellence the Real presents itself in concrete and more 
or less isolated data, in virtue of which the universal nature, 
or the system of further differences charged with the universal 
nature, is referred to reality. In Deduction par excellence the 
Real presents itself as qualified by an intelligible system 
e. g. by mathematical attributes ; and further differences are 
referred to reality as constructed by and out of this system. 
It may be doubted whether Newton's discovery of Gravitation 
was Inductive or Deductive. That in process it was largely 

1 There may be and indeed must be true induction in mathematical 
matter in so far as instances suggest underlying laws. The case of 
gravitation, to be discussed below, illustrates the degree in which this is 
possible. 



I2O Scientific Induction by Analysis [BOOKII 

deductive there is of course no doubt. The popular story 
however, about the falling apple, 1 would indicate, if true, an 
inductive aspect that of a problem set by concrete data, and 
resolved by analysis and hypothesis. But we must not suppose 
Newton's mind to have been as empty of mathematical general- 
isations as our own. He probably brought a systematised 
qualification of Reality, drawn from elements in the researches 
of previous mathematicians, to meet the facts that demanded 
explanation. In this example the aspects of Induction and of 
Deduction are about equally balanced, and we see the whole 
principle involved in the distinction together with its merely 
transitory importance. The relation of the universal to its 
differences is not affected by the order in which they have 
presented themselves to us as qualifications of Reality. But 
it is this order alone which furnishes the differentia of 
Induction. 

Regarded as relations within a system, i.e. in the light of the 
principle of Sufficient Reason, all inductive explanations point 
beyond themselves. They demand in the first instance the 
explicit statement of the system from which their necessity 
is derived, and thus they appeal as we have seen from the 
pure Hypothetical judgment to the Notional or Disjunctive 
judgment. But the underlying real systems themselves are 
in various degrees limited and incomplete, and in virtue of 
their finite nature, as we have seen to be the case with space 
and time, demand explanations which go further and further 
afield in accounting for the boundaries which persistently 
present themselves. The task of explanation imposed upon 
the mind by the principle of sufficient reason is therefore an 
endless task. The principle of sufficient reason, as Schopen- 
hauer says, is not like a cab which you can send away when 
it has brought you to your destination. Nothing is isolated, 
but as the connections which debar isolation reach to infinity, 
nothing is complete, nor has what it requires in order to justify 
its existence. This is the standpoint of relativity, which 
applies in a degree to all known matters. How far we can 
escape from this standpoint, which has been called the stand- 

1 For comments on this and for an excellent criticism on popular 
notions of Induction, see De Morgan's Budget of Paradoxes, pp. 49, 8i % 



CHAP, iv] Limits of account of Induction 121 

point of the Understanding, and which as thus stated is merely 
an abstraction of our own minds, will appear when we return 
to more concrete forms of thought. 

Two observations may be made about the account here to be 
given of Scientific Induction. I shall not speak in it especially 
of Causation. I have attempted to show in Book I l 
that cause is a merely popular idea, indicating one or another 
ill-defined grade in the process of inductive explanation. The 
only distinctive peculiarity of Cause contrasted with Reason 
is that it refers to operation in time. I believe that all which 
has value in this idea will be elucidated by our account of 
inductive explanation, taken together with the analysis of the 
idea of Cause to which I have referred. 

And I do not propose to give any account of inductive 
disproof. Disproof is for the theory of Inference only a form 
of correction or modification. If at any point we are unable 
to perform the processes necessary to correction, then we have 
pro tanto a disproof if e.g. we fail in accommodating a sug- 
gested rule to actual exceptions, or actual exceptions to a 
suggested rule. But for theory such a failure is not a positive 
phenomenon. We must suppose that there is a true rule, 
which, if we could but hit upon it, would cover the facts and 
appear as a correction of our disproved rule. The failure to 
light upon a hypothetical rule fulfilling these conditions is 
a mere delay in making the required correction, of which 
theory need take no account. Bacon's complaint that the 
1 axioma distinctione aliqua frivola salvatur ' is, but for 
' frivola ' which is its sting, an account of the sole and inevit- 
able process of knowledge. 

In order to exhibit distinctly the variations which impede 
a clear definition of Induction, I propose to speak separately 
of Induction as perceptive analysis and of Induction as 
inferential explanation. These two varieties, together with 
Analogical Inference and Enumerative Induction, are all con- 
fused together in the popular idea of Induction as opposed to 
Deduction. 2 

1 Chap. vi. 

2 Compare Mill, ii. 25 if. He tries to separate Hypothesis from Induc- 
tion, but really includes, though he denies doing so, much Hypothesis 



122 Scientific Induction by Analysis 

Induction ii. Induction in the narrowest sense is perceptive analysis, 
tfve^na?* a * We suppose ourselves to have obtained from any source 
lysis. whatever, all such sources being ultimately reducible to 
Symbolic analogy, the problematic judgment that the attribute or 
occurrence B in virtue of a nature a b c R, has probably 
a necessary coherence with the attribute or event C. This 
is so far only a presumption arising from the value for cognition 
which we have been led to attach to the nature a b c R 
a value depending, in all the higher and truer applications 
of analogy, on the ultimate identity of human purposes and 
necessities, 1 and in the lower walks of inference on the identifi* 
cation of self-maintenance or self-preservation with some such 
idea as that of purpose. I follow Lotze in employing an 
expression of the type a b c R in which a, 6, c may be taken 
to stand respectively for definite attributes or relations and 
R for the residual nature of the concrete whole before us, con- 
sidered as only contributing its normal support to the opera* 
tions of a b c and not as actively interfering to modify them. 
It is worth mentioning that Mill's account of the Experimental 
methods, otherwise at least suggestive, is rendered terribly 
perplexing by his use of corresponding letters A and a to 
indicate from the first the several antecedents and consequents 
underlying concrete phenomena. The result is that his first 
statement of every problem presupposes in symbolic form its 
explicit solution. When the phenomenon can be resolved into 
antecedents ABC and consequents a b c the work is already 
done. Mill, no doubt, does not mean to have determined by 
his expression the fact that a particular element A of the 
given content is from the first known to correspond to another 
particular element a. He intends A and a to be empty forms, 
indicating the problem which our analysis has to solve. But 
the correspondences of the symbolic letters are undoubtedly 
misleading. 

in Induction. His test seems to be that where you have a vera causa you 
have Induction, not Hypothesis. But he admits that in Induction the 
vera causa may^ot be known to be present in the case under investigation. 
1 The process of learning a foreign language, and ultimately of 
understanding language at all, is an excellent example of this. We are 
guided throughout by the assumption that identical aims and feelings 
underlie the different systems of expression. 



CHAP, iv] Limit of Isolation 123 

I mention this question partly because it illustrates our 
present task. The problem is just to break up B into a ft y R, 
so that we can say of each element in turn, ' If a R, then a R ; 
and if a R, then a R.' In each case we must understand all 
the elements which we are not observing to fall back into the 
mass of R. This neglect of the other elements is capable of 
two interpretations. Either the other elements may be taken 
to retain their normal relation to the a under investigation, 
and are not especially and abnormally operative upon it under 
the conditions of the observation, or they are actually inopera* 
tive and might be removed. This latter interpretation can 
never be justified without special proof, which must address 
itself to a definite analysed R. For every conjunction of condi- 
tions whatever is an R, i.e. an inexhaustible concrete, even 
in the most precise experiment, and all that can ever be done 
in the way of isolation is to exclude some portion x of the 
whole concrete R, by substituting for it an element y which has 
the effect of turning R into R|. We have then excluded x, 
but not R as such, i.e. we can only exclude R in as far as we 
can analyse it. 

And to end the subject of symbolic expression, I may point 
out that for simplicity's sake I shall not consider the whole 
analogical suggestion ' B is probably connected with C, both 
being conjoined with a b c R ', but shall confine myself to one 
member at a time, as we should have to do in a practical 
investigation, e.g. to ' B is conjoined with, and probably 
coheres with, a b c R '. This is not an inadequate treatment. 
It would be easy to add C as a character to a b c R, indicating 
that their conjunction must be taken subject to unknown 
conditions ; and in any case the investigation of B in relation 
to a b c R is certain if pursued to the end to lay open the track 
of coherence between a b c R and C. The defect of symbolic 
modes of expression in these higher forms of reasoning is that 
not only are all elements of the content most variously inter- 
connected, and far from being on the same level in value, but 
also every element of the content is undergoing transformation 
from the beginning to the end of the whole process. Therefore, 
as Mill no doubt really intended, corresponding symbols like 
a and a represent a pair of series or a pair of continuous 



124 Scientific Induction by Analysis [BOOK IT 

developments within the inference rather than a pair of fixed 
contents. 

Estab- )3. I will begin by analysing at some length an example of 
^f o* 1 *? 1 * P erce pti ye analysis conducted chiefly through observation as 
ary Hy- opposed to experiment though experiment was at times 
caMud "- a PP^ e d a ^d in respect of its content just on the borderland 
ment. between analogy and scientific induction. 

It might be suggested without doing violence to facts that 
the Linnaean classification in botany corresponds on the whole 
to the stage of enumerative or conjunctive Induction ; the 
mere natural classification to Analogical Inference ; and 
the analysis of plant-structure and evolution in the light of 
the Darwinian hypothesis to scientific induction to percep- 
tive induction where we deal with the visible adaptations of 
particular species, and to generalising or reflective induction 
when we lay down universal conditions as controlling the 
evolution of the organic world. 

Let us suppose that Analogy, the habit of ascribing what 
I have ventured to call de facto purposes to adaptations in the 
organic world, has made it probable to us on inspecting the 
flower of the Bee Ophrys that it (B) is adapted for self- 
fertilisation (a b c R). 

Here the expression ' adapted for ', in consonance with the 
notion of de facto purpose, refers not merely to the mechanical 
adjustment of a contrivance, but to the fact of that contrivance 
actually achieving in normal use the purpose which it suggests. 
A case in which we cannot make out this additional element 
of meaning will be mentioned below, and in it the purpose will 
not rank as established by Induction. 

I should observe, too, that the element C which we usually 
spoke of in analogy and which we mean to omit here for the sake 
of brevity may in the present example be identified with any 
peculiarity the conjunction of which with the general appear- 
ance B might have first attracted our attention to the flower B. 

Of course my analysis is only rough and typical. I select 
two or three prominent characters out of a whole apparatus 
of converging contrivances. 

The object is now to analyse the flower B in the light of 
a b c R. We may attempt this roughly as follows : 



CHAP, ivj Fertilisation of Bee Ophrys 125 

(a) Caudicles (stalks of pollen-masses) are of the right 
length to (a) reach the stigma. 

(/3) Anther-cells open of themselves, and (b) let the pollen- 
masses fall to the level of the stigma, 

(y) Hanging pollen-masses oscillate in the wind till (c) they 
strike the stigma. 

R in this example has the significance that the remaining 
parts of the flower and plant are necessary to give the process 
its value, and to make it possible for the contrivance to operate, 
by nourishing and mechanically supporting the flower. But 
all this is involved in the nature of a plant, and therefore 
assuming a, /3, y to be in a living plant, and that, of course, 
the right plant, R need not be further considered in the analysis 
at present ; i.e. until it in some way interferes with the possi- 
bility or reality of the action we are investigating. 

The very important relation of y to c in the above analysis 
assumes the operation of an external cause, and requires a 
confirmation without which the whole analysis is futile ; for 
as the pollen masses when liberated do not fall on the stigma, 
but only hang like a pendulum on the level of the stigma, it is 
incumbent on us to show how they can be and are brought 
in contact with it. There is a further interest at this point 
in affirming or denying the action of insects, which are usually 
necessary to cross-fertilisation, but the need for whose inter- 
vention would impair the certainty which is the purpose of 
self -fertilisation. Here we have recourse to the negative 
instance which, here as usual, contains an element of experi- 
ment. For the essence of the negative instance is to obtain 
a positive content equivalent ad hoc to an exclusion, and this 
can only be done by a disjunctive limitation of possibilities, 
and an exact ascertainment of the reality within the possi- 
bilities so limited. The limitation of possibilities consists, not 
in removing all R, which is impossible, but in securing an R 
analysed and believed to be passive ; and artificial combina- 
tions give the best chance of obtaining this condition. And 
the exact ascertainment of reality consists in observing a 
positive or negative condition, or both, whose nature we can 
exhaustively analyse. Here again artificial production gives 
the best choncc. To test the connection of y (movement by 



126 Scientific Induction by Analysis [BOOKII 

wind) with c (contact with stigma) Mr. Darwin put a spike of 
Bee Ophrys in water in a room. Thus he secured an R, 
residuary conditions, which he could ensure to be passive 
(absence of touching by animate or by any unknown cause of 
motion), and having thus limited the possibilities he was able to 
observe with certainty and with a high degree of exclusiveness 
the absence of wind, not-y, which resulted in absence of contact, 
not-c, the pollen-masses continuing to hang freely in front of 
the stigma. Thus he obtained the confirmatory or true nega- 
tive instance ' not-y is not c ', which is the contrapositive 
converse of ' c is y ', i.e. ' contact arises from wind.' We have 
here left the ground of formal logic, 1 in which ' not-y is not c ' 
could only rest on the knowledge that ' c is y ', In the process 
now considered ' c is y ' actually rests on the knowledge that 
' not-y is not c ', The corroborative power of the negative 
instance in induction depends on the fact that it has a positive 
content within the same ultimate system as c and y, and, 
within that system, related by way of definite negation to 
them. Thus the negative instance is capable of independent 
agreement with the positive case. ' Not-y is not c ' = ' Free 
caudicles without wind give no contact \ 

But it will be said that we have gone too fast. We read 
the ' free caudicles in a room give no contact ' as ' not-y is 
not c '. But it was probably also ' Not-G (no insects) is not c ', 
* where no insects, there no contact,' i.e. in searching K we 
have found a not-G, an absence of a condition, which, it is 
suggested, may not be, as R was meant to be, indifferent. 
We may treat this as a positive suggestion from analogy, 
' G is probably c ; ' for in the absence of such a positive sugges- 
tion we should have no more cause to note the absence of 
insects G from the experimental R than to note the absence 
of direct sunlight L or extreme changes of temperature T, 
But there is plenty of analogy for insects fertilising plants ; 
so ' G is probably c ' demands attention. 

Mr. Darwin provided against this suggestion by exposing 
some of the flowers under a net, which excluded insects but 
admitted wind. In the cases so treated contact was effected. 

* See i. 305-7. What is true of the double negation is true of the con- 
trapositive converse which implies double negation. 



CHAP, iv] A Suggestion and Exception 127 

We may read this off as an exception in the form ' not-G is c f 
against the suggested rule ' G is (probably) c ', or ' insects 
(probably) produce the contact ', and as at the same time 
a positive instance in favour of the suggested rule ' y is c ', 
' wind makes contact '. This double-edged character, proper 
to a negated content at this stage, is justified by the experi- 
ment above-mentioned which might be read off as ' R y not-G 
is c ' ; R standing for the mass of conditions presumed to be 
indifferent, not-G for the exclusion of insects, y for the presence 
of wind, and c for contact. 

y. And this connection y is c (wind acting on the pendent Estab- 
pollen-masses produces contact with the stigma) has been ^liSti!. 
defined and confirmed i.e. re-inferred in a precise form procal 
through the two conjunctions claiming to be connections, thetical 
R-not-y is not c (pendent pollinia without wind l do not touch J u <*g- 
the stigma) and R y-not-G is c, i.e. pendent pollinia with wind 
and without insects 2 do touch the stigma. From not-y is not c 
(R being disregarded as the common basis) we infer c is y, i.e. 
' contact comes from wind ', the reciprocal of ' wind produces 
contact '. And by ' y-not-G is c ' we confirm this reciprocal 
' contact comes from wind ' by overthrowing the suggestion 
that G may be the operative agent in c 9 and consequently that 
cither wind or insects may be concerned in the contact. 

It is true, however, that we have not obtained, against 
' G may be c\ the more fatal exception ' G is not c ' (in presence 
of insects no contact is effected) ; the exception which we 
obtained is strictly an exception against the reciprocal of this, 
viz. against c is G or contact comes from insects, i.e. against 
the suggestion that insects are the only agency in producing 
contact. Thus we have not strictly proved, as against insect 
agency the only suggested alternative, that wind is the exclusive 
agency in the self-fertilisation of this flower, for when wind 
was excluded, insects were probably (in the room) excluded 
with it. In fact the y with which we began included G, and 

1 Experiment of the flower in a room. 

8 Experiment of flowers under a net in the open air. This experiment 
goes far to give the pure judgment ' only y is c ', which no ordinary 
Judgment-form will express for Logic, except the clumsy equivalent 
1 All c is 7 '. I have written it ' 7-not-G is c ', 



128 Scientific Induction by Analysis [BOOKII 

was really ' wind-or-insects ', and it is of this y that the 
reciprocal * c is y ' was proved by the experiment not-y is not-s. 
But we subsequently make it probable that this y ought to 
mean wind only, by making it certain that it may mean wind 
only. This shows the transformation which a content under- 
goes in course of an inductive inference. 

And for the kind of matter with which we are dealing this 
conclusion is perhaps sufficient. We are studying the use of 
an adaptation, which use any normal agency suitable to it will 
suffice to establish. We could not, hope to prove that no insect, 
or that no human hand, has ever fertilised a Bee Ophrys by 
pushing the pendent pollen-masses. When we know that the 
wind can do it, and does it without other aid, and that wind 
is a common occurrence, and that in the absence of wind 
(though in the absence of other things at the same time) the 
adaptation fails, then we are justified in saying that here we 
have the only agency which is normal enough to account for 
the growth of a contrivance adapted to it. Logically, these 
considerations are represented by the claim of every judg- 
ment to become reciprocal, which formal claim has different 
values and interpretations in different kinds of matter. Here, 
for instance, we might make our judgment truly reciprocal 
and purely truistic by transforming the content of y into 
simply ' a sufficient cause of motion '. This would suffice for 
a mechanical construction of our problem, but not for an 
organic explanation of it. An organic adaptation demands 
for its explanation a definite regular agency to which it is 
adapted ; it need not exclude agencies of diverse origin ; but 
it is pretty certain to shape itself on some one well-defined 
type of operation. Thus in speaking of agencies to which 
evolution has adapted structures, the claim of any actual and 
normal agency to be the exclusive agency is prima facie very 
strong. To make it absolute we should proceed by analysing 
c as we have analysed B itself, and showing that y, wind 
agency, as f v is the only agency corresponding to c as x y z. 
But this I at all events am unable to do, further than by 
pointing out that ' normal ' and ' general ' in y correspond to 
' gradual growth * and ' need of a reliable agent ' in the con- 
trivances concerned in c. 



CHAP, i vi Exclusive Agency 129 

Thus far we are left with B as a ft y R is a b c R or S. The 
flower of the Bee Ophrys as having flexible caudicles of the 
right length and self-opening anther cells, and considered as 
acted upon by wind, is adapted for self-fertilisation by the 
pollinia falling to the level of the stigma and oscillating till 
they touch it. 

8. In formal logic the affirmation of one attribute can have Conver- 
no influence on the affirmation of another about the same Senerli 
subject unless an explicit contrariety between the two affirma- isation. 
tions is within our knowledge. In short, difference does not 
justify negation. To say that a flower is self-fertilised does 
not formally warrant us in denying that it is cross-fertilised. 
But in science every content claims to be treated as a system, 
and every attribute must either quarrel with any other attri- 
bute suggested of the same subject, or must make peace with 
it on definite terms. Therefore the inductive conclusion B is S, 
' The Bee Ophrys is self -fertilising/ which we have thus 
obtained, contains in its claim for reciprocity, i. e. for pre- 
dominance or essentiality on the part of the attribute, a further 
suggestion to which in material or actual knowledge we are 
bound to pay attention. We cannot indeed expect to show 
that every self-fertilised plant is a Bee Ophrys ; i.e. we cannot 
reduce self-fertilisation to mean solely the adaptations of the 
flower in question, nor can we extend our idea of the flower 
in question to include all adaptations that in any plant might 
ensure self-fertilisation. The attribute ' self -fertilisation ' is 
not sufficiently concrete and specific to be identified in this 
way with the nature of a particular species of plant. But 
though we cannot reduce self -fertilisation as such to mean 
simply and solely the fertilising contrivances of Ophrys apifera, 
we are confronted by the reciprocal tendency of judgment with 
another problem which Darwin, with his usual exhaustiveness 
of apprehension, has frankly stated and discussed. We saw 
that B is S, or, to prepare for our present enquiry, B is b S, 
i.e. The flower in question is characterised by its own peculiar 
contrivances for self-fertilisation. Can we convert this judg- 
ment materially ? Can we say ' Self-fertilisation S, not cross- 
fertilisation F, is the characteristic of this species ', or in 
hypothetical form, ' If S pure and simple, then B ? ' This 

1337-2 K 



130 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

suggestion might be embodied with more formal correctness 
in double negation or in contra-position, as ' B is not not-S ', 
or, ' If any not-S, then not-B/ and the question would thus 
arise whether F (cross-fertilization) was not-S in the sense of 
being incompatible with S in B. But Simple Conversion 
without limitation (formally impossible) expresses the guiding 
idea more effectually, in demanding that an essential attribute 
of a subject shall be the sole attribute in the relation to which 
it belongs. Here however this suggested reciprocal is not true. 
The contrivances which have their meaning in subserving 
cross-fertilisation, the viscid discs, sinking caudicles, and 
elastic threads tying up the pollen-masses, are present in the 
Bee Ophrys without the least trace of becoming aborted, and 
therefore a strong analogical inference holds, to show that 
B being deJisF, and so is not-S in as far as not-S is identified 
with F ; in other words, that S, and not-S in the sense of F, 
are not contrary or incompatible in B, and so if we like that F 
is in this case not to count as not-S, or else that B is both S 
and not-S, to which, if not-S only means different from S, 
there is no objection. 

A certain methodical gain is drawn from affirming this con- 
junction of S and not-S, although unintelligible to formal logic. 
Having failed in Conversion, we are driven to Generalisation. 
For though S and F form no logical contradiction, but are 
prima facie quite compatible with one another, yet ultimately 
and from the point of view of a harmonious theory there is 
a contradiction until we reconcile them. Difference without 
a reason, i.e. difference in the same relation, or difference 
of means 1 to the same end qua the same, is a contradiction. 
We express this problem justly by saying, ' The flower B is 
self-fertilised S, and apparently may also be cross-fertilised 
Not-S.' We are here in need of a further suggestion by which 
to generalise S and not-S into one conception. This sugges- 
tion cannot be mechanically obtained, but must be drawn by 
analogy from our general knowledge of the organic world. 
Combining what Darwin soys in the place under discussion 

1 Apart from the insufficient amount of the one means, which therefore 
may need supplementing by another. If the one means is as easy to 
provide as the other, this reason falls away. 



CHAP, iv] Difference and Antagonism 131 

with his views in other works, we might give this suggestion 
the form, ' S (healthy preservation of the species) demands 
some F (cross-fertilisation) at least ; ' under which we may 
infer by analogy from ' B has besides S some F (not-S) ' that 
' B the special adaptations of the Bee Ophrys have for their 
all-embracing and determining nature the tendency to 2 the 
healthy self-preservation of the species, including both S and 
not-S '. 

Beyond analogy, in this final inference, we cannot go, for 
cross-fertilisation is not, according to the passage upon which 
I tely, affirmed of Reality as a datum in the content of Ophrys 
apifera, but is itself only inferred from analogy ; and therefore 
the general conclusion, though a suggestive concurrence of 
analogies, cannot be considered as a truth resting upon 
scientific induction. The operation of the contrivances by 
which the self-fertilisation of this flower is secured may on the 
other hand be regarded as made good by precise perceptive 
analysis at every point. 

In establishing this positive attribute of self-fertilisation 
considered as significant of a de facto purpose, we have about 
reached the limits of perceptive analysis. In establishing the 
probability of cross-fertilisation we have in one sense gone 
beyond the limits of perceptive analysis into the region of 
hypothesis, if in another sense we have retrograded into mere 
analogy. Such a hypothesis as we have just recommended by 
analogy, if drawn out into a variety of precise details and 
supported by their precise verification as real data, would be 
the essence of reflective, mediate, or generalising Induction. 
We must however bear in mind that hypothesis was present 
in a germinal form throughout perceptive analysis, throughout 
analogy, and even throughout enumerative induction, where 
it was represented by the content of a common name ; so 
that there is no saltus between these phases of inference. The. 
fascination which attaches to the researches of the great 
masters lies just in their power of absorbing, by exhaustive 
analysis, the mass of perceived data into intelligible con- 
ceptions. 

iii. In order to estimate the logical character the position Logical 
in the evolution of thought of such a process as this which character 



132 Scientific Induction [BOOKTT 

ofPercep- I have attempted to describe, three special points must be 

ductfon. briefl y treated. These are, a. What is the essence of the 

inferential process concerned ? ft. What is the purpose of the 

symbolic representation of it by letters ? y. What part in it 

is played by number of instances ? 

Its a. Ordinary mediate inference, either subsumptive or con- 

inference, structive, may be detected in every step of the process which 
we have examined, as in any complex judgment of perception. 
As we analyse, for example, the flower into its parts, and its 
parts into mechanical adaptations, we obtain the material for 
a three-term inference by which the adaptations in their 
mechanical aspect would be formally brought home to the 
flower. Or again, the contra-positive conversions and the 
ideal reciprocity of the judgment, to which we have so freely 
appealed, may be held to require explicit proof through syllo- 
gistic or disjunctive argument based on abstract principles. 
The mediate inference thus involved is of two kinds. 

With regard to the mediate inference involved in every 
complex judgment of perception, and therefore in every precise 
one this is really present in the Induction of which we are 
speaking, and may sometimes need to be explicitly drawn out 
in order to correct the results of an overhasty perceptive 
analysis. Especially this is the case when we are employing 
experimental apparatus which embodies whole chains of 
reasoning and concentrates on a single datum a multitude of 
precisely determined conditions. The observer e.g. with a 
microscope must always bear in mind what it is that his 
instrument does in virtue of the principles of its own construc- 
tion, and in many classes of observations is liable to be thrown 
back on constructive optical inference, in order to determine 
the interpretation of the appearance presented to him, 
whether it means a true line or an interference-line, whether 
an elevation or a depression, whether absence of structure or 
complete transparency of structure (in which latter case the 
use of polarised light will sometimes detect the illusion). Such 
mediate inference as this is really and genuinely present in the 
processes we have been considering, being concerned with 
material principles relevant to the special subject of the infer- 
ences. But yet such mediate inference does not belong to the 



CHAP, iv] Mediate Inference in Induction 133 

differentia of Induction, but is shared by all Inference what- 
ever, being inherent in the nature of Judgment. 

On the other hand, it appears to me that mediate inference 
from abstract principles of knowledge, such as principles of 
disjunction, of causation, or of sufficient reason, is not a 
genuine element of scientific Induction at all, although it may 
be the duty of the logician to point out a relation between 
inductive inference and such principles as these. The active 
form of thought, to which these principles belong, loses, as we 
have seen, 1 its active nature if it is made a mere content 
within an inference. The relation, for example, of the judg- 
ment that embodies a ' negative ' instance to the affirmative 
judgment which it corroborates is a case of the active form of 
negation engaged in acquiring a definite content within a 
certain complex system. We should gain nothing in such 
a case by erecting an argument to the effect that What is not 
A is not-A. The problem is, given the forms A and not-A, 
the positive and its limit, to bring these two forms into material 
agreement in respect of the matter to be organised. 

To reject abstract argument from principles of knowledge is 
however a different thing from the omission to exhibit the 
material of inference as permeated and articulated by the 
active forms of thought. Such an omission I hold to be 
unjustifiable. I have argued elsewhere that Mr. Bradley goes 
too far in holding that an inference qua inference is not bound 
to exhibit its principle or rationale. 

The essence of induction in this, the perceptive stage and 
beyond this stage it more and more transcends mere induction 
is in the peculiar parallelism between the positive connec- 
tion which suggests, the negative connection which defines in 
corroborating and corroborates in defining, and the ' excep- 
tional ' connection which modifies either itself or the affirma- 
tive connection. I have explained 2 why I do not take account 
of the sustained exception which overthrows. The logical 
peculiarity of the process is in the positive and consequently 
independent value of the negations, which are established 
without being derived from the affirmations, but operate on 
the latter through the formal interdependence of negation and 

1 Cp. chapter i of the prebent Book. 2 p. 116, above, 



134 Scientific Induction 

affirmation. The process is of course not mechanical. Mechan- 
ical Induction is an idle dream. The reciprocal adjustment of 
the negations and affirmations consists in the revelation of 
intelligible systematic ideas which are thus inferred to be true 
of reality. 
Theoreti- /3. The symbolic representation of these processes by letters 

po^of" may seem to have an exteinal affinity with the processes of 
represen- equational logic. But the two systems are to be regarded in 
symbols^ P recisel y opposite aspects. In the above discussion not-a and 
not-0 have been employed to designate contents which are 
positive, but have, towards a and a respectively, a boundary 
or negative side. The only object of such designations was to 
emphasise, for theoretical purposes, the negative relations 
subsisting between certain inter-connected positive contents. 
But for practical use the events or attributes in question must 
be taken in their concrete form, upon which everything turns. 
By manipulating them in the shape of abstract symbols no 
progress can be made in the task of Induction, which is a 
problem of material suggestion and adjustment. ' Just where ' 
and ' just in so far as % fails to be a it fails to be a ' ; this is the 
meaning of the inductive ' not-a is not a '. And no handling 
of symbols * can express or can warrant this ' just ' and ' in 
so far as f which are the whole essence of the process. What 
warrants these expressions of definite relation is and can be 
nothing less than a ground or real system containing parts 
which negatively determine each other. It is the business of 
Induction in the form of perceptive analysis to initiate the 
disentanglement and reciprocal determination of elements 
within such systems, in the light of ideas germinal hypotheses 
suggested by analogy. Analogy, in fact, does not cease to 
operate in Induction. Induction is Analogy fortified by 
negative and precise determination. 

Part y. Induction, we saw, is popularly identified with proof by 

number^ instances ' ^d owes its recognition as a distinct method of 

of in- inference to this identification, 
stances. 

1 Of course this remark does not extend to true calculation, which 
has been independently treated and does not fall within induction. The 
two processes have some common ground in statistics, as will appear 
from 7 below. 



CHAP, ivj Observed Ratios 135 

(1) But scientific induction does not depend on or in any In per- 
way deal with instances as such, i.e. particular occurrences ^viSs 
or observations with reference to their particularity their proper, 
number or recurrence. Here we have an antinomy, to which 

at the present stage we need only draw attention, as it has 
really been solved by the distinction between Enumerative 
Induction and the subsequent diverging phases of the Induc- 
tive process. All that scientific Induction demands is a con- 
tent referred to reality ; in how many observations or cases 
or occurrences the content is presented is a matter of entire 
indifference to science. If, to put an extreme supposition, the 
entire content, positive and negative, employed in the above 
analysis of the Bee Ophrys, could be observable in a single 
flower, that single flower would, subject to one reservation to 
be mentioned presently, form a sufficient ground for all the 
conclusions that were then drawn. What characters can be 
and what cannot be united in a single or continuous observation 
is a question of the nature of the object concerned, and not 
of logical theory. The same flower cannot be both fertilised, 
and ultimately not fertilised at all. It can be both fertilised 
(later) and not-fertilised (up to a certain point of time). Or 
it can be both self-fertilised, and not-self-fertilised in the 
specific sense of being cross-fertilised. The first of these three 
comparisons requires two ' instances ' ; the two latter need 
only require one apiece, or indeed one between them. And 
then is an ' instance ' a plant or a flower ? If a plant, one 
instance would probably do all we should demand. 

(2) There is, however, one case to be distinguished to which Known 
the above remarks do not apply. The self-fertilisation of the ^ ff ^ cts 
Bee Ophrys, Darwin says, is markedly ' successful '. The Bee cpndi- 
Ophrys, which is self-fertilised, in many dozens of plants had tlons * 

a capsule (seed-vessel) for every flower. 1 The Fly Ophrys, 
cross-fertilised by insects, had only seven capsules in forty- 
nine flowers. This is again ' a is a ', ' not-a tends to be not a.' 
And here number of instances is essential to the result, because 
we are dealing with the operation of conditions not fully known. 
This throws us back at once into enumeration of instances, 
statistical methods, or even the statement of chances. We 
1 Exceptis excipiendis deformed flowers. 



136 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

proceed by the comparison of hypotheses explanatory of 
observed ratios, as we saw in discussing the statement of 
chances. If, to use an extreme illustration, we could say ' Fly 
Ophrys is exclusively insect-fertilised ', and ' the observed 
plants of Fly Ophrys are in a place inaccessible to insects ', 
then we should not need a single instance to fortify the con- 
clusion that all these plants must remain unfertilised. But 
as we do not know with precision what conditions are opera* 
tive, and to what degree, in securing or hindering the approach 
of the right insects to the flower at the right moment, we are 
reduced to enumerating observed instances in order to obtain 
an actual ratio between successes and failures, upon which 
we may base an estimate of the nature of the cause or causes, 
whether in the flower or outside it, which would probably have 
produced the observed ratio of successes to failures, We have 
as data, say, forty-eight cases and forty-eight successes in 
self-fertilisation, compared with forty-eight cases and only six 
successes in cross-fertilisation by insects. We have to conjec- 
ture or construct the kind or type of causes which are most 
likely to have produced these two observed series. 

Supposing indeed that we take into account all unknown 
conditions whatever, no question can be raised, foi it is a mere 
transcription of the series to say that the one flower is less 
adapted to the conditions which have acted on it, than the 
othei to the conditions which have acted on it. And supposing 
that Darwin excluded interfering causes in counting both his 
sets of instances, as he did in one, there is no more to be said. 
The self-fertilised plant meets the unknown conditions wholly 
and the other does not. In order to compare probabilities we 
must have a suggestion as to some special kinds of causes that 
normally operate with an assigned frequency, 1 and for the 

1 We must in short take by way of hypothesis some ' natural cycle ', 
or what comes to the same thing, some cycle external to that observed, 
otherwise there are no two ratios to compare in respect of each observed 
series, See Book I, chap. viii. We might indeed compare the proba- 
bilities that each series proceeded from a supposed cause, and from 
chance (unknown independent conditions) respectively, but this would 
be, where we know some of the conditions operative, to forfeit the use 
of knowledge which we possess. If we wished to reckon the probability 
of either series occurring by chance, I suppose we should have to take 
(faute de mieux] the chances of failure and succesb as even for each flower. 



CHAP, iv] Normal and Abnormal Conditions 137 

sake of illustration I will assume that obvious accidents have 
not been excluded. As every adaptation has its limits beyond 
which conditions become abnormal to it, i.e. are accidents, 
I am able by this means to suggest the idea that the two kinds 
of flower may be equally well adapted to normal conditions, 
but that in the observed series of cases the Fly Ophrys may 
have been the victim of a set of disasters which destroyed the 
flowers inspected, by causes lying outside the limits of adapta- 
tion of either flower. Abortion of the flower or destruction 
by insects before maturity may easily prevent seeding in one 
flower out of four. Now of course in the first place it is an 
impossible assumption that Darwin would not have noticed 
any extraordinary prevalence of abnormal interfering causes 
confined to the flowers of the Fly Ophrys. In order to obtain 
a useful ' not-a is not a ' the two negative contents must 
diverge from the positive a and a only in a-ness and #-ness. 
They must be, as we have insisted, within the same real system ; 
i.e. the R of general conditions must be the same in both, or 
in the same relation to both. 1 

But in the second place, making this false assumption for 
the sake of illustrating our point, we will suggest that one 
flower in four of the Fly Ophrys is on the average destroyed by 
accidents which no adaptation could avert. And then it be- 
comes not impossible that in a given series of forty-eight 
inspected flowers, these accidents have been heaped together 
by unknown causes ; and that the flowers, though adapted 
to a// normal conditions, i.e. as successfully adapted as those 
of the Bee Ophrys, were nevertheless in forty-two cases out 
of a given forty-eight hindered from being fertilised by a series 
of extraordinary accidents. We have then to compare, as 
regards the Fly Ophrys, the hypotheses of maladaptation to 
normal conditions, such as to cause failure in forty-two cases 
out of forty-eight, and of perfect adaptation to normal con- 
ditions, hindered of its effect by abnormal conditions in forty- 
two cases out of forty-eight. The possibility of making this 

1 It is not indeed fair to say that in order to a just comparison the Fly 
Ophrys must have its insects as the other must have its wind, because 
the question is whether the Fly Ophrys was wise to rely on so capricious 
an agency as that of insects. But there must be no extraordinary 
influence known to be keeping the insects from it. 



138 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

comparison by calculation depends on our being able to assign 
an average ratio of operation to the abnormal causes. Taking 
them to produce on an average established by general observa- 
tion one failure to be fertilised in every four flowers, and 
excluding probabilities derived from the non-appearance of 
extraordinary hindrances in the instances of the Bee Ophrys, 
we have to determine the probability that in forty-eight inde- 
pendent flowers, with three favourable chances and only one 
unfavourable for each flower, we should obtain a set (in any 
order) of forty-two failures and only six successes. I presume 
that this problem is the same as to estimate the chances of 
drawing a black ball exactly forty-two times in forty-eight 
out of a box containing only four balls, being three white balls 
and one black ball. These chances would be expressed I 
suppose by (|) 6 x (J) 42 the chances of six successes in di awing 
a white ball on assigned occasions multiplied by the com- 
binations of forty-eight things taken six together, in order to 
add together the number of independent ways in which six 
successes and forty-two failures can be realised. 

This probability, which must be very low, owing to the 
enormous number of failures required, with the low chance 
J for each, has to be compared with the high probability with 
which the assumption that, normally, insects only visit one 
flower in eight, and that therefore the flowers are maladapted 
to seven sets of conditions in eight, would give as a consequence 
the ratio of forty-two failures in forty-eight flowers. This 
would I suppose be the same as the chance that out of a box 
containing seven black balls and one white, forty-two black 
balls should be drawn in forty-eight trials. The combinations 
remain the same as in the former case, and the factor supplied 
by the fractions expressing the chances would be () 6 x (I) 42 , 
involving a high power, the forty-second, of the very favourable 
chance f . The comparison of these probabilities would be 
our warrant for deciding, on the assumptions which we have 
made, that Fly Ophrys is much worse adapted to normal con- 
ditions than the Bee Ophrys. In fact, our conclusion is much 
more certain than on these assumptions, for it is certain that 
any violent interfering cause which destroyed one flower in 
four would have been noticed and excluded by any such 



CHAP, iv] Share of Estimated Reality 139 

observer as Daiwin. But in as far as we rely on the exclusion 
we are ceasing to rely on number and are going back to analysis 
of content. The exclusion, however, in such varied and un- 
certain conditions is probably imperfect, and therefore, in our 
actual inference, I take it that we eke out our reliance on 
Darwin's accuracy of comparison by a reliance on the pro- 
bability of a normal feature in the conditions (viz. a degree of 
unsuitability to the flowei) as against the very low probability 
of a variety of accidental conditions which Darwin did not 
exclude. We shall illustrate this particular application of the 
inference from number of instances directly. 

The above case may serve as a type of all Inductive pro- 
cesses in which number of instances, as number, plays an 
essential part. Their essence consists in selecting as most 
probable that cause or class of causes which would produce, 
as an alternative bearing the largest proportion to the sum 
of possible alternatives, the ratio actually observed among 
the phenomena. Apart from the assumption of any parti- 
cular cause, every additional instance enormously increases 
the improbability of every single definite succession by making 
every such succession one among an immensely increased 
number of possible alternative successions (or conjunctions). 
If therefore any cause can be alleged or supposed, which 
would give that particular definite succession which exists 
in reality as sole alternative or as one of a comparatively 
small number of alternatives, the principle of impartial 
ignorance urges us to decide for that cause as giving to the 
actual observed succession the nearest approach to its actual 
position as real i. e. the largest share of estimated reality. 
Or if two or more causes are suggested, from which each 
component event of the actual observed succession can be 
derived as one out of different numbers of alternatives 
respectively (e. g. as one out of three alternatives in one case 
and as one out of twenty alternatives in another), then we 
compare the probability of these two causes just on the same 
principle as that on which we compare the probability of a 
single imputed cause and that of the total absence of any 
single cause at all, forming a case in which the actual succession 
must be attributed to a succession of what we call accidents. 



140 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

A particular class of accidents however, such as that assumed 
above as destroying one flower in four before maturity, is 
of course a class of causes, and may be defined and treated 
for purposes of calculation as * a cause ', 

Number of instances thus operates by increasing the im- 
probability per se of every particular conjunction or succession 
of phenomena, and therefore increasing the probability of 
any cause which can be proved capable of producing the given 
conjunction or succession as one out of fewer alternatives 
than the number derivable from any other suggested cause 
or from the whole series of instances treated as accidental. 
Probability is estimated by counting, on the basis of impartial 
ignorance ; hence the opposition between enumeration of 
instances and analysis of content. 

The case of so-called elimination of irregularities by accu- 
mulation of instances may readily be exhibited as an appli- 
cation of the above principle. A class of causes, or common 
element in a variety of active conditions, is for our present 
purpose a cause or ground. If, on the accumulation of 
instances, there appears in the observed succession or con- 
junction any feature, e. g. of recurrence in certain cycles, or 
a fortiori of persistence in a single character, which can 
be hypothetically referred to any common element in the 
wholly unknown conditions ; then the accumulation of 
instances progressively increases the relative probability of 
causation by this common element, by progressively de- 
creasing the probability of every conceivable sequence, in- 
cluding the one observed, if considered as the result of accident, 
i. c. of independent causes. 1 In other words, it becomes more 
and more probable that, the unknown irregularities not- 
withstanding, the unknown conditions include a cornmon 
element, however composed, relative to the persistent feature 
of the observed conjunction or succession, and uninterfered 
with by the unknown irregularities of the unknown conditions. 
Material considerations of content, suggesting an approxima- 
tion to exhaustiveness in the enumeration of kinds of instances 
and consequently of kinds of conditions, are almost invariably 

1 See below, p. 170, on Kirchoff s proof of the presence of iron in the 
sun. 



CHAP, iv | Artificial Observation 141 

present to reinforce in some degree the argument from sheer 
probability. 

iv. Experiment is observation under artificial conditions. Observa- 
What is artificial bears to a certain extent the impress of jj^eri^ 
human intelligence, and is, to this extent, abstract and ment. 
idealised. Human action, in virtue of the human thought 
which directs it, is definite and selective. And ' artificial ' 
means produced or arranged by human action. The differ- 
ence between observation and experiment therefore is in the 
degree of definiteness and ideal selection which is present in 
the material conditions of the latter process. 

a. It is obvious that natural conditions would serve the Natural 
purposes of enquiry as well as artificial conditions on the 
assumption that they were exhaustively known. And if 
exhaustive knowledge of natural conditions were in no case 
possible, observation could not exist as a scientific process. 
But it must be noticed that in giving effect to the knowledge 
which guides it, observation itself tends to take on the 
character of experiment. The transition between the two 
processes is therefore gradual. Experiment would usually be 
considered to begin where we pass from intentional selection 
of our standpoint and from the use of contrivances auxiliary 
to perception, to actual analytic interference with the object 
under observation. Before the line is reached, however, 
observation passes into something which may properly be 
called ' natural experiment J . I quote an excellent passage 
from Jevons l in illustration of this point. 

' It may readily be seen that we pass upwards by insen- 
sible gradations from pure observation to determinate ex- 
periment. When the earliest astronomers simply noticed the 
ordinary motions of the sun, moon, and planets, upon the 
face of the starry heavens, they were pure observers. But 
astronomers now select precise times and places for important 
observations of stellar parallax, or the transits of planets. 
They make the earth's orbit the basis of a well-arranged 
natural experiment, as it were, and take well-considered 
advantage of motions which they cannot control. Meteorology 
might seem to be a science of pure observation, because we 
1 Principles of Science, pp. 400-1. 



142 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

cannot possiblygovern the changes of weather which we record. 
Nevertheless we may ascend mountains or rise in balloons, 
like Gay-Lussac and Glaisher, and may thus so vary the points 
of observation as to render our procedure experimental. We 
are wholly unable either to produce or prevent earth-currents 
of electricity, but when we construct long lines of telegraph, 
we gather such strong currents during periods of disturbance 
as to render them capable of easy observation.' 

Observa- p. There is a further point connected with this transition 
accurate* which calls for remark. We habitually speak of telescopic, 
instru- microscopic, or even of spectroscopic observation. Con- 
sidering what an enormous artificial interference the instru- 
ments thus employed exert upon the image of the object to 
be observed, it may seem strange that we call the result an 
observation and not an experiment. The instinct which 
guides our use of language is however just, at least so far 
as concerns the ordinary applications of telescope and micro- 
scope as magnifying instruments. An apparatus which merely 
brings the object nearer our perception is par excellence an 
observing instrument. In the compound microscope the image 
is variously transformed, and often goes through some degree 
of chromatic dispersion, in transits, but as it is reconstituted 
before reaching the eye, these transformations do not amount 
to experiment. This question turns on the employment of 
interference not merely to make an object accessible to us, 
but to analyse its content. Thus the moment we modify the 
object under observation itself, e. g. by applying heat, elec- 
tricity, or chemical reagents on the stage of the microscope, we 
say that we are experimenting. When we use spectroscopic 
devices to observe the real prominences of the sun, without 
waiting for a total eclipse, we are really analysing the solar 
image, though not the sun, but strong analogy from the 
general use of optical instruments makes us still say that 
we are observing. In actually compounding coloured lights 
with a colour-box for the purpose of equation, however, there 
is no doubt that we are experimenting. The fact is then 
that experiment is not merely observation under artificial or 
determinate conditions, but observation under determinate 
conditions which constitute an integral part of the image or 



CHAP, i vi Phases of Condition and Result 143 

product to be observed. Thus common dissection is not experi- 
ment, though it introduces conditions in the way of separation 
and demarcation as definite as anything can be ; but vivi- 
section is experiment, because the determinate conditions 
it produces enter as factors into the action of the organism 
observed. 

y. Returning for the sake of brevity to the symbols which Experi- 
we used before, we may say that the function of experiment jessed*" 
is to exhibit both a and not-a as determinate cases of /3, y, 8, in logical 
&c. which form the ultimate analysis of R so far as R is sym s ' 
relevant to a. The cases of ft y 8, &c. obviously may include 
zero values of any one or more of these factors, and apart 
from a special hypothesis to be tested or rather if the 
hypothesis to be tested is merely that /3 y 8 are concerned in 
a all possible combinations of values of the three or more 
series must be tried, a moreover is certain to be continuous, 
and to admit of variation within itself ; for no phenomenon 
is utterly atomic. But in order to secure a distinct corre- 
spondence between phases of condition and of effect, it is well 
to treat every appreciable phase a, within the general a, in 
turn, as a bounded by not-a, so as to identify its condition a, 
viz. a phase of /3 y 8, with absolute precision, as being on both 
sides bounded by not-a, viz. other positive phases of /3 y 8 
excluding that which is a. The goal to be attained, if the 
experimental conditions admit of it, is a reciprocal Hypo- 
thetical judgment ; consisting of an affirmative hypothetical 
judgment in the form, ' If a (a determinate phase, or series 
of phases, of /3 y 8), then a,' supported by its simply corrobora- 
tive equivalent, ' If not-a, 1 then not-a ' (viz. determinate 
phases of /3 y 8 excluding the phases a), and by its recipro- 
cally corroborative equivalent, ' If not-a, then not-a/ 

Can this reciprocal, equivalent to 'If a then a ', be justified 
by experiment, which can at best take the shape, ' in order 
to remove a you must remove a,' and not ' by removing a 
you remove a ' ? It can be thus justified on the assumption 

1 Not-a under experimental conditions is of course itself positive and 
exclusive of a. If there are different not-a's, as is quite possible at first 
sight, they determine different a's. E. g. aerial impulses too slow to be 
heard as musical sound, and discord, are two not-a's as against a's in 
musical sound. 



144 Scientific Induction 

that a considered as a phase of /3 y 8 is an ultimate analysis 
of R. For in this case all possible combinations of the 
ultimate components of R have been exhausted, and we can 
lay down throughout them all the demarcation between a and 
not-0. But if we take R in its primary meaning, of which we 
cannot stop short without special justification viz. as the 
entire system of the universe this assumption can never be 
true except in virtue of a consistent abstraction by which it is 
taken as true. 

Such an abstraction is the source of mathematical neces- 
sity. I will not say that in mathematical construction we 
are secure from the irruption of any conditions beyond those 
which we have put there, because we may be guilty of omission 
or oversight on mathematical ground, and the fact that 
discoveries can be made in mathematics seems to show that 
such omission constitutes the gradually receding limit of the 
science. But it may safely be said that in mathematical 
construction we are secure against any conditions which do 
not fall within the definite general type of those which we have 
put there. 

Apart from such an abstraction, the assumption that we 
have a perfect analysis of R is always erroneous, and the 
postulate that we must express a and not-a in terms of the 
ultimate analysis of R is theoretically incapable of being 
fulfilled. The approximate or presumptive fulfilment of the 
postulate depends chiefly on our general systematic knowledge 
of the course of things, which enables us, as we think, to draw 
a line between R t the whole irrelevant residuum, R 2 the real 
basis of both a and the positive not-a which make up the 
phenomenon prima facie in question, and therefore as such 
irrelevant to the distinction between a and not-a, and R 3 the 
limited number of precise positive conditions on the combina- 
tion of which, including their reciprocal interference, the precise 
distinction between a and not-a depends. R 3 is finally reduced 
to the general a. It is obvious that R a has its roots in R^, 
and R 2 in R l? so that the distinction between these remainders 
cannot be pressed far except on the ground of specific know- 
ledge. Gravity for example belongs to R, in relation to an 
acoustical experiment which I purpose to describe pre&ntly. 



CHAP. iv] 7s Residuum irrelevant? 145 

No doubt gravity is essential to this experiment in the same 
sense in which it is essential to all that takes place on the 
surface of the globe. But the variations of gravity within their 
actual limits do not affect the experiment appreciably or at 
all. Thus general systematic knowledge operates through con- 
fining the immediate problem to R ;i or at most to R 2 and R 3 , by 
setting down R x as for this purpose not-R, viz. not a residuum 
within the problem, but one outside it. R of the problem 
(viz. R 2 and R 3 ) is related to not-R of the problem (viz. R x ) 
just as a is related to not-a in the immediate experiment. 

And secondarily, in as far as R x is not materially known, 
but is an unknown residuum, a presumption of its irrelevancy 
may be supported by the number of instances in which R 
(as R 2 and R 3 )is a sufficient R for the experiment, i.e. presents 
a and not-a as required. This confirmation of the line drawn 
between the R of the problem and the not-R of the problem 
is precisely the same in kind as the confirmation by number 
of instances of a material difference in the adaptation of two 
plants to their environment, worked out above, p. 135. Every 
successful trial to generate a and not-a on the basis of the 
R of the problem alone, increases the difference between the 
probability of the result on the hypothesis that it is due to 
the known factors included in the R of the problem, whose 
certainty of existence is assumed, 1 and the probability that 
the successive occurrences of a and not-a are due to inde- 
pendent causes, some of which must therefore fall outside the 
persistent conditions which make up R 2 and R 3 . 

If, on the other hand, we confine ourselves to the R of 
the problem in its most limited sense, viz. to R 3 analysed as 
/3, y, 6, then the assumption that we have in /3, y, 8 an ulti- 
mate analysis of R can only be questioned on the ground of 
a further analysis suggested or presumed. The possibility 
of a positive suggestion needs no explanation ; it would arise 
from conjunctive induction and pass through analogy in the 
ordinary way, having the form ' 8 is probably complex, 
consisting of A, jut, v ', and would be tested by further experiment 
in the ordinary way, some part of such experiment probably 

1 Because if we fail to produce them all, we do not expect o, nor count 
the case as a trial. 

1337-2 L 



146 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

coinciding with passing ft y 5 through their possible variations. 
This experiment would however then be extended by taking 
account of the variations and zero values oi\p,v and including 
or excluding these, as the result might require, in the analysis 
of a and not-a. A presumption of further analysis very com- 
monly arises when no positive suggestion is forthcoming. We 
have a strong presumption e.g. from the history of chemistry 
and from the nature of ordinary substances that we shall not 
constantly be lighting upon new elements ; and therefore we 
do not assume an unfamiliar substance to be an element 
i. e. we presume that further analysis is possible even though 
we should fail to analyse it at the first attempt. 

After using the above example, however, I must guard 
myself against the idea that ' analysis ' is for this logical pur- 
pose to be understood in a sense borrowed from chemistry. 
Logical analysis is the understanding of any whole in reference 
to its constituent parts or factors, and chemical analysis is 
only the understanding of a chemical whole as chemical. It 
is a trite observation, but perhaps necessary to be repeated 
here, that the analysis of an organism, if it is not its analysis 
as an organism, may destroy rather than display its inmost 
nature. If 6 is an organic element, and A, /u, v are its chemical 
constituents, then our first business in ' analysing ' is to 
ascertain whether we want these constituents A, p, v, which 
are, strictly speaking, constituents not of 8 but of b l (6 as a 
merely chemical substance), or whether we want other con- 
stituents o, TT, r, which if we can we may then further construe 
into forms of combined chemical action A //. v (o), A /x v (TT), 
A fji v (r). In speaking of organic characteristics as capable of 
analysis, I have in mind such questions as the precise degree, 
direction and mode of transmission in which irritability in 
plants sets up reflex action ; or how far certain movements 
are reflex and how far purely mechanical e. g. in the case 
of circumnutation. 1 The description of analysis needed in 

1 I have not the smallest desire to deny that the joint action of A n v 
as chemical agents may make up, and, for all I care, initiate the action of 
8 as organic. The question of abiogenesis is an open one for Logic, 
I am only pointing out that, combined as 5, the constituents A, p, v, 
acquire organic attributes o, ir, r, which are capable of having their 
nature precisely determined by experiment. 



CHAP, iv] Logical Analysis 147 

each particular case must of course be determined by the 
nature of a, and the consequent nature of parts or factors with 
reference to which it is to be understood. 

b. A very simple and beautiful example of the progressive Experi- 
reciprocal definition by experiment of a a and not-a not-a ^^the 
is to be found in the well-known verification of the connection Siren 
between rapidity of periodic vibrations and musical pitch, as anal y bed - 
given by help of Helmholtz's Siren. The reader would do 
well to study the account and figure of this instrument in 
Helmholtz's Popular Lectures. 1 In the light of the account 
which has just been given of the logical purpose of experiment 
we may roughly analyse this arrangement as follows : 

R,, or the not-R of the problem, may be typified by the 
action of gravity, which pervades all matter, but the varia- 
tions of which within their actual limits are indifferent to the 
phenomena now in question. 

The R of the problem, consisting of R 2 and It,, within 
which a a and not-a not-a are to be sought for, is in general 
terms the musical sound produced by the machine, and its 
conditions, including the machine. Of these we may take as 
R, (extending, as we knew it must, continuously into RJ the 
air in the room, the hearing ear, and the machine itself, as 
operative in the production of a physical effect which together 
with a hearing ear results in musical sound. R 2 is relevant 
as the proximate basis of the phenomenon itself, and as such, 
regarded by contrast to R L or not R, is itself an a defined 
by a not-a and connected with an a. But prima facie and 
outside the experiment itself, R 2 does not demand much 
analysis. The air in the room or some conductor of sound 
must act as a medium between the machine and the ear 
sound cannot pass through a vacuum ; the ear must not be 
outrageously abnormal this is included in a reasonable inter- 
pretation of ' hearing ear ; ' and of course there must be no 
other source of sound undistinguished from the machine itself. 
And as R 3 , the unanalysed whole which is the phenomenon! 
we must take the action of the machine as akeady somewhat 
idealised by analysis, i.e. in respect of its quantitatively 
specified effect upon the air in generating aerial impulses with 

1 Eiigl. Trausl., published by Longmans & Co., Series I, p. 57 If. 

L2 



148 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

a measurable rapidity of succession restricted to certain limits, 
and in one seiies, or in two simultaneous series, at pleasure, 
a, the musical sound, 1 is most conveniently considered as 
included in R 3 , but as also distinguished by anticipation and 
confronted with the gradually narrowing R's and their analyses 
as the problem to which they are all directed. Ultimately, 
however, a itself will of course be reacted upon by analysis, 
and will be found to include distinct elements both in kind 
and in degree. 

If we omit, for the sake of brevity, to speak of the charac- 
teristics of quality and loudness in musical sound (and these 
are in fact not especially illustrated by the Siren), we find 
that R 3 is immediately reducible to a very simple relation, 
the relation of comparative rapidity of succession between 
series of puffs of air, which series differ in no other assignable 
respect. R 3 is, in other words, assumed ad hoc to be exhaus- 
tively analysed. Confining our attention, to begin with, to 
the case of a single series (and not two sounding at once) we 
become aware first of a constant relation between any given 
rapidity and the pitch of the note which is heard while that 
rapidity is maintained, and secondly of a relation of quasi- 
proportion, sufficiently explained above, 2 according to which 
rapidity is to rapidity in a definite numerical ratio, while pitch 
is to pitch in a definite recognisable relation, measurable by 
intervals but not made by summation of intervals. First, 
then, every particular rapidity is to us as an a, deviations 
from which on either side are to it as not-a, corresponding to 
an a deviations from which on either side are to it as not-a. 
But as each and every deviation from a brings a ' proportional ' 
deviation from a with it, every such not-a is to some corre- 
sponding not-a as an a to an a; and we have therefore the most 
perfect case of negative relation between positive contents. 
But, secondly, when the quasi-proportional character of the 
two series attracts attention (which it did from the earliest 
times, as a fact demanding explanation, owing to the relation 

1 ' What musical sound ? ' the reader may ask. I reply, in fact some 
musical sound in particular, but as a problem musical sound in general. 
It is impossible to particularise the sound you have heard, except as 
a result of advancing analysis. See p. 74, above, 



CHAP, iv] Deviations as cases of Law 149 

of the length of strings to the notes which they sound) it 
becomes an essential element in the relation which constitutes 
Rg, and presents itself as a further determination of the mere 
principle ' rapidity has a constant connection with pitch ', 
which forms the first simple a a. We thus obtain the 
suggestion of a law, and the verification of this suggested law 
becomes the object of the experimental process. A law is 
treated just like any content a. The object is to show that a 
the realisation of the condition is attended by a the realisation 
of the consequent, and that not-a, any deviation from the 
consequent (ultimately perhaps a variation of the consequent), 
is preceded or attended by a deviation from or variation of 
the condition. Thus as always our goal is in the Hypothetical 
judgment, ' If a, then #/ with its reciprocal, ' If a, then a.' 

It is further worth while to mention how the experiment 
in question obtains minute measurable variations of a and a 
at pleasure. If rapidity corresponds to pitch in a certain 
proportion, then two rapidities in the right proportion corre- 
spond to a definite harmony. Deviations from a harmony 
are recognisable by a trained ear with extreme minuteness. 
Helmholtz's Siren will sound two sets of impulses, of con- 
trollable rapidity, together ; and in the first place by adjust- 
ing the two precisely to the proportion required by the law, 
it verifies the law a a in a compound case. But then by a 
contrivance for very delicately, and measurably, altering the 
rapidity of one of the series, a slight or considerable discord 
can be produced at pleasure. If we were interpreting a a 
as ' i : 2 gives note and octave ', this result reads as a con- 
firmatory content, ' not a not-a,' i.e. ' deviation from i : 2 
gives deviation from note : octave. 1 But of course, as before, 
this not-a is a case of a, rapidity corresponding to pitch, 
though not to two notes, one an octave above the other 
because the sets of impulses are not as 2 : 1 in rapidity. 

But here, with the Siren alone, we are pretty much at an 
end of our analysis. That R 3 is not merely a law of rapidity 
in succession, but a complex theorem concerning shapes of 
vibrations and their decomposition into pure pendulum 
oscillations, related to the quality of a and to discordant 
beats in a (if a includes two notes sounding together), does 



150 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

not appear from the above experiment. It would perhaps 
not have been suspected but for the obvious fact that an 
air wave must have some shape, on the one hand, and that 
pitch is not the only element in sound, on the other. 

The point of the above illustration consists especially in 
displaying the various senses of not-fl, and the various stages 
of its adjustment to a. R t is not-# in one sense, R 2 in 
another, and in a relative and shifting manner portions of 
R 3 are not-0 also. The same applies throughout to not-a. 
Induction consists in separating the R's and in establishing 
those variations of a which appear, against any fixed starting- 
point, as relative not-a's (and the same with a). 

I may conclude this chapter by calling attention again to 
what I have insisted on in another work, 1 as the claim of 
an experimental apparatus to be considered in the light of 
a reasoning machine. It must be granted that in any logical 
engine whatever we have to make the conclusion, i.e. to read 
it off as a conclusion, and if we are to do this we may read 
off the connection of imperfect ratio and false harmony from 
the Siren as distinctly as we can read a combination of letters 
from Jevons' logical machine. In the operations of nature, 
causes have their consequences ; but the causes are not 
precisely known, and the consequences are therefore not 
consequents. In experimental instruments we find the 
attempt made to generate actual consequences which shall 
also be consequents, as arising from conditions precisely 
known in respect of the mode and degree of their combination. 
Any instrument which does this may be called a reasoning 
machine, whether it deals with combinations and eliminations 
of letters as logical symbols, or with the same relations of 
actual number, or of any definite motions with their effects. 
The value of the connections thus demonstrated is of various 
degrees ; but a complex experimental apparatus has the 
advantage in the synthetic variety of the contents which it 
exhibits as relevant to each other, if the logical machine 
has the advantage in the abstract generality of its formal 
conclusions. 

1 Knowledge and Reality, p. 327 ff. Cp. Jevons, Principles of Science, 
p. 282 ff. 



CHAPTER V 

SCIENTIFIC INDUCTION (continued). 

i. HYPOTHESIS is a name that may be applied to any Hypo- 
conception by which the mind establishes relations between Postulate 
data of testimony, of perception, or of sense, so long as that 
conception is one among alternative possibilities, and is not 
referred to reality as a fact. 

i. From Aristotle onward, indeed, logicians have been Hypo- 
anxious to consider a hypothesis as the suggestion of a real f^n^out- 
agent a thing or occurrence in a thing related to the data side Pos- 
as ' cause ' to ' effect ' ; and to distinguish such a suggested tulate 
' agent ' from a mere suggested ' reading ' of the phenomena 
a principle, law, or definition. Of course there is a primary 
difference between a material agent and an ideal law or 
principle, but the distinction is not ultimate in theory and 
appears to be, for this reason, incapable of being sustained 
in scientific practice. A ' working hypothesis ' and most of 
the great unifying conceptions of modern science are working 
hypotheses is the suggestion of a real agent taken as equiva- 
lent to the suggestion of a mere law or principle. It is 
worth while for the sake of clearness to look at the distinction 
between law and real agent in a form recently given to it by 
Lotze, viz. as the distinction between Postulate and Hypothesis. 

In the account to which I refer l the name of Postulate is 
given to the conditions which are absolutely and essentially 
involved in a given set of appearances, and apart from which 
' the content of the observation with which we are dealing 
would contradict the laws of our thought '. These conditions, 
it must be observed, need not be abstract, except in the sense 
of being definite and precise. They might therefore, I infer, 
exhaust or define the nature of a real agent, in so far as a real 
agent is capable of being determinately known. But it is 
plain that as a rule they will not suffice to do so. The concrete 
1 Lotze, Logik, sect. 273. 



152 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

nature of a material thing will contain much that is indifferent 
to the conditions precisely involved in any determinate effect. 

By hypothesis, therefore, in this same account, is meant 
a conjecture which specifies the natural agents taken to be 
at work in a phenomenon and to be the means of fulfilling 
the postulate involved in it, in the case under investigation. 
In other cases, it is implied, the same postulate might be 
satisfied by means of other agents. And, it should be added, 
by a fiction is meant the reference of an effect to a cause or 
principle which we know to be incapable of producing it, but 
from the real effects of which it only differs by an error which 
is capable of being determinately assigned. Omitting the 
case of a confessed fiction, and including a fiction, not con- 
fessed to be such, under the title of a hypothesis, we may 
throw the remainder of our discussion into the form of 
an enquiry into the distinction between Hypothesis and 
Postulate. 

The Postulate sets an abstract problem which Hypothesis 
has to solve in the concrete. The distinction pnma facie 
coincides with that upon which Mill lays stress in his treat- 
ment of hypothesis, between a quantitative law of action, 
and the thing which acts according to that law. But it 
would certainly seem that every hypothesis in order to be 
established must be passed over into the content of the 
postulate, in the sense that, without the matter suggested in 
the hypothesis, no less than without that suggested in the 
Postulate, ' the content of the observations with which we 
are dealing would contradict the laws of our thought/ For 
this is ultimately the ground on which we affirm of Reality 
everything that we do so affirm. When the postulate is 
shown to contain the hypothesis, by a concrete proof that 
the suggested thing or fact is necessary to prevent self- 
contradiction in our thought, then we have a hypothasis 
with a vera causa (see ii. below). When the hypothesis is 
moulded into the postulate, not or not exclusively by proof 
of the concrete supposition, but in a great degree by atten- 
uating its content into a ' law of action ', then we have a 
'working hypothesis ', i.e. materially an abstract postulate, 
but formally a supposition of a real agent. Such a hypo- 



CHAP. V] Law and Agent 153 

thesis is a fiction which may or may not be a confessed fiction. 
In Mill's notes on Whewell 1 we see the process of attenuation 
at work, reducing hypotheses to fictions which are confessed 
by Mill and not confessed by Whewell. Modern science seems 
to the outsider more and more tending to substitute explana- 
tion by laws of action for causation by unknown real agents. 
But, in theory, a determinate agent may be involved in the 
postulate just as much as an abstract law, supposing that the 
agent is operative in the content in modes sufficiently many- 
sided to assign it a determinate nature. For logic, law and 
agent are alike conceptions by which thought constitutes the 
content into an organised whole ; both may be ' within ' the 
content, if we include in the content what is needed to con- 
stitute it rightly ; neither can be within the content if we 
separate it, by an unreal and indeed impossible distinction, 
from the work of thought in determining it. Every object 
of perception is such a conception, by which data of sense are 
determined in a way necessary to make them intelligible. 

The real distinction which Lotze should have drawn is 
not between the law of action and the concrete real agent, 
but between the concrete real agent as known to be necessary 
for the explanation of the observations, and such an agent 
as not so known, but arbitrarily imagined, or identified with 
something known from other sources. If we assume a thing 
thus arbitrarily, or on the ground of extraneous knowledge, 
then (considering the thing in the latter case apart from the 
extraneous knowledge on the ground of which it is assumed) 
we have the relation ' If a, then a ', but not the reciprocal 
' If a, then a ' ; i.e. in other cases other agents than a might 
satisfy the same postulate, or minimum of conditions, involved 
in a. But this unnecessary element in a hypothesis cannot 
of course be acquiesced in. The supposed real agent must 
either be elevated into the content of a postulate, or depressed 
into that of a fiction. Obviously, however, before deciding 

1 Mill's Logic, i, p. 335, and ii, p. 24 ; e.g. ' Can an agency undulate ? 
Can there be alternate motion backwards and forwards of the particles 
of an agency ? ' Mill is maintaining in effect that Whewell 's view of the 
imponderable agents reduces them to laws of action. He is distinguish- 
ing an agency from an agent (the ether). And compare Clifford on 
Causation, Lectures, &c.,[Vol. i, p. 153. 



154 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

that the latter course is the only one open to us, we must 
concentrate all available knowledge upon the supposed real 
agent in order to test its right to become a postulate. One 
science e.g. may need one aspect of it, and another another. 
Hypo- ii. Thus to meet the difficulty that many characteristics 
withV^m ^ a thing assumed hypothetically to account for certain data 
Causa. are likely to fall outside what those data demand and justify, 
it is usual to require of a hypothesis that a the supposed 
agent shall be a vera causa. This can ultimately have but 
one meaning. It must come to this, that a, though containing 
elements which are superfluous for the explanation of the data 
from which we happen to have started, yet contains no elements 
which are not necessary to the explanation of some data or 
other. It is commonly said that a vera causa is one inde- 
pendently known to exist, or accessible to direct perception. 
Of course we do not restrict our conviction of reality to 
matters accessible to direct perception the centre of the 
earth, the inside of a block of marble, the other side of the 
moon, are cases in point. And if we did attempt this restric- 
tion, what is direct perception ? All perception is inferential, 
and proceeds by furnishing conceptions which bring data of 
sense into intelligible relation. And if we require that the 
cause shall be independently known to exist, this is a mere 
question of the range of observations which it is to explain. 
A vera causa then is a thing, or occurrence in a thing, whose 
reality we are thoroughly convinced of from the necessity of 
reconciling observed data, 1 and there is no reason in the 
nature of things why a single science or a single range of 
reality should not suffice to produce such conviction. 'Direct 
perception ' is a mere popular phrase without logical meaning. 
The question is simply whether our data are determinate 
enough to guide us to the nature of a real thing as explaining 
them. What is really demanded in the vera causa is probably 

1 The most thorough and simple way of classifying matters known 
from testimony or history is to include them under the head of concep- 
tions which are necessary to determine observed data, the observed 
data being the books, speech, &c., which bring the facts to our individual 
notice. As to ranking agents under the head of conceptions, I may say 
that this is not reducing agents to mere conceptions. As known and 
established to us, they are conceptions, though they may be more. 



CHAP. V] Colligation of Facts 155 

independent evidence of the thing's reality, with an eye to 
the doctrine of chances. A single coherent set of errors may 
vitiate a whole coherent system of appearances, but the 
chances against errors in independent sets of observations are 
the same as the rapidly increasing chances against coincidences 
of independent events. 1 This is a parody (as the doctrine of 
chances is always a formal parody of some material truth) 
of the operation of multiform data in moulding a concrete 
hypothesis, which will be illustrated directly. 

Thus in a ' working hypothesis ' we have postulate and 
hypothesis tending to identification by attenuation 2 of the 
hypothesis, in a hypothesis with vera causa we obtain the 
same result by extension of the postulate to cover the alleged 
cause and turn it into a vera causa. 

2. In an ultimate sense, there is no knowledge without Phases of 
Hypothesis. ^Jjjtei 

i. 'All science may be rightly described as progressive Rudi- 
" colligation of facts " through superinduction of conceptions ' 3 Hypo^ 
if it is understood that, though such conceptions are present thesis, 
in the real facts and are not mere additions out of our heads, 
yet in the progress of our knowledge such colligation does not 
operate upon the real facts themselves, but only on the facts 
as imperfectly understood by us. Thus the whole course of 
the present work has been an attempt to trace the progressive 
determination of feelings, or of facts imperfectly understood, 
by conceptions which may be regarded as hypotheses in course 
of development and proof. The continued identity of an 
individual, for example, which is the soul of the individual 
judgment, may be regarded as a conception or hypothesis 
which is superinduced (though without conscious reflection) 
upon the successive appearances which we observe, and 
' colligates ' these facts. And as we have seen in speaking 

1 If the chance of error in one set of data is J, the chance of indepen- 
dent error in two sets (of the same but independent liability to error) is 
-}, in three J-, and so on. 

2 A working hypothesis often, and perhaps usually, partakes of the 
character of a fiction, being in fact suggested as a vera causa, and subse- 
quently attenuated till it is clearly not a vera causa, though retaining 
its original claim to be so. 

8 Green, Philosophical Works, ii, p. 288. 



156 Scientific Induction 

of Induction, hypothesis in a genuine sense, as a conscious 
activity, begins to operate where the individual judgment 
begins to be employed in explaining the conjunction of 
attributes, in conjunctive or enumerative Induction. From 
this point, at which Hypothesis is represented by the content 
of a generic or specific name, we have watched its development 
through analogy and through scientific analysis, till in the 
experiment of the Siren we found ourselves testing by deter- 
minate perceptive comparison a relation which can only be 
completely explained by a complex mathematical theorem. 1 
Mediate ii. Procedure by Hypothesis proper is mediate, 
thesis" a * ^ * s c * ear fr m w h a * h as keen sa *d that we must assent 
Hypo- in substance to the view of Jevons and Sigwart which is in 
thetical the main that of Whewell 2 and De Morgan, 3 so far as it asserts 
Indue- the essential identity of Induction with procedure by Hypo- 
tion. thesis. And indeed Mill himself might almost be reckoned 
on this side. He shows 4 triumphantly that the Method of 
Difference will test the premises of a Deduction, and the fact 
that the ' instances ' on which it operates are in that case 
obtained by Deduction, he sets down as of no consequence, 
i.e. as not interfering with its Inductive character. But it 
is not so clear that this method, which unquestionably will 
test the consequences of a precise deduction and therefore 
the truth of its premises, will perform any other function 
that could be called Inductive. Mill's objection 5 against 
Whewell's hypothetical method, on the ground of insufficient 
provision for excluding unproved or unproveable elements of 
hypothesis, is an objection which arises from the impossible 
demand for merely negative and exhaustive determination. 
It is very probable that Whewell makes too little of the necessity 
for showing or for its being possible to show that nothing but 
a could produce a ; but what Whewell seems to have rightly 
felt is that this is after all in its essence a material and positive 
question, depending on the degree and mode of connection 
between a and a, and being for logic the same as the question 

1 The theory of wave-propagation, which explains among other 
things the discordant beats produced by sonorous impulses which have 
not certain definite ratios of rapidity. 

2 See Mill's Logic, n. 24. 3 Budget of Paradoxes, p. 49. 
* Logic, ii. 12. 6 See Mill's Logic, ii, p. 24. 



CHAP. V] Function of Hypothesis 157 

whether a as such produces a. The possibility of proof or 
disproof, which is claimed as essential to the ' legitimacy ' 
of a hypothesis, must be a material or real possibility, and 
reduces itself to specific presumptions that proof may be had, 
which are in themselves giades of proof. But while accepting 
the general view to which I have alluded of the importance 
of hypothesis in Inductive Inference, I am unable to agree 
with some important results which have been held to follow 
upon such a view. 

j8. I shall begin by endeavouring to lay the true doctrine Example 
very briefly before the reader, in the sense in which I under- of fusion 
stand it and in which it seems to me to follow from our previous hypo- 
discussions. It will then be necessary to speak of the relation * h ^ 
between Induction in the scientific sense and the work of 
generalisation which is popularly ascribed to it, and I shall 
conclude the present chapter with some observations on the 
above-mentioned misapprehensions, and on the true relation 
of Induction to Inference as such. 

The purpose of the example which I propose to analyse is 
to exhibit the mediate identification of a hypothetical cause, 
at first sight somewhat remote, with a given effect. I inten- 
tionally select an instance in which the identification is not 
quite perfect, in order to display the full nature of the difficulty 
to be overcome. 

As a datum to be explained, we will take the curious fact, 
long known to scholars, that the Greek god Apollo, especially 
the Apollo of the Troad, is associated with the mouse, both 
in his appellation Smintheus and in recorded usages there 
were sacred mice and figures of mice in his temple, and so 
forth. 1 

The conjunction of aspects which excites surprise in this 
fact is the association of an insignificant animal with the 
worship and the temples of a comparatively pure religion. 
A large choice of analogies lies open to us, any one of which 
might furnish some sort of mediation between these two 
extremes, and of these that which is at first sight the most 

1 My example and my arguments are all drawn from Mr. Lang'b 
Custom iind Myth, p. 103 It. My purpose however only permits the 
meagre reproduction of some points out of this interesting study* 



158 Scientific Induction [BOOK n 

remote may perhaps on a consideration of all the phenomena 
be considered the most hopeful. 

It seems that in the Peruvian religion we find this same 
conjunction of aspects, the association of insignificant animals 
with the worship and the temples of a comparatively pure 
creed. And in that instance, it further appears, we have a 
definite and complete mediation or explanation of the two 
terms or ' extremes '. Before the establishment of Sun- 
worship by the Incas as the creed of the state, the Indians of 
the various tribes worshipped tribal animal gods, including 
all sorts of insignificant animals, the Indians of each tribe 
believing themselves to be descended from some one of these 
animals. ' After the establishment of the purer religion, the 
Incas had the good policy to collect all the tribal animal gods 
into their temples in and round Cuzco, in which the two 
leading gods were the Master of Life, and the Sun.' This 
toleration of an older and cruder in subordination to a purer 
faith is a very common phenomenon, as Mr. Lang truly 
observes, in religious evolution. And he cites an example of 
a festival described by Theocritus which still continues in 
a Catholic country. 

Here then we have a content the whole of which is given 
(I assume) in perception or in the proximate interpretation of 
perception, viz. in history. Analogy or Induction would not 
commonly be held to apply within the limits of this content ; 
but nevertheless in as far as within the single ' instance ' or 
range of reality which is really the life of a whole nation 
a principle is detected by our thought, there is operative what 
constitutes the essence of inductive as of all other inference. 
But no details have to be referred to reality solely on the 
strength of the principle, because it happens that they are all 
warranted by testimony. 1 

Now if the content which perplexed us in Greek religious 
history fell bona fide within the lines of the content thus 
warranted and interpreted in Peruvian religion, no inference 

1 It is probable, and appears I think from Mr. Lang's account, that 
the interpretation even of the known succession in Peru into an intelli- 
gible evolution would involve, as almost every interpretation does, 
some remodelling and supplementation of details. So far we have 
inference in the popular sense. 



CHAP, vj Suggestion of a Hypothesis 159 

would be necessary, or rather, the purely formal inference 
which recognised the identification would suffice to include the 
Greek problem under the same solution as that which supplies 
itself for the Peruvian problem. But the very slight and 
superficial abstraction which is all that we have thus far 
formulated of the Greek problem can warrant no such material 
identification so far as we have yet stated the point, almost 
any hypothesis might explain it ; the misunderstanding of 
a name, or the caprice of a priest or king. What we must now 
do is to look in the Greek problem for the facts and relations 
of which we have seen the significance in the Peruvian problem. 
But as historical data such facts and relations are wanting ; 
and here we have the essential difference between Induction 
by analysis of Perception, and Induction by mediate Hypo- 
thesis. Our hypothesis is prima facie a conjectural matter of 
fact falling wholly outside the content which has to be ex? 
plained. The view which I wish to illustrate is that our proof 
of the hypothesis must ultimately depend upon the charac- 
teristic positive connection between the hypothesis and its 
consequences. This connection is as we have seen elucidated 
and purged of irrelevancy by the establishment of limiting 
negations, but is not otherwise dependent on the disproof of an 
indefinite number of alternative hypotheses, and is no more 
restricted to mere probability than is the determination of any 
perceived data by any conception which makes them intelligible. 1 
We have before us, as a datum of fact, a surprising con- 
junction between Apollo and the mouse, especially in Apollo's 
temple. We have as a suggested fact which might explain 
this conjunction, a previous state of Greek or neighbouring 
tribes in which they worshipped animals such as the mouse, 
together with a religious evolution in which the earlier cult 
survived by the side of the later and purer worship. According 
to the ordinary process of Induction as inverse Deduction, 

1 Contrast with this the mechanical views of Jevons, Principles of 
Science, p. 152, and Sigwart, Logik, ii, p. 357. Jevons thinks that no 
proof by Imperfect Induction (Induction falling short of complete 
enumeration) can be more than probable. Sigwart thinks that a hypo- 
thesis is refuted by refuting its consequences, but not proved by estab- 
lishing them, though it grows in probability as its consequences agree 
with the facts. 



160 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

we proceed to ' deduce the consequences which might be 
inferred from the hypothesis '. 

In drawing consequences from a hypothetical state of facts 
we have to apply that state of facts to the reality on the basis 
of which it is supposed, and to examine in detail the results 
of the combination. This analysis of the content of the 
hypothesis is not a contrivance of demonstration, but an 
inevitable necessity of knowledge. In working out, for example, 
the hypothesis now before us, we must take into account the 
customs relating to marriage and to names which belong to 
that phase of savage life which we are conjecturally imputing 
to the Greek race in the past. Among savages named after 
tribal animals which they worship and bear as name or emblem, 
and from which they trace their descent, the members of one 
family do not intermarry with people bearing the same name 
or emblem, and the children of every marriage take the 
mother's name or emblem (totem). These names consequently 
tend to become scattered throughout a large region, and are 
associated with the well-known phenomenon, for which in very 
early society there are obvious grounds, of counting kinship 
through the mother and not through the father. On the 
other hand, when this state of society passes away, as in 
European nations it has passed away, it is plain that a powerful 
family will crush out the names of the other families in a 
district, and form a local tribe called by an animal name. 
From this hypothesis thus analysed, if applied to 'mouse 
families ', there follow primarily four results, which briefly 
stated amount to this : 

(1) There would be places named from mice, and mice will 
be held sacred in those places. This was so in the Troad. 

(2) The mouse-name would be given locally to the god who 
superseded the mouse. This was so in the places called after 
the mouse. 

(3) The figure of the mouse would be associated with the 
god in his temple, and used as a badge or local mark in places 
where the mouse had been venerated. The former usage was 
found, and the latter was not uncommon, in Greece. 

(4) Stories would be told in the district in question to explain 
the worship of the mouse. This was so in the Troad. 



CHAP. V] Results of Hypothesis 161 

I do not say that these four points, thus baldly stated, 
carry us very far. But in so far as they support the hypothesis 
at all, they do so not merely as an arrangement of coincidences 
due more probably, in a calculable degree, to a single cause 
than to independent unknown causes ; but, like an arrange- 
ment of results which some person has the power and a strong 
motive to produce, they support the conjectural cause by the 
material connection of the data with it, or a material extension 
of the data towards including it. One of the above points for 
example is the appearance of the figure of a mouse as a badge 
or city emblem in Greece. This, when referred to an actual 
race of men exceedingly conservative in its customs, is a point, 
though a trifling one, actually in common between hypothesis 
and data. The badge or crest of a city is not the same thing 
as the totem of a family, but the connection of parts of cities 
with local tribes is too well made out in Greece and elsewhere 
to give us pause. And the veneration of an animal by the 
people of a city in ways strikingly analogous to totem worship 
is made out in the case of Egyptian cities. Of course this 
point may be otherwise explained than by the suggested 
hypothesis, and so may all the others ; but they all, as referred 
to the life of a race, demand some explanation, and the only 
difficulty is to model that explanation rightly. It is this idea, 
that of moulding a hypothesis, that should be substituted for 
the idea of gauging its probability as something attaching to 
its definite and irrevocable form. To meet paradox by paradox, 
rather than admit that a hypothesis can only be established 
by the refutation of infinite others * and the non-refutation 
of itself, I would maintain that of every set of data some positive 
hypothesis (viz. that ' something or other ' conditions these 
data) is within our knowledge demonstrably true, and that the 
problem of induction by the inverse method or by hypothesis 
is merely to further determine this ' something or other '. In 
this work of definition, as we have abundantly seen, negation 
is all-important ; but it must be motived and relevant nega- 

1 This is the root of the idea that no results of hypothetical Induction 
can be certain. The idea is ridiculous when it is once seen that hypo- 
thetical Induction is identical in principle with common perception and 
with all Inference whatever. 

1837-2 M 



162 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

tion, ' not this, because thai, which has a determinate relation 
to this/ 

I should weary the reader by further discussion of the 
mouse hypothesis, which moreover space forbids me to treat 
in its interesting details. But I must point out that by con- 
sidering the peculiar marriage customs (e.g. maternal kinship), 
sacrificial and festival rites, and animistic beliefs, which are 
traceable throughout Greek life, and which are characteristic 
of the primitive phase that forms the content of our hypothesis, 
we can remodel hypothesis and data once more, and this time 
into a really intimate approximation to each other. Hypo- 
thesis and data approach amalgamation in the conception of 
a finely gifted race still bearing in its prime the traces of a 
natural though characteristic evolution out of a savage past. 
We might almost claim that a savage phase of life is a vera 
causa, apart from the proof of our special hypothesis, 1 not 
only in the Peruvian but in the Greek race. Is not the concep- 
tion of a past and natural evolution, in the case of any race 
of men which we may be considering, a conception ' apart from 
which the content of the observation with which we are dealing 
would contradict the laws of our thought ' ? But if so, then, 
according to the distinction accepted above, the conception, 
although that of a real agent or event, is a postulate and not 
a mere hypothesis, and therefore is the conception of a vera 
causa ; and the work of induction is, as said above, to assign 
to the postulate in detail its actual content or law of action. 

Other hypotheses, independent of that which the author 
advocates, are carefully dealt with in the chapter from which 
I have been quoting. And I think that any one who considers 
the matter in the light of this or any equally genuine piece of 
research must feel that just in so far as the adverse hypotheses 
are independent, their refutation, although a sine qua non of 
the establishment of the hypothesis advocated, can never 
genuinely contribute to that establishment. In other words, 
the refutation of other hypotheses is a genuine assistance to 
one hypothesis only when it elicits positive content which goes 
to model this latter hypothesis. 

Before leaving this subject I must refer back to the dis- 
1 Every hypothesis when proved is a hypothesis with vera causa. 



CHAP.V] Moulding the Hypothesis 163 

cussion of Book I l on cause and ground, and must explain 
that the content of a hypothesis may correspond, according 
to the degree of its purity or relevance, to any member of 
the series there described ; to cause, to effect, to antecedent, 
consequent, or ground. The reason for treating an example 
in which the popular sense of cause is dominant was simply 
that the equally popular sense of hypothesis, from which the 
theoretical difficulty of its use arises, corresponds to the 
popular sense of cause (or effect). The more scientific type 
of hypothesis approaches more nearly -prima facie to the 
nature of a postulate or ground of a principle included in 
the facts, or of a systematic reality which they constitute. 
And hypotheses which are, to begin with, of this type do 
not present the great apparent difficulty of passing by sheer 
inference from isolated data to actual things and facts not 
included in them. As we have seen, a hypothesis which to 
begin with is not of this type, necessarily tends, in course of 
demonstration, to approximate to it ; just as, in the case 
which we tried to analyse, certain isolated data and isolated 
suggestions about the Greek race tended to coalesce into a 
systematic conception of that race as developing in a normal 
fashion under the natural influences and conditions which 
appear to be common to mankind. 

3. It is unquestionably the case, that a process or result Generali- 
which may be termed Generalisation is somehow connected sation - 
with Induction. The only question is how to state the con- 
nection. 

i. I trust that the popular idea according to which Indue- c From 
tion is a process from what happens often to what happens J}f ex- 
always, from particulars to the totality of particulars, hasploded. 
been set in its true light by the whole scheme of our account 
of Induction. The conception, to which unhappily Professor 
Jevons adhered, of Perfect and Imperfect Induction as corre- 
sponding to complete and incomplete enumeration is hope- 
lessly fallacious. It cannot, I think, be necessary to pursue 
this error at the present stage. 

ii. There is a sense in which all abstraction, i.e. all becoming By mere 
conscious of the determination of sensuous data by explicit nation! 1 

1 Chap. vi. 
M2 



164 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

conceptions, operates as Generalisation. Such generalisation 
is embodied in the hypothetical judgment, which of course is 
not hypothetical qua judgment and is in no sense a hypothesis, 
but is an affirmation, based upon a reality illustrated by 
a hypothesis. The explicit conditions forming a determinate 
case which, as the antecedent in the hypothetical judgment, 
illustrate or qualify Reality, take the consequent with them 
wherever they go, and in this sense the judgment is general, 
absolute, or universal. Supposing the judgment to be abso- 
lutely true and formally we can suppose nothing else of 
a judgment which we make, though of natural phenomena no 
judgments are absolutely true it is absolutely universal. 
Varieties of detail may fall within it, but they do not affect it. 
Against such unessential variations, and against mere number 
of examples in time and space, the explicit antecedent appears 
as general, and in selecting and defining it a work of generalisa- 
tion has practically been accomplished. There is no advance 
from known to unknown in the strict sense of the case we are 
now considering. There is no advance from known to unknown 
in saying that a pair of parallel straight lines which you may 
intend to draw to-morrow will never meet. If the ' intent and 
purpose ' of the antecedent ' hath full relation ' to the example 
to be adduced, there is prima facie no inference, no extension, 
no advance, in affirming the consequent true of that example. 

A still stronger and a far more important case of such 
generalisation by mere determination is afforded by mediate or 
inverse induction through hypothesis. A hypothesis is a hypo- 
thesis because it is not to begin with present in the data, and 
has to be brought there by mediation. But to supply matter 
for modelling a conception which is not furnished by mere 
direct interpretation of sense, i.e. by perception or by testi- 
mony, a set of data must have wide range and be capable of 
a high degree of systematic inter-relation. Thus e.g. in an 
anthropological hypothesis about the past of the Hellenic race 
a considerable portion of the history of Europe is ultimately 
involved, and the data bearing on it are inter-related and 
elucidated. 

In this sense a hypothesis or mediately obtained deter- 
mination of observations by a conception superinduced upon 



CHAP, v] Kinds of Generalisation 165 

them, is likely to involve as a result an elucidation and articu- 
lation of a wide range of reality. Sparta and Athens, Crete 
and the Troad, Sicily and Magna Graecia, all fall within the 
region of reality which through determination of our knowledge 
about it by the anthropological hypothesis in question would 
acquire for us a certain set of highly important common 
properties and relations. Here the generalisation results from 
the range of the explicit system, and not from the mere 
abstract precision of a hypothetical antecedent. What we are 
systematising is a reality, and the judgment which expresses 
our conclusion may indeed, like all precise judgments, be 
thrown into hypothetical form, but its content makes it really 
categorical. In it therefore we have two kinds of generalisa- 
tion, one depending on the range of the system which we have 
constituted, the other on the hypothetical abstractness which 
makes even this concrete system a case, within the lines of 
which systems differing from it in other relations may con- 
ceivably fall. 

iii. The generalisation that falls within the limits of strictly Material 
scientific Induction is confined to what has just been described j ^,"*~ 
as Generalisation by mere determination. It is not generalisa- Generali- 
tion in the sense of an advance from the known to the un- satlon ' 
known. Obviously there can in no case be such an advance 
except in the sense that the unknown becomes known. And 
this advance is made in the determination itself ; the case, 
when determined, is known, and is generalised in so far only 
as it is known. Water is composed of oxygen and hydrogen 
in certain proportions. There is no further generalisation in 
applying this to water such as we have analysed ; and if there 
could be a doubt whether a certain liquid was in that sense 
' water ', the judgment gained by previous analysis would not 
prima facie determine it. The hypothetical character of this 
judgment is an automatic apparatus for excluding material 
generalisation. In the extreme instance of such exclusion the 
antecedent ' water ' is little more than a name, to which 
' composed of oxygen ' &c. supplies the content. Then if 
' composed of oxygen ' &c. is not true in a particular case, 
that case ipso facto falls outside the hypothetical judgment. 
Or in a less extreme instance, ' water ' may indicate certain 



i66 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

visible or other properties which are synthetically related in 
the judgment to the chemical composition. But here again 
the least variation in those index-properties may formally 
throw the case in which it occurs outside the hypothetical 
judgment. 

This is all very well so long as we interpret the hypothetical 
judgment to be strictly hypothetical abstract or necessary. 
But the account given in Book I of the Universal Judgment 
in its sub-forms of Corporate and Generic Judgment reminds 
us that we have a Categorical element to deal with in the 
characteristic nature which binds things together into ideal 
or actual totalities, and we have to face the possibility that 
the nature of these totalities may conflict with the content 
of hypothetical judgments in which they are set down as 
antecedents. Every universal is an identity in difference, and 
the identification of the conditions by which inductive enquiry 
has determined a content is not, as we assumed just now, 
a purely formal activity, but is, like every judgment, a syn- 
thetic and material operation. Reliance on the accuracy of 
our analysis will lead us back to a Lockeian formalism, if 
we neglect the identification of the data analysed. ' Man is 
rational, because if a creature turns out not to be rational, 
it is not what we called a man,' is an argument which, unless 
specifically justified, has no more content than A is A because 
we called it A. If no distinct elements are fixed within the 
synthesis, the synthesis itself is destroyed. But on the other 
hand, if we affirm our analysis directly of a generic content 
which is categorically taken and includes a system of differ- 
ences, it is clear that we are pledging ourselves to a material 
generalisation. Does ' water ' for example, in the judgment 
above cited, include steam and ice ? Apart from specific 
chemical knowledge, I do not see how we could predict that 
it would do so. And if we say ' water ' for chemical science 
is matter of a certain composition, whether in a liquid, solid 
or vaporous state, then we have got back to the nominalist 
judgment criticised above ; ' a is xy because what is not xy 
is not called a. 9 

I do not mean to say that the above considerations are of 
serious importance in precise scientific induction, in which the 



CHAP, v] Material Truth 167 

definition of the data as elements in a synthetic relation is 
always a primary problem. But either in popular applications 
of science the most fertile of all sources of fallacy or in 
provinces of knowledge which are largely dealt with by analogy, 
it is essential to bear in mind that the identification of the 
datum, which has been analysed or determined by a concep- 
tion, with either the popular import or the analogical generic 
content of that datum, is always a matter involving a material 
synthesis and not a mere formal recognition. Where indeed 
the precise determinate conditions of a phenomenon are 
explicitly recognisable, there the identification of the pheno- 
menon is a formal act, and the hypothetical judgment applies 
ipso facto. But where, as is constantly the case in practice, 
and, owing to the nature of a universal, always in theory, the 
conditions are not unambiguously recognisable, but only either 
a Part of them, or a case of them, or an index-mark of them 
can be discovered, then we must form a synthetic judg- 
ment of identification or distinction, based on the general 
principles which we have seen to govern argument by 
analogy, viz. on the reality of a system of recognisable types 
and purposes. 

Apart from such a material assumption the truth of principles 
derived from Scientific Induction itself would be practically 
though not theoretically destroyed. 1 A system of unapparent 
deviations in the properties of natural objects, such as to 
defy classification, might be such as to destroy the applicability, 
while not interfering with the formal truth, of hypothetical 
judgments. In our earlier discussions on the hypothetical and 
categorical aspect of judgments, it was conceded that the pure 
hypothetical judgment does not allege the existence of the 
elements which it explicitly puts in relation. But it is also 
clear that no ordinary result of Induction ought to be taken 
bond fide as a judgment of this type. A judgment which cannot 
be denied but which has no range of real application has only 
abstract and not concrete truth. If all our knowledge were 
of this character, as qua mere determination it conceivably 
might be, it would have no hold upon reality. 

1 i.e. would be destroyed for concrete and real theory, but not for 
abstract and formaljheory. 



168 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

So long indeed as the variations of natural objects observed 
a continuous and mutually coherent progression, we should 
only have a state of things not unlike the system of animated 
nature, which would be in some respects favourable to know- 
ledge by the clearness with which it would mark the course 
of evolution, and might not be incompatible with human life. 
But it is easy of course to imagine varieties in fundamental 
properties of substances not indicated by external appearance, 
which though following strictly from natural antecedents, and 
not in any way miraculous, would yet be incompatible with 
such a degree of knowledge as is necessary to maintain human 
life on the surface of the globe. No analysis of water would 
help us, however true under the conditions under which it was 
made, if something which we could not distinguish from water 
except by renewed chemical analysis were liable to arise out 
of water by a concealed process of causation, and were endowed 
with the properties of sulphuric acid. No formal principle 
will meet this conceivable difficulty. Many distinctions all- 
important for human life are only learnt by degrees or are 
only drawn with imperfect success e.g. between pure water 
or milk and the same liquids when contaminated with sewage- 
poison. We can only say that */ we are to live on the surface 
of the globe the results of scientific induction must not only 
have formal or hypothetical truth, but must also have that 
degree and proportion of categorical application which is 
necessary to enable us to adapt ourselves to the environment. 
This degree of categorical application, of which mere deter- 
mination, except in the case of an extended system of reality 
like the Hellenic race, or Europe, or the British Constitution, 
or the Solar System, can tell us nothing whatever, measures 
the work of recognition or of generalisation which is over and 
above the work of generalisation by mere determination. 
When I say ' Water is composed of Oxygen and Hydrogen ', 
I must mean by water, not necessarily all, but some large 
proportion of what I commonly take to be water. If not, 
m Y judgment, however true in the abstract, fails to grasp 
reality in the concrete. 

The ideal of knowledge, no doubt, is not in this analogical 
generalisation, but in the second and larger kind of generali- 



CHAP, v] Induction and Chance 169 

sation by mere determination, viz. in the progressive reduction 
of reality to a single system or to comprehensive single 
systems. It must be remembered, too, that the synthetic 
nature of every universal or identity is double-edged. If all 
sets of conditions have to be recognised and interpreted as 
universals, all sets of conditions should be fixed and determined 
in the inductive analysis as universals i.e. with the full pre- 
vision that differences, variations, extreme cases, will arise 
within them. Nevertheless, it seldom happens even in geo- 
metry that a principle when fiist established is established 
in its full content and application. Inductive analysis can 
never make lull provision for the application to fresh cases of 
a principle which it discovers, except in as far as it discloses 
the nature of a comprehensive individual system of Reality 
within which other individuals fall. 

4. Our results as regards Induction are then as follows. General 
i. Our view of Induction as an inverse process differs essen- iJ^ 
tially from that of Jevons by its dependence on material and tion. 

positive connections, which are only defined by negation. In- Differ- 

i i_ i xi_ x i x- i? xx ence from 

verse procedure by hypothesis is for him essentially a matter jevons. 

of probability, and depends on the exclusion of alternative 
hypothesis simply qua alternatives, i.e. ultimately on the 
statement of chances 1 or the number of cases out of all con- 
ceivable cases which are in favour of the result in question 
upon the hypothesis proposed. This view essentially depends 
upon the false conception of generalisation which has been 
frequently alluded to, and according to which the ideal of In- 
duction is perfect Induction, i.e. the summation of an infinite 
series. As we have seen, 2 the statement of chances admits of 
valuable and extended application where we are dealing with 
classes of unknown conditions, i.e. conditions known to us 
simply as furnishing such and such numbers of ' equal alter- 
natives ' ; and in astronomical and other exact science it is 
justified by the splendid success of its results. I will venture 
however to point out, in respect of one example adduced by 
Jevons, that other considerations seem to have contributed 

1 Sigwart seems to waver between this view, and the true view of 
proof by content. Logik, ii, pp. 428 ff. . Tr. u. 308. 
1 P- 135, 



170 Scientific Induction [BOOKII 

to the inference beyond those which fairly aiise out of the 
statement of chances. Kirchoffs proof of the presence of iron 
in the sun l depends upon the exclusion of the alternative that 
the 60 dark lines of the solar spectrum coincide by chance with 
the 60 bright lines of the incandescent vapour of iron. The 
probability of a chance coincidence being (from the distance 
between the lines on the spectrum) about i for each line, the 
probability in favour of a chance coincidence for all 60 lines 
is about (J) 60 , i.e. less than one in a trillion. ' But on the other 
hypothesis/ Jevons continues, 'that iron exists in the Sun, 
it is highly probable that such coincidences would be observed. 1 
Here the proof seems to appeal to some of the considerations 
which belong to the positive connection between given content 
and hypothesis, or to material generalisation, or to both. 
Why should ' the other hypothesis ' be ' that iron exists in 
the Sun ' ? The answer must be, I should suppose, either that 
the 60 bright lines have a connection with the nature of iron, 
as a characteristic or exclusive differentia, which would dispense 
with the proof by calculation or that though there is no 
exclusive connection between the nature of iron and the pro- 
duction of 60 bright lines, yet in fact no known substance but 
iron produces such lines, and it is very improbable on general 
grounds that a substance unknown to us but sharing this 
property with iron is present in the Sun. 2 The former of 
these considerations would belong to the nature of true 
Inductive determination, the latter group to the postulates 
of material generalisation. The real function of number 
and ratio in Induction has been sufficiently illustrated 
above. 

Ultimate ii. After the discussion on p. 117 above of the connection 
Inducf- f between Induction and other inference, I need only sum up 
tion. the view which I have taken in a very few words. Induction is 

1 Jevons, Principles of Science, p. 245. 

a The fraction (])* represents, I suppose, the chance of 60 coincident 
cases all produced by independent causes ; but ought we not also to 
consider the probability not merely of one unknown cause producing 
all the cases, and that cause being iron, but that of all the possible 
alternatives in which 2, 3 and so on up to 58 inclusive, of the coincident 
cases, are produced by a single unknown cause, and the remainder in 
each alternative by accident ? 



CHAP. vj What do consequences prove? 171 

not a species of inference, as calculation, geometrical reasoning, 
analogy and subsumption, are species of inference. It has 
not, that is to say, for its differentia any peculiar nature 
in the universal which carries the conclusion. It is conse- 
quently, like Comparison or Recognition, like Observation or 
Experiment, a transient and external characteristic of in- 
ference. An Inductive proof, when completed, may be a 
geometrical construction or an arithmetical calculation, an 
articulate subsumption or a morphological analogy. Its 
Inductive character belongs exclusively to the process of 
discovery, and depends on the relation between the elements 
of the content and the qualification of reality from which the 
process of cognition starts. Inferential connection is one, 
and is necessary and invariable ; but the points at which 
a single and coherent system may be in contact with the real 
world as known to an individual cognitive subject are infinitely 
various. From these points, whatever they may be, the 
cognitive subject has to build up the single and coherent 
system, which he then refers to reality. When these points 
are isolated perceptions, occurrences or qualities, then the 
task of building up the system which they necessitate is called 
Induction. 

Inductive proof rests, like all Inference, on systematic and 
necessary connection of content. How many observations, 
what experiments, how many and how favourable conjunctions 
of phenomena, may be needed to disclose the connection to 
us, is, as Aristotle implied in the Posterior Analytics, 1 theoreti- 
cally indifferent. The observations do not give us the connec- 
tion, but we judge the connection on the basis of the system 
demanded by the observations, and this systematic or reasoned 
judgment is the essence of the proof. 

Is a principle then proved by the number and variety of 
its verified consequences ? It gains nothing from any repetition 
of identical consequences once established to be fact ; but 
variety of consequences may be said to prove it by displaying 
its nature as actual and modelling it into concrete identity 
with themselves. I incline to think that the truth upon this 

1 Anal, post., p. 90, a. 24 ; cp. p. 87, b. 39 ; and see the author's 
Knowledge and Reality, p. 285. 



172 Scientific Induction by Analysis [BOOKII 

point is best stated through the paradox proposed above. 1 
Every fact, every sense-perception, every datum of testimony, 
absolutely and irrevocably proves something and necessitates 
the assumption of some agent or principle. Repetition of the 
same datum, qua the same (i.e. assuming that it was completely 
and correctly observed at first, which is never true), can add 
nothing to what it proves. But every further datum which 
can be connected with the first goes to develop the content 
of that agent or principle which both the data prove. If 
therefore we speak of the mere proof that something or other 
beyond the datum must be assumed, one datum is as good as 
a host to prove this, and the proof of it is absolute at first ; 
and to allege variety and range of data as contributory to this 
proof is to fall once more into the fallacy of generalisation 
from number of instances. What is proved once does not need 
to be proved again. Every datum proves irrefragably the 
reality of the system to which it belongs, whatever that may be. 
But this representation of the matter, though it leads up to 
the truth, is in itself a paradox without real import. A proof 
which proves the reality merely of something or other is a 
proof of nothing at all. But if we speak of the proof of a deter- 
minate agent or principle or real system, then both range and 
variety of data are essential to the proof, and the proof of the 
whole is not absolute at once, and therefore the proof of any 
part, as a part in that whole, is not absolute at once. For the proof 
depends upon the intelligibility with which the hypothesis 
to use the terms explained above is adjusted to or included 
in the postulate ; that is to say, with which the alleged real 
system is identified with the real something demanded by all 
the data taken together. And from the nature of knowledge 
as a system the necessity of this synthetic connection can only 
be evident in an extended range of applications ; and hence 
it is not from number of consequences, but from the varied 
determinations which are indispensable to define any universal 
in its inter-connected differences, that range and variety of 
data are contributory to the proof of a hypothesis. 2 Thus we 

1 p. 161. 

a I am omitting, to avoid confusion, the consideration of repeated 
observation as eliminating accidental errors, which depends on the 



CHAP, v i What constitutes Induction 173 

may say, if we like, that variety and range of data contribute 
nothing to the proof of a hypothesis, but only aid in its 
definition. a But we must then bear in mind that the proof 
to which range does not contribute, and which each isolated 
datum effects absolutely and ultimately, is a proof of some- 
thing in general, but of nothing in particular. 

Induction, then, is the reference to reality of a system on 
the ground of particular differences within it by which reality 
is taken as qualified ; and may involve, in the constitution 
of the system for knowledge and in its identification with 
those differences, any process known to Logic. It is essentially 
an advance from the Individual or concrete Generic judgment 
to the pure hypothetical, or to its higher form, the Disjunctive 
judgment. When we are able to start from a reality qualified 
to us by pure hypothetical or by disjunctive judgments, then 
we can go at once from the differences as in the universal to the 
relations of other differences, and we can refer these differences 
to reality on the basis of the universal itself which is accepted 
as real. We do not in this case employ species of inference 
unknown to Induction ; but the process in which we employ 
them has not the peculiar relation to given Reality, e.g. the 
gradual emergence of negative determination, which con- 
stitutes Induction. 

principle of chances illustrated above. Accidental errors are errors 
arising from a variety of unknown causes. Repeated observation dis- 
tinguishes series such as are likely to be due to a single cause, from 
series likely to be due to unknown causes. 

* It is a good way of stating how far a hypothesis is proved to ask 
ourselves what we should have to disbelieve if we disbelieved it. The 
more it is efficient as an interpretation of the data, eliciting and depend- 
ing on their individualities, the more difficult it is to disbelieve it without 
disbelieving the data, or at least without disbelieving a certain reading 
and colouring of them which ex hypothesi is included in their verification. 
The proof that ' nothing else can explain them so well ' is really depen- 
dent on this reading and colouring of them expanding into the detail of 
the hypothesis, not on the detached destruction of competing hypo- 
theses. And then of course the wider the range of the data, the more 
difficult it is in turn to disbelieve them, without disbelieving the whole 
of the rest of our experience. There can be no doubt I think in principle 
that true conclusions data as deduced support their premises. 



174 On Defective Formulation [BOOKII 

ON DEFECTIVE FORMULATION OF THE INDUCTIVE 
PRINCIPLE 

Inference iii. A point which I have touched upon above, relating 
tition*^ 6 * *h e k as i s f Induction, has recently been brought into 
prominence by the attitude of M. Bergson, with the imitation 
and repetition theorists whom he appears to follow,* to the 
creative and constructive activity of the intellect. I cite 
a typical passage (Evolution Crtatrice, p. 218) : ' L'intelligence 
a pour fonction essentiel de Her le meme au meme, et il n'y 
a entierement adaptable aux cadres de Intelligence que les 
faits qui se repetent/ 

' Same a. Such a statement is in the sharpest possible conflict with 
sanfe ^ le v * ew * i n ^ e U ec ^ ua l activity which to many of us seems 
effect.' natural and obvious. But when we refer to the most accredited 
expositions of the logical theory of Induction, which attempts 
to deal with the characteristic working of the scientific intelli- 
gence in the advancement of natural knowledge, we find them 
dominated by ideas which appear to justify M. Bergson *s posi- 
tion. \Vhat I wish to attempt is a brief reconsideration of the 
exact meaning and function of these ideas in Inductive Logic. 
The basis of Induction is usually stated in some such 
formula as * Same cause, same effect '. It is unnecessary for 
our present purpose to raise the questions connected with the 
converse formula, ' Same effect, same cause. 1 It is enough to 
understand the simplest truism of Identity, that a thing does 
what it is its nature to do under given conditions, 1 ' and cannot 
do otherwise except by some change in the conditions ; from 
which it follows, that if, in an alleged causal nexus, the alleged 
effect is sometimes absent while the alleged cause is present, 
cetens panbus, it is impossible that the alleged cause should be 
the real cause of the effect in question. The principle is sound, 
beyond any doubt, as far as it goes. It is, in fact, nothing 
more than can be read off from the law of non-contradiction, 
as formulated, for example, by Plato. The same thing cannot 
behave differently to the same thing in the same relation. If 

* Cp. Tarde, Les Lois de 1' I mi tat ion, p. 15. 'II n'y a de science . . . 
que des quantites et des accroissements, ou, en termes plus g6n6raux, 
des similitudes et des repetitions ph6nom6nales.' 

b Cf. Mr. Joseph's Introduction to Logic, chap. xix. 



CHAP. V] Mere Elimination ? 175 

it seems to do so (Plato's condition ' at the same time ' is 
superfluous), you can infer that there is a difference in the 
supposed agent. The same, so far as it is concerned (i. e. if no 
condition is altered) produces the same ; what produces some- 
thing different, out of itself, is not the same. If this much is 
not to be assumed, we cannot treat anything as having an 
assignable nature. Truth ceases to have a meaning. Any- 
thing might behave anyhow. 

Now it is from this law or truism that, according to current 
logical theory, the fundamental Inductive test of causal con- 
nection is derived. The Inductive process is thus regarded 
as one of elimination.* You have before you, it is assumed, 
one or more suggested connections of cause and effect, and 
you labour to eliminate from among them all alleged causes 
that are present in the absence of effects with which they 
claim to be connected. Such elimination leaves, it is pre- 
sumed, a surviving statement which approaches more and 
more closely to a true, i. e. an invariable, causal connection. 
The principle is simply that which M. Bergson refers to : 
What is the same, does the same ; if the same product is not 
there, the same agent is not there, The same produces the 
same. And yet, if this were all, we should have a difficulty 
in denying M. Bergson 's doctrine which I began by stating. 
It would then seem to be the case that the essential work of 
the intellect lies in binding the same to the same, and that 
the true type of the logical universal the essence of cogni- 
tion is, as M. Bergson says, the relation of an abstract 
statement to examples which repeat its tenor wholly without 
variation. That water boils at sea level at 212 Fahr. would 
be such a generality ; and according to the number of instances 
in which people boiling their kettles at or near sea level b found 

a The rules of elimination which depend on the further principle, 
'Same effect, same cause ' (i.e. on the exclusion of plurality of causes), 
rest merely on a more precise consideration of the ideal of identity, which 
it is not necessary to take account of in order to understand the point at 
issue in this discussion. See Joseph, chap. xxii. 

b I am satisfied to take a case in which strictly accurate repetition is 
all but impossible, because it illustrates the real fact, which is that the 
interest of the generality lies in the differences which it binds together. 
A strict repetition could have no interest at all. 



176 On Defective Formulation [BOOKII 

the water to be about 212, would be its rank and power as 
a piece of knowledge. 

This a j3. But why should we deny M. Bergson's doctrine ? Per- 
logy haps it may be the truth. As a primd facie answer to this 
suggestion, we need only refer to such a criticism of tau- 
tology as we find, for example, in Mr. Bradley's Principles of 
Logic.* 

M. Bergson's doctrine is logically bound to deny not only 
the advance from one truth or connection of fact to another, 
but the possibility of apprehending or of uttering any signi- 
ficant truth at all. It may appear that this criticism is 
exaggerated, because the doctrine explicitly treats (so far as 
I am aware) as outside the principle of the intelligence, only 
the difference between the corresponding terms of one nexus 
and those of another nexus, and not the difference between the 
terms themselves alleged cause and alleged effect which are 
constituents of a single nexus. But there is no escape by this 
road. If tautology is the principle of the intelligence, the 
connection of any two distinct terms, say, as cause and effect, 
stands on the same ground as the connection between two 
different connections. With tautological identity as the 
principle of intelligence, all systematic coherence, between 
term and term, equally as between judgment and judgment, 
inevitably vanishes. 

But in fact there is (i) some misinterpretation involved in 
setting up the principle ' Same produces same ' as the dominant 
principle of scientific Induction and as governing the nature 
of the generalisation which is the aim of that process ; 
although 

(ii) I admit and maintain that the current logical statement 
of the theory of Induction lays itself open to this misinterpre- 
tation. The view which I have taken above b indicates, I 
believe, the right theoretical direction, with its consequence 
as regards the place of elimination of erroneous hypotheses in 
drawing Inductive conclusions. But I hope that the point 
will be made clearer by a few additional remarks. 
Its mean- (i) When you postulate as the basis of Inductive Inference, 
in s- the principle ' Same cause, same effect ', you do not mean that 

* e.g. p. 29. b p. 164. 



CHAP, v] A Stereotyped Nexus 177 

the effect is the same as the cause.* They must be different, 
if the relation of cause and effect is to be worth establishing. 
You do mean (a) that assuming the truth of an alleged causal 
nexus A B, it only applies in cases which are absolute 
repetitions of it, i.e. where you have exactly the same A as 
before without any variation ; and (/3) that in examining the 
truth of an alleged causal nexus A B, your rule must be that 
if you find a case in which, ceteris paribus, B is different 
(o or Bj) and A is unvaried, your alleged causal nexus A B is 
disproved. For if it were true, the same cause would be 
producing, ceteris paribus, two different effects, which is impos- 
sible. (If A is plural, or rather, various, and B singular, this 
is not literally a case excluded by the formula ' Same cause, 
&c.', which is strictly taken silent about it, i.e. about plurality 
of causes, and no negative inference follows, unless we are 
making what usually counts as an additional postulate ' Same 
effect, same cause '). 

What you mean by ' Same produces same ', then, is an 
assertion that the cause, in a nexus guaranteed by this principle, 
is unvarying compared with itself, and the effect unvarying 
compared with z'lself. You imply no comparison between 
cause and effect. 

And your principle makes no suggestion towards the 
estimation of any possible cause and effect allied to or devel- 
oped out of those forming the nexus whose truth we assume 
to be accepted. According to a proper interpretation of the 
word ' same ' some such expansion would be permissible, 
passing from a b to a ft and from a ft to A B. But 
what makes it impossible is the demand for a methodic rule. 
Plainly there cannot be a general rule that will tell how much 
variation in your cause and effect, each from each, will be 
justified under the principle ' Same cause, same effect '. And 
therefore, if you want a rule, you must take one which justifies 
no variation at all, and makes your ' generalisation ' cover 
nothing but sheer repetitions, and degrades your procedure 

* In a remote sense some such meaning might be assigned to the true 
Inductive principle which I desire to see established, and it may be that 
some hint of this possibility prevents the formula under discussion from 
seeming as naked as it really is. Its strict meaning can only be that 
stated in the text. 

1337-2 N 



178 On Defective Formulation [BOOKII 

in connecting the same with the same into one which admits 
of no novelty or true inference. 

But the two types of connection thus disregarded, that of 
cause and effect, and that of any generalisation and its more 
advanced but kindred form, really contain the very life and 
mainspring of Inductive thought. How the suggestion of the 
effect B issues from the fact of the cause A ; or how the more 
complex and advanced a (def) b (xyz) came to be substituted 
for the cruder A B ; this is where the real work of the scientific 
intelligence lies. This is the work of invention or discovery, 
of which the imitation and repetition theorists, whom M. Berg- 
son appears to me to follow, have never succeeded in giving 
any serious account. a It is the process by which isolated 
observations are built up into a science, through an assignment 
of conditions which is always becoming more systematically 
complete on the one hand, and more relevantly precise on 
the other. Examples of such an inventive pursuit of a universal 
relation would be the rise of the science of acoustics out of the 
old observation that the pitch of musical notes has a ratio 
comparable with that of the lengths of the stretched strings 
which produce them ; or the development and limitation of 
the conception of equi-potentiality as applied to organic 
growth in recent embryology. Here we have the plain fact, 
that it is the essential character of intelligence to bind different 
to different in binding same to same ; and that it is for the 
former character that the latter is valuable, and, indeed, it is 
through the former only that the latter can exist. But the 
sameness here in question is not the sameness of M. Bergson's 
doctrine or of the formal Inductive test. We can see this from 
the nature of its aim. The universality or generality, which is 
the goal of such a process, is not the relation of the terms of an 
abstract judgment, term for term, each to each, to the terms 
of repeated cases which fall under it. It is the relation of the 
different terms of a judgment to each other, or of an organised 
system of conditions, representing a certain range of experience 
(e.g. our experience of musical sound or of embryonic growth), 
to the several connected factors or conditions, whether constant 
or varying, which it embodies and explains. Its universality 
* Cf. especially Bergson, Evolution, p. 177. 



CHAP, v] The Mainspring of Knowledge 179 

is not measured by millions of repeated instances, but by depth 
and complexity of insight into a sub-system of the world. 

(ii) The logical theory of Induction gives but scanty atten- True 
tion to this work of the universal in suggesting and pursuing ^ P* nt of 
new connections, because, for good logical reasons, that is, tion. 
because of the individuality of truth, it cannot be reduced, 
like the eliminative test, to something like a formal rule. 
Nevertheless, this work is the true spirit and mainspring of 
the inductive advance of knowledge ; and to disregard it, while 
insisting on an eliminative test, is an error analogous to 
demanding a general criterion of truth. But truth has no 
criterion except the fuller truth. And the real interest of 
logical theory in the advance of knowledge is to note how, by 
the analysis and purification of its conditions, a perception 
passes into an organised system of understanding. 

The existing connections or universals with which the mind 
is stored, act as clues among the new experiences which con- 
front us, selecting those that are kindred or complementary, 
and inventing new systematic ideas after the manner of what 
have been called proportional systems, and by means of relative 
suggestion.* That is to say, that an existing connection of 
thought, when confronted with new matter, is able to reproduce 
itself in a new form which is at once appropriate to the new 
matter, and continuous with the connection as previously 
thought. This is not a question of reproducing objects of 
thought which have previously been connected in the mind. 
It is a question of continuing some elements of such a con- 
nection into new forms of nexus, because the connection 
between the new objects has a real kinship with the connection 
between the old, although differentiated by the nature of the 
new objects themselves, and made, as a connection, something 
new, and not a repetition of what it was before, like the 

* Cp. Stout, Anal. Psych., n, p. 80. I note that Professor Stout here 
observes that relative suggestion ' would not of itself enable (the dis- 
coverer) to fix in exact detail the special variations '. In the case he is 
dealing with, calculation was necessary. In our instance from embry- 
ology, observation is necessary. But it seems to me that the question 
what calculation ? what observation ? is answered by the governing 
idea in both cases, and the relevant conclusions are selected by it, and 
it is it that they develop. 



i8o On Defective Formulation 

continuation of a varying curve from the datum of a given 
fragment of it. a Such a continuation is plainly not a repetition, 
and I think that in view of the current theory of Inductive 
generalisation, the notion of repetition as a condition of 
knowledge is not meant to apply to such an inventive con- 
struction as that of which I am speaking. 

Let us look at an example. In recent embryological dis- 
cussions, 1 ' covering the old ground of preformation and 
epigenesis, we read of experiments which primd facie suggest 
two precisely opposite causal connections. 

Half an ovum, we are told, in certain cases will produce 
only half an embryo ; but in other cases the half ovum may 
develop into a perfect embryo. The former fact suggests 
a complete preformation of the organism, each part of it 
in a fixed part of the ovum ; the latter suggests that the ovum 
has a structure of which ' every part may become anything f . 
It is of great logical interest to look at the course which these 
two alleged types of connection have imposed upon Inductive 
research. Sheer prelocalised preformation is an idea, it would 
seem, that the experiments undertaken to confirm it immedi- 
ately destroy. And if a universal nexus had no power of 
developing into novelty, this check would have been check- 
mate, and the idea would have been dead. But a universal 
can take on new shapes as demanded by new matter ; and 
though, as it seems, the ' mosaic theory * (of the independent 
preformation of parts) must be abandoned in its rigid shape, 
yet the most various experiments on the tissues of organisms 
in later stages have shown that some of these are necessary 
to the development of some organs, and that therefore some- 
thing essential to special development (perhaps ' organ-forming 
substances ') is preformed, though not necessarily pre-localised. 
The logical interest is, that the idea of preformation, defeated 
in its primary and rigid shape, has been able to act as a clue 
to new experiments in a different region, such as to confirm 
it when restated in a more subtle and flexible form. 

So with the idea that every part of the ovum has the capacity 

a Cp. Bradley's Principles of Logic, p. 28 1 ff. 

b My example is drawn from Driesch's Gifford Lectures and Jenkin- 
son's Experimental Embryology. 



CHAP, vi Inductive Invention 181 

of becoming a whole. It is easily seen that this capacity is 
limited, and is sooner or later lost ; but the idea of the kind 
of causation at work modifies itself according to the limitations 
which are discovered, and seems to suggest new lines of 
research which promise to account both for the capacity, and 
for its limitation and arrest. And the logical interest is, that 
by means of this suggestion, that of ' organ-forming sub- 
stances ' and their distribution, it appears as if the two 
universals in question, ' preformation ' and ' epigenesis ', 
might coalesce in an idea different from either, but satisfying 
the requirements of both. 

Of course I am offering no opinion upon the value of these 
investigations. I only adduce them as striking examples of the 
ordinary course of a universal in its Inductive development. 
What works throughout is a continuity through differences ; 
and its value is in the differences it connects. This is through- 
out the essence of creation and invention, which permeates 
the whole of life, and so everyday a process as the use of 
language is a striking example of it. No one ever used the 
same word twice in precisely the same sense ; in ' finding the 
right word ' there is always a creative effort. 

Now the general rules of Inductive elimination, based on 
1 Same produces same ', are simply the minimum negative 
criterion of truth, and can do by themselves no Inductive work 
at all. To rely on them alone is to reduce Induction to trial 
and error.* 

y. Thus, I do not think it is true to say that ' Same cause, The True 
same effect/ is the basal principle of Induction ; and if this is pnnci P le - 
so, there ceases to be any ground for maintaining that it is the 
essential function of the intelligence to connect the same with 
the same. The true principle I should rather state in some 

* It is a subtlety that in fact the underlying positive nature of 
negation often asserts itself, and the ' just-not a gives just-not b ' affords 
a positive extension of the nature of a and 6 respectively, which may be 
theoretically valuable, see above, p. 134. Thus in Driesch's Tubularia 
experiment, it is now alleged, the capacities of different cells are just 
not equal, as they just belong to different elements of the body. And 
this suggests that differentiation is present in a certain degree a posi- 
tive correction and extension of Driesch's conclusion. Driesch, Gifford 
Lectures, i.p. 128, and Jenkinson, Experimental Embryology, p. 292 n. 



182 On Defective Fortmilation [BOOK n 

such form as that every universal nexus tends to continue 
itself inventively in new matter. It is true that to guide this 
process we can have no general criterion, because, as we have 
said already, the only criterion of truth is the fuller truth the 
science at a more developed stage. And, therefore, there can 
be no rules for it, and it tends to drop out of logical theory. 
But none the less, it is this process to which the whole positive 
construction or invention of our inductive knowledge is due ; 
while the principle ' Same produces same ' can only eliminate 
what, having been suggested, is found on further trial not to 
produce the minimum characteristic of a real nexus. We have 
seen, indeed, a how a good experiment may sometimes reveal 
a correlation of serial variations, which is in itself a positive 
expansion of the suggested nexus. But this is only incidental 
to the strict process of Inductive Elimination. 

The neglect of the positive continuity between differences 
as the inventive factor in Induction appears to me to show 
itself in the doctrine that Inductive progress consists strictly 
in mere elimination of the unfit, b in reducing the number of 
nexuses that can claim the position of the true invariable 
law. This doctrine seems to me to subordinate the more 
important process and element of proof, because it can have 
no abstract criterion, to the less important, which is nothing 
but an abstract criterion. But if the aim of logic is not to 
give rules of practice, but to understand the nature of know- 
ledge, this ground of subordination is invalid, and it remains 
true that the mainspring of inductive advance in natural 
knowledge, as of knowledge in general, is the power of ideas 
to make experience coherent, and that therefore the demand 
of continuity between term and term or between nexus and 
nexus of a positive explanatory character attaching to the 
nexus is a fundamental requirement of inductive science, 
which is in fact merely an elementary stage of knowledge, 

Develop- a nd shares all its positive characters. 

mg the ^ jh e modification outlined above in the idea of Inductive 

a P. 175 and p. 181 footnote. 

b See Bradley's criticism of one form of Disjunctive reasoning, Princi- 
ples of Logic, p. 515, and above, p. 156. 

c But see Mr. Joseph's example from the discontinuity between 



CHAP. V] Getting the full Conditions 183 

universality or generalisation follows from this conception. 
The value of an Inductive conclusion, as of any piece of 
knowledge, lies in the amount of reality which it enables us 
to grasp, and this is very slightly tested by the number of 
cases in which the nexus is repeated in fact. And if the idea 
of identical repetition could be realised (which it cannot, for 
every so-called repetition is differenced by a new context) the 
frequency of recurrence would have no connection with 
universality at all. 

What is here advocated as the true view of Inductive 
advance has been suggested by Green's treatment of logical 
theory, a and has in some degree been embodied in the present 
work, at the point b where it dealt with true Inductive general- 
isation as consisting in the range of differing data and con- 
ditions welded into a system by any investigation, as contrasted 
with the number of recurrent cases which may fall under 
a single abstract statement ; and there is a definite logical 
necessity for making the former type of universal the goal 
to which the latter is a halfway house or less. For, as Plato c 
pointed out and as Mr. Bradley d has recently emphasised, 
statements of fact (implicit statements of nexus), but slightly 
hedged with conditions, must always be at the mercy of 
unexpressed factors for their truth or falsehood. They 
tumble backwards and forwards between ' is ' and ' is not ' ; 
Plato's famous expression, which Mr. Bradley's argument in 
the passage just referred to strictly and precisely justifies. 
The remedy, as Mr. Bradley says, is to get the conditions into 
the subject ; and this means either an explicit or an implicit 
reference to a complete system. 6 

physical cause and psychical eftect, p. 453. I believe, however, that 
more could be done than is usually done to remove this discontinuity, 
though of course there can be no resolution of the ultimate difference 
of kind. But I suggest that a consideration of the way in which 
elements of brain-excitement reinforce and modify each other, would 
have made impossible the defects, say, of Kant's ethical doctrine. An 
idea unsupported by outlets of activity could not be a powerful idea, and 
therefore not one ethically fitted to be paramount. 

ft Works, ii, pp. 288-90. b Above, pp. 164 and 169. 

c Rep., p. 479, c. d Mind, No. 72, p. 499. 

e See above, i, p. 245, for judgments which imply, though they do 
not expressly include, a relevant scientific system. 



184 On Defective Formulation [BOOK n 

The normal and natural working of intelligence, then, is 
creative and constructive, tending towards the concrete and to 
continuity within differences. The universality which is its 
mainspring is in itself a nisus to the concrete. This operative 
continuity is not represented by the linkage of the same to the 
same. Its law the law of intelligence is not the law of 
Identity, unless the law of Identity is construed in a way that 
takes it deep into the postulates of organic systematisation. tt 
And phenomena which should merely repeat themselves would 
present an absolute barrier to the central nexus of the intellect. 
Mere repetition, in fact, if it were possible, would be incom- 
patible with understanding. 

I am, therefore, still confident that the restriction of Induc- 
tive proof to the disqualification of competing hypotheses is 
a fundamental error of principle. b What really works in the 
proof is the same as what works in the discovery, the power, 
that is, of an idea to harmonise experience. No doubt the 
hypothesis which best satisfies this condition would also be the 
least likely to fall a victim to the rule of elimination. But yet, 
theoretically speaking, if accepted for this latter reason, it is 
accepted, so it seems to me, for the wrong reason, and its value 
as knowledge is not genuinely apprehended. But this point 
is only incidental to my discussion, and I will not pursue it here. 

a See below, li, pp. 210-1 1. 

II I am afraid that here I find myself in opposition to Mr. Joseph, 
whose Logic I greatly admire. And I must add that I cannot at all 
follow Mr. Lindsay's comment on the above remarks (The Philosophy 
of Bergson, p. 230), 'When we say, this is like A, and .*. its effect will 
be like B, we are applying a result of that insight [viz. the insight that 
A causes B] and we are concerned with A' only in so far as it resembles 
A. This implies that A' repeats A, for its difference with A must for 
our purpose be ignored.' Mr. Lindsay has no doubt considered the 
relation of this statement to the conception of inference as a develop- 
ment of umversals into their differences. But I really cannot under- 
stand it. Let A be a given depth of corolla-tube, seen to condition B, 
the length of an insect's proboscis. In applying this insight to A', in 
which the depth is different, how can we ignore the difference ? Or 
would Mr. Lindsay contend that no universals can be developed into 
definite new applications except in quantitative law ? But this would 
surely be an extraordinary thesis. All non-mathematical inference, 
except perhaps pure subsumption, would be abandoned. For nature 
of universals see especially Bradley's Logic 281 ff. For further instances 
Stout Anal. Psych. 1. c., or above r8o ; cp. also p. 192. 



CHAPTER VI 

CONCRETE SYSTEMATIC INFERENCE 

A PURE hypothetical judgment, the outcome of scientific 
Induction or the embodiment of abstract relations in com- 
bination, expresses a synthetic connection based upon an 
underlying real system. Analogical inference, from which 
scientific Induction was a divergence, depended rather upon 
an estimate, usually inadequate, of such real systems in their 
concrete import. Now if, as a result of a highly exhaustive 
Scientific Induction taken together with an Analogical reason- 
ing, we are able to recombine the abstract relations which the 
former has disclosed one by one, into a single totality which 
has an obvious significance, then this totality or system is the 
real determinate ground of each separate relational judg- 
ment that enters into our conception of it, and belongs, at 
the same time, to the concrete or categorical type of knowledge. 
For the ground which warrants a hypothetical judgment is in 
the last resort always a real system, and moreover the content 
of every judgment is understood l to have such Reality as it is 
capable of. 

I. Therefore, in dealing with totalities which are thus Phila 
thoroughly concrete and thoroughly rational, we are able to {J{J^. 
advance from the figure of analogy ' A and C are B, there- tion. 
fore A is probably C ', to the first figure of the Aristotelian 
syllogism, * A is B, B is C, therefore A is C.' 

In spite of all that has been written about and against the 
syllogism, I can find no more simple and natural expression 
than this for the reasoned judgment which embodies a real 
necessity. Thus applied, the syllogism is subsumptive in so 
far as it appeals to unity of relations within a concrete subject, 
but has abandoned the differentia of subsumption proper, in 
so far as the definite form taken by the result of the appeal 
depends on intelligible coherence and not on mysterious con- 

1 See Bk. I, chap, ii, on Categorical and Hypothetical Judgment. 



i86 Concrete Systematic Inference [BOOKII 

junction. It is essential to such arguments that the teleological 
or quasi- teleological unity of the subject, which in analogy 
was conjectural and obscure, should be absolute and explicit. 
It is only this absoluteness that can warrant the position of 
the middle term as subject in one premise, i.e. as a qualification 
which prescribes the precise content affirmed of it in the 
predication. It is only this explicitness that can justify by 
a specific 1 necessity the determinate relations which the unity 
of the subject imposes on the two extremes. The conditions 
thus demanded can only be fulfilled in subjects the nature of 
which is known as a definitely organised system. We saw 
indeed, in the earlier discussions of Book I, 2 that such a system 
cannot avoid presenting quantitative relations between its 
parts, in as far as its pervading unity contains within itself 
differences of a common quality. But in a true concrete 
individuality such quantitative relations are secondary, result- 
ing from the nature of the system but not exhausting it, and 
therefore the system, although definitely intelligible, cannot 
be ' constructed ' by geometrical or numerical combination. 
Such combinations may however enter into it in various degrees. 
Judgments which deal with these concrete individualities are 
at once individual and universal, and have been analysed in 
Book I as a combination of these characters. 3 

Fluid though the distinctions between types of inference 
necessarily are, it will be convenient to distinguish the im- 
portant class of inferences now before us by an unmistake- 
able differentia, at the risk of unduly limiting their province. 
This differentia is the ascription of real teleology to the content 
analysed. And by real teleology I mean the embodiment or 
operation of a conscious purpose entertained by a human 
intelligence. All other teleological inferences, such as those 
depending upon the de facto teleology (quasi-teleology) of the 
organic world are most conveniently relegated to the category 
of analogy. 

The lowest case of real teleology is closely akin to that 

1 See Bk. II, chap, i, on specific necessity of Judgments. 

* See Bk. I, chap. iii. 

See on the Corporate Judgment and the Individual Generic Judg- 
ment, above, Bk. I, chap. v. 



CHAP, vi] An individual System 187 

which was the highest case of analogy. A tool, instrument, 
or machine, of which we know the use intended by the maker, 
furnishes this lowest case of real teleology, while any object 
of the same class the use of which we could only conjecture, 
furnished the highest case of quasi-teleology or analogy. It 
was in part from the example of an instrument contrived by 
human intelligence that Plato introduced the conception of 
function or final cause into philosophy ; l and the ultimate 
meaning of ' organism ' is a system of tools or instruments. 
The term ' mechanical ' in its modern philosophical accepta- 
tion abstracts from one-half of the import of ' machine ' ; for 
though we are accustomed to think of mechanical determination 
as a resultant of any de facto combination of forces, yet we 
are not accustomed to think of a machine except as a com- 
bination of forces for a purpose consciously entertained. 

At first sight, then, we have in the tool, instrument or 
machine with known purpose, an adequate example of the 
type of knowledge before us. 'A screw that is meant to turn 
one way only must have its head cut so as to give the screw- 
driver no purchase when turning the other way ; a coffin- 
screw is a screw meant to turn one way only ; therefore a 
coffin-screw is one which has its head cut/ &c., &c. Or again : 
1 A locomotive engine meant to drag a weight a at a velocity 
b must have boiler-space x and cylinder-stroke between the 
limits z and z l ; a locomotive which is to work in the New- 
castle coal traffic must drag a weight a, &c., &c. ; therefore 
a locomotive which is to work this traffic must be constructed 
as above determined. 1 

It will strike the reader however on looking at such examples 
as these that the premises are very closely allied to hypothetical 
judgments, and are much more ' constructive ' than * sub- 
sumptive '. It is true that in the analysis of a machine the 
inference does rest on the system of the mechanical combination, 

1 Republic, end of Bk. I : 8/>eirai/y r$ till TOVTO ipyaaOivn. The 
examples alleged by Plato in this important passage are of very different 
values, and are well worth careful attention. The well-known descrip- 
tion of the function of a thing as $ &v % povy itcwy iroty rts < aptara 
leans to de facto teleology, and would not of course protect an object 
from a function alien to its nature but relative to human purpose. Such 
a function could justify no analogy. 



i88 Concrete Systematic Inference [BOOKII 

and that this system with all the details dependent on it 
can, in a machine that works well, be deduced from the intel- 
lectual purpose which the constructor proposed to himself to 
realise in that mechanical combination. So far, as reading 
the significance of the parts in the coherent whole without 
which they would lose it, the inference is subsumptive. On 
the other hand, all tools or machines are liable to initial or 
acquired mal-adaptation. Their de facto function or actual 
result may diverge from their intended function. And when 
this comes to pass, their existence as mechanical combinations 
is not thereby terminated. A clock that has a hopelessly 
variable rate may not, philosophically speaking, be rightly 
called a clock (being absolutely useless to indicate time), but 
it remains a real mechanical combination in which co-operating 
parts produce a necessary result. In other words, though 
a machine embodies a purpose, yet it only embodies it in a 
mechanical form, dependent, that is, on the right adjustment 
of a mechanical combination, and therefore on the continuance 
of that right adjustment. Therefore in every such inference 
there might be substituted for the statement of purpose 
a statement of the mechanical system in which the purpose 
is supposed to be realised ; and as the purpose is only present 
in the actual system of adjustment, and not as an intellectual 
idea, such an analysis would be in one sense adequate to 
the nature of the object analysed. Such inference might 
fairly be treated as employing merely hypothetical judgment 
and constructive combination, taking no account of any 
significant unity in the content of inference, or of any special 
relation between it and the real world. The system would, 
by such a transformation, have forfeited its individuality and 
have become a mere necessary sequence of relations upon 
relations in the abstract world of force and mass, instead of 
an actual whole in the unique structure which we call reality. 
It must be noted however that the limitation or abstraction 
which is needed to make such an account intelligible, has 
by the change supposed become merely arbitrary. Qua 
mechanical result, every cinder that dropped from the fire- 
box and every cloud of vapour blown from the funnel 
would have as good a right to be described and deduced 



CHAP, vi] Purpose in Mechanical Form 189 

from the mechanical combination which makes up the loco- 
motive, as would the capacity of the engine in the way of 
traction. 

' But the purpose may be hypothetically inserted into the 
inference, as indeed was done above. 1 We may state a purpose 
or any other content hypothetically, if we indicate that by 
intentional abstraction we are doing so. I only say that, 
apart from any mark of forcible abstraction from reality, 
a judgment or inference that deals with a system having unity 
in a purpose presupposes the reality of that system because 
its content is adequate to reality, while a judgment which 
merely draws the necessary consequences of a determinate 
combination of forces, without reference to any purpose to 
which that combination is directed, is essentially hypothetical, 
for the particular combination has no pre-eminent individuality 
or raison d'etre ; and essentially imperfect, because in the 
absence of a raison d'etre there is nothing to guide the selection 
of aspects or of consequences. In Ms sense the hypothetical, 
the arbitrary, and the merely mechanical coincide. 

In the distinction between a machine which serves a purpose, 
and a machine which does not, we have in a nut-shell the 
question of categories. Both are actual mechanical combina- 
tions producing results, and neither has in it one whit more 
life or intellect than the other. But it is perfectly clear that 
our understanding of the useful one is incomplete if by pre- 
serving our ignorance of its purpose we remain on the same 
level of apprehension with reference to it which is the highest 
we can possibly attain with reference to the other. And it 
is absurd to say that the category so implied is an accidental 
aspect and does not represent a fact. It is true however that 
this category of purpose does not exist within a mechanical 
system in its proper or intellectual form, and that therefore 
the system can be regarded by a natural abstraction as on 
a level with a purposeless combination, and may by internal 
or external changes at any moment become such. This 
hypothetical aspect of a combination of forces, in virtue of 
which it produces its resultant according to fixed necessities 
and in complete indifference to any purpose, is the purely 
4 mechanical ' relation of a machine, and if exclusively pressed 



190 Concrete Systematic Inference [BOOKII 

home destroys as we saw all possibility of regarding it as an 
individual thing having its unity in a function. 

Beginning with the mechanical contrivances of which we 
have been speaking, there extend upwards in a series which 
forms the content of philosophy the phases and embodiments 
of man's intelligence and conscious will. All of these, the 
individual will with its complement in the moral order of 
society, the product of fine art, and the religious or philo- 
sophical system, are totalities which combine an explicit 
intellectual unity with determinate interdependence of parts. 
The statement of the general character of these embodiments 
of mind may serve as an example of the argument we are 
considering. ' The mind is a unity of reciprocally determinate 
but not reciprocally exclusive parts. A feeling is an element 
in the mind ; therefore a feeling enters into a unity of recipro- 
cally determinate but not reciprocally exclusive parts/ Or 
again : ' The British Constitution is in its main features 
determined by the thoroughgoing application of ordinary law ; 
the position of the prime minister is a function of the British 
Constitution ; therefore the position of the prime minister 
is in its main features determined by the thoroughgoing ap- 
plication of the ordinary law. 1 Or, finally : ' The general will 
is expressed in the moral order of society ; the individual 
will finds its freedom in the general will ; therefore the 
individual will finds its freedom in the moral order of society.' 
When we consider the logical nature of such arguments as 
these, we notice two obvious characteristics of the content, 
and one, resulting from them, of the form. 

Logical i. In respect of their logical content they are at once 
Real 6 * 1 * ca tegorical and hypothetical, a. The systems which form the 
System, content of such reasoned judgments as these are naturally 
taken as real systems in virtue of their individuality. It is 
of course not impossible to construct a political or religious 
system on paper the consequences of which are laid down in 
hypothetical judgments and inferences from them, which in 
form might be identical with such judgments as are here 
employed. The content of such judgments has an indeter- 
minate place in reality so far as it has a meaning or objective 
reference, and depends on determinate reality so far as it 



CHAP, vi] Teleological Contents igi 

proceeds to affirm actual consequences. But the content of 
a judgment which deals with an individual system is taken 
as real in our world unless the contrary is indicated ; and even 
in hypothetical judgments that depend on the nature of the 
human mind, the real ground which would have to be made 
explicit in order ultimately to justify the consequences drawn 
is the intelligible and concrete system of that mind itself. 
Prima facie, therefore, we are dealing in these arguments 
with categorical judgments about reality, which explicitly 
postulate the real grounds that in the hypothetical judgment 
were latent. 

ft. The nexus of the inferences in question is not, as in Apodeic- 
Analogical Reasoning and in Enumerative Induction, devoid 
of strict apodeictic sequence. The systems of which we have 
been speaking, although they need not be capable of mechani- 
cal, numerical or geometrical construction, which however, 
as in the case of a machine, may play their part in the analysis 
of the concrete whole, are nevertheless invested with hypo- 
thetical or apodeictic necessity in two forms ; in the relation 
of their parts one to another within the systems themselves 
as wholes, and in their own ultimate relation as parts to the 
unique system of reality as a whole. 

Of these the former is for our logical purpose the more 
important. Within such a whole as the normal order of 
civilised society, regarded as the expression of the general 
will, it is obvious that there are parts united by necessary 
relations dependent on the nature of that whole and capable 
of being expressed in hypothetical judgments if we abstract 
from the explicit assumption of the whole itself. We may 
say, for example, ' If a right, then a duty/ The justification 
of this statement would be given by the affirmation, as a 
real ground, of the moral purpose involved in the moral order, 
which purpose exhibits itself as right or duty according to 
the attitude which the individual will may assume towards 
it. Such an inference as this does not cease to be necessary 
when its ground, in this case the moral purpose and moral 
order, is affirmed to be real. The basis of the synthetic transi- 
tion is here as everywhere the nature of an identity or universal, 
and that the universal is affirmed to be fact makes no dif- 



ig2 Concrete Systematic Inference [BOOKII 

ference to its apodeictic force. What in particular that 
apodeictic force may be, how it should come to pass that one 
thing can necessitate another, depends, as I have said before, 
on the ultimate fact of the nature of knowledge. What we 
have more particularly to observe at this point is the coarseness 
of the illusion that systematic necessity can only exist in 
spatial and numerical perception. Given the relation of man's 
intelligent will to an actual moral order, the relation of right 
and duty is as plain a consequence as, given the nature of 
space, the equality of vertical angles. And apart from a given 
reality, there is in either case nothing, from which nothing 
can follow. 

Hence we arrive at the second aspect in which individual 
systems, though real, are nevertheless hypothetical. They 
are each and all of them, for us, hypothetical upon the whole 
given leality within which they exist. When we speak of a 
thing as real, we imply that it is complete and self -existent ; 
for if it is not, its reality includes a condition beyond the 
content which we have included in the thing, and it therefore, 
as we have formulated it, not including the conditions essential 
to its own reality, is falsely asserted to be real. 

Here we have the aspect of relativity which prevails 
throughout our knowledge, which is increasingly overcome by 
the work of intelligence in as far as it connects the actual 
and intellectual world into an organised whole, but is never 
thoroughly done away. 
Logical ii. As regards the form of these inferences, it follows from 
what has been said that the only value of the syllogistic 
1 arrangement is to exhibit the structure of the reasoned judg- 
ment, which itself contains or displays the articulated universal. 
No question arises as to which premise we know first, and 
so which supports the other. The prior or previous phase 
of the inference is not the proof of detached premises, but 
the entire thought in a less precisely articulated form. If 
we are urged to say whether we know the major, the minor 
or the conclusion first, the only true answer is that, in their 
full import, we know them all simultaneously. As detached 
fragments of experience we may know any one of them first. 
And as each element of the universal when rightly under- 



CHAP, vi] A Real Necessity 193 

stood involves the others in their full determinateness, there 
can be no real difference in kind of import between major 
and minor premises, and no reason for preferring one order 
of the terms to another. The order will in fact be subjec- 
tive, depending upon the qualification of reality which we 
take as starting-point, whether in time if our inference has 
the accidental aspect of a progress in time or because of 
its individual nature. The real purpose is the dominant 
essence of the universal, but the real purpose may be taken 
as conveyed by the general idea of the system in question 
as a whole, represented by its name, or as involved in the 
analytic scheme of its parts, or as concentrated into some 
special application by which some one part does the work 
of the whole. And thus any one of these elements of the 
universal may stand as the middle term in reasoning, i. e. as 
the ground or universal par excellence. Hence there is no 
use in considering the syllogistic rules at the point we have 
now reached. They belong to calculative and in some degree 
to analogical argument ; but the postulate on which they 
rest, of the absence of reciprocal determination between the 
elements of inference, does not hold good of a coherent 
system when thoroughly known. We have thus arrived at 
a goal analogous to that attained by the theories of Quanti- 
fication and of Equation in judgment, at a perfect reciprocal 
identity between the elements of the reasoned judgment, so 
that any one of the terms may occupy any place in the argu- 
ment. But we have attained it, as we hope, without sacri- 
ficing difference to identity, and thereby destroying the identity 
itself. The equational form, though it symbolises correctly 
certain results of the reasoned judgment (the conjunctions 
which this judgment in fact involves), yet crushes into shape- 
lessness its true living texture, and, as a simple sign of the 
deformation, forbids all growth and reconstruction within the 
inference itself, which reconstruction nevertheless, as we have 
seen and shall further see, cannot be avoided. 

As a particular case of the inapplicability of the syllo- 
gistic rules to the inferences now before us, it may be men- 
tioned that we have here nothing to do with inference from 
negative premises. We must take the negative form to have 

1337-2 O 



194 Concrete Systematic Inference [BOOKII 

done its work and obtained positive significance, in the process 

which we have watched of constituting such a system as that 

which we are now considering. We are now considering these 

systems as real grounds, and so with reference to what falls 

within them, and not with reference to what falls outside 

them. For to what falls outside the system itself, unless with 

reference to a further system including that ' outside ', the 

system can ex hypothesi only be related in the way of bare 

negation that has no import and is no judgment. In analysing 

the completion of a type of knowledge it is vain to raise a 

question which would take us back to the beginning of the 

course we have traversed. But as a determining agency within 

a real system, and as invested by that function with positive 

import, negation reappears in disjunctive reasoning. 

Disjunc- 2. The nature of disjunction and its imperfect forms have 

Disiu]Qu> k een discussed under the head of the disjunctive judgment, 

tive Rea- and it only remains here to recapitulate the inferential nature 

sonmg, Q ^ s ^ e most com pi e te and explicit form of the universal. 

Inference under a disjunction is usually represented thus : 
' A is either B or C, A is not B /. A is C ; ' or, ' A is B /. A is 
not C.' Yet such an inference has no meaning except in the 
case of a disjunction of ignorance or a disjunction referred to 
a point of time. The categorical minor premise adds nothing 
whatever in the way of content to the disjunctive major 
premise. It only has meaning as resolving a doubt or as 
affirming one member of an alternative to be true in a given 
point of time. This defect could not be removed by specifying 
in the minor the ground on which that one member of the 
alternative is affirmed, for this ground cannot really fall out- 
side the content of the disjunction and its specification can 
only throw a doubt on the categorical nature (in the narrower 
sense) of the minor premise itself. ' The signal is either 
danger or safety ; it is red and so danger .*. not safety/ Ob- 
viously here, if we can conclude from ' red ' to ' danger ' in 
the minor premise, this relation must fall within the knowledge 
which constitutes the major ; and moreover, by introducing 
a specific ground of assertion it exposes the minor to a charge 
of being hypothetical. 
We saw in treating of the disjunctive judgment that the 



CHAP, vii No Negative Inference 195 

disjunction of ignorance and the disjunction referred to time 
are not cases fundamentally distinct from the true disjunction 
of knowledge, being justified, in as far as they are justified, 
by the same type of knowledge which forms the basis and 
content of disjunction proper. Only, being limited by an 
accidental condition (the speaker's knowledge, or an arbitrary 
point of time), they lend themselves to an appearance of 
progressive inference through supplementation by a perceptive 
or narrative judgment, which applies them under a limiting 
condition without expressing that condition. In the true dis- 
junction, which expresses the organisation of a system as 
such, the reference to an arbitrary condition falls away, and 
although the judgment is capable of inferential application 
under specified conditions, whether of time or of other kinds, 
yet this application is not essential to its import, and is 
not demanded by its form. 

We are thus driven to the paradoxical conclusion that the 
essence of disjunctive argument is included within the dis- 
junctive ' major premise ' ; in other words, that this judgment 
is in fact not a mere premise bat at once a categorical judg- 
ment and a complete systematic inference, in which the 
content of a real system, thoroughly understood, is developed 
in its reciprocal positive and negative bearings. The universal, 
or pervading identity, is developed in it as a system of #'s 
and ' just not a's V such that in virtue of every ' not a ' the 
system is positively determined to a certain definite a, and 
in virtue of every a the system is negatively determined to 
a certain definite not-fl (which is b). Our ideal of inferential 
knowledge does not go beyond an individual system of this 
kind, of which every part is mediated in its turn by all the other 
parts and assigned by them its appropriate place in the whole, 
whose pervading nature is present in every part and prescribes 
the arrangement and content of all. Such a system contains 
its own applications, for the material conditions under which 
it developes its nature are given within it. The mere realisa- 
tion of one alternative member as fact or as a point in time, 
e. g. in present perception, has in relation to such disjunc- 
tive knowledge the aspect of a case brought under it by an 
1 See account of Scientific Induction, chap, iv, above. 
O2 



196 Concrete Systematic Inference [BOOKII 

unknown condition, and so implies a defect in the disjunctive 
knowledge itself. For if there is no such defect, then per- 
ception or testimony can add nothing to the necessary reality 
embodied in the disjunction. A watch is either going or not 
going ; and I do not need observation or testimony to tell me 
that at any time when the mainspring is broken it is not going. 
' But your disjunctive knowledge will not tell you beforehand 
or apart from observation whether the mainspring is broken/ 
I reply, ' Oh yes it will, up to the limits to which it extends.' 
It will tell me the signs of breaking, the risks of breaking, 
the limit of breaking-strain ; and therefore, supposing my 
knowledge of the world were disjunctively complete, it would 
tell me exactly when and how often the mainspring has been 
or will be broken. That it does not practically tell me this is 
not owing to the defectiveness of disjunctive knowledge but 
to my not possessing it. Therefore, as in all the affairs of life, 
I have to supplement scientific knowledge from testimony 
and unorganised observation, i. e. observation of what occurs 
under conditions not precisely known. But this observation, 
qua unorganised, adds nothing to knowledge, though in fact 
every content that is distinctly observed has necessarily some 
organisation, and leaves the disjunctive judgment a little 
richer than before. But as mere abstract position or affirmation 
of a case fully known before, it adds in theory no element 
whatever to our disjunctive knowledge of a real system. 

Therefore the disjunctive judgment must be taken to 
correspond not to the major premise of the syllogism, but 
to the whole syllogism. The syllogism must tell us, for 
instance, that the human will, being an activity of the human 
intelligence, sets its purposes before it in the form of definite 
ideas. The disjunction would in this case perhaps tell us that 
the human animal asserts himself practically either through 
the intelligence as will or through the sensuous instincts as 
appetite ; or again, that he asserts himself through the in- 
telligence either practically as will or theoretically as know- 
ledge. Here we obviously have the whole content of the 
syllogistic ' reasoned judgment ' but in a more elaborate and 
more thoroughly articulate form. It is clear that the whole 
conclusion, in so far as it is a conclusion that grasps scientific 



CHAP, vi] Conjunction and Disjunction 197 

truth as the definition of a real system, falls within this 
disjunctive judgment. The application of it in a special his- 
torical case can be of no importance, unless the new example 
suggests new matter for the definition of the term involved ; 
in which case the content of the example must be taken up 
into the disjunctive judgment. 

I need hardly remark that it need not be an objection 
against a disjunction of this class that the determinations of 
the system do not exclude one another in time. The essential 
point is to know how the system in question, e.g. the mind, is 
organised into parts which as such exclude one another. I am 
not prepared or concerned to deny that will and appetite may 
coexist in a mixed state of mind, or even that appetite may be 
included in will ; but in as far as the mind merely has appetite, 
it does not will, and in as far as the mind distinctly wills, it 
has not mere appetite. The disjunction would only be false 
if appetite and will were essentially identical parts of the 
mental system, and not, so far as the mind enters wholly into 
either ; reciprocally exclusive. 1 

' Then mere differents are disjunctively opposed ? ' Yes, 
if the conditions are precisely assigned under which the real 
subject becomes capable of the one and incapable of the other. 
A ' conjunction ' or conjunctive judgment about a single sub- 
ject differs from a disjunction merely by the non-assignment 
of the precise relations under which the various determina- 
tions attach. Thus it is, as Plato showed, that knowledge 
can solve the apparent contradictions of the perceptive 
judgment. ' A is both great and small.' Knowledge dis- 
tinguishes cases and explains, ' A is compared either with x 
and then is great or with y and then is small/ 2 

The inferential principle of Disjunction is nothing more 
than the principle of all inference in its most explicit form. 
Every matter capable of being known consists in a common 
nature including within it and constituted by parts or differ- 
ences, which are related to one another at first sight negatively 

1 Appetite, when it enters into will, must surrender its character as 
mere appetite, not merely by the addition of something else, but by 
taking on a new character in itself. 

3 See Plato, Republic, p. 524. 



198 Concrete Systematic Inference [BOOKII 

qua excluding one another, but further, through this very 
negation, are related positively because by their negative 
relation they positively determine one another. Every such 
matter when explicitly stated in articulate form, is known 
as a disjunctive judgment. And this is the nature of the 
ultimate judgment by which the individual consciousness 
sustains its real world. The simplest cases of these reasoned 
judgments are to be found in the spatial perception, in which 
the determining differences take the shape of parts external 
to each other and so negatively related, but nevertheless by 
their position determining one another, and so through their 
negative relation positively related. But the most perfect 
cases are those intellectual creations that are the objects of 
philosophical science, in which the whole system not merely 
appears by its common nature in parts which remain external 
to each other, but tends to throw itself in its entirety into 
each of these differences, passing by an organic necessity from 
one difference to another. Here, in short, the differences are 
not merely parts which remain outside one another, not 
merely phases which succeed one another, but moments which 
succeed one another so that the earlier are retained in the 
later through a progressive development, and yet the distinc- 
tive character of each moment is not weakened. Such, for 
example, is the relation of the conceptions which by their 
development constitute the history of philosophy. 

It is usual to treat of classification as one special form, 
among others, of logical thought. I am unable to regard it in 
this light. It appears to me to be merely an external conse- 
quence, reappearing in every kind of universal, of the relation 
between universal and differences. The nearest approach 
to pure classification is therefore to be found in superficial 
arrangements destined merely to facilitate reference, in the 
dictionary, the index, the Linnaean system. After this come 
the natural or morphological systems of botany and zoology, 
in which the universal appears though not explicitly, yet 
effectively, through analogy. While in mathematical concep- 
tions as in the true systematicdisjunction we have classification 
relegated to its proper place, as a corollary of the com- 
prehensive application of explanatory theory. 



CHAP, vi] Will and Purpose 199 

3. By introducing into logic the real or conscious teleology The judg- 
of the human intelligence, we have rendered unavoidable 
some consideration of the judgment of value, which rests upon 
the correspondence of a real system and the purpose for which 
it exists. This judgment obviously presupposes two condi- 
tions ; i. our knowledge of the purpose for which a system 
exists, and ii. our knowledge of the degree in which the system 
fulfils that purpose. 

i. The former condition demands a real teleology ; a that Real 
is, a conscious purpose for which the system is intentionally 
recognised or maintained by the human will. We cannot 
here enter upon the questions, belonging to ethical science, 
which arise with reference to the objective justification of 
man's recognition of a purpose in the non-intellectual world. 
Indeed we cannot avoid extending such questions in some 
degree to the world of man's own volition by admitting that 
e.g. the systems of law and government which appear prima 
facie to be made and maintained by man with a view to a 
purpose which he consciously sets before him, have nevertheless 
an element of growth or development which goes beyond the 
knowledge or intention of any single individuals at any time 
concerned in framing them. The works of mind, in short, 
are something more, as the works of nature are something 
less, than the intentional achievements of any individual will, 
and therefore our estimate of their value is in many respects 
analogous to that recognition of a purpose which we apply so 
fallibly to natural objects. We may however for we must 
assume on the whole that the persistent purposes of mankind 
are represented within our own intelligence, and that therefore 
in our estimate of law and morality, of art and religion, of 
political and social institutions, there is at any rate some firm 
foundation of real teleology. 

ii. The second condition demands mediation. We have to Media- 
ascertain whether a whole fulfils its purpose by comparing the tlon - 

a See above, p. 99 note, on the defect of the conception of teleology, with 
the removal of which, however, it ceases to be teleology. The standard 
of value bhould rather be expressed as Individuality, and the condition, 
which many would insist on, that value involves a feeling mind, is 
satisfied by the consideration that a feeling mind is necessary to indi- 
viduality. 



Concrete Systematic Inference 

operation of its mechanism with the idea which is intended 
to be its essence. This mediation was involved in the philo- 
sophical syllogism, in so far as the purpose of the whole was 
taken to be its essence or unity. But after analysing, in the 
disjunction, the matter of the universal into a system of 
reciprocally determined parts and moments, we have forced 
upon us the question whether the totality of these parts or 
moments corresponds in detail to the purpose with which we 
credit it. Such correspondence is what we understand by good- 
ness or value. We may say for instance of a given social system 
that under it the people are either aristocrats who are not the 
best and do not rule, or a proletariate who pay no honour to 
those above them and who cannot be ruled. And this contra- 
diction between the effect of the system as realised in its parts, 
and its recognised purpose, entitles us to say that it is a bad 
system ; in the form ' a being either not x or f not z is not A.' 
Extra-logical as this judgment of value may seem to be, 
it is really implied in the constitution of knowledge from the 
point at which quasi-teleology begins, and with it the con- 
ception of ' a thing ' takes its rise. a I shall have to return to 
this subject in the last chapter when I come to speak of the 
ultimate nature of dialectical or logical necessity to which 
the term aesthetic has sometimes been applied. 

The main 4. Inference was first defined on p. i as the ' mediate 

of in- reference of an ideal content to Reality ', and further explained 

ference. on p. 3 as ' the indirect reference to reality of differences within 

a universal, by means of the exhibition of this universal in 

differences directly referred to reality '. And we have gone 

throughout on the principle that the species of inference are 

determined by the species of universal which occur in the 

realm of knowledge. Having attempted to analyse these 

species, and to point out their affinities and their distinctions, 

we have not much more to say about the nature of inference. 

But it may be useful by way of recapitulation to read off 
from the somewhat tedious treatment to which we have 
subjected the phases of inference a few answers to the vexed 
questions which concern it. 

a See note on previous page. If we replace the conception of teleo- 
logy by that of individuality, the judgment of value will appear, as it 
ought, inherently logical, in the sense of Plato's <ta}0cia and over/a. 



CHAP, vi] No schedules of reasoning 201 

i. Is the syllogism a complete antecedent scheme, pre- 
scribing the shape and outcome of every possible inference ? 
ii. Is there any fundamental set of conditions to which all 
Inference must conform, and further, iii. what relation does 
the syllogism bear to such a set of conditions ? 

i. There is no such thing as an antecedent scheme pre- No ante- 
scribing, so to speak, a set of schedules in one or other of scheme of 
which every argument can be written out merely by filling Inference, 
up the blanks. The form of knowledge is an active and 
constructive principle, to the workings of which no abstract 
type antecedently prescribed can be adequate. Not merely 
is Logic incapable of passing judgment on actual truth, but 
it is incapable of prescribing beforehand the type of relations 
which an inferential totality may impose upon its parts. 
Granting that where we are dealingwith imperfect subsumption, 
with the relations of attributes conjoined in individual subjects 
according to unknown grounds, the syllogism is able to antici- 
pate the very indefinite form of combination that can result, 
yet we should not dream of claiming for it this capacity of 
prediction in the region of calculation, of mechanical or 
geometrical construction, or of philosophical subsumption. It 
is true that as regards the last-named process we found a 
type of reasoning which appeared to represent it adequately 
in the syllogism in Barbara. But the reader must have 
observed in the examples which were given, if judged by the 
standard of formal logic, that irritating inaccuracy of form 
which is known to teachers in the first attempts of pupils to 
construct a precise syllogism. In our examples and in their 
efforts this inaccuracy is due to the same cause ; to the difficulty 
of moulding the vital and constructive action of thought into 
shapes prescribed by an artificial scheme, which does not 
precisely correspond to any single type of intellectual action. 
The violent transformations by which formal logic attains 
this end are not perhaps an undesirable scholastic exercise ; 
for they unquestionably drag into light, though only as a 
meagre and skeleton framework, a certain ultimate community 
of type in all inferential operations. In so far as the difficulties 
of pupils arise from inability to transform or translate their 
intellectual operations at all, any exercise which demands such 



2O2 Concrete Systematic Inference [BOOKII 

transformation is perhaps better than none. But in the 
analysis of operations that constitute highly determinate 
individual totalities the difficulty of conforming absolutely to 
the scheme of the traditional syllogism rises into something 
like impossibility, because the parts within such a totality 
do not lie side by side like units in a ' class ', but have peculiar 
and distinct relations, imposed, each upon each, by their 
individual place within the whole. 

Thus we cannot preserve, or can only by a tour de force 
succeed in preserving, the identical correlations of terms 
demanded by the rules of formal logic. In our example ' the 
mind is a unity of determinate and not exclusive parts ' ; 
we could not go on to affirm ' a feeling is the mind ', according 
to the good old type ' Socrates is a man ', and so we could not 
conclude that ' a feeling is a unity ', &c. But we were obliged 
to say either that a feeling is a reaction of the mind, or that 
a feeling is an element in and is a part of the mind, and could 
only conclude that a feeling is a factor or element in such a 
unity. And the other examples given in the same context, 
which preserve more appearance of correct formulation, are 
in reality no less charged with individual and diverse relations. 
The mere fact that the syllogism naturally leads on to tne 
complete disjunctive judgment is the most striking proof 
of this. I may say at this point that to treat l the dis- 
junctive judgment in systematic Logic as a form of thought 
needing completion by Induction, Analogy and Subsump- 
tive Syllogism, seems to me to be a hopelessly erratic 
selection of phases out of the progress of the individual 
mind. This progress includes no doubt even in very early 
stages those imperfect shapes of disjunction which I have 
called the disjunctions of ignorance ; and these disjunc- 
tions are expanded into systematic knowledge by the pro- 
gress of determining thought in its various forms. But 
to make the complete disjunction prior to the imperfect 
forms of syllogism involves a retrogression from complete 
systematic knowledge of a real ground to the knowledge of 
the operation of this ground in individual cases and in 
a latent form. 

1 As Lotze does, Logik, sect. 97 ff . 



CHAP, vi] Terms and Data 203 

ii. If we ask the more reasonable question, not whether Condition 
a form can be laid down beforehand for every possible in- f Infer ~ 
ference such that the inference can be drawn by merely 
putting terms into the blank spaces of one or another of certain 
prescribed schedules, but whether in the common nature of 
thought a system of conditions can be discovered which in 
one way or another is conformed to by every act of inference, 
on this head I think that an affirmative answer may be 
gathered from our previous discussions. 

(a) Inference must have three terms and no more. 

The explanations given in chap, i of the present Book 
appear to me to justify this assertion. They consist in a 
sharp distinction between terms and data the number of 
data being accidental, while the number of terms or moments 
depends on the essential nature of the universal ; and in the 
restriction of Inference proper to mediate Inference. We 
admit however that the function of thought from elementary 
reproduction upwards is essentially one, and we more especially 
contend that every judgment, in so far as it is explicitly 
synthetic, that is to say in so far as it affirms one definite 
content to be a consequence of another definite content, is an 
activity only separated from Inference by the degree of 
distinctness with which its parts are analysed. Every such 
judgment, and therefore ultimately every judgment, can by 
further reflection be expressed as a three-term inference, and 
this is especially the case with what we called the true Imme- 
diate Inferences, Comparison, Abstraction, and the rest. 

(6) An explicit Inference is a conclusion from two premises 
and no more, which assert relations between differences qua 
belonging to a single universal. Assuming therefore that the 
propositions which express the premises are not to be disguised 
purposely or through negligence, but are bona fide to express 
the judgments employed in reasoning, the two premises must 
have an identical term in common. And 

(c) that this identical term must be universal follows neces- 
sarily from the theory of inference which has been developed, 
and follows also from the fact that this one term is able to 
stand in both premises. For a universal is that which without 
prejudice to its identity persists through or contains in itself 



204 Concrete Systematic Inference [BOOKII 

different relations. The simplest example may be found in 
what we termed the ' Inductive ' Syllogism, in which, if we 
take the middle term as the meaning of a proper name, we 
argue that Socrates is both good and a Greek, therefore a 
Greek may be good. Here Socrates, although ex hypothesi an 
individual, is universal at least in virtue of the double relation 
to good and Greek i.e. of the synthesis, in the ' middle 
term ', of these differences. The universal or identity, however, 
need not, as in this case, be a ' subject ', although it will be 
found ultimately to imply a subject. The identical point in 
space, in which two lines meet in a spatial construction, is 
the synthesis of two relations in space, but is not, only implies, 
space itself as a whole containing these relations. 

And (d) I do not see how we can escape from saying that 
not only one premise, but both premises must be universal. The 
only apparent exception would be the case in which one 
premise is negative ; about which it might be urged that the 
common term does not stand in two relations, but in one and 
none, i. e. in one only. If this were so, however, the negative 
premise would be a bare denial, would be no judgment, and 
could give rise to no conclusion. I do not see how a conclu- 
sion can arise without a synthesis of two positive relations. 

If then (e) negation means bare denial, it results that there 
can be no negative premise. But as bare denial is not a case 
of genuine judgment we must interpret negation to mean 
significant denial only, and in this sense we must lay it down 
that both premises may be negative. 1 

Relation iii. If now, in order to define our attitude towards the con- 
eLnfto troverted questions which centre in the doctrine of syllogism, 
these we enquire ; In what relation does syllogism stand to the type 
ticns!" * inference determined by the conditions just enumerated ? 
we shall obtain the following results. 

We must distinguish the traditional syllogism with its 

apparatus of rules and its distinctions of quality and quantity 

from the syllogism as treated in the present work. 

The tra- a. The traditional syllogism is a hybrid between what we 

SyUc a have called analogical inference and what we have called 

gism. inference or induction by complete enumeration. It woiild 

1 See chap, iv, above. 



CHAP, vi] The Syllogism as a hybrid 205 

therefore (a) exclude many forms of inference which perfectly 
conform to the above conditions, and also some which have been 
included in our account of the syllogism. Not only would it 
exclude ' calculation ' and what has been called * construction ' 
in the mechanical or geometrical sense ; but it would find no 
place for Induction or Analogy or even for philosophical sub- 
sumption as above described. Induction would be excluded 
by the conjunctive premise consisting in a number of indivi- 
dual judgments ; Analogy by the material weight and stress 
thrown upon the definition of the predicate, which the 
ordinary half-numerical syllogism has no power of indicating ; 
and philosophical subsumption by the genesis within it of 
new relations, not prescribed by any major premise. The 
traditional syllogism, in short, fails to recognise the synthetic 
activity of thought. 

(b) The form of universality relied on by the traditional 
syllogism is vicious 9 except for purposes of calculation, which 
it does not attempt. It is true that its express form of totality 
' All A are B ' does not really cover what we understand to 
be its import ; but its rules and transformations are derived 
from this express form, and exclude such vital and genuine 
processes as for example modal conversion. The fact that we 
interpret the numerical totality into true synthetic connection 
only shows that the inadequacy of this form of universal is 
actually recognised. 

(c) There is no justification for the traditional pre-eminence 
assigned to one premise as the l major ' ; a pre-eminence which 
depends on the vicious quantitative form of the universal, 
and carries with it the petitio principii which has been irre- 
sistibly demonstrated to be present in the traditional syllogism. 

(d) There is no justification for the distinction between uni- 
versal and particular premises, except in as far as by a reserva- 
tion depending on unknown conditions one premise may 
become merely probable. 

(e) The true ' reduction ' or transformation of arguments in 
figs. 2 and 3 into fig. i can only be effected by a material trans- 
formation of their content into the content demanded by fig. I 
through the processes of analogy and scientific induction. Reduc- 
tion without transformation of content is a grammatical tour 



2o6 Concrete Systematic Inference [BOOKII 

de force which illustrates no principle except that a simple 
inference can be awkwardly expressed. 

The syl- ft. When we come however to make the comparison between 

reasoned 8 our g enera l conditions of inference and the syllogism as 

judgment, described in the present work, our results are somewhat 

different. Syllogism as we have described it is a subsumptive 

reasoned judgment depending upon the unity of differences 

within an individual subject, and making the intelligible 

ground of this unity explicit in various degrees, according 

to which the unity displays itself as a conjunction or as 

a coherence. 

The syllogism as thus understood is (a) co-extensive with 
subsumption, and exclusive only of calculation and construction. 
The differences between the syllogistic figures in the sense in 
which we have retained them depend on the degree in which 
the Reality that stands as subject to the reasoned judgment 
is already qualified by antecedent judgment as a concrete unity 
or individual system. In the Inductive Syllogism the Subject 
is as nearly as possible a particular, a mere name or designative 
reference ; in the Analogical Syllogism it is a particular as 
known under a universal characteristic, an individual ; in the 
Syllogism of Philosophical Subsumption it is an individual 
thoroughly known as a universal in its particular differences, 
and so a concrete system. 

(b) The difference between the syllogism thus understood, and 
the abstract combinations of arithmetical or geometrical reasoning 9 
lies merely in the correlative imperfections of the two pro- 
cesses. The syllogism begins with the perception of unanalysed 
individual unity, which it is unable to bring to bear as a deter- 
minate relation upon the attributes conjoined within it, and 
thus rests in the mere fact of their conjunction. Calculation 
and construction begin with the perception of a specific 
determinate unity by which relations affect and generate each 
other, without making clear at the outset within what concrete 
system, and subject to what ultimate conditions, these deter- 
minate combinations (e.g. in space) are effected. The two sets 
of Inferences ultimately involve the same elements. 

And therefore (c) if the determinate ground is made clear 
within a subsumption, or the individual subject is made clear 



CHAP, vij Syllogism and Calculation 207 

which includes a combination of relations, the two types of 
inference fall theoretically together, and either may be classed 
as the perfect form of the other. But, as we have seen, this 
identification would remain formal and not wholly bona fide, 
because of the comparatively indifferent and unconstrgining 
character of the abstract totalities within which geometrical 
or arithmetical reasoning is carried on. It is true, on the other 
hand, that the syllogism as we have treated it has no repug- 
nance to the genesis of constructive relations within the unity 
that is expressed in the inference. 

Here we see the true interdependence of the classificatory 
ideal of knowledge with the ideal which takes the shape of 
explanatory theory. The former is teleological, categorical, 
and concrete ; the latter is mechanical, hypothetical, and 
abstract. It is only by a combination of the two which are 
not ultimately separable that a real and coherent world can 
sustain itself in the judgment which is knowledge. 



CHAPTER VII 

THE RELATION OF KNOWLEDGE TO ITS POSTULATES 

The for- i. IT is usual to devote some discussion in a logical treatise 
tulates S of t the principles or axioms on which the possibility of know- 
know- ledge is supposed to rest. Adhering as I do to the conviction 
ledge. ^j^ t *jj ie fr^fa j s th e whole ', I cannot be expected to attempt 
a justification of any abstract principles as points of attach- 
ment antecedently furnished upon which the truth of know- 
ledge could be supposed to depend. But as postulates, as 
general characteristics of known Reality, which it is convenient 
to state in an abstract form in any systematic treatment of 
knowledge, because they are inwoven in the whole texture 
of the real world, some of these axioms call for comment 
both on their actual import and on their alleged necessity. 

It is convenient to distinguish the abstract principles or 
postulates which are thus found to be involved in the nature of 
knowledge, as I. Formal, 2. Material Postulates. This distinc- 
tion must not be understood to mean that some are drawn 
from the nature of intelligence exclusively, while others are 
merely drawn from the content furnished by perceptive ex- 
perience. It would be more correct to say that those which we 
call formal are drawn from the character of experience merely 
as experience, existing no doubt solely for intelligence, but for 
that very reason not separable in its source or nature from 
any other source or nature which could be described as intelli- 
gence pure and simple. Whereas those which we call material 
are drawn from the actual significance which we ascribe to 
the content of experience as developed in a concrete system, 
and being ultimately coincident with the conclusions of 
philosophy and of science must necessarily vary with the 
progress of these constructions. And it is obvious that the 
formal principles are in fact continuous with and grow into 
the material principles, the two kinds of axioms bearing at 
bottom the same relation to one another that exists between 



CHAP, vii] Axioms as Postulates 209 

the judgment that there is a system, and the judgment that 
the system is of such and such a nature. The former, of course, 
implies the rudiments of the latter, as the latter includes the 
import of the former. Accordingly the distinction between 
the two classes of principles will correspond to the distinction 
between abstract and concrete science ; 1 between explanatory 
theory and classification ; between the law of sufficient reason 
and the conception of a teleological whole. 

I call these principles by the name of Postulates, because 
when presented to us as abstract reflective ideas they operate 
as guides to knowledge 2 which lead to their own subsequent 
substantiation in a concrete form. As reflective conceptions, 
then, they are postulates, i.e. principles which we use because 
we need them. But they only come to be reflective ideas 
because on analysis of experience they are found to be active 
factors in it from the first, factors which acquire their content 
pari passu with experience itself, of which they merely express 
the animating principle of growth. They cannot therefore be 
taken in a definite form as hypotheses or axioms antecedent 
to experience. Experience may be said to begin with the 
certainty that ' there is somewhat ' ; and the postulates of 
knowledge do but express in abstract form the progressive 
definition of this ' somewhat '. 

Among formal postulates of knowledge it will be sufficient 
very briefly to examine the four most notable ; the Law of 
Identity, the Law of Contradiction, the Law of Excluded 
Middle, and the Law of Sufficient Reason. As a sub-form 
of the latter the Law of Causation demands no separate 
treatment. 

Each of these laws may be interpreted in more ways than 
one, according to the degree in which we may acquiesce in its 
mere abstract form, or attempt to penetrate its further mean- 
ing. But at any rate with a view to anything like a separation 
between intelligence and experience, as such a separation is 

1 This is in strictness almost equivalent to the distinction between 
physical science and philosophy. But of course evolutionary science 
with the conceptions of ' higher ' and ' lower ' does not fall within 
physical science as thus denned. 

a See the account of reflective ideas as guides to knowledge in com- 
parison, &c., ii, chap. i. 

1337-2 P 



2io Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

purely fictitious, there is nothing to be gained by cutting 

down the content of these principles to a minimum, in the hope 

of restricting their reference to thought as opposed to things. 

The Law i. The Law of Identity must be taken to signify at least 

tity den " ^at ^ * s P oss ikle t make judgments that have a meaning 

and are true. 

Tauto- a. In the bare form ' A is A ', however, a form which is 
logy " not diawn directly from Aristotle or from Plato, the law does 
not prima facie possess this significance, and therefore indeed 
not any. If it means that A is A and no more, or is mere 
A, then it is aggressively untrue, for it denies the synthesis 
of differences which alone can make a judgment. If, again, 
the law is taken as a mere symbol of the pervading unity of 
the logical subject, and not as intended to exclude all differ- 
ences from entering into it, then it is an inadequate symbol, 
erring by omission though not by exclusion. In an absolute 
tautology which excludes or omits difference, identity itself 
disappears and the judgment vanishes with it. 1 

Symbol Therefore, /3. we can only assign a meaning to the law 
cnrte 11 " ' A is A ' if we take the repeated A to be not a specification 
Identity, of the identical content, but an abstract symbol of its identity. 
The law will then mean that, in spite of or in virtue of the 
differences expressed in a judgment, the content of judgment 
is a real identity, that is to say, has a pervading unity. It says 
that there is such a thing as identity in difference, or in other 
words, there is such a thing as genuine affirmation synthesis 
of differences referred to reality which yet is true, that is 
to say, does not interfere with (but in fact is indispensable to) 
identity, 

Unity of And, y. we are only expanding what is implied in the allega- 
Reahty. tion of real i dent i ty if we say that the i aw ' A is A ' ultimately 

asserts the thorough-going unity of Reality. A significant 
judgment, symbolised by ' A is A ', lays down for itself no 
reservation beyond that which its own content may dictate, 

1 It is desirable to remark upon this peculiarity of the formal ' Laws of 
Thought ' as represented in symbolic letters, because the error to which 
it tends is characteristic of false doctrines of identity and difference. 
Locke defines Identity by saying, ' When the ideas vary not at all/ 
and the notion of negation in formal logic is also that of ' mere ' or ' bare ' 
negation. Cf. Euler's circles. 



CHAP, vii] Contradiction and Excluded Middle 211 

and claims therefore to be true without any reserve. Its 
simple affirmation leaves no room for any discontinuity in the 
real world, such that on one side of it the judgment may be 
true, and on the other fake. If there were such a discontinuity, 
the judgment, such is the claim of the categorical affirmation 
and all affirmation qua affirmation is at least categorical 
would have taken note of it within its content, and would in 
that respect affirm under a reservation. But once true, always 
true* All reservations necessary to truth are included in the 
content. Reality, therefore, is one throughout. Relation to 
time, for example, is not involved in the fact of affirmation, 
but only, if at all, in conditions belonging to the content 
affirmed which depend upon facts in time. 1 Affirmation as 
such is unconditional, that is to say, is not limited by con- 
ditions outside its own content, and so if true, is true without 
reserve. There is not one Reality of which it is true and 
another of which it is false. Reality is what it is, and if it 
turns out not to be what we thought, then we thought amiss, 
i.e. judged falsely. 

ii. The Law of Contradiction is but the complement of the Law oi 
Law of Identity. It supplies something without which t^e Law 
of Identity is not logically complete nor distinctly intelligible. 
But yet, by the fact of conferring distinctness, it is an addition. 

This Law also, a. in its barest statement ' A is not both A Truibm or 
and not-A ', if understood to deny that A can be B, is either a se * 
unmeaning or aggressively false. Considered as the principle 
of the negative infinite judgment A is not mere B, it corresponds 
as the form of bare negation, to A is mere A as the form of 
bare affirmation. In this form it is simply inadequate or 
unmeaning, and equivalent to ' A is at least A*. But taken 
as the exaggerated abstraction of negative judgment in the 
sense ' No A can be any not-A ', i.e. ' No A can be B at all ', 
it corresponds to the more open interpretation of the Law of 
Identity as c A is at least A ', and is equivalent to the more 
aggressive interpretation of that law as ' A is mere A '? For 

1 See i, chap, v, on Time in the singular judgment. 

8 The corresponding meanings of the Law of Identity and the Law ot 
Contradiction, judged by the latitude employed in interpretation, are 
not their equivalent meanings. The more exaggerated denial is equwa* 

P2 



212 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

it then denies that any B (not only that mere B) can be united 
in a judgment with A. This is simply a reiteration in negative 
form that A is mere A and no more. 

A genuine But if, /3. we take the Law of Contradiction in the obvious 
lh W lf sense tl&i a statement and its denial cannot both be true, 
Ug * it bears witness to the fact that a judgment may be truly 
denied, i. e. that a judgment may be false, and therefore that 
there may be truth in a negation. 1 It has been observed above 2 
that, apart from the traditional distinction of quantity, the 
difference between the Logical contrary and the Logical con- 
tradictory, i. e. between the principle of contradiction and the 
principle of excluded middle, disappears. But because they 
retain a meaning for vital thought although not for formal 
logic, even in the absence of quantitative distinctions, we will 
distinguish the two aspects of negation treated of by these 
two principles, and will speak first only of falsehood established 
by truth, and not of truth established by falsehood. Though 
really, if our instance of contrariety 3 is ' A is B ' and ' A is 
not B ', we have before us both falsehood established by truth, 
and truth established by falsehood. 

A law of y- If we do not press hard on the implications of the Law 

Reality. o j- identity, it may be said that the significance of the Law of 

Contradiction carries us one step further. But it is doubtful 

if truth can exist apart from the conception of falsehood, and 

lent to the more tautological assertion, and the more pregnant or 
significant assertion to the denial of mere identity. Thus 

1 A is mere A ' corresponds to ' A is not mere B '. 

*. ? 



^ \ 

\* f o 

' A is at least A ' corresponds to ' A is never any B '. 

1 According to the traditional rule, a statement may be so denied that 
both judgment and denial are false. But obviously in such a case some 
denial is true, though the one made is not. To say that a judgment is 
false is to say that it is truly denied. 

8 See above, on negation, p. 295 ff. 

3 I have pointed out before the inconvenient accident that the Law 
of Contradiction applies to Contraries only, while Contradictories or 
Logical Contradiction come under the Law of Excluded Middle. 



CHAP, viii Determinate Negation 213 

therefore it is better to say that the Law of Contradiction 
simply confirms and reiterates that assumption of the unity 
of reality which the Law of Identity involved. Reality, the 
Law of Contradiction asserts, is a consistent unity ; which is 
merely to say over again that it is a unity. You cannot, that 
is to say, play fast and loose with reality. What is true at 
all, as the Law of Identity said, is true throughout Reality ; 
but more than that, every such truth is double-edged, and 
carries with it throughout Reality consequences by which it 
affects and limits matters that are prima facie outside itself. 
To infer from * A is B ' that ' A is not not-B ' means at bottom 
that A is determined by B in respect of C or D. 

iii. The law of excluded middle, expressed by Aristotle ss Law of 
' Between the assertions of a logical contradiction there is no 
middle ', i.e. no third alternative, applies of course to all strict 
denial, for all strict denial is a logical contradiction of the 
judgment denied. 

a. In its symbolic form ' A is either B or not-B ' it lays down A Truism, 
the ultimate formal schema of negation as the absolute alterna- 
tive. Literally interpreted according to this symbolic form it 
has corresponding defects to those of the previous laws when 
interpreted in the same way. That is to say, all that it abso- 
lutely lays down is the form of bare negation which is per se 
not enough to constitute a judgment, because it involves the 
truth of the infinite judgment ; but which in relation to any- 
thing further, for example to the intelligible antithesis ' A is 
either B or C ', is only the affirmation of a possibility, and the 
hypothetical definition of a relation. To invest a positive 
contrary C with the logical character of a contradictory not-B, 
is the work of determinate knowledge. 

/3. Interpreted in the plain sense, e.g. as by Aristotle, the A law of 
law of Excluded Middle means that the significant negation lhou g ht 
of any judgment is an absolute alternative to it, viz. that not 
only the judgment and its negative cannot both be true, but 
one or other must be true, and if true, we may fairly add, 
must be significant. This means that falsehood can establish 
truth, or that negation can involve affirmative consequences, 
[n this sense the postulate in question is the essential principle 
if disjunction, which is an absolute alternative between two 



214 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

or more positive and significant members. Therefore genuine 
disjunction has not the form ' A is either B or not-B ', but 
has the form ' A is either B or C ', which invests the positive 
assertion, in virtue of which C is taken to deny B as its con- 
trary, with the absolute exclusiveness that only belongs of 
right to the bare form of denial, which has for its essence to 
express the contradictory. In other words, the old account of 
the contrary, that it denies, and also asserts something more 
beyond the denial, must also be true of any significant con- 
tradictory. 

A law of y. The principle of Excluded Middle, then, ultimately affirms 
Reality. ^at R ea ifty i s no t merely one and self-consistent, but is 
a system of reciprocally determinate parts. In affirming that 
a significant or genuine judgment is possible, such that within 
it a negation l shall carry a determinate and explicit positive 
consequence not merely, as the law of contradiction affirms, 
that a truth may carry with it definite negative consequences 
the law of Excluded Middle fixes upon that reality which is 
constructed and maintained by judgment the character of 
a self-determining whole. For a nothing can only be invested 
with the character of a something by being a precisely limited 
nothing that implies a positive nature in the limiting and 
sustaining something, such that in affirming the nothing we 
are not affirming an absolute nothingness, but are covertly 
alleging a positive something which is or is involved in the 
nothingness of something in particular. From the mere and 
entire non-existence of mechanical cohesion, i.e. of any such 
thing as mechanically coherent substances, nothing strictly 
speaking could be inferred. The idea would be the content of 
a bare denial, and unintelligible. But from the failure of 
mechanical cohesion in the axle of a locomotive running at 
sixty miles an hour under precisely known conditions, all other 
substances retaining their mechanical properties, the most 
precise and detailed results could be predicted and must 

1 According to the bare scheme of Excluded Middle, the significant 
negation must be a negation of the negation ; for though the falsehood 
of the affirmation involves the truth of the negation, yet in the phase 
to which such a scheme belongs we are hardly warranted in affirming 
that a negation as such has positive significance. This use of double 
negation is a factor in identifying contrary with contradictory opposition. 



CHAP, vii] Necessity and Reality 215 

follow. This is a simple instance of the difference between 
the negation which has meaning and consequences, and that 
which has none. 

iv. The law of Sufficient Reason, with its sub-form the law Law of 
of Causation, is a corollary from that aspect of reality which f^j 
the negative laws of thought have brought to our notice, and of 
Reality being a system of reciprocally determining parts, 
every part or feature of reality may be regarded as a conse- 
quent to which some other part or parts, or ultimately the 
whole, stands as ground. Every consequent, so this law 
tells us, has a ground from which it necessarily follows. 
Necessity indeed means nothing but the inevitableness of the 
consequent when the ground is given. 1 

In plain English, the Law of Sufficient Reason represents 
the demand of intelligence for the explanation of everything 
by something else. And it is plain that in the case of anything 
but the absolute whole this demand must go on to infinity, 
for outside any given content there is always something which 
can be regarded relatively to that content as something else. 
We have sufficiently criticised the operation of this law, the 
law of natural science as such, in the construction of the 
would-be totalities of abstract time and space, and it is not 
necessary to repeat the proof that this aspect of experience, 
taken per se, generates and must generate the infinite series. 
For it rests on the relations of parts in abstraction from the 
whole, or in other words, without the element of totality. 

One point must be noticed here. Schopenhauer rightly 
maintains that absolute necessity is a contradictio in adjecto, 
because all necessity is ex hypothesi conditional. We have 
therefore not spoken of an absolute necessity but only of a 
real necessity, namely a necessity rooted in a ground which 
is a fact. We ought not to feel as if in this substitution the 
world had lost something of its "rational coherence. Absolute 
necessity was a false ideal, and produced a fallacious preference 

1 See the admirable section 49 in Schopenhauer's treatise on the ' Satz 
vom Grunde '. His attempt, however, to show (sect. 50) that the law 
of ground and consequent in cognition does not entail an infinite series, 
although in causality or in space this is entailed, cannot be called success- 
ful. It depends on his distinction between Causality and Sufficient 
Reason. 



216 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

of necessity to reality. For a part, necessity is a higher point 
of view than mere perceptive reality, because necessity involves 
relation to the whole, whereas perceptive reality, being isolated, 
is only formal x or potential reality. But for the whole, reality 
is a higher point of view than necessity, for reality is its self- 
dependence as a whole, while necessity would at once depress 
it into a part. 

The above are the principal ' Laws of Thought '. We class 
them not as principles of intelligence apart from experience, 
but as principles of science 01 of rational experience as such, 
discoverable by analysis in every minutest portion of its 
texture, and capable of being regarded by a very easy abstrac- 
tion as essential to its existence as contrasted with its special 
significance. They may therefore be ranked together as the 
formal postulates of knowledge, or as the formal aspect of 
the principle of Uniformity, in contrast with those which are 
not prima facie necessary to the existence of experience, or 
involved, at all events equally, in all reality as such ; and 
which may therefore be considered under the head of material 
postulates of knowledge. The reciprocal implication of the 
formal and material postulates in one another, of a teleological 
significance in a self-consistent system, is plainly a matter of 
degree, and our task is to analyse the mode in which it does 
exist, not to predict how it must exist. 

The 2. To emphasise the transition from the formal to the 

^tu r - al material postulates of experience, I make use of the follow- 
lates of ing sentence from a distinguished writer : 2 
ledgeT ' I* i fi conceivable that man and his works and all the higher 
forms of animal life should be utterly destroyed ; that moun- 
tain-regions should be converted into ocean depths ; the floors 

1 i. e. it has the contact with feeling which is the form of all contact 
with reality, but it falls short in content and is a mere fragment which 
has something, we do not yet know what in particular, of reality in it. 

a I quote and comment upon this passage purely because it is a strik- 
ing illustration of my point. I have not the least intention of imputing 
to its eminent author (Professor Huxley in Contemp. Review for 
February, 1887) that he in fact undervalues those activities, the annihi- 
lation of which, according to this passage, would make no breach in 
the order of science. I cannot but think, on the other hand, that any 
logical theory with which such a statement were compatible would be 
gravely defective. 



CHAP, vii] Laws of Nature 217 

of oceans raised into mountains ; and the earth become 
a scene of horror which even the lurid fancy of the writer of 
the Apocalypse would fail to portray. And yet, to the eye 
of science, there would be no more disorder here than in the 
sabbatical peace of a summer sea.' 

Translated into simpler language, this sentence means that 
if all these things happened, they would happen without a 
miracle ; or in logical phrase, they would be capable of explan- 
ation according to the law of sufficient reason. And this is 
undoubtedly a truth that we must lay to heart. Our choice, 
being what we are, lies between the experience intelligible 
according to the formal laws, or none at all. A ' suspension 
of the laws of nature ', a ' supernatural interposition ' or 
' interference ', is perhaps the one and only matter that if 
alleged as a fact can be denied on the sole evidence of the 
abstract ' laws of thought '. Against any phenomenon, any 
occurrence, however extraordinary, these laws, apart from 
more concrete experience, have no foothold and no purchase. 
But the allegation that something is known and yet not 
knowable, nay more known as not knowable and in respect 
of the peculiar essence which makes it not knowable this, 
if we would retain our sanity, we must refuse to entertain as 
conceivable. And if supernatural means anything but this, 
any causation handled by superior knowledge and power 
within the unity of Reality, then for logic it is natural and we 
must treat it as we treat all natural phenomena. We deny no 
occurrence on the strength of formal laws ; we only deny 
a theory about the occurrence. Formal laws do not care 
how extraordinary a phenomenon may be ; anything may 
have happened or may happen ; the only question is whether 
it did, or will. 

Much unclear thinking and much false sentiment might 
have been avoided if the mechanical aspect of nature had 
been recognised * long since as Professor Huxley states it. 
Nature, as a mechanical system, is not teleological. Disease 
and deformity are as natural, as orderly, as much according 
to law, as health and beauty. It is idle verbiage to enlarge 

1 e.g. by Charles' Kingsley and teachers of his school who preach 
concurrence with and conformity to the ' laws of nature '. 



218 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

upon a contrast between law and lawlessness in the natural 
world, considered as a natural or formally knowable system. 
The only lawlessness is in the supposed supernatural within 
the natural. Nothing that happens can escape from the 
principle of sufficient reason, and therefore nothing that 
happens is without an aspect of law. 

But these considerations, though true, are not the whole 
truth. We unquestionably expect something more of the 
world than a capability of being known according to the law 
of sufficient reason. It is the nature and the warrant of these 
expectations that I now desire briefly to examine. 
The main- i. I do not think that it can be doubted that we expect an 
^definitely prolonged not necessarily everlasting continu- 
ance of such conditions of the earth's surface as are compatible 
with human life. It would not be justifiable to derive this 
expectation from the formal postulate considered above on 
any such ground as the necessity of a human intelligence to 
the existence as we understand existence of the actual 
woild. This merely logical necessity might at worst be satisfied 
by an appeal to our ignorance ; for how can we know that the 
human intelligence is the only intelligence, in the system of 
things ? But in any case we are now compelled to accept as 
fact a state of the globe prior to the existence of the human 
race, or even of organic life, and if we find no insuperable 
difficulty of form in this view of the past, why should there be 
any in a corresponding belief as regards the future ? 

It may be said, again, that our whole state of knowledge, 
and the absence of urgent warning from our scientific look- 
out men, justifies a disbelief in any imminent disaster or trans- 
formation of the earth's surface. Now it is my contention 
in the present chapter that the postulates of which we are 
speaking simply sum up the pith and essence of our know- 
ledge, and I have no reason to doubt that the actual state of 
scientific prediction is a large element in the practical certainty 
with which we regard the future of our globe. Unmotived 
possibilities rightly go for nothing, and it is the case, I suppose, 
that there are not at present above the scientific horizon any 
seriously motived possibilities of a speedy end to man's 
existence. 



CHAP, vii] Eschatology 219 

But I cannot think that this exhausts the question. It 
appears to me that the real root of our conviction is ethical, 
and ultimately depends upon our confidence in the relation 
of our purposes to the scheme of the universe. Such an ethical 
conviction is not a irov o-ra> outside our knowledge, but is the 
very core of almost all that knowledge on which our distinc- 
tively human life essentially depends. The purposes of the 
civilised world form the real teleology a on which our organised 
knowledge of society and of all human achievement is based, 
and it is on the conviction, inwoven in this knowledge, of the 
reality of these purposes in their essential content, that our 
faith in the future seems to me to be founded, and under 
present conditions of knowledge to be rightly founded. 

It may be said, with an appeal to eschatology, that such 
a faith is not even a ' quod semper, quod ubique ', &c., and that 
a speedy end to man's existence on earth has in fact frequently 
been expected by large bodies of human beings. On this sug- 
gestion two observations are to be made. In the first place, 
it would be interesting, both logically and psychologically, to 
know the exact effect of such a belief on the practical postulates 
of civilised life in those who hold it to know, in short, the 
degree of reality with which, as a working belief, it has ever 
been held. To some extent the doctrine has been specially 
directed to meet the dangers which it tended to cause, by 
inculcation of the duty of diligence in business and of orderly 
conduct as the best preparation for the end. And then in the 
second place, as this adaptation of the doctrine shows, the 
conception of an ethical continuity of purpose is satisfied by 
the idea in question, although not necessarily under the form 
of a continued terrestrial existence. 1 

a See notes, pp. 99, 199, above. The argument would be sounder 
in form, but not very substantially different, if we substituted ' indivi- 
duality ' for ' real teleology ' ; the general principle is that our criticised 
desires though not our given desires have evidential value, where 
' criticised ' means divested of self-contradiction. But anything more 
than the briefest indication of this problem does not belong to Logic. 

1 Under this head, of a satisfaction for our ethical demand otherwise 
than in the form of our continued existence, may be classed in great 
part the curious psychological fact of the slight practical effect produced 
by prospective death even on men whose lives are by any cause gravely 
imperilled. I ascribe this, though in part only, to our prospective 



220 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

If the question were pushed home, and we were asked to 
translate our ethical postulate into terms of time and degree, 
we could only, I think, fall back on conceptions akin to the 
)3ios T\tibs of Aristotle, i.e. on the conception of a duration 
and environment of life adequate to the accomplishment of 
some worthy purpose. And what catastrophes befalling the 
human race are compatible with the purposes of the world 
we cannot presume to guess. 1 It would be hard to believe, 
for example, in the likelihood of a catastrophe which should 
overwhelm a progressive civilisation like that of modern Europe 
and its colonies, so that the history of the world would have 
to be begun anew, without any influence at any time arising, 
by rediscovery of remains, from the prior civilisation. 

' But we may be mistaken in our postulate. 1 Certainly we 
may be mistaken, as in our present knowledge, so in the 
sum and substance of our present knowledge. But unmotived 

satisfaction in the maintenance of our essential activities and purposes 
by others after our death ; and I do not think that this satisfaction would 
exist in view of a prospective extinction of the race. Again, the truth 
that a belief in some continuance is necessary to any action, and that 
some action is necessary to any continuance, is merely the minimum 
grade of the postulate we are discussing. 

1 The writer is aware of a strong prejudice in his own mind that 
a disastrous earthquake in London is an exceedingly improbable occur- 
rence. Not, of course, that volcanic agencies can act otherwise than 
they must, but that such a degree of inconstancy as to tempt an enor- 
mous heavily built city to be erected, and then to turn and rend it, 
would seem malicious on the part of Nature. The prejudice is only 
mentioned as a psychological curiosity, and is not defended for a moment. 
The writer believes it to be a blundering application of an ultimately 
genuine principle.* 

tt I am aware that this note has been adversely criticised, and I admit, 
as I admitted in it, that the actual belief expressed in it is probably 
indefensible. Yet I do not cancel it, because it calls attention to a 
technical point which seems to me fundamental, and which I doubt if 
my critics have observed. It is this, that as inference from particular 
to particular is impossible, and you must always make the circuit 
through the universal nature of the system on whose manifestations 
you are arguing (see above, pp. 22, 1 39), it is necessary to accept a heavy 
responsibility when the whole nature of that system is concerned, and 
if you cherish a general view about it, and allow this view to affect your 
inference, it is illogical not to formulate and defend your view. If you 
believe that the world-system is wholly indifferent to the interests of 
civilisation, you shoulder just as heavy a logical responsibility as if you 
believe the opposite. And you are bound to exhibit your view. 



CHAP, vii] The minimum of Knowledge 221 

possibilities of error must go for nothing ; and in departing 
from the positive import of the knowledge which at present 
we possess, we abandon concrete reality for more or less 
abstract imagination. In this first material interpretation 
which we have been putting upon the law of the Uniformity 
of Nature, we have simply been analysing a condition which 
is essential to the maintenance of human life as reality now 
presents it to us, viz. the prospect of continuance. If the 
constancy of content which this prospect demands were ever 
to become doubtful with good reason, the doubt would ex 
hypothesi show itself in our knowledge on positive grounds ; 
but till then we must accept this constancy not indeed as an 
ultimate certainty, but as a leading characteristic of our 
actual world. 

ii. But the unifoimity of nature as materially understood The re- 
goes at least one step further than to postulate the maintenance 
of human life on the earth's surface. It also postulates the 
reality of those purposes and achievements which make man 
what he is. 

It is possible to fancy not merely a state of the earth in 
which the life of the human animal should be physically 
impossible, but a state in which though life were possible 
and actual, yet the apparent caprices of nature, however 
formally rational, should prohibit all advance in knowledge 
and civilisation. What degree of ambiguity in the appearance 
of natural bodies, in spite of an actual constancy of their 
properties, might make knowledge impossible, is a question 
which there is no sense in asking, as we have no measure by 
which to estimate the answer. Many ambiguities have been 
resolved by knowledge ; but the operations of the intellect 
unquestionably demand not only the theoretical constancy of 
properties, but some degree of limitation in their variety. 
Exhaustiveness is, in short, though not theoretically deducible 
from the law of Sufficient Reason, a largely and increasingly 
essential element of knowledge. What would it help us that 
the specific gravity of gold is constant, if elements undis- 
tinguishable from gold by other ordinary tests, but differing 
in specific gravity, were continually to present themselves in 
our operations upon Nature ? And although infinitesimal 



222 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

variation is a predominant law [of the organic world, yet 
knowledge is at least greatly facilitated by the existence of 
marked points of transition between species and species, 1 and 
it is plain that a succession of animals differing by variations 
of minute and equal value would not be compatible with our 
present modes of natural knowledge, although in geometrical 
matter the intelligence has displayed the power of theoretically 
grasping an absolutely continuous evolution. 

It might be said indeed that we were alleging above that 
* If there is to be human life there must be human life ', and 
are alleging now ' If there is to be knowledge there must be 
knowledge ', truisms which amount to nothing. So far as 
content goes, this may, by abstraction, be true. A mere 
analysis of content is eo ipso hypothetical. But the content 
which we are analysing is, moreover, affirmed of our real 
world as an integral element of the significance of that world, 
which significance is primarily ethical. 

And this significance for which I am contending is not an 
a priori postulate or axiom, from which any specific know- 
ledge could be derived apart from experience. If I am asked 
1 What is the material uniformity ? How do you limit it ? 
What does it imply ? ' I can only answer by pointing to 
the progressive "content of knowledge itself. The postulate 
of Uniformity is ultimately that there is such uniformity as 
our knowledge in detail reveals to us. Do I believe that mass 
and energy are constant, that gravity operates in the region 
of the fixed stars, that any of the heavenly bodies have an- 
imated inhabitants, or that the elements are ultimately reducible 
to a single form of matter ? None of these, I should have to 
reply, are questions of an ultimate logical postulate. Our 
convictions upon all of them must be determined by the state 
of our knowledge and by our estimate of its tendencies. From 
an ethical postulate we can deduce nothing but the empty 
form of a logical principle, the form that ' what is involved in 
ethical a reality is real ' ; the material details must come from 
science only. 

1 Owing, no doubt, to the extinction of intermediate forms* 
* In any new work dealing with these points I should not make use 
of the term * ethical ', which now seems to me an individualistic term, 



CHAP, vii] Meaning of 6 a priori ' 223 

The three degrees then which may conveniently be distin- Three 
guished in the interpretation of the Law of Uniformity of inter P re " 
Nature or of the Unity of Reality, considered as the postulate Unifor- 
of knowledge, may be assigned as follows. Nature 

(1) Reality is a mechanical system through and through. R eal i ty 
This postulate is expressed in the so-called ' laws of thought ' is mecha- 
which find their most explicit form in the ' Law of Sufficient nlcal * 
Reason ', or principle of Relativity. 

(2) Reality as a mechanical system is adapted to the Reality is 
evolution and maintenance of life, i. e. is at least quasi-teleo- 
logical. This is a first approximation to what is practically 
assumed as the material Uniformity of Nature. 

(3) Reality as a mechanical system is further adapted to, Reality is 
or includes as elements within its unity, the substantive 
purposes of human intelligence, i. e. is really teleological. 

It is possible, by intellectual abstraction, to dissociate the 
first of these aspects from the others, as the import of ' mechani- 
cal ' can be dissociated 1 from the import of ' machine '. It 
is not possible to dissociate either quasi-teleology or real 
teleology from a mechanically-conditioned system. The nature 
of a system can only be real in as far as the parts or differences 
that enter into it have a real mode of activity. Miracle 
destroys teleology, for it destroys the relation of part to whole. 
And activity or variation of activity, that has no ground in 
the one Reality, is miracle. 

3. It seems desirable to conclude the present work by The 
bringing to a point the views that have been implied through- 
out it upon the ultimate nature of intellectual necessity, and Necessity, 
upon the sense in which such necessity can be predicated of 
any elements within knowledge. 

i. It would be a tedious task to analyse at length the 

applicable to an attitude right and characteristic for a finite being 
within a whole, but neither to the whole, nor to the position of the finite 
being completely considered. I should substitute some such expression 
as ' the conception of absolute reality '. ' Human ' is an instance, not 
an ultimate. But obviously the problem goes beyond Logic. 

1 This concession must be read subject to the reservations of p. 99. 
This dissociation is not possible in an ultimate sense. But of course 
dissociation from any particular teleological scheme is abundantly 
possible, and that is the point oi material importance. 



224 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

A priori components of Mill's discussions J relating to the basis of 
necessity ne cessary truth. But nothing could, in my judgment, be more 
diation. conducive to a thorough mastery of the question than a 
careful study of the chapters referred to in Mill's Logic in 
the light of some plain distinctions, which, in default of a 
better guide, I will here endeavour to lay down. By Mill 
himself, together with the writers whom he quotes, nearly 
every position of importance in the controversy is assumed 
in its turn, and the argument is a strange mixture of penetrat- 
ing sagacity with unphilosophical confusion. 

Mediate a. Necessity, as we have abundantly convinced ourselves, 2 

nature of i nv olves mediation or inference. No isolated judgment qua 

forgotten, isolated can have necessity. Every necessary truth must, in 

so far as it is necessary, present itself as the conclusion from 

an antecedent. In the idle controversy whether axioms are 

known a priori or ' from experience ' this aspect of necessity 

is forgotten on both sides. 

'From (*) If a priori necessity is taken as inherent within the 
some- f our corners of the axiom itself, the very nature of necessity 
prior. 1 is contradicted, and the only meaning which I presume the 
phrase a priori can ever have had is stubbornly denied to 
it. 3 ' A priori ' (K Trporepav) says in so many words that the 
knowledge to which this term applies is 'from something 
prior to it ', i. e. is derivative, inferred and mediate. The 
metaphor involved in ' prior ' no doubt created for Aristotle 
a problem about the series of premises, which, it would seem, 
must come to an end somewhere in an ultimate premise ; 
a problem which could only be solved, as Aristotle, I imagine, 
was really quite aware, by making the series ultimately return 
into itself, and lose its successive character by transformation 
into an organised system. a But this difficulty about the 

1 Mill's Logic, Bk. II, chaps, v and vi. 

a Cp. especially above, i. 1 34. 

3 I am quite unable, for the reasons assigned in the text, to subscribe 
to the views as to a priori knowledge which are stated in sections 355-6 
of Lotze's Logik. In placing the test of ' self-evidence ' in an immediate 
recognition without any process of proof, he appears to me to surrender 
altogether the rational character of knowledge. His subsequent ex- 
planation, sect. 358, seems to me exactly parallel to Whewell's practical 
retractation respecting the law of atomic weights. See below, p. 227. 

a See p. 269 below. 



CHAP, viii Vicious Intuitional Belief 225 

ultimate premise of a series, even if unsolved, does not justify 
the neglect of the plain logical differentia imposed by the 
term a priori upon all that claims to be known a priori, 1 viz. 
that it shall be inferred from knowledge, whatever this may 
be, other than itself. 

(2) If, on the other hand, by those who object to the ' a Indis- 
priori ' origin of knowledge, supposed to be alleged as not 



experiential, an appeal is made to any form of indissoluble tion. 
association, originating no doubt in constant experiential 
conjunction, but operating finally through a sheer psycho- 
logical inability to disjoin the parts which insist on present- 
ing themselves together in the mental picture, here if any- 
where we have the vicious doctrine of a priori knowledge in 
its most outrageous form. For, it must be remembered, 
the past is past ; the psychological history of our conviction 
cannot come into court when we wish to demonstrate the 
conviction to be true or false. It is of no use to say, ' I have 
seen it so often that I cannot help believing it true/ One 
might almost as well say, ' I have said it so often that I cannot 
help believing it true/ The question is not how often you have 
seen it, but what you now know that you saw, and under 
what precise conditions. If nothing in the content of the 
experience, as it now is in the mind, goes to exclude error 
or to carry conviction, 2 then we believe it simply because we 
find it in the mind, which is just the description of vicious or 
intuitional a priori belief. 3 

1 Prantl, Geschichte der Logik, vol. iv, p. 78, quotes from Albertus de 
Saxonia, A.D. 1 390, as the oldest authority for the dualistic use of * a 
priori ' . ' Demonstratio quaedam est procedens ex causis ad effectum, 
et vocatur demonstratio a priori et demonstratio propter quid et potis- 
vsima ; . . . . alia est demonstratio procedens ab effectibus ad causas, et 
talis vocatur demonstratio a posteriori et demonstratio quia (that) et 
demonstratio non potissima.' Nothing could be more sharply opposed 
to ' immediate ' knowledge. 

8 The distinct relations to the percipient, which make us sure that our 
recollection is not a fancy, are what perform this office in an act of 'simple* 
memory. In fact, no act of memory is absolutely simple, as indeed no 
intellectual act of any kind is. The truth of our recollection is inferred 
from content, not accepted because of mere psychical mdissolubility. 

* In the discussion alluded to in the text, Mill is on the whole the 
champion of organised knowledge and inferential necessity against 
unreasoned conviction and mere indissoluble association. But he 

1337'2 Q 



226 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK ir 

Organised . The distinction on which the relation of necessity to 
organised Experience really turns is the distinction between organised 
experi- an( j unorganised experience. The former can give necessity ; 
the latter cannot give knowledge. To maintain with Whewell 
that there is a necessity which does not depend on experience 
is to concede Mill's contention that necessity is a psychological 
illusion. If there is no organisation of experience into a system, 
the latter view is obviously the truth ; but with the necessity 
which Mill rejects there must in that case also be thrown 
overboard the knowledge which he maintains. If there is 
organisation of experience, then the necessity which attends 
complete conception, although nothingirrational, supernatural, 
or immutable, is more than a psychological illusion, It 
simply means that given this and that, being the conditions 
imposed by our knowledge of the matter in hand, then the 
other must follow because of the relation between them. 

This distinction may be, I think, pretty thoroughly eluci- 
dated with reference to Whewell's treatment 1 of the prin- 
ciple, in his time quite a recent discovery, that chemical 
combination takes place between elements in certain con- 
stant definite proportions only. Whewell was able to per- 
suade himself that this law, when once understood by a mind 
with adequate scientific resources, could not but be accepted 
as a law whose falsity was inconceivable. Of course such an 
assertion, made by a writer suspected of a belief in intuitional 

wavers in his position, (i) by refusing to maintain against Whewell that 
a justifiable necessity can be generated by experience, and confining 
himself to the contention that an illusory show of necessity can be so 
generated this means that the experience of which he is thinking is 
the mere repetition of sense-perception and not a determinate system 
of science ; and (2) by the constant appeal to the profusion of experi- 
mental evidence in favour of geometrical axioms, and in particular to the 
mental picture of parallel straight lines as the instrument, by a constant 
repetition of experiment, of generating the certainty that they are 
incapable of meeting. Here we lose sight of the principle which owes 
so much to Mill's advocacy, that one good experiment will establish 
a law. Sir J. Herschel as quoted by Mill wavers in precisely the same 
way, appealing now to iteration of experience, and now to systematic 
knowledge. Spencer seems to hold the view characterised in the text, 
not interpreting his test by conception into logical proof and therefore 
leaving us to suppose that it consists in psychical conjunction. 
1 Fully adduced and discussed in Mill's chapters above referred to. 



CHAP, vii] Intuition and Conception 227 

or something like innate and unreasoned convictions of 
necessity, about a principle ' the discoverer of which was still 
living ', was open to the ridicule with which Mill assailed it. 
But the interest lies in the explanations which Whewell sub- 
sequently offered, and which make the course of his mind 
in the matter tolerably clear. In order to perceive necessity 
in such a case, you must, he says in effect, understand the 
terms, you must conceive all the elements of the problem 
distinctly, and you must be furnished with a degree of scien- 
tific knowledge which not every man of science possesses. 
The ' intuition ' of the truth, he says, ' may be a rare and 
difficult attainment.' 

There can hardly be two opinions as to what all this means. 
Conception as thus understood is simply systematic know- 
ledge, and the reason why you cannot conceive the law false 
is that you have attained a thoroughly mediate insight that 
the system of science requires it to be true ; i.e. that if it 
were taken not to be true your system of reality would be 
shattered and overthrown. This necessity is read into the 
terms of the principle in question, the interpretation of which 
has been insensibly enlarged, and without careful analysis 
there is great likelihood that the principle will seem to possess 
a necessity involving no relation to anything outside itself. 
In the particular case in question it may be though the 
suggestion is hazardous that a confusion was operative in 
WhewelTs mind between a very abstract principle which is 
involved in the place held by quantity in the real world, and 
the peculiar law discovered by Dalton as the law of atomic 
weights. All quantity is definite, and every combination is 
a combination of definite quantities. Nor can there be any 
doubt that every mixture has different properties according 
to the relative quantities of the things mixed together. Wine 
and water will mix in any quantities, but the mixtures will 
not all be the same. I venture to write down these platitudes, 
as Mill, in maintaining that the occurrence which Whewell 
called inconceivable really represents the general rule, almost 
seems to forget that every mixture is a mixture of definite 
quantities, and that a change in the proportion will make 
a difference in the mixture. No doubt this comparatively 

Q2 



228 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

formal principle is a long way from the law which Dalton 
discovered, viz. that the peculiar combination known as 
chemical combination would not take place at all except 
between definite proportions of the elements. But yet, 
assuming the constancy of the resultant combinations, e.g. 
that there is only one kind of water and not two or more kinds, 
and also the limitation of their number, i.e. that there is not 
in nature a series of compounds containing the same elements 
as water but in slightly different proportions and I should 
have imagined that the truth or untruth of these two sug- 
gestions must have been notorious to chemists before Dalton's 
time then presupposing all this it does seem to an outsider 
as if the law of combination in definite and constant propor- 
tions * was pretty much rendered necessary by the mere 
nature of quantity. At all events, without being so rash as 
to infer from the operations of my own mind to those of 
Whewell's, I may suggest that some such process as the 
above, which is obviously a mediate inference from matters 
of fact combined with a formal principle about quantity, 
constantly follows upon the discovery of a law. We are apt 
then tacitly to presuppose the matters of fact, and to identify 
the new law with the formal principle which it interprets. 
This, I venture to think, is the key to the general character 
of the process which Whewell's mind must have passed through 
in the case before us, with the result of his mistaking mediate 
for immediate necessity. 2 In any case, his reason for believing 
Dalton's law plainly was, as he says in so many words, that 
he thought he saw the whole order of nature to be involved 
in it. If the intuition of an a priori necessity excludes media- 
tion or inference, then this logical process was not the intuition 
of an a priori necessity. 

1 The theory of atoms goes further than this in form. But I under- 
stand Mill and Whewell to be speaking of the law only in as far as it 
refers to definite proportions. 

8 It is said that men always begin by denying a new truth, and then 
say that they knew it before. This is simply that the material interpre- 
tation or development of an accepted abstract principle is at first strange 
to them and they resist it ; but when they have understood it, they 
pass it over into the old formal principle, identify the two, and become 
unconscious that they have made any advance, 



CHAP, vii] Conception and Imagination 229 

In as far then as Conception means this complete insight, 
its necessity is clearly the sole test of truth, being simply 
identical with the necessity of knowledge. Mill's polemic 
against the test by mere Conception is largely justified by the 
ignorant use that was made of this test, as if it were immediate 
and operated by mere inspection. In this polemic Mill shows 
himself alive to the true source of experiential necessity, 
although he rejects the term necessity except in reference to 
mathematical reasoning. Thus, strangely enough, Mill re- 
introduces into knowledge the distinction between necessary 
and not-necessary truth, which the experiential school might 
be expected to deny. And his account of the distinction is 
on the whole sound, referring it simply to the difference 
between the complete knowledge of the conditions, which is 
possible in mathematics, 1 and the partial knowledge of the 
conditions which alone is possible in ordinary physical investi- 
gation. It would be better, however, either to abolish the 
term necessary altogether, or to extend it to all scientific 
knowledge as such. 

Mere imagination, on the other hand, as Mill rightly contends, 
though inclined to extend the contention erroneously to con- 
ception, has nothing to do with truth or knowledge either way. 
Allegations are not more likely to be true because we can 
imagine their content, nor less likely because we cannot. 

It follows from the above considerations 

(i) That every judgment is necessary 2 and mediate in as far 
as it is known ; and that no judgment has necessity or precision 
(which depends on the explicitness of the mediating conditions) 
if taken apart from the totality of knowledge ; 

and (2) That the content of every judgment, as well as its 
truth or necessity, is correlative to the one ultimate judgment, 
i. e. to the whole system of knowledge ; and that therefore 
while we do well to maintain that the body of knowledge has 
certain indispensable functions, we nevertheless commit an 
error of principle if we deny that the identity of these functions 
is like other identities compatible with variation. 

1 The view of mathematical conceptions as hypothetical does not 
concern us here. See Bk. I, chap. iv. 

2 See also chap, i of this book, on the specific necessity of judgment. 



230 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

Thus for instance knowledge, or reality as known, must 
have such a function of relativity as that which we express 
by the law of causation. But to suppose that the shape in 
which that function happens to be familiar to us, involving 
perhaps homogeneity of cause and effect, is necessarily an 
ultimate shape, is one of the most mischievous results of the 
fallacy of an isolated necessity. I do not think that there 
can be any doubt that even the conceptions of the straight 
line or of three-dimensional space are modified in their content 
by the explicit distinctions needed to save them from being 
confounded with arcs of great circles on a sphere surface or 
with space of more or less than three dimensions. Unques- 
tionably the new conceptions, however unreal, make them- 
selves felt as restricting the absoluteness of the old ones. 
Every judgment is relative to the whole of knowledge, and 
no judgment entirely escapes modification as this whole is 
modified. 

Rchabili- ii. In order to illustrate the true import and value of such 

form* 1 ! * conce pti ns as that of a priori truth or of necessary knowledge, 

distinc- I will venture to give a brief sketch of the process, tending to 

tions. repeat itself in history, by which such distinctions are most 

thoroughly apprehended, and which, if only in the individual 

mind, is perhaps necessary to their apprehension. 

When, in an epoch of genuine enquiry, a student first opens 
his eyes, so to speak, in the philosophical world, he finds 
himself confronted by a multitude of traditional distinctions, 
some of which claim to be fundamental lines of demarcation. 
Impressed with the ruling idea of all great epochs or earnest 
intelligences, that of the unity of reality, he assumes a pro- 
testant attitude towards these distinctions, which appear to 
him incompatible with the demands of his genius or of his 
time. His iconoclastic zeal is inflamed by the justification 
which it finds in the obviously meaningless and mechanical 
rigidity of the tradition which it attacks, a tradition that has 
come to be in many respects a real offence against the primary 
postulates of intelligence. And turning from his contem- 
poraries to the great masters of thought whom they profess 
to interpret, he finds in them also the phrases and ideas which 
he has learnt to regard as the symbols of an unmeaning super- 



CHAP, vii] Distinctions reassert themselves 231 

stition. And therefore, finding no help in man, such a pro- 
testant reformer in philosophy will proceed to reconstruct his 
world on the basis of that aspect of it in which its unity has 
been revealed to him ; that is to say, in the case of logic, 
probably on the basis of sensation, of observation, of particulars, 
of inductive experience. 

But when with labour and pains some progress has been 
made in this reconstruction, then for the reformer or for his 
successors there arises a further stage. The duty now falls 
upon them of maintaining the essential distinctions of thought, 
between perceptive comparison and geometrical demonstration, 
between empirical laws and laws of nature, between induc- 
tion by simple enumeration and the constructive processes of 
methodic science. When these antitheses are fully developed, 
then the time has come for a rediscovery of the meaning of Plato 
and Aristotle. The language which science is compelled to hold 
reveals itself as coincident with that of the teacher who first 
explained in what science consists. The distinction between 
the province of self-contradictory opinion l and the province 
of coherent knowledge recovers for science the meaning which 
it had all but lost for scholarship. When it becomes un- 
avoidable to erect, within the whole of ' experience ', which 
has been passionately proclaimed to be coextensive with 
knowledge, the included wholes of ' empirical ' observation 
and mere fact, as opposed to deductive certainty and mathe- 
matical necessity, then it is understood how such distinctions 
as these when originally made were distinctions within the 
knowable world, and were not incompatible with the unity 
of experience. No geometrician, I imagine, would accept the 
statement that the ratio of the diameter to the circumference 
of a circle, so far as ascertained, is ascertained by observation, 
because this would mean that it was found by direct measure- 
ment. But, in denying this ' empirical ' origin of the cognition 
in question, he would not suppose that he was alleging its 

1 De Morgan's Budget of Paradoxes is little else than the self-defence 
of science against opinion. The failure to distinguish relations, which 
in the world of opinion makes difference into contradiction, is well illus- 
trated by one of De Morgan's cases, an argument against the rotation 
of the earth which asks ' How can a man go 200 yards to any place if 
the moving superficies of the earth do carry it from him ? ' p. 78, 



32 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

independence of our acquired knowledge concerning space 
and spatial relations. He would explain, I suppose, that no 
doubt the calculation in question was based upon spatial 
relations that could only come into the human intelligence 
through its being aware of a spatial world (however this its 
spatial perception is attained), but that nevertheless the 
conclusion is reached by a process of reasoning or calculation, 
and is not an observation in the sense in which it is an observa- 
tion that there are ten volumes in the shelf at my right hand. 
And by extending the same reasonable interpretation to Plato 
and Aristotle which we extend to ourselves, remembering, 
that is, that all contentions are relative to certain purposes 
and proceed on certain assumptions, it becomes possible to 
recover something like their natural meaning. 

The development of Logic in England from Bacon to Mill 
and Jevons is a good illustration of the process which I have 
attempted to describe. And on a still larger scale, extending 
to every side of life, I make no doubt that the Renaissance 
itself, and also the new Renaissance of Winckelmann, Schiller 
and Goethe, were examples of a similar phenomenon. Ancient 
systems of thought or of religion can in fact only be interpreted 
in as far as their interpreters feel the necessities which were 
pressing upon their authors. And thus the individual mind, 
in as far as its ideas develope from a root of genuine interest in 
reality, tends to pursue an analogous course. If a great master 
of thought could come on earth again after some centuries, 
he would seldom find his true followers among those who have 
never deviated from the straitest sect of his exponents. 

Thus a cynic might say that the history of philosophy is 
a process in which the meaning of Plato and Aristotle is 
periodically forgotten by their disciples and rediscovered by 
their antagonists ; who then, perhaps, become their disciples, 
and so the cycle recommences. And the observation would 
be just except in so far as it implies that in each rediscovery 
no advance is made on the meaning as understood before. 
The cycles of philosophy repeat themselves, but not with 
identical content. The Encyclopaedia Britannica is a very 
different thing from the Encyclopaedia of existing knowledge 
as sketched in Plato's Republic. 



CHAP. vii] Logical Meaning of 'Aesthetic' 233 

iii. It has been suggested by a great writer 1 and the'Ae&the- 
suggestion falls in with many current ideas about philosophy ^y 1 ? 068 " 
that the necessity or propriety on the strength of which 
synthetic connections are derived from or combined into an 
including unity, ultimately the unity of the world, may be 
rightly described as ' aesthetic '. This conception contains 
elements of very unequal value, and I suspect that the element 
for the sake of which it is recommended is one for the sake of 
which it ought to be rejected. 

It does not matter, or ought not to matter, whether we speak 
of self-evidence, propriety, or necessity. They all attempt to 
express the same fact, that in knowledge, that is in judgment, 
we are not free, but are under a constraint exercised upon us by 
the content of knowledge itself, such that some judgments 
have to be accepted and others to be rejected. But if we ex- 
press this fact by the term necessity, then in virtue of the 
explanations which have been given above we exclude, and 
rightly exclude, an interpretation which the terms self-evidence 
and propriety admit if they do not compel, that is to say, 
an intuitional interpretation. 

' Aesthetic necessity/ then, would either mean something 
which we might accept as a fact, though we should pronounce 
its appellation unduly limited, or else would be a contra- 
diction in terms. I will consider the latter alternative first. 

a. An aesthetic judgment, like a moral judgment, is in in one 
everyday life, at any rate, not explicitly mediated. It is ^ l n ^* a f 
the peculiarity of the aesthetic product, or of the aesthetic diction, 
aspect of any object, that although coherent and rational, 
having passed through the medium of mind, yet nevertheless, 
qua aesthetically operative, it is not discursively analysed. 
Although in aesthetic judgment discursive analysis must play 
its part, yet such analysis is not the essence of aesthetic 
appreciation, but is on the contrary that which aesthetic 
appreciation has in common with scientific understanding, 
and is the mere organon of careful perception, by which the 
aesthetic product is constructed and brought to notice in the 
mind. A work of art, or any object regarded as beautiful, 
makes an appeal to feeling ; which, as such an appeal, must 

1 Lotze, Logik, sects. 364-5. 



234 Rdation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

be immediate, although the feeling to which it appeals is 
moralised or spiritualised, and consequently there is on both 
sides, in the work of art and in the spectator, a rational content. 
This, though it appeals to feeling in an immediate form, is of 
course capable ol being analysed in mediate form. But yet, 
as the work of art is the outcome of a spiritual mood of feeling 
in the artist, so it appeals to such a mood in the spectator. 
It was not constructed by combination of abstract relations, 
and though its fabric must be coherent and charged with intelli- 
gence, yet no mere intellectual reconstruction of such a fabric 
can reproduce the spiritual mood which is the essence of the 
work of art. This, if expressed in an abstract or inferential 
form, may retain a value for philosophy, but loses the dif- 
ferentia of fine art. Therefore, as necessity involves explicit 
mediation, and aesthetic judgment in the strictest sense 
excludes explicit mediation, to speak of aesthetic necessity 
is a contmdictio in adjecto. It is this immediate or intuitional 
self-evidence, this appreciation by feeling, which, as I suspect, 
the suggestion before us intended to identify with logical 
coherence or necessity. If recommended in this sense, the 
suggestion must I think be absolutely rejected. Necessity 
only attaches to a judgment in as far as that judgment involves 
the whole of knowledge. Unreasoned necessity is irrational 
belief. 

fi. If, on the other hand, aesthetic necessity merely meant 
^ a1: synthetic coherence of parts which every aesthetic whole 
type of shares with all universals whatever, then though we should 
necessity, admit the description to be true, and in one respect striking, 
yet we should have to add that it really did no more than 
refer us to one instance, and that an imperfect one, of the 
general relation to be described. An aesthetic whole is, so 
to speak, a universal made easy. In it the individual unity 
which belongs to everything real is not left to be toilsomely 
unravelled by reflection, but is presented in a shape capable 
of at once appealing as a unity to sense-perception or to 
imagination. Hence the discursive analysis which is instru- 
mental in the apprehension of a work of art, however subtle 
in its ultimate refinements, is ex hypothesi in great part 
evident and unavoidable. In this sense and to this extent 



CHAP, vii] Analysis of Work of Art 235 

the rational coherence in which all knowledge consists is 
strikingly illustrated, not by the aesthetic judgment itself, 
but by the analysis which accompanies the apprehension of 
a work of art in so far as this apprehension is of the same 
nature with the apprehension of any perceived object or 
complex of relations whatsoever. For this reason it is not 
uncommon to take a work of art as an example of the com- 
pulsion by which the nature of a whole controls its parts, 
simply because this control, which is the essence of individuality, 
lends itself readily to analysis in a work that is pervaded 
by an especially harmonious unity. 1 But precisely the same 
is the case with geometrical conceptions, and for precisely 
the same reason geometrical necessity, which is not only 
rational but also essentially mediate, is often taken as the type 
of logical necessity. 

Of these two classes of examples the geometrical con- 
ception is the more perfect in one respect and the aesthetic 
in another. The aesthetic object is an imperfect type of 
necessity because its nature is not exhaustible by reasoned 
judgment, but consists in being such as to produce a certain 
spiritual mood. As this mood involves and is accompanied 
by some degree of reflective apprehension directed to the 
coherence of parts in the artistic whole, which coherence is 
necessary, there is apt to be a confusion between the feeling 
and its concomitant insight which leads to an erroneous 
notion of immediate necessity. And it may be added that 
in trained artistic perception there is an immediate reaction 
of repugnance or acceptance, analogous to the e very-day 
moral judgment, which is right and accountable in its place, 

1 The famous simile of the statue in the beginning of the fourth book 
of Plato's Republic will occur to every one. This simile, occurring at 
a critical point in an important work, is perhaps responsible for a current 
idea that the Logic and Ethics of Plato and Aristotle were * aesthetic ' 
or ' artistic '. But the fact is that Plato and Aristotle dealt almost 
exclusively with the general principles which underlie all individuality 
and function, and illustrated these from fine art, from industrial art, 
and from science, almost indifferently. They possessed indeed no 
specific term for fine art, and though they gave a just weight to the idea 
of beauty, yet nothing in their theories was aesthetic if that means 
sentimental or unreasoned. If anything, they were too systematic and 
intellectual. 



236 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

but is the worst possible elucidation of logical necessity, with 
which the form of feeling is wholly incompatible. The geo- 
metrical object is not open to this censure. Its nature is to 
be capable of systematic construction through and through. 
And the pervading nature in virtue of which the universal 
determines its differences, the root of logical necessity, is no- 
where more explicitly formulated and applied than in geometry. 

As to individuality, however, the matter is reversed. A 
work of art, though not an embodiment of real teleology, 
for it has not a purpose conceived as a definite reflective 
idea, has nevertheless the content or nature of real teleo- 
logy, being thoroughly penetrated with reason * in the form 
of feeling. It is therefore individual in a special sense, as 
an outward and visible form thoroughly identified with an 
idea that pervades it, so that the work of art is distinctly 
relative to human intelligence, though it has no separable 
purpose embodied in abstract human thought* Thus a work 
of art is an exceptionally effective instance of an individual 
whole. In geometrical objects the pervading unity is of the 
most various kinds, and sometimes, taking the imperfect form 
of a progression to infinity, appears to be incapable of con- 
stituting a whole complete in itself. Even space seems 
powerless to limit itself, and therefore its parts seem rather 
to lie indifferently behind one another than to constitute 
a totality in which each has its peculiar place and function. 
In this sense no doubt the peculiar and specific necessity 
imposed upon parts by the whole which they constitute is 
better illustrated by the aesthetic than by the geometrical 
whole. 

Yet the wholes of real teleology, the moral order, for ex- 
ample, as exhibited in a moral person filling his place in a 
community, illustrate the nature of rational necessity better 
than either the aesthetic or the geometrical system. The 
identification of necessity with the idea of an intuitional or 
isolated self -evidence is the rock to be avoided. 

1 Mr. Matthew Arnold's phrase * criticism of life ', applied to poetry, 
explains what is meant by saying that art contains reason. That the 
reason must be in the form of feeling this term ' criticism ' appears to 
ignore. 



CHAP, vii] Specific Necessity 237 

Necessity, then, is a character attaching to parts or differ- 
ences interrelated within wholes, universals, or identities. If 
there were any totality such that it could not be set over 
against something else as a part or difference within a further 
system, such a totality could not be known under an aspect 
of necessity. The universe, however we may conceive of it as 
including subordinate systems, must ultimately be incapable, 
ex hypothesi, of entering as an element into a system including 
more than it. Strictly speaking, therefore, its relation to 
knowledge must be one of reality, not of necessity. But also, 
strictly speaking, it is a reality which we have no power to 
question or to explain, because all our questioning or explana- 
tion falls within it. There can be no meaning in talking about 
what might be the case if the universe were other than it is, or 
about what has been the case to make the universe what it is. 

But except in the case of this unique and imaginary refer- 
ence of that which is assumed to be the absolute whole to 
something outside itself, every judgment is the synthesis of 
differences, in a whole or identity expressed or understood, 
and is therefore at the same time the analysis of that identity. 
It makes no difference to the ultimate or actual import of 
a judgment whether as a process in time it took its rise from 
the synthesis of two data, or from the analysis of one. In 
every judgment there are differences within an identity. In 
every judgment therefore there is affirmed a necessity based 
on a reality. The necessity itself may have for its content 
a further reality, or may remain an abstraction which can 
only be set down as descriptive 01 illustrative of reality. 
The latter is the case with the more extreme forms of the 
hypothetical judgment. 

The various forms of universal which are the source of 
necessity and constitute the content of judgments, the com- 
parative value of these forms for knowledge, and the affinities 
between them, are the object-matter of Logical Science. 
And because our intelligence creates and sustains our real 
world by a continuous judgment which embraces these forms, 
in their concrete connection, within the unity of its system, 
it is further true that Logical Science is the analysis, not 
indeed of individual real objects, but of the intellectual struc- 



238 Relation of Knowledge to its Postulates [BOOK n 

ture of reality as a whole. In speaking of the intellectual 
structure of reality, it seems to be suggested that reality is 
modified by knowledge and is dependent upon mind. How 
far and in what sense this is the case I have attempted to 
explain in some additional chapters dealing with current 
contentions of to-day. 
Genetic 4- In more than one passage of the first edition of this 

Theory wor k I referred to considerations bearing on the limits of a 

and Ne- . . f -r * + * <. 

cessity. Genetic theory of Logic. The development of systematic 

thought as it reveals its inherent nature in response to stimuli 
largely conditioned by its own advance, and according to its 
own necessity, appeared to me to be the true type of genetic 
analysis. a It seemed to me fuither that a sharp distinction 
must be drawn b between varied forms and degrees in which 
the conditions of knowledge might be fulfilled in various 
environments, and any attempt at evolutionary explanation 
of its ultimate principles, such as the law of non-contradiction. 
On the other hand I was careful to point out that even such 
leading principles the necessary functions, as I proposed to 
call them, of the rational mind were not to be considered 
as formal propositions, given and self-evident each within its 
own four corners, and irresponsive to alterations in the general 
body of knowledge. I regarded them as roughly d comparable 
with the main functions of an animal organism, which may be 
fulfilled in all sorts of shapes and degrees, but must be fulfilled 
if life is to reside in it. 

There must, I urged, for example, be a function in the body 
of knowledge corresponding to what we know as the law of 
Causation. But in what precise shape it is to be asserted has 
been and is still a matter of controversy, which will no doubt 
continue to lean in different directions from time to time 
according to the requirements of the matter to be dealt with. 

I propose here to return to the above question, which 
has been the subject of much recent discussion, and has 
lately met with a substantive treatment in a treatise on 
Genetic Logic. 

a Vol. i, p. 2. b Ibid. pp. 7-8. c Vol. ii, p. 229. 

d Roughly, because for life the environment is the surface of the earth. 
For mind it is the universe. 



CHAP, vii] Reason Creative 239 

i. There is, however, one general difficulty which may be dealt Reason 
with in advance. ' What matter ? ' it may be replied to me. ^dapta- 
4 According to current views, and your own in particular, all tion. 
genesis is only revelation, and there is no true creation de 
novo. " Tout est donne." Suppose that reason is only an 
evolutionary adaptation, selected by the environment from 
variations of thinking, for you at least that makes its nature 
none the less its own. However moulded, it had to be as it 
has turned out. What difference can the particular process 
make ? What logical interest can you have in combating 
a view which professes to trace the genesis of the logical 
reason as an adaptation due to natural selection ? * Now in 
a sense I am prepared not to admit but to contend that 
everything is modelled by the environment the whole which 
means, in the end, by something like natural selection. But 
within this wide principle there are distinctions which must 
be taken. Above all, we must distinguish systematic con- 
trivance the conscious working of a principle of totality 
and non-contradiction from trial and error. The conscious 
endeavour towards non-contradiction and totality is no doubt 
a powerful instrument towards survival through natural 
selection, but it is also a great deal more. It is within itself 
a power of construction and of judgment, by its own law and 
necessity, in its own right. This power is what we call reason 
and intelligence ; it is characteristically self-contained and 
self-complete ; and has its own necessity, which is systematic, 
and not the mere success de facto that comes through trial 
and error, the pure and simple form of moulding by natural 
selection. 

How reason is truly creative I have briefly discussed above, 
and hope to consider more at large in another work. Briefly, 
I should urge that reason alone means creativeness, the con- 
tinuity of the bona fide old with the bona fide new, and that 
there is nothing in the universe that is strictly creative except 
reasonable a and logical process such for instance as we 
observe in every original work of art. That every such element 
is new and unparalleled is a quality secured to it according 

tt See above, p. 182. 



240 Limits of a Genetic Theory of Logic [BOOK n 

to the degree of its individuality, which is one thing with its 
logical perfection. To repeat or be repeated means imperfect 
individuality a failure, pro tanto, to hold one's own as an 
element in the whole. But I must not here digress further in 
this direction. 

Reason, then, however it manifests itself in answer to 
demands of an environment, has its own necessity and does 
its own selection in virtue of its own constructive principle. 
It is the nature of this necessity, and the organisation which 
embodies it, that we investigate in Logic, and from the stand- 
point of which, so far as the system has been apprehended, 
we can judge and understand its partial incarnations in the 
course of evolution. This distinction between rational neces- 
sity and de facto survival will be further insisted on in the 
sequel. 

Imitation ii. I understand it to be the claim of the recent Genetic 
Selection. theor y of L S ic to explain the rise and growth of the charac- 
teristic organisation of thought which we portray in logical 
science, by a process of Imitation through which thought- 
variations are suggested, together with one of Selection, 
through which only certain of these are permitted to survive 
owing to their fitness for social and practical needs. Granted 
these factors, it is held, the nature of logical thought can be 
accounted for by them and out of them. 

My contention is, on the other hand, that Imitation is merely 
a later and partial aspect within the character of relevant 
response which belongs to the principle of non-contradiction 
developing in its world of Identity and Diversity of experience, 
which is to it as the world of organic being is to the principle 
of Life. 1 And further, that Selection is something which 
Thought does for itself as in the relation of any theory to 
the experience it unifies and from its own standpoint. A 
Genetic theory, therefore, I contend, may exhibit the de facto 
evolution of the thought system and thought principle under 
historical influences ; but it can never derive from other 
factors that systematic necessity of reason, rooted in the 
principle of non-contradiction, in virtue of which it pronounces 
some judgments to be true and others to be false. 
a But see p. 238 above as to the different environments of the two. 



CHAP, vii] Similarity versus Identity 241 

iii. Imitation is a partial case of relevant response, which Meaning 
depends on a recognition of Identity in Difference, a. I can ticn? 1 ^ 
not agree with the view that this distinction is verbal, e.g. 
in its application to biology. It is easy to show that a working imitation 
whole cannot be represented in terms of similarities between 

* 

its members. And for the same reason the nature of the mem- 
bers themselves must in a great measure be omitted from such 
a representation. The Linnean classification, or the current 
* natural ' classification in botany, may be taken as a repre* 
sentation according to resemblances, though I should not 
admit that any scientific classification is so intended. But a 
region of the world, as a whole of competing and co-operating 
members, according to the light thrown by the principle of 
evolution, can never be represented in such a form as this. 
It can never bring together the things which have most to 
do with each other : competing species of plants, co-operative 
plants and animals, the soil, the climate, and their effect 
on the living things. Of course all this can be added in foot- 
notes, as it were, to classification by resemblances ; but it 
cannot be represented in the structure of the classification 
itself. It would be like trying to explain a locomotive by 
arranging its parts in classes according as they resemble each 
other. The reason of the impossibility is that the parts or 
members have their connection through their differences ; 
and in a classification by resemblances, these, though they 
have their weight as differences, have no weight as instruments 
of identity. This whole subject is treated by Green, a and 
I think is too little understood. I should strongly suspect 
that the reform of logic in this sense in the great Idealist 
days promoted, or at least was akin to, the transition from 
Linnaeus to Darwin. 

/3. Imitation (I 3ummarise in my own language) is alleged Why held 
to be a vera causa, it shows, is psychical, genetic, you can see 
it at work ; the operation of a universal (that is, an identity in 
difference) is an assumption, shadowy, almost, I think, a priori, 
mystic, antiquated, invisible. I assume, it is urged, publicity, 
the common awareness of a situation in which more than one 
person is concerned, which ought to be explained. 

a Sec p. 183 above. 
13872 R 



242 Limits of a Genetic Theory of Logic [BOOK n 

Now I cannot see any ground for all this in the facts. Imi- 
tation no doubt is a fact, and plays an important part in 
furnishing the self with material. I quite recognise the value 
of the work which has been done on this subject. But surely 
response and reaction, indices of communication through a 
common nature, are much wider and more primary facts, 
extending over the whole world, physical and psychical. The 
adapted response is earlier is it not ? than consciousness ; 
and the process of its passing under the control of intelligence 
and being emancipated from trial and error, is fairly well 
understood, though still doubtful in some details. But the 
adapted response, as controlled by intelligence, just means 
a consciousness of the situation based on an inference which 
pro tanto dispenses with the test of material action ; an inference 
based on perception is substituted for a certain number of 
errors, as when a man sees at a glance how to open a gate, 
which a dog will paw at till it comes open. There seems to 
me no assumption in this ; it is a plain statement of fact, 
and of fact more general and fundamental than imitation, and 
requiring no more assumption. 

With responses adapted by intelligence on the part of two 
or more agents you have ' publicity ' or ' the situation \ 
What you want, to account for this, is not imitation, but the 
power of consciousness to combine perceptions and see their 
results in short, the unity of consciousness. As I understand, 
it is urged that this must not be assumed but can be and 
ought to be genetically accounted for. This I will speak of 
when I come to comment on the meaning of the term ' genetic '. 
My present point is merely that imitation is the secondary, 
less general, and less completely stated fact, and that the 
assumption of it, while involving, as much as a response does, 
the assumption of the unity of consciousness, is in no special 
way a help towards explaining the apprehension of a situation 
as a whole. 

False y. The treatment of facts introduced by this theory seems 

tionof" * me P recar i us aU round. Particularly is this the case with 
Imitator the separation of the imitator and the inventor. I am con- 
ventor. v ^ nce d that a really critical study of any branch of history 
would demonstrate the crudeness of this antithesis when 



CHAP. vii] Is Truth explained? 243 

offered as a matter of principle. The advance of the human 
mind, independently, so far as can be judged, of individual 
original genius, is one of the most striking phenomena of 
history, and one is inclined to add that the deepest transforma- 
tions are those which have taken place in this way. It is an 
old and true saying that man must advance or recede ; to 
stand still is impossible for him. That is to say, the application 
of tradition to life is in itself a generator of inventions ; it is 
impossible even to borrow ideas without drawing conclusions 
which the lender never drew. And it is well known how rarely, 
if ever at all, an invention can be assigned to a single mind. 
The history of art is very instructive on this point, e. g. the 
education of a Turner. a 

iv. The second question (p. 240, on evolution of Thought), Truth or 
seems to amount to this : Does a genetic account of thinking Behcf 
explain by what character judgments are true, or only under 
what influence we have come in fact to hold (often wrongly) 
certain judgments to be true ? And what bearing has either 
alternative on the theory of selective thinking ? 

a. I will say at once that I see no meaning in a genetic Lmutb ot 
account of knowledge, except as a history of opinion ; but 
I admit that this involves a history of mental organisation. 
A simple illustration will do as well as an ambitious one. 
We constantly make such judgments as this : ' A. B. is a 
moderate Evangelical ; he was brought up as an extreme one, 
in a family and circle whose views were extreme, but his 
work and intercourse with varieties of people have made him 
much more temperate/ Here we have the true place of a 
selective theory of thinking, so far as I understand it, in a 
nutshell. A. B. inherited a platform, an organised mental 
constitution and logical or quasi-logical system ; i. e. he 
acquired it by adaptation to his parents' and teachers' views, 
or imitated them. Starting from this, he developed his later 
position through varied forms of social selection acting on 
his ideas, involving accommodation to practical needs ; and 
he now has a mental content and organisation at once fairly 

tt See, in Mr. Fiuberg's book, the drawing copied by Turner in boyhood 
from an engraving, set side by side with the engraving from which it 
was copied. 

R2 



244 Limits of a Genetic Theory of Logic [BOOK n 

harmonious with the circle in which at present he moves, 
and determined as a whole by the platform which he inherited. 
I do not doubt for a moment that a history of all of us and of 
the human race could be written in terms analogous to these 
with a great deal of truth. And it would not omit the facts 
of mental organisation. The metaphysician, the psychologist, 
the biologist, mathematician, and also the Englishman, French- 
man and German, would all prove to possess, yes, and to have 
acquired and developed, certain favourite categories, certain 
forms of logical or quasi-logical bias, and predispositions to 
accept explanations of certain appropriate types. 

In such a historical enquiry some theory of selective thinking 
might have, so far as I see, very interesting applications. It 
would show by what needs and under what direction of 
attention the minds of nations and individuals had grown 
into certain structures, and had acquired certain logical pre- 
dispositions. 

But even here it would be necessary either to expand very 
largely the sense in which, or to limit very strictly the extent 
to which, we affirmed action to be the instrument of selection. 
If action meant all change of consciousness directed to an end, 
then, in referring the course of cognition and mental organisa- 
tion to the needs of action, we should be making cognition 
itself the standard of cognition, a and saying that it learns to 
act as it does act primarily by seeking its own ends and 
secondarily by taking account of a certain contact with 
material action. Then we might fearlessly say that ' action * 

a Mr. Stout in his Manual of Psychology seems to me to agree on the 
whole with me, never blinking the relative importance of the cognitive 
system as compared with external action, nor the liability of social 
endorsement to be erroneous. But in one place he seems for a moment, 
as I venture to think, to slur the distinction on which I am here insisting. 
On p. 547 he insists that because belief is a condition of activity, there- 
fore activity must be a condition of belief. And this remark he extends 
to theoretical activity, though, indeed, as referring it to the provisional 
acceptance of working hypotheses, he gives it a very restricted and 
innocent application. But the point I wish to urge is this. In a ' prac- 
tical ' activity the end is assumed to be given, and it is not a cognitive 
end ; therefore in this case there is some tendency to adopt beliefs 
which purely cognitive processes might not confirm ; i. e. there is 
a possibility of a real non-cognitive influence on cognition. But in a 
theoretical activity, unless a preconceived opinion is to be supported 



CHAP, vii] Meaning of * Action' 245 

is the sole test and instrument of selective thinking. How 
* action ' operates, would be the further question, to which 
Logic would be the answer. 

If, on the other hand, action were taken in the sense of the 
production of change in the external world, we should return 
quite a different answer. We should say that the influence 
of practical needs was a diminishing factor as the content 
of systematic knowledge increased. a We should point out 
that when thought has become complex, action on the external 
world is to it as sensation is to science, a condition which is 
little more than negative ; something, disagreement with 
which demands more or less modification of the discrepant 
thought, but any given agreement with which carries us but 
a very little way towards truth. We should further urge 
that the much talked of ' social endorsement ', as applied to 
systematic ideas, has no existence. This is a very important 
point in its practical bearing. Social endorsement does apply 
roughly to habits of action. But to cognitive ideas, to the 
actual content of inventions, and to theories, as such, it has 
no application, only touching them in one or two points out 
of thousands ; and to suppose otherwise is a very mischievous 
superstition. b It is a transference of the ideal postulate 
of reason, that all valid judgment is valid for all intelligence, 
to the de facto social consciousness, to which it applies only 
in grades so contingent and varying as to be of no selec- 
tive value whatever. The leading ideas of society, so far as 
they can be conjectured from their expression, are always in 

(which is an aberration from the theoretical consciousness), the end to 
be obtained is not given, but is itself a conclusion to be constructed. It 
therefore involves ipso facto a modification of the beliefs ancillary to 
it, and the dangerous primacy of action over reason is not confirmed by 
this instance. 

a Mr. Stout in his Manual seems to me perfectly clear on this point ; 
and to be wholly free from the ambiguity whether thought is made true 
by being socially and practically selected, which I find in others. 

h I hope I shall not annoy a friend who conversed with me in the 
U.S.A., in 1892, if I make use of his observation to me : ' Sir, the people 
of these States have endorsed the philosophy of Mr. Herbert Spencer,' 
The example seemed too apposite to be neglected, as showing the 
laxity with which a rough coincidence in one or two points is construed 
as an ' endorsement '. 



246 Limits of a Genetic Theory of Logic [BOOK it 

arrear of the truth known to experts, and more especially 
are discrepant with its own habits of action, which do 
represent in a rough and unorganised form the external 
needs of life. a 

The exclusive importance attached to action on the external 
world, and to social endorsement, even as influences on the 
history of opinion, is, I hold, a mere paradox, unsupported 
by facts. The subordination of the vast cognitive systems 
and interests of mankind (which have, it must be remembered, 
their own relations, dictated by cognitive needs, with the 
' external world ' or sense-perception) to the test of action in 
the narrower sense of material external change, I believe to 
be simply an elementary blunder. If, on the other hand, we 
are only asked to call these interests and systems ' practical ', 
as Aristotle carefully pointed out that they are, in virtue of 
their inherent conativeness, we are asserting, I take it, the 
contradictory of Pragmatism, b but are returning to obvious 
truths. 

The /3. And when we raise the whole question of Pragmatism, 

TYuth g f ** e * as * understand, not ' How do we come to think something ? ' 
but ' What tests or makes its truth ? ' the idea of selection by 
social endorsement, or by success in producing change in 
the external world, loses all claim to consideration, except as 
involving agreement with sense perception, which is provided 
by cognitive activities in a much more adequate form. As 
we have seen, nearly the whole of cognition is simply untouched 
by action on the external world. In such action itself the 
outward change effected is but a minor part, from which, as 
we know, e.g. in all ethical considerations, it is impossible 
with certainty to understand a man's mind ; and when 

a e. g. T. H. Green usually agreed with J. S. Mill on questions of public 
policy, though on all theoretical matters their minds were diametrically 
opposed. This is possible, just because theoretical ideas, even of social 
matters, have so very little of their content in contact with practice. 

b Because Pragmatism says, as I understand, that the only ends of 
action are those which consist in change wrought upon the external 
world, and that, to these, cognition is a means. For me, cognition, as 
a harmony in our experience, has the character of an end of action, 
though not the whole end. But external change is never an end. 

c See Stewart, Notes on Aristotle's Ethics, 1098, a 3, and citation from 
the Politics. 



CHAP, vii] Selection makes Truth ? 247 

we come to the great cognitive systems the prerogative of 
such action vanishes altogether. Indeed, there is but one 
criterion of truth, and that is, a fuller systematic cognition of 
the content whose truth is in question. No history of opinion, 
no formation of a platform, no idiosyncrasies of mental 
organisation, can come into court when the question of truth is 
raised. Then we have to do with nothing but the systematic 
necessity of knowledge and the fact that fuller cognition can 
compel every false judgment to expose itself as flat self- 
contradiction. 

Now the advocates of Genetic Logic seem to me to mean 
that selection by social and practical needs not merely accounts 
for our holding opinions, but also constitutes their truth or 
falsehood. If so, then, as the problem opens out, we have the 
whole of Pragmatism on our hands, and are, as I hold, beyond 
the limits of legitimate genetic explanation. Grant, e.g. for 
the sake of argument, that the unity of consciousness first 
appeared in practical action in the narrowei sense given above 
(as it must have done if there was a time when consciousness 
was entirely * practical ' in its aim), or that it is motor in its 
nature, or that it appears in some sort of general sensory 
process. All that is interesting in the history of opinion, but 
has no bearing on the logical value of such unity. This is 
only to be discovered by an analysis of the part played by it 
in the organisation of experience so as to avoid self-anni- 
hilation by self-contradiction. It is an old story ; granting 
(what is not true) that we need not play the game, yet if we 
sit down to it we must observe the rules. If we are asked, 
Why must we ? there is no answer but to show by analysis 
in any given case that in trying to evade them we are dis- 
guisedly throwing up our hand. I can imagine its being replied, 
1 But you say that A.B.'s rules and platform are got by his 
history and education ; then surely his truth is so too. 1 The 
answer is that his rules and platform are an imperfect apprecia- 
tion of the rules and platform, and cannot stand against 
another, in him or outside him, which more nearly approaches 
them, and therefore is able to exhibit his as self-contradictory. 
His knowledge, or rather opinion, qua his, may be compared 
to his body, a de facto structure, accounted for by accident 



248 Limits of a Genetic Theory of Logic [BOOK n 

and selection as well as nutrition and correlation. But his 
knowledge qua knowledge may be compared with the work 
his body is now capable of as a machine a test to which his 
genesis has nothing whatever to say. Truth is the most 
organised organisation of reality in the medium of judgment ; 
our history may excuse our failures in it, but cannot make 
them successes. 

Views like this suggest to some thinkers the idea of ' the 
mind, for no reason, and by no regular processes, making 
its truth what it will ' ; or of ' the essential mysticism of a 
priori formalism which prevailed before the rise of the genetic 
point of view '. 

This again is an old story. The very error with which I am 
charged appears to me to be merely in the mind of my anta- 
gonist. The whole antagonism of principle between classical 
and modern logic ; the whole conception of a modern develop- 
ment of the genetic point of view, considered as any- 
thing which affects the nature and criterion of truth ; the 
whole idea of ' thought in itself ' as opposed to the nature of 
the real in cognition all this appears to me to be the 
merest mare's nest. The truth of anything is for me 
simply its fullest nature so far as expressible in judgment, 
organised, as the fullest nature must be, so as to avoid 
diminution by the contradiction of its parts. What I deny is, 
not that thought is the expression of organised reality, but 
that the organisation of reality is confined to the production 
of material change in things. The nature of things is both 
general and special, and besides its more general and formal 
characteristics, there are all sorts of grades and variations 
as we push deeper and deeper into the heart of complex 
individuality. These, as found by analysis, form respectively 
the more abstract and more concrete elements of Logic. 
But obviously all of them contain and confirm the general 
nature of truth. 

Why should not the universal ' be a mental experience 
which has for its physical counterpart the synergy of adapted 
action ' ? To me the answer seems simple because there 
is very little thought, proportionately speaking, to which 
there is any adapted action, in the sense of external material 



CHAP, vii] The Ends of Action 249 

change, to correspond. I have said that I think that unity very 
likely first showed itself in adapted action. But no thought, 
probably, ever had its content exhausted in the adaptation 
of external action ; no thought of a cultured mind can ever 
be so exhausted to-day, even in the most practical of activities ; 
and a very great part of life, a part which even economically 
and industrially is an immense and commanding interest in 
the world, has no end in external adapted action at all, but 
on the contrary uses and transforms such action by making 
it its means. A great scientific laboratory, for example, has 
not its unity in a material operation to be produced ; its 
actions have their unity in a cognition to be attained. The 
same point is very strikingly shown in the enormous material 
activities of a Wagner or Handel festival ; whose whole 
practical business has for its determining purpose the produc- 
tion of a harmony in minds, of the same general (not specific) 
nature as a cognitive state. The harmony is the end ; the 
' action ' is the means. 

The formation of new reality, as a bona fide addition to the 
universe of what was not in it before, seems to me a contra- 
diction in terms. But the discovery of reality new to us, 
and the adaptation of intelligence to it, is surely a fact which 
no one has ever denied. And what we call the discovery of 
reality, the coming to take part in it, as for example by 
education a finite mind must at some moment begin to 
accepting its burden as part of the experience we have to 
work out all this is not simply a finding of something pre- 
existent. It is an element, an appearance, of the tension by 
which something maintains itself in ultimate reality ; an 
element or appearance without which the self-maintenance 
could not be complete. There are not two worlds, an original 
which pre-exists, and a copy which we make according to our 
discoveries of the first. When we discover, we neither add 
to the universe nor repeat it. We simply play our part, 
which as we are finite, has a beginning and an ending, in its 
self-maintenance. 

Now if this distinction would satisfy the genetic point of 
view, I think we might come to terms. But if that view 
means a that new reality is created in the sense of being 



250 Limits of a Genetic Theory of Logic 

actually added to the universe by no continuous self-main- 
tenance or logical process, and not created in the sense of being 
discovered as above explained, by entering into its act of 
continuous self -creation, and ft that action on the external 
world, and social selection, are the determinants and criteria 
of truth, then I am afraid there can be no reconciliation 
between us. a 

a See Bradley Mind 79, 323 ff. where he urges that ' My act never is 
creative ' (p. 329). I take it that he does not deny that the universe, 
as a life, maintains itself in some degree through my act. He only 
denies, I gather, that my act brings something new into the nature of 
the universe as a whole. 



CHAPTER VIII 

THE ABOVE THEORY OF JUDGMENT IN RELATION TO 
' ABSOLUTISM ' 

i. A THEORY of Judgment must be criticised on its own Our 
merits. Still, it would point to some defect in such a theory, T ^ ry 
if, without the strongest possible reason, it should tie us down diced ? 
ab initio to an ulterior metaphysical doctrine. 

Judgment, we may say, should be an instrument of asserting 
whatever we want to assert. If it trammels us in our beliefs, 
we must surely be interpreting it wrong. 

Therefore I understand it to be an attack on the theory of 
Judgment which, having originated elsewhere, is in the main 
adopted in this work, when we are told by distinguished 
writers a that it by itself b makes necessary the doctrine of 
Absolutism. The attack is primarily indeed addressed to 
reveal the slightness of the foundation of the latter doctrine ; 
but I take it that its suggestion is double-edged, and might be 
briefly rendered thus : ' Your logical theory is a caprice which 
is enough by itself to force you to Absolutism, and will not 
let you say what you mean. Your Absolutism is a meta- 
physical doctrine founded on little or nothing beyond this 
logical caprice.' My aim in this chapter, as befits a logical 
treatise, is to combat the first of these two suggestions. But 
so far as the ' by itself ' is concerned, this cannot be done with- 
out reference to the positive grounds which force the theory 
of Judgment to define itself in favour of Absolutism. And 
therefore to indicate the reasons for the latter doctrine, though 
strictly belonging to metaphysics, also becomes relevant here. 

The criticism runs thus : If every judgment in ultimate 
analysis qualifies an existing reality by an abstract universal, 

a Mr. Russell, Philosophy of Leibniz, p. 15, and Principles of 
Mathematics, p. 448 ; Professor Stout, Aristotelian Proceedings, 1902-3, 
p. 7 ; Professor A. E. Taylor, ibid., 1908-9, pp. 202-5. 

b These words, ' by itself/ indicate a principal feature of the criticism 
in the sense in which I desire to repel it. 



252 Judgment in Relation to 'Absolutism* [BOOKII 

it is impossible to arrive at a plurality of individuals which 
can be ultimate subjects of predication, because no combination 
of abstract universals can confer the uniqueness a which alone 
distinguishes an individual. There can therefore be but one 
ultimate Individual to which all predicates must belong ; and 
this doctrine is Absolutism. 

On this basis there are two charges against our theory of 
Judgment. First, that its consequent, the doctrine of Abso- 
lutism, is false, and therefore the antecedent, the theory of 
Judgment, must be false also. That is/there are many ultimate 
subjects of predicates, and a theory which involves the denial 
of this must fail. 

Secondly, in any case the theory of Judgment binds us 
from the beginning to a certain metaphysical view, which is 
an unfair and improper use to make of a logical caprice, or, let 
us say, of a logical analysis of the mere form of assertion. 
No finite i The set of facts upon which the former charge is supported, 
real self- begins, as I understand, with the necessity of recognising real 
pluralities of terms in logic and in mathematics. From this 
fact, as I read the argument, b is inferred, what is not included 
in it as a fact, the existence of a plurality of substances of 
which, on the strength of an appeal to our private experience, 
the self is taken to be the principal example. And the exis- 
tence of such true substances is also independently affirmed. 
By substance is meant something which can only be a subject 
and never a predicate, and which is a uniquely individual 
existent, so far independent that as a part or element it is 
no less individually real than the whole, while the whole is 
no less individually real than the parts. 

Now the doctrine of a single Individual Reality rests on 
the demonstration that no finite individuals are self-complete 
and self-contained, and that therefore none such can be self- 
existing substances, or irreducible subjects of predication/ 1 

a See Professor Stout, loc. cit. 

b Taylor, loc. cit. It is very noticeable that this fact is not taken as 
itself including the existence of a plurality of substances ; so that prima 
facie it is a proof that you can quite successfully work with a plurality 
of terms which have no claim to be substances. c Ibid., pp. 208-9. 

d Cf. Bradley in Mind, 74, p. 160, which I saw first after this passage 
was written. 



CHAP, vni] Degrees of Substantiality 253 

I suppose that every discussion of substance to-day must 
start from the position which Lotze has made familiar ; tt 
that to call anything a substance must indicate its mode of 
behaviour, and not an occult somewhat presumed to be in- 
herent in it. From such a point of departure we come at 
once to the position that substantiality, like individuality, 
is a matter of degree. No finite real is wholly independent and 
self-existent ; none, that is to say, when taken as a subject, 
can be concerned in judgments which are completely true 
either regarding its predicates or regarding its relations with 
other subjects. 1 * If this is so and even the argument 
which I am disputing admits and maintains it c there is no 
finite real which is in the full sense a substance. No judgment 
in which such a real stands as subject or term can ultimately 
be true ; the connections alleged about it must either be too 
much or too little. 

I must explain that to deny the self-existence of any finite 
real, is not to assert that Reality could be complete without 
it. Nothing is self-existent, but nothing is non-contributory. 

ii. The above argument is merely carried into detail in the Degrecb 
doctrine of degrees of individuality. This, if we start from ^duality. 
Lotze 's position, is indisputable ; and is over and over again 
asserted both by implication and in so many words in the 
argument under discussion. d There are terms, we saw it admit, 
which are not substances ; and when we come to substances, 
it is granted that the finite self has less individuality than the 
social whole, which nevertheless most people would not admit 
to be a spiritual substance at all. And in fact, no finite 
individual is self-contained, self-consistent, or self-dependent ; 
all finite individuals differ in their degrees of these charac- 
teristics. This seems to me to be one of the truths which 
are accepted without being believed. I do not think that it is 

ft Metaphysics, Eng. Trans., p. 76. b See i. 206 ff. above. 

c Taylor, loc. cit., and Stout, Ar. Proc., p. 21 ; and cp. Bradley, 
Appearance and Reality, in the arguments against Pluralism, pp. 141-3 
and 607. 

d e.g. p. 211, 'we might draw a distinction here between individual 
substances of higher and lower orders.' 

e I cannot reconcile this with the requirement that the element ib to 
be as real as the whole, and vice versa, ibid., p. 208. 



254 Judgment in Relation to * Absolutism ' [BOOK n 

or can be seriously disputed on philosophical grounds. All 
the distinctions which philosophy takes account of between 
higher and lower grades of life and experience come back to 
this. Any logical or metaphysical system is enough to show 
how the positive value of the law of non-contradiction 
embodies itself in such gradations ; and the argument of 
Mr. Bradley's Appearance and Reality is, as I understand it, 
the same in principle throughout. Yet if this principle were 
not only accepted but believed there would surely be at once 
an end of pluralism and of the multitude of self-existent 
substances. If all finite subjects have in various degrees their 
reality outside them, it is idle to speak of any of them as 
substances in the sense before us. As a striking example of 
gradation, we may note how the series of individuals passes 
downwards into cases where individuality, and with it reality, 
touch a minimum, and fade into the extremes of self-contra- 
diction and self-alienation, as in various grades of the animal 
mind, or in the terms, such as point or atom, for which it is 
not claimed that they are substances. Confront an upholder 
01 selves as self-existent substances with a brood of new- 
hatched chickens, and ask him whether these are individual 
substances or not. They are certainly unique by their relation 
to presentation ; but this, as we shall see, is a feature actually 
opposed to true individuality. If, further, they are in be- 
haviour and capacities true individual substances, or if they 
are not, the answer is equally fatal to the substance-theory. 
In the former case an enormous difference of degree is admitted 
within the series, so great as to destroy the value of the 
self-existence claimed for its members ; in the latter case 
a distinction of kind is admitted between grades of spiritual 
beings which cannot be other than arbitrary. 

Experi- iii. The appeal to our experience of ourselves is of all 
things the most fatal to a doctrine of self -existent substances. 



to doc- The evidence is so abounding that it is hard to know where 

sub- 6 t begin. Perhaps it is enough to say that no doctrine of 

stances. a monadic self, in the sense of a self which is single and sub- 

stantial, has ever been able to deal with the self as it actually 

exists ; a Plato's least of all, as he constantly admits and 

a Cf. Appearance and Reality, p. 86 ft. 



CHAP, vni] The monadic soul impossible 255 

maintains. What we miss in him, what would have taken him 
fairly beyond the doctrine of the monadic soul, which hampers 
him as he himself points out, a is the conclusion which lies so 
near him, that the terrestrial course of the soul is the soul's 
opportunity for self-perfection, and that when struggling with 
multiplicity it has not fallen, but is for the first time (as com- 
pared with its self-existent purity) in the way to rise. The 
logic of his system in fact demands this point of view, and it 
might be said to be implicit in his doctrine of the eartldy 
life ; b but I cannot say that he has anywhere to my knowledge 
expressed it. Some kind of unification at some stage of being, 
no doubt we with Plato assume as inevitable. But what 
kind of unification, and at what stage of being, whether or 
not within the limits of an individuality that can be called 
ours this is altogether a different question. Nothing in our 
experience seems to warrant or even to suggest it, while our 
moments of fullest life seem most distinctly to deny it. That 
our self, or will, or mind, at its best, is not the self or will or 
mind of a unique individual, bounded, so to speak, by our 
normal circumference, is the one definite point on which 
spiritual experience seems unambiguous. c And in the relation 
of the individual to society, described as before referred to, 
we have this admitted ; and, as its consequence, that no 
individual which has a foreign environment can act in a way 
purely self-expressive. What kind of individuality is that, 
which cannot express itself in its acts ? It is to me quite 
astonishing that an appeal in favour of a doctrine of inde- 
pendent substances should be made on the ground of our 
experience of ourselves. What all great masters of life have 
felt this to reveal has been a seeking on the part of the self 
for its own reality, which carries it into something beyond. 
And social experience, like that of art, is absolutely conclusive 
on this point, 
iv. But a logical objection is raised against an apparent Difficulty 

subject being in any sense a ' predicate '. d m Subject 

^ * being Pre- 

* Rep., ix. end and x. 611 C. dicate. 

b As the need and value of the Fall is in Christianity. 

c See Bracllcy's Ethical Studies, p. 288. 

d It is noticeable that Mr. Bradley, in the Principles of Logic, spoke 
of judgments about non-temporal subjects as a class of singular 



256 Judgment in Relation to 'Absolutism ' [BOOK n 

Class Pre- It is urged that to predicate an individual subject of the 
dication. A b solute has the self-contradictory result that the Absolute 
is included, so to speak, in that individual as a class of one ; 
in other words, is identified with that individual. 

Now the connection of Subject and Predicate in judgment 
has essentially nothing to do with the inclusion of the subject S 
in a class P. Judgments which are so construed a mean some* 
thing else, and are in no case the equivalent of assertions of 
class inclusion. And the importance of this is, that though 
in some cases class inclusion is inferrible from (in no case 
equivalent to) them, yet, following the straight line of what 
judgment really means, not only do we never at all deal with 
class as such, but when we come to the point where Logic 
deals with the universal in its true form, we leave the pre- 
conception of class behind us for good and all. From the 
point where the development of the judgment branches into 
the assertion of differences within individuals (the Singular 
judgment with proper name for subject b ) on the one hand, 
and the abstract nexus of different contents (the ' hypothetical ' 
judgment) on the other, the predicate has nothing more to do 
with class significance. The meaning which has really underlain 
all its forms, the holding differences together within a whole 
of identity, becomes sole and unmistakable. 

The real significance of the Individual Judgment is revealed 
when it has developed into the Disjunctive judgment, in 
which you have a significant individual subject-system set 
out in the subordinate actual forms which it takes under 

judgments in which the true categorical, undiscoverable elsewhere, might 
conceivably be found. He gave as an example among others, ' The 
soul is a substance.' (Principles of Logic, c. 2, s. 7, 41, 81). I should 
suppose that the criticism of Appearance and Reality is hostile to the 
claims of these judgments to express metaphysical truth, although 
they might still be recognised as forming a separate class in Logic. 

tt Bradley 's Logic, pp. 162-8. 

b It may be said ' But you can treat this as a class judgment ', as in 
the old type ' Socrates is mortal *. The fact is, you can play almost 
any trick with the forms of proposition, because they have so much 
in common. But what such a judgment form really challenges us to do, 
is to develope the content of Socrates as an individual whole containing 
connected differences. And so the predicates should be regarded as 
elements entering into him, just as his acts are. 



CHAP, viii] Individual as Predicate 257 

different conditions. ' When the Absolute tumbles into the 
water it becomes a fish ; ' so in asserting itself under this or 
that condition of its own imposing it becomes Mr. Smith or 
Mr. Jones. Why not ? No true relation of membership 
within a concrete universal can be expressed in a class- 
predication, or in any judgment to which such a predication 
is equivalent. And no judgment, strictly speaking, expresses 
by its form a class-predication at all. 

v. It is said that a predicate is always universal (meaning Imper 
abstract universal), and that therefore an individual can ^ 
never be a predicate, even of the Absolute. can be 

First, it should be remembered that the individual is the tl^al 
highest and only true form of the universal, and if a member Predi- 
of a system, has in it the nature of the whole to which it cate * 
belongs. It can, therefore, as has just been pointed out, be 
a predicate of that whole, if the conditions under which it 
becomes so are specified. 

Secondly ; no doubt a wholly self-complete and self-con- 
tained individual could not be a predicate of any other in- 
dividual. No conditions could be assigned under which it 
would be so. They would be two perfect worlds, and there 
could not be two perfect worlds either side by side or in any 
dependence on each other. a 

But we are free from all difficulty on that head, for it is 
amply clear and confessed that our individuals are finite and 
imperfect. They are, as we saw, b members within a whole 
on which they are dependent for their very self-hood and self- 
identity. Such individuals can certainly be predicates, in the 
sense in which members of a whole are conditionally predicable 
of the whole. The nature of an organism, starting as an equi- 
potential whole, may express itself, in elements conditioned by 
being at one end of the body, as a head, in those conditioned 
by being at the other end, as a tail, or according to other 
conditions as eye or gills. Of course these organs are predicates 
of the organism as a whole, subject to the conditions which 
have differentiated them. 

But there is something more. Individuals which like all 
finite individuals fall short of true Individuality are, as we 

ft Appearance and Reality, chap, xx end. b Above, 254-5. 

1837-2 S 



258 Judgment in Relation to ' Absolutism ' [BOOK n 

have seen, not, as they stand, terms in true judgments. a They 
have no power to resist reduction when considered in the 
light of the demands of reality ; and are in ultimate analysis 
connections of content within the real individual to which 
they belong. b And this becomes important in the present 
case ; for though no one doubts that the self has a degree of 
individuality, yet its real character consists not in individuality 
but in a claim to it, which may or may not, so far as a first 
appearance can show, be realisable consistently with the exist- 
ing form and arrangement of the self. That the latter is the 
case in a considerable degree, i.e. that the self, in order to 
become anything like a true individual, must be very greatly 
transformed from what we are aware of it as being, I hold to 
be an obvious truth, guaranteed by all experience and by 
every serious religious creed and philosophical belief. 

I repeat and summarise ; a member in a whole can be 
predicated, under a condition, of that whole which is his 
subject. d And further, an imperfect individual is according 
to the degree of his imperfection a subject whose connection 
with his predicates can only be expressed in judgments which 
are untrue ; and to bring his nature into harmony with the 
truth of the whole it must be transmuted and rearranged so 
that it can be expressed as a true connection within the 
content of the whole. It is plain from the argument before 
us that this is so. The kind of individual with which we are 
dealing is unable to express his own nature in his own be- 
haviour. He is, in Spinoza's language, very largely f passive ' ; 
the acts ascribed to him are not his own. And therefore 
judgments in which he appears as a subject are not true. 

Take as an extreme case the minds of animals, of which 
we spoke above. Are they not best treated, most adequately 

a See Mind, 74, loc. cit., and above p. 254. 

b See Principles of Logic, p. 93. 

It seems to me clear that Plato, even if he holds the soul to be eternal, 
does not think the same of the self. 

d Professor Stout, Ar. Proc., loc. cit., p. 21, seems to me to take an 
example of part and part for a relation of whole and part. The roof 
or pillar holds in each the nature of the cathedral, though not so directly 
that of each other. Certainly each of these is predicable, condition- 
ally, of the cathedral, as an eye is of the organism. 



CHAP, viii] The Theory of Judgment not biassed 259 

treated, as streams or eddies of mind in which some temporary 
combination, some minor aspect or centre within the universe 
demands transitory expression, in cases where the needs and 
conditions do not exist which give rise to an apparently 
individual subject ? No one, who has loved a dog, can doubt 
that its mind has a value of the same kind, if remotely 
the same, as his own. a No one, on the other hand, can well 
suppose that it has the distinctness and organisation of content 
which we should expect of anything that is to have a permanent 
place of its own as a separate member of the system of reality. 
Surely the solution must be of the general type which conceives 
this partial mind as contributing a character, some intensi- 
fication of loyalty and affection, to some greater existence, 1 * 
but not claiming in itself to be a unique differentiation of 
the real. 

vi. So far then it seems clear that there are plenty of good Absolu- 
grounds, akin to but not dependent on the theory of judgment ong est 
in question, for presuming that there is ultimately but one own sub- 
true individual Real, of which all contents that can be affirmed 
in judgments are ultimately predicates. In fact it would 
almost appear that this is not denied. And if so we have 
only to establish, in answer to the second charge, that our 
theory of judgment lets one say, for ordinary purposes, 
what one likes about ' individuals ' as subjects of judgments, 
and about other pluralities of terms. 

2. And passing here to the second charge (p. 252), we recall Freedom 
that this is a point which has been greatly misapprehended. me nt on 

i. For all current purposes of logical utterance and we have thls 
seen that the criticism itself is at a level which concerns no- e y * 
thing more, nothing really ultimate it is the doctrine of a sole 
self-existent subject which has first given complete freedom to 
the judgment. For, in view of it, the traditional theory of a 

a Cp. Bradley, Mind, 72, 508. 

b Compare the well-known and attractive doctrine of the final 
annihilation of the wicked only, which in its modern form consists in 
conceiving an individual participation in eternity as something which 
is not for every mind, but perhaps for some. 

c Professor Stout, loc. cit., seems to me to affirm a plurality of 
ultimate subjects, but to admit that they are not ultimately self- 
existent. 

S2 



260 Judgment in Relation to 'Absolutism* [BOOKII 

Gram- proposition divided into S and P becomes a mere superstition.* 
matical j t p erm j|. s fa e judgment to be formulated as any complex 
jected. of terms and relations, any arrangement of a plurality of 
apparent subjects, as well as of a substantive and adjective 
standing in the regular scheme as grammatical subject and 
predicate. Ultimately all this can make no difference ; for 
the one part of the judgment is not judged of the other ; the 
whole complex, grammatical S P and all, is predicated of the 
ultimate Reality. Thus one shape of judgment is as good as 
another, except that the most natural and convenient is the 
best. No one has resisted more strenuously the folly of forcing 
every assertion into the S P schema than believers in the sole 
Real. One may use the form of the common subject, as the 
present writer has urged, b to express the condition or limitation 
under which the ultimate Real accepts the predicated content. 
But this is not what the common S P schema takes itself to 
mean, and is not intended for a defence of it. 

Thus I infer that no objection lies against the doctrine 
of a sole ultimate subject from any tendency to interfere 
with the freedom of the judgment-form, which this doctrine, 
more than any other, has tended to establish. 

Indi- ii. But there is a last intensification of this objection to 

demands deal with - Jt is contended that whatever may be the fact as 

Designa- to what we commonly call subordinate individuals, whethei 

mistake. * n rea lity they me genuine subjects or not, our theory does 

not leave the question open, but cuts away db initio all 

possibility of distinguishing them as individuals. For it 

restricts us to universal predicates, and universal predicates 

can nevei, by any complication of them, distinguish and define 

individual subjects. This can be done, and can only be done, 

by contact with immediate experience. This is to say, that 

Individuality rests upon designation, to which a predicate 

can never be equivalent, for it never confines us to a ' this ' ; 

and therefore an individual can never be defined bypredicates. 

And I reply at once that Individuality cannot possibly rest 

on designation ; and that what does so rest is not Individuality 

a See Principles of Logic, p. 23, and above, i, p. 76. 

b See above, i. 3, 75-7. 

Stout, Ar. Proc., loc. cit., 19-24 ; cp. Bradley, Mind, 72. 500, 



CHAP, vim The Individual Definable 261 

but Particularism ; a the very sign of negation and imper^ 
fection, which, wherever it applies, is the proof pro tanto of 
the absence of Individuality. But yet the point is in a sense 
perfectly sound. Our individuals, so far as imperfect, ' do 
depend on designation for the recognition of their uniqueness. 
And this is a conclusive proof that they are not and cannot 
be genuine individuals. I cannot understand why Professor 
Stout calls them ultimate when, as it seems to me, he explicitly 
admits that they are not. b For designation just excludes self- 
containedness and self-completion, and that uniqueness which 
comes of filling a definite place in an ordered whole. It is 
tending, I note, to become a commonplace that the indivi- 
dual can only be designated and cannot be defined. But in 
truth, ultimately, the distinction should be reversed. A true 
individual cannot be designated, but it alone, and nothing 
else, can be defined. Designation means pointing as with 
the finger ; mute identification ab extra ; but the true 

a Bradley, Principles of Logic, 76-7 ; Mind, 72, loc. cit., and 74. 167-8. 

b Ar. Proc., loc. cit., p. 21. I cannot think that the argument of 
p. 23 successfully impeaches Mr. Bradley 's criticism of the analytic judg- 
ment of sense. 

No doubt (Mind, loc. cit.) it is impossible to recover, on the level of 
ideas, the uniqueness belonging to mere designation, the mute and 
negative '.this not that '. Objections may always be raised such as 
Mr. Bradley raises in the passage referred to. You cannot specify 
a partial and imperfect individual by conditions which ensure that he 
is unique in the universe. But this is not because he is individual, but 
because he is imperfectly individual. And so far as an experience 
possesses individuality so far as it has a complete and self-contained 
nature, positive and real, so far it has uniqueness because it includes 
the conditions which protect it against repetition by assigning its place 
in the universe. That these conditions cannot be complete when the 
individual itself is partial and imperfect is only natural. But for all 
that, in principle, uniqueness depends on completeness of explicit 
conditions and not on designation, and thus we are intensifying and not 
enfeebling it as we tend to complete the organisation of experience 
through ideas. If a perfect individuality is not to be experienced in 
the form of discursive thought, that is nothing surprising, and in no 
way suggests that it may not be approachable through that form. As 
we have seen throughout, individuality varies pari passu with degrees 
of being and reality. It is altogether perverse to find in it the character 
of the datum of mere contact, as of the undefinable. See Green, Prol., 
sect. 194 and author's notice of G. E. Moore's Principia Ethica j Mind, 
xii. 259. 



262 Judgment in Relation to ' Absolutism ' [BOOK n 

individual, and any real so far as individual, identifies itself 
not mutely but explicitly, and not db extra, or negatively,* 
but intrinsically, by what it has in itself. If about any element 
you are able to urge that so far as we know there might be 
another just the same, that is a sufficient proof that the first is 
not genuinely individual. If it were, it would contain, in its 
completeness, the reason why there could be no other beside 
it. Uniqueness by designation, by mute contact with our 
experience, is, we might say perhaps, formal. b Uniqueness by 
adequacy of content and absence of need or room for repetition 
we might call mateiial. In dealing with the imperfect elements 
which meet us in our experience we have need of both ; but 
nevertheless the predominance of the one or of the other 
practically measures the whole distance, within our world, 
between the poles of the unreal which is merely given, and the 
real which is coherent and self -complete. 

Doctrine iii. We have sufficiently seen then I hope, that (a) the 
mate*" ^^ eor y f the s l e ultimate subject does not stand by itself, 
' Subject ' as a logical caprice, in necessitating the theory of the Absolute, 
pTuo? kut is the consequence of a comprehensive and well-supported 
sophical philosophical attitude, and (b) that it does not, as a matter 
f re e e ry of expression, forbid our common so-called individuals any 
completeness that could be ascribed to them ; but that they 
fall short only because they are incapable of receiving more, 
and, in the higher forms of judgment are denied only a means 
of distinction (the ' this '), which could not possibly be service- 
able in establishing their individuality. 

tt i.e. by a mute discrimination against others. * 
b See i, 1 06 and 207 above on the relation of the Demonstrative to 
the Universal Judgment. 



CHAPTER IX 

TRUTH AND COHERENCE 

i. IT seems worth while, for the reasons assigned in the Dis- 
Preface, to restate at this point the general attitude of the ? 
present work to the theory of truth. spon- 

The main current doctrines on this matter have been con- 
veniently designated in recent discussion as the theory of 
Coherence and the theory of Correspondence respectively. I 
should hardly have thought it necessary to explain that I 
cannot for my own part conceive how the doctrine of Corres- 
pondence can be adopted as a serious theory, were it not that 
in an elaborate criticism a of the first edition of this work it 
has been urged that I have myself adopted it. b 

The genetic theorists have discovered the failure of the 
correspondence theory, and believing some of us to be old- 
fashioned, they attribute it to us and then attack it. But we 
think, or at least, I think, that no logician really of the first 
rank ever held it, and that our critics are belated in awaking 
to its impossibility. However, whether the misconception 
is my fault or my critic's, it will be well to make a short re- 
statement of my view towards the close of so voluminous 
a work. The details of the criticism will all, I think, settle 
themselves if the radical misconception is explained. But I 

* Cf. 'Bosanquet's Theory of Judgment.' Miss Thompson, Chicago 
Decennial Publications, 1903. I may note that for myself I entirely 
disclaim the epithet ' epistemological ' which Professor Dewey frequently 
employs in his introductory essay. For I understand it to imply a 
theory of cognition in which truth and reality are treated as external 
to one another, in fact, some form of the correspondence theory. He 
is indeed discussing Lotze and not any writer with whose views I am 
in agreement. But I am not sure how far his criticism is meant to 
stretch, and it is better to guard oneself. 

b Under all the circumstances, this supposition recalls to me a vulgar 
story current in my youth, of a doctor who, finding himself unequal to 
treating the patient's actual ailment, proposed to inoculate him with 
a quite different malady, ' for,' he said, ' I'm death on that.' 



264 Truth and Coherence [BOOKII 

shall further take occasion to express my own interpretation of 
the present position in the philosophical world, with reference 
to logical theory, which offers certain highly suggestive 
antitheses. 

An Ex- i. I will say at once that there is just one expression in 
w r wch n m y kook which in my opinion may have given some sort 
might be of colour to what I must call my critic's fundamental error, 
mislead- It j g the phrase in which j sta ted the relation of Reality, 

as the subject to be defined, to thought as the process of 
defining it, I said : a ' It is an essential of the act of judgment 
that it always refers to a Reality which goes beyond and is 
independent of the act itself.' Such an expression, taken by 
itself, or in a treatise framed on wholly different lines from 
the present one, would not have been inconsistent with a 
conception of reality as an existent world external to our 
thinking, in resemblance or dissimilarity to which lay the 
truth or falsehood of our ideas. But in criticising a work 
which takes for its watchword the saying that ' The truth 
is the whole ', offering this as the solution of the difficulty 
that a world outside thought cannot be laid hold of by thought, 
it does seem to me a gratuitous misconception. And further, 
I think it is one which not only every paragraph of general 
theory, but still more the whole progress and structure of the 
book disowns. The mere structure of the treatise is enough 
to explain the expression. 

Reality is independent of the Judgment in two senses. 
There is, of course, an ultimate Reality ; a higher experience 
than ours ; we must postulate that if we do not mean to accept 
e.g. all individuals' worlds of experience as separate and 
unconnected. When I speak of this Reality as independent 
of our act of judgment, as it is in an enormous proportion, 
I do not mean to exclude the truth that our judgment, in an 
infinitesimal degree, contributes to sustain it, and forms an 
element in its life. In this limited sense the two forms of 
Reality are interdependent. But their interdependence is not 
correspondence, and their independence is not that of original 
and copy. 

This Reality then shows itself in our world of experience 

a i, 97- 



CHAP, ixi c Veritas norma sui ' 265 

in a way which is independent of our act of judgment in a 
second sense. For our immediate experience, our feeling, our 
possession of a contact with a world,, has individuality in a 
mode which as a mode of experience a our judgment cannot 
confer or originate, but can only attempt to restore by a 
secondary process, when its unity is transcended. The contact 
in feeling has existence and quality together, and primarily is 
satisfactory and self-contained, though carrying a sense of 
diversity which challenges analysis in judgment, but is as such 
independent of interpretation through judgment. 

We construct our world as an interpretation which attempts 
to restore the unity which the real has lost by our making 
its diversity explicit. This construction is our intellectual 
world. It is a form of reality, possessing some of its characters ; 
and there are other forms, higher and lower. But none of 
them can be a world external to our thought and yet acting 
as its standard. The thing is a contradiction in terms, not 
because of the metaphor of externality, but because of the 
vital autonomy of the thought system. 

If we ask, how we know our interpretation to be true or 
false, to possess or not to possess the character of reality, 
so far as its discursive form allows, the answer comes from the 
principle of non-contradiction, which is only another form 
of words for the principle that the Truth is the whole. This 
could easily be shown at length. b The important point is that 
the principle of non-contradiction is positive and constructive ; 
its force cannot be evaded by a logical quietism, by saying 
nothing. For you cannot get away from the world ; if you 
try to say nothing you are in contradiction with a mass of 
experience ; not with a presumed external world, but with 
what enters into your own being ; and you leave it in contradic- 
tion with itself. 

ii. Our doctrine of truth is therefore wholly immanent. The 
There is no external standard, and, of course, no possibility 
of applying it if there were one. The criterion c identifies itself nent. 

a For its content is modifiable. See below, p. 297. 

b I hope to go over this ground in much greater detail in a forthcoming 
work of a more metaphysical character. 

We have been warned that a criterion is properly a label, extraneous 
to the character which it indicates. But any such criterion in highly 



266 Truth and Coherence [BOOKII 

absolutely with that imposed by the doctrine of coherence. a 
And the structure and nisus of the treatise is a simple embodi- 
ment of this principle. It is a progressive interpretation of 
the ' this ' ; the contact with reality in which we possess 
both existence and quality. It is an advance from one form 
of individuality to another ; from individuality which has 
never gone beyond itself to individuality which has experienced 
contradiction and is being approximately restored as an 
explicit system of non-contradictory content. It is a product 
of the interest and purpose to explain all that you can ; to 
push the explanation further and further in response to the 
demand for removal of contradiction in the relative whole 
of experience at every stage. This interest and purpose is 
the clue pursued by the effort of judgment from beginning 
to end. It is ^the special and distinctive cognitive interest. 
And a treatise like the present endeavours to trace in its 
genesis the system developed by the action of this interest 
which is of course inclusive of all more special stimuli and 
occasions. The whole interpretation, as referred to the 
individuality that appears solid, but therefore only implicit, 
in the ' this ', possesses the character of reality, viz. indivi- 
duality ; not perfectly, but in the degree in which the form 
of finite thought can achieve it. b We know this by the fact 
that this character, the character of a systematic whole, is 
the condition of our possessing a world of experience at all. 
If we let a contradiction stand, we possess so much the less 
of reality. Something cancels something, and we are the 
poorer and dissatisfied. 

Truth its iii. Immanence is the absolute condition of a theory of truth. 

own test. It is this that ma kes the fundamental contrast between the 
coherence and the correspondence theory. As I said at 

organised matters is a bad, i. e. highly fallible criterion. And it is well 
to insist that in such matters the only sound criterion is the character 
itself or some important element of it. 

a See the author's Knowledge and Reality, p. 331 (publ. 1885), 
for a criticism of the simile of the foundations of knowledge. This 
criticism is always decisive of a writer's attitude to the correspondence 
theory. Cf. Bradley, Mind, 71. 335. 

b Need I say that errors in the personal thought-process are expected 
and admitted ? 



CHAP, ix] De facto correspondence 267 

starting, truth is individual.* This is only another formof words 
for the principle of non-contradiction, the principle that the 
truth is the whole, and the doctrine that coherence is the test 
of truth and reality. Truth is then its own criterion. That 
is to say, it can only be tested by the more of itself. Your 
completest system at the moment cannot be further tested. 
You can only test it further when you are in a position to make 
it more complete. Then what interferes with its greater 
completeness must go. 

Is it necessary to say a word about comprehensiveness ? 
Sometimes we are told that our criterion is mere formal con- 
sistency. This can mean nothing but that the critic has not 
thought the matter out to the bitter end. By coherence or 
consistency we mean the consistency, so far as attainable, 
of the whole body of experience with itself. Nothing less 
would satisfy the law of individuality or the necessity of 
non-contradiction. But in this interpretation of consistency 
comprehensiveness is obviously included. 

iv. One word more about correspondence. If an identical Not all 
principle operates in different worlds, e.g. in the experiences gpond'en 
of different spiritual beings, the products aie likely to corre- means 
spond. And I notice a tendency b to aid the process of inocu- 
lating us with the malady which is not ours, by insisting on 
this obvious truth. If the fundamental principle of reality 
is operative in the sphere of finite thought, of course this 
sphere will show a character that possesses certain common 
features with those of other spheres or of the ultimate real. 
But if correspondence, i.e. identity in certain characters of 
two or more systems, must result, that is no argument that 
correspondence is the criterion for either system. If two men 
add up a sum right and therefore the same, that does not 
mean that the sums are right because they are the same, or 
that one man has copied from the other, Of course, there is 
a reality which is more than an individual's thought. There 
is, at least, the thought of other individuals. And undoubtedly 
these will correspond, i.e. will show a structure identical in 

a *> P- 3 above. 

b See even Joachim in The Nature of Truth, p. 174. 

c On the nature of correspondence, see Essentials, p. 18. 



268 Truth and Coherence 

principle but different in details. But that is nothing against 
the character of both being immanently determined. 

I shall return in a later section to the question in what sense 
the coherence theory fails. 
The 2. I will now venture to state what I believe to be the 

WOTk? 1 cause an d tendency of the peculiar logical movement of 

to-day, to-day. 

'Life, i. It is plain that the last half century has brought to 

tke a>C ~ philosophy in general a great revival of interest. This re- 

* Feeling/ vival has coincided with a marked increase of the tendency, 
traceable in European thought ever since Rousseau, to empha- 
sise the philosophical value of feeling, of practice and action 
in the plainest meaning of the woids, and of what has come 
to be called, in an almost technical sense, * life ' and ' living ', 
The movement has conceived itself as a sort of democratic 
revolution in the things of the mind, a and is obviously con- 
nected with the change of affairs in society and politics. A 
supposed aristocracy of intellectualist principles is to be 
dethroned. Truth is to become more vital, more accessible, 
its touchstone more obvious and more easily applied. Life, 
one may say, is to be substituted for thought as the central 
object and impulse of philosophy. 

All this has had and is having the usual effect of revolu- 
tionary demands in philosophy. b The new theorists are insist- 
ing on something which was really vital in the older tradition, 
and the result of their movement will probably be a certain 
alteration of balance and emphasis in the formulation of that 
tradition. One can hardly suppose that a movement so 
widespread and so popular will bring with it no elements 
of gain at all. If it brought nothing but its adherents' interest 
in philosophy it would already have brought a good deal. 

The mis- ft. But the movement itself, I am sure, is conducted under 

conx;ep- a m j sa pp re h ens } on< j t j las ^j^ o f some thing very partial 

which 

governs a Cp. the author's Philosophical Theory of the State, ed. 2, Introd. 

the move- Nietzsche represents perhaps the ' Saviour of Society ' who attends 

ment * upon some democratic movements. 

b Cf. the analysis p. 231 ff. above, of the relation of epochs of em- 
piricism to the traditional distinctions of Logic. 

c As will appear, I believe this to be far the greater part of the gain 
it will bring. 



CHAP, ix] Place of Genetic Logic 269 

and consequently sees, and, as I have pointed out, further 
produces by its assumptions, a fundamental opposition where 
there is really nothing but a part unduly contrasted with 
its whole. 

Let us particularise. Genetic Logic, the treatment of 
thought as a system or at least an aggregate of adaptations 
evolved in response to the needs of practice, has in principle 
adopted and popularised the coherence theory of truth. This 
doctrine, being as we have seen a doctrine of immanence, is 
essential to all vital philosophy and logic, and, to the best 
of my belief, no other has in fact been held by any leader of 
European thought from Plato downwards.* But by re- 
stricting the coherence which is to be the standard to the 
coherence of adaptation with external action, at first (as no 
one can doubt) in the purely normal and everyday usage 
of the latter term, it has on the one hand voiced a popular 
demand, but on the other has precluded a real understanding 
by itself of its own philosophical position. And so it strongly 
tends, as we saw, to assume that in the older philosophy, 
which it feels to be in some way its antithesis, the view opposed 
in principle to its own, that of correspondence to an external 
standard, must be the prevailing one. And it conducts its 
controversy on this basis, reinforcing its attitude by utilising 
another popular demand, that for actual individual endeavour 
and modification of things, which it is unable to unite (the 
great and ultimate test of a philosophy) with the belief in 
a perfect and timeless real. And the completer form of its 
own logical view, the coherence theory of truth, it is apt to 
stigmatise as a mere formal consistency. 11 

a See, for example, my remark on Aristotle, p. 224 above, I Icnow 
that this has been adversely criticised, but I believe that when we 
consider the full meaning of apprehension by vovs as the sort of insight 
which comes, for instance, by induction, my view will be seen to hold 
good. Cp. for example, Burnet's Ethics of Aristotle, pp. xxxvii and 
xlii. I may say in general that I should have guarded myself much 
more emphatically against the correspondence theory if I had ever 
imagined that it could by any mischance be imputed to me. 

b As I suggested above, the controversy is thrown completely askew 
if you take Lotze as typical of philosophical Logic. The whole state- 
ment of the issue, as based upon the contrast of thought in general 
with reality in general (Dewey in Introductory Essays to Chicago 



270 Truth and Coherence [BOOKII 

Fallacies iii. Thus in a very able statement a of the contrasted 
of Gene- positions of genetic and the older philosophical Logic, I seem 
to myself to find three connected misconceptions at the very 
basis of the whole representation. 

First, there is Dualism. Thought is from the beginning 
conceived in contrast to its occasions. It is taken as reflective, 
as what arises now and again when we set ourselves consciously 
to ' think '. That is to say, this is the limitation of the thought 
with which the writer deals. Something called Constitutive 
thought is mentioned in contrast with it ; but whether this is 
simply the working thought by which we carry on unreflective 
life, or some theoretical construction of a creative force in 
the universe it seems impossible to tell. What is clear is this 
much, that not merely the limitation of thought as a distinc- 
tive form of reality which operates through ideas, but the 
special limitation of ' pale reflective thought ' as against 
' active endeavour ', or of ' abstract description ' as against 
' living appreciation ' are accepted as formulations for the 
object of the new conception of Logic. b ' Thought arises in 
response to its own occasion.' Then, by removing only the 
definiteness of the occasion, which ought to be retained, and 
retaining the dualism of nature between constructive and 
discursive thought, which ought to be removed, an antithesis 
is created against philosophical logic which assigns to it as 
its characteristic problem the relation of thought in general 
to reality in general, as the epistemological issue out of which 
its whole treatment springs. And an apparent corroboration 
of this attitude is found by giving a predominant place to an 
analysis of Lotze's position. 

University Decennial Publications, 1903) appears to me thus utterly 
falsified. If we want to deal with a master of philosophical Logic why 
not select Hegel or Plato or even Green ? That is, if one was not going 
to take the obvious course of considering Mr. Bradley's whole position 
with regard to Thought and Reality. a Dewey, 1. c. 

b This takes us back to the conception of thought as decaying sense, 
which, whether right or wrong, is sharply opposed to the conception of 
it in the masters of Idealism. I should explain that Idealism, in the 
sense in which I use it for the philosophy, say, of Hegel, is the antithesis 
of what is commonly called Rationalism. But I know of no other 
name that would carry the reference. 

c Dewey, p. 6, and cp. Green, Prolegomena to Ethics, p. 27. 



CHAP, ix] Logic and Epistemology 271 

This idea of the situation I say it mainly to make my 
own conviction clear seems to me wholly and utterly false. 
The relation the nature of the antithesis is in my view 
altogether different from this. 

In Logic as I understand it, attempting to follow out at 
a long interval the practice of the masters, there is no episte- 
mology in the sense supposed, a no treatment of thought in 
itself as opposed to reality in general, no question of a bridge 
from the one to other. In analysing the thought-world it holds 
itself to be analysing the structure of reality, the detailed 
and articulated responses by which the living body of experi- 
ence exhibits its endeavour to approximate as a system of 
ideas to a non-contradictory whole. Of course all these phases 
could be construed as responses to the environment. But 
the environment for thought is not the sphere of external 
action but the universe of experience. The occasions which 
evoke responses of thought within specific limitations are 
merely a fragment of this total environment. The genetic 
theory, so it seems to me, has merely insisted on an arbitrarily 
limited fragment of the genuine logical theory. 

From this, therefore, it is separated in degree rather than 
in kind, by a further error involved in its naive Dualism ; 
an error for which I can find no better name than Occasionalism. 
Thought, we are told, is always within the limits of a specific 
occasion, a specific purpose. It is charged against what is 
treated as general logical theory b that it disregards these 
limits, or only regards them as throwing light on the terms 
on which thought transacts its business with reality. ' But 
in the end all this is incidental. In the end the one problem 
holds. How do the specifications of thought as such hold 
good of reality as such ? In fine, logic is supposed to grow 
out of the epistemological problem, and to lead up to its 
solution/ c 

a The explanation i, p. 3 above, was intended to guard me against 
the appearance of dealing with ' epistemology ' or ' a theory of cogni- 
tion ', by which I mean an examination of the nature of knowledge as 
something apart from the reality which is then taken as its external 
standard. 

b It should be remembered that this is not accepted as a just title 
for philosophical logic. c Dewey, p. 6. 



272 Truth and Coherence [BOOKII 

All this, as I see the situation, is the same old half-truth 
turned into a complete delusion. There is no discussion of a 
relation of thought in itself to reality at large. No question 
arising out of it determines the course of logical investigation. 
But it is perfectly true that thought (in a way, as we shall 
see, comparable to life, about which the same error is made) 
has in all its specific responses and adaptations the universe 
implicitly before it. Its adaptations, like those of an organ 
in an organism, are controlled throughout by a system of 
functions which is a response to something continuous in the 
nature of the environment as in life, to the conditions of 
organic existence on our earth's surface ; so in knowledge, 
to the condition of belonging to a universe. Occasionalism, 
the insistence on response to specific occasions as the condition 
of thought,thus misses its underlying and continuous character, 
as the active form of totality ; the nature by which all experi- 
ence strives of itself towards the whole. Thought is essentially 
the nisus of experience as a world to completion of its world. 
TJie intervals of conscious reflection are merely one of its 
forms of advance, and are not, in their paleness and meagre- 
ness, characteristic of thought, which is essentially organic 
concrete and constructive. In its Occasionalism again the 
genetic theory is saying something so far true, but fragmentary, 
and is again taking it as the basis of an antithesis which has 
no existence, except as a relation of a partial to a more 
comprehensive view. 

And lastly, Dualism and Occasionalism take shape in 
Adaptationism. This is more than a recognition which would 
be justified that all thought may be regarded as a response 
or adaptation to surroundings. It consists (a) in neglect of the 
character of thought as a system of functions adapted to the 
removal of contradiction throughout experience and having 
always this complete systematic function operative in con- 
trolling specific responses or adaptations ; And (6) in the 
suggestion that, considering the complete explanation of 
evolutionary growths to be only possible through regarding 
them as adaptations to their environments, each to each, 
the antithesis of origin and value ought to be treated as 
superseded, and psychology, for instance, should become in 



CHAP. IX] Meaning of Natural Selection 273 

its aspect of a historical science a serviceable instrument in 
logical valuation. 

a. As to the former of these points, it is now I think Thought 
recognised that to consider a living organism as a mere box f !^ of 
of patent a contrivances, a collection of adaptations to parti- devices, 
cular situations of environment, is to consider it inadequately. 
Every adaptation is built on a system, and the system is 
determined by essential functions, which may be regarded 
if we like as a great general adaptation. But these functions, 
as a system, it must be borne in mind, constitute a large 
proportion of the environment for every specific adaptation. 
In every adaptation life is there as a whole, and has the whole 
nature of the environment in view, not as a general abstraction, 
but as a concrete whole that enters into every specific situation. 
So with thought. It is, if we like, all developed as responses ; 
but it is inadequately considered if it is considered as a box 
of tricks. Thought never really forgets the universe. There 
is always more in it than its occasion brings, or rather, it 
makes its occasion more than it is. 

6. And the idea that evolutionary explanation has disposed Value not 

of the antithesis between genesis and value seems to me more depen- 

dent on 

particularly to invert the real relation. It is true of course history. 

that natural history is much interested in natural selection ; 
but the decisive point for logical theory is that natural selec- 
tion is not in the smallest degree interested in natural history. 
One may fancy oneself pleading before the court of natural 
selection. ' Only give me time, and I can explain everything ! 
The fact is, I was not adapted to to-day's environment, but 
only to yesterday's . That is why I am not equal to the situation . ' 
But the court, I take it, replies, ' My dear sir, in the court 
of history that would be interesting, but in this court it is 
wholly irrelevant. We must ask you to deal with the situation 
of to-day, or .' It is being equal to the whole situation that 
is the criterion for Logic as for Morals. Past adaptations can 
justify no theory of to-day. Have we or have we not a system 

a The Mendelian theory is not quite this. But even its way of re* 
yarding an organism, as, if I grasp the idea rightly, a group of more or 
less independent factors, seems difficult to accept without further 
explanation. 

1837-s T 



274 Truth and Coherence [BOOKII 

which gives the possible maximum of non-contradiction, in 
the construction which it puts upon the fullest conceivable 
experience ? This is our standard for the present, and in it, 
for the past. And Professor Dewey says what seems to me 
equivalent to accepting this standard ' The historical point 
of view explains the sequence ; the normative follows the 
sequence to its conclusion, and then turns back and judges 
each historical step by viewing it in reference to its own 
outcome.' a Yes, but the sanction lies surely not with the 
history of adaptation, which shows a certain stage to be 
de facto the outcome ; but with the court of natural selection, 
which applies the test of adequate or inadequate adaptation, 
that is, of power or impotence to deal with contradictions, 
taking the whole body of experience together as constituting 
the concrete situation. This is the test, the test of coherence 
and non-contradiction, which philosophical Logic accepts ; 
the immanent test of the presence of the character of Reality 
within the thought-form as one of the many branches or 
appearances of the real. 

Psy- iv. Psychology, from anthropology upwards, beginning with 

Ch s 1 ?n y a na * ura l history conditioned by quite other environments, 

into leads gradually up to a situation in which, as the proper 

Logic. character of mind emerges, the logical test by present adequacy 

of working supersedes the historical explanation by past 

adequacy of work in a less complete environment. ' Working ' ; 

that is the apparent watchword, the name accepted on both 

hands for the test which might bring the two theories together. 

But to cover the problem of philosophical Logic it must take 

the environment as the widest conceivable experience, and 

must recognise the fact and right of cognitive interest. 1 * 

When once the ultimate criterion is accepted, with the 
extension of the supposed new view to its natural boun- 
daries, that is from practical working to dealing adequately 
with experience, I cannot understand how the relation of 
Psychology to Logic should present a difficulty. I have 
observed above that the epistemological attitude which the 

ft Chicago Publications, p. 16. 

b The true type of the relation of Psychology to Logic is in the relation 
of associated contents impure universals- to pure logical connections* 



CHAP. IX] Limitations of recent views 275 

new theory is attempting to force upon the old is nowhere, 
so far as I know, accepted byit. a And in fact the historical 
method, the explanation of past phases in the light of their 
environment, was not derived by philosophy from the historical 
or evolutionary sciences, but rather by them from it. b It is 
a notable characteristic of Plato, and could hardly have been 
more prominent than it is in Hegel's Phenomenology and in 
his Philosophy of Mind. It is unfortunate that there is really 
no word free from irrelevant suggestions for what we mean by 
Idealism when we apply it to the philosophy of Plato or of 
Hegel. But taking c Objective Idealism ' as a more or less 
accepted equivalent, we may say that the history and estimate 
of thought-adaptation in relation to the environment has 
always been the peculiar pride and province of objective 
idealism. Only, the actual test of truth, of the character of 
reality in the thought-form, was by it always kept separate 
from the historical estimate of imperfect forms, the justifi- 
cation of which had shown itself, as we may say, doubly 
relative. 

v. This then, is one part of the logical situation as I feel Summary 
obliged to conceive it. It is well to vindicate for Logic the ^~f fects 
sphere of Life and practice as against an imaginary heaven attitude, 
of ideas to which however no master of thought has relegated 
it. It is well to bring the development of thought together 
with the conception of adapted response, and to apply to it the 
general idea of natural selection. It is well to vindicate for the 
individual mind a living share in the self-maintenance of Reality 
as against the idea which Plato repudiated of a statue-like 
immoveable system. All these are attitudes of special emphasis 
due to the philosophical and semi-philosophical movement of 
the last fifty years. But if the reforming theorist limits 
practice to the sphere of external action, adaptation to the 
history of de facto success apart from the principle of its deter- 
mination, and our living concern with Reality to effecting in it 

* I have explained why I think it misleading to take Lotze as a 
specimen for criticism. 

b A remark of W. Wallace. I have not the reference. 

' Relative ' as falling short by the standard of our best experience; 
doubly relative, because that standard is itself not absolute* 

T2 



276 Truth and Coherence [BOOKII 

ultimate change, in a time which is ultimately real, then 
his view remains fragmentary, and he has failed to grasp the 
inheritance which is coming within his reach. 

Realism 3. Complementary to the view of truth which I have just 
c a iiacy. me "attempted to explain the view for which thought is an 
adaptation, and truth along with reality is bonafide in process 
of being made is the reassertion of Realism in the modern 
world. Realism, indeed, however opposed to the conception 
of a universe in actual genesis, belongs at bottom to the same 
impulse of modernism. The very same flowing tide which 
carries with it the demand that truth shall be a mere adaptation 
to vital needs, brings also the antagonistic requirement that 
truth shall lie in a relation to simple given fact. On both 
sides we have the demand for immediacy ; here the immediacy 
of satisfaction, there the immediacy of apprehension. And 
the second, as we admitted of the first, a has doubtless, even 
from our point of view, contributions to offer. The first, we 
hoped, would bring about a correction of the confusion of 
Idealism with rationalism, and destroy the conception of a 
pale and meagre thought, identified with decaying sense. The 
latter, we hope, will undo the unhappy connection with mere 
psychicalism or mentality b and bring into prominence the 
more robust conceptions of a philosophy which admits true 
differences of kind within the whole. 

I propose to devote the following chapter to explaining 
the attitude involved, in the theory of truth which has been 
followed through the present work, to mental states and the 
claims of naive realism. 

But here some remarks will be in place concerning a doctrine 
of truth which, as far as I grasp it, shares on one side only 
the position of naive realism and simple apprehension, while 
on another side committing itself to a special theory of existence 
with which naive realism has directly nothing to do. c The 
doctrine of simple apprehension, and the true meaning of the 

a p. 268 above. 

b See e.g. Mr. Moore's Refutation of Idealism, cited and commented 
on in Joachim's Nature of Truth. 

c I think that even in their theory of existence the two have an impulse 
in common, that of hardening into isolated existence purely relative 
objects. 



CHAP, ixi Mr. Russell on Relations 277 

principle that knowledge makes no difference in what is known, 
will be spoken of in the following chapter. 

a. ' The world is a world of many things, with relations Theworld 
which are not to be deduced from a supposed nature or scholas- 
tic essence of the related things. In this world, whatever is 
complex is composed of related simple things. There is no 
identity in difference, there is identity and there is difference, 
and complexes may have some elements identical and some 
different, but we are no longer obliged to say of any pair of 
objects that may be mentioned that they are both identical 
and different/ a 

The core of the view, as is well known, is the rejection of 
what have been called * internal relations ', i. e. relations 
grounded in the nature of the related terms ; and the assertion 
of mere external relations, i. e. as I understand that there 
is no reason why relations should be so grounded. 1 * The phrase 
' internal relations ' seems to me not quite satisfactory, as 
suggesting relations between parts within a given term. At 
least the view which to me appears reasonable would be better 
expressed by some such term as ' relevant relations ', i. e. 
relations which are connected with the properties of their 
terms, so that any alteration of relations involves an alteration 
of properties, and vice versa. 

The following reasons for accepting a doctrine of relevant 
relations appear to me to be unimpeached. 

(i) In a large proportion of cases the relevancy of the Relations 
relations to the properties of the related terms involves a 
community of kind. You cannot have a spatial relation be- 
tween terms which are not in space. You cannot have a moral 
relation between terms which are not members of a moral 

a Russell, Philosophical Essays, p. 169. I do not think it is main- 
tained on our part that relations can be deduced from the properties 
of single terms which are in relation. I understand the point of interest 
to be that you cannot explain one term of a complex without explaining 
the rest. Every complex, it must be remembered, has a special quality 
of its own, and every member of it has a quality relative to this ; see 

i, PP- 139-40. 

b Op. cit., p. 161. It would be important to know if it is maintained 
that relations cannot be so grounded, because then we could ask for 
the author's explanation of the more obvious cases in which they appear 
to be so. 



278 Truth and Coherence [BOOKII 

world. Why is it absurd to ask for the distance from London 
Bridge to one o'clock ? Surely because the one term is in 
space and the other in time. This is not a general argument 
that if the relation were other the terms would be other, from 
which any possible conclusion might follow. a It is an analytic 
determination of a common positive element on which both 
property and relation depend. 

The (2) There is further no case in which on philosophical 

oUermf scrut i n y b the relevancy of relations to properties is not per- 
reiative ceptible. I do not say that the relation can be reduced to 
grouping, a fact about the one object only together with a fact about 
the other object only. The point of the relevancy of rela- 
tions, as I understand it, is that each of two or more terms 
can only be understood if all are understood. ' Father ' and 
* Son ' is a vulgar traditional instance. But I do not see 
that it is not a sound one. And in every case, I think, the 
basis of such a necessity can be shown. This or that observer 
may not possess the knowledge or the acuteness required to 
formulate the element which changes with the relation in 
precise detail. But it can always be shown what sort of thing 
must be relevant to the relation. So much so, that I cannot 
think this to be really and totally denied of so-called exter- 
nal relations. And I will pass on to a point of view which 
raises this question. 

Rela- (3) Relations are true of their terms. They express their 

press be- P ositions in complexes, which positions elicit their behaviour, 

haviour their self-maintenance in the world of things. This is really 

in groups. the all-important argument. And I cannot believe that if 

the doctrine of mere external relations were completely stated, 

we should not find the same thing admitted by it, in one way 

or another. d If the relations make no difference to the terms, 

a Russell, Philosophical Essays, p. 166. 

b I have in mind Mr. Bradley's argument in Appearance and Reality, 
eel. 2, p. 572 ff. Russell, p. 161. 

d As I understand the appearance of this is avoided by connecting 
the mind with the relation straight, so to speak, and not through the 
terms. But this seems to me simply a bold omission of a fact in the 
complex. Does not the conception of a ' sense * in a relation like love 
necessarily admit this ? The term A is different according to the 
1 sense ' of the relation of love between A and B. Or take spatial 



CHAP, ix] Pluralists are Absolutists 279 

it follows that things do not react or behave with reference 
to the complexes to which they belong. Yet if Charles I 
had died in his bed, he would have died in a different bodily 
attitude from that in which he died on the scaffold. 

&. I do not understand relations to be adjectives of their Rela- 
terms. They are not adjectives because they involve other girted 
terms which are as substantive as any of which we might be to be ad- 
inclined to pronounce them adjectives. Relations cannot be * ec lves * 
reduced to qualities, nor qualities to relations. Relations 
are just the way in which discursive thought represents the 
unity of terms which it cannot make adjectives of one other. 
As Mr. Bradley has said that they are a modus vivendi between 
predicates of the same subject whose unity we cannot really 
construe to ourselves, so it might be said they are a modus 
vivendi between terms in the same universe, of whose unity 
in the imperfection of our experience, the same is true. 

None of the objections which have been put forward appear 
to me to touch these points.* 

I quite understand that on the doctrine offered to us 
Identity in Difference must go. And I quite see for myself 
that it must go ' in the end ', that is to say, in any experience 
for which objects are self-contained, and cease to transcend 
themselves. What our pluralist realists b are grasping at 
is therefore justly anticipated. Undoubtedly the Real is 
self-complete and self-contained. But I insist on the words 
' in the end ' because it is their repudiation of them that I 
take to be the root of their failure. They are the extreme 
Absolutists. They are not content to have the Absolute ' in 
the end ', as we more modestly claim it, not meaning after a 
lapse of time, but in so far as what are fragments for us point 
out to us a completion beyond them. And there is surely a 
difference of completeness in different experiences. But they 

relations in the visual field. When a new object is inserted in the field, 
every object in it becomes a member of a new pattern, and so necessarily 
exhibits a new quality. 

a Of course I am following Mr. Bradley, Appearance and Reality, 
loc. cit., though he is not responsible for what I say. 

b I do not wish to use a name that will be disliked. I merely invented 
an appellation that seemed to be fair, for shortness' sake. 

c Russell, pp. 159, 163. 



a8o Truth and Coherence [BOOKII 

will have the Absolute here and now ; and to make it handy 
and adaptable for everyday use they split it into little bits. 
A universe of tiny Absolutes ; that is really what they offer 
us. a But if any of these Absolutes imply any term beyond 
themselves their absolutism breaks down. And we have tried 
to show that in all relations this is the case. 

Truth c. As to error we have only to bear in mind that degree 
an t E K ror of partiality of the truth asserted must combine with a belief 
lute. that it is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, 
in constituting the degree of erroneousness. And also, for 
practical purposes and within certain limits we let imperfect 
truth pass as absolute. A repudiation of the phrase ' in the 
end ' denies these distinctions. But surely in denying them 
it denies nearly all the facts of life. Presupposing these reser- 
vations, what has been said in satire b is surely a plain truth, 
which only needs complete application to make it obvious. 
A man who accepts the view that all his judgments have only 
partial truth is certainly pro tanto less wrong in each of them 
than if he believed he had got in each the truth, the whole 
truth, and nothing but the truth. But obviously, in this form 
the principle is only a general warning, and cannot directly 
amend the actual partiality of what a man judges as truth. For 
this follows from determinate reasons, and in each case he 
must judge or not judge. A purely general warning cannot 
guide his judgment. But it can stimulate him to caution and 
criticism, and this is an obvious excellence in his whole 
cognitive system, which is excluded by the belief that partial 
truth can be absolute. A man who has grasped the warning 
that you must only believe about one-half of written history 
is certainly pro tanto, i.e. if both have the same positive 
knowledge, nearer historical truth than one who thinks he 
may with safety swallow it all. And though this caution alone 
will of course not tell a man which half to believe, yet it will 
place his cognitive system in a much truer relation to the facts, 
than that of a man, who, making the same judgments as the 
other, believes them to represent absolute truth. It is the 

a I suppose this is a familiar idea in the case of the Atomists and the 
Eleatics. See Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy, ed. 2, p. 387. 
b Russell, p. 155. 



CHAP, ix] On what Falsehood depends 281 

case no doubt, that you cannot, out of caution, half make 
a judgment ; you must make it or not. But it is further true 
that to make an additional judgment, ' there is a good deal 
more to learn about ' this or that character or incident, puts 
your positive judgments in a proportion to the facts which 
is likely to be much more in harmony with them, than if you 
entertained no such critical principle. 

d. I believe the fact to be that the doctrine of which we are The illu- 
speaking gains its vraisemblance and its apparent clearness, gj^ 
from clinging to just the region of so-called plain and simple fact, 
fact, the illusory hardness and isolation of which really 
a defect of low-grade knowledge a it takes for absoluteness. 
And in this region it does seem prima facie absurd to take 
error as partial truth. You must be, it appears, either right 
or wrong. The fact is fixed, and you are in relation with it 
or are not. There are no degrees of truth, and nothing which 
is truth in the beginning and not in the end, or in the end and 
not in the beginning. I will try to show the nature of this 
delusion, as it seems to me, by a few words on truth of fact 
and truth of system. 

' It is plain that the truth or falsehood of a given judg- 
ment depends in no way upon the person judging [it is 
common ground that there must be a mind to judge], but 
solely upon the facts about which he judges/ ' Thus the 
judgment that two terms have a certain relation R is a relation 
of the mind to the two terms and the relation R with the 
approximate " sense " [ = direction of the relation from A to B 
or from B to A] ; the "corresponding " complex consists of the 
two terms related by the relation R with the same " sense ", 
The judgment is true when there is such a complex, and false 
when there is not. The same account, mutatis mutandis, will 
apply to any other judgment. This gives the definition of 
truth and falsehood/ The complex, it is to be remembered, is 
composed of simple related things. b 

a Of course no one uses the whole of his own experience in his theories. 
He uses what for some reason has struck him and seemed typical to him. 
I do not think it is without precedent that men of very high attainments 
should rely theoretically on very naive types of experience. I think 
analogies for this are rather common. 

b Russell, pp. 169, 173, 184; cp. Stout, Ar. Proc. 1911. 



282 Truth and Coherence [BOOKII 

I wish to explain, by a comparison of judgments differently 
related to ' the facts ', why it appears to me that, in the first 
place, truth and falsehood depend on the judging mind in 
another and more vital sense than is here admitted, and not 
on the mere presence or absence of a complex of entities 
corresponding to the judgment, and, in the second place, that 
the facts themselves, though they are real, are not real in 
the way here asserted, as bits of reality, immediately accessible 
to apprehension, and corresponding each to each with the 
terms of our commonplace judgments. 

Stating a (i) Let us begin with Charles Reade's mediaeval physician, 

b^teSnf who, having a grudge against a reluctant patient, tried to 

a lie. have him arrested, laying an information that he intended 

to fly the country. But ' his sincere desire and honest endeavour 

to perjure himself were baffled by a circumstance he had 

never foreseen nor indeed thought possible. He had spoken 

the truth. AND IN AN AFFIDAVIT'. For the patient 

had fled. 

Here the doctor told a lie, but in telling it, he spoke the 
truth ; if, that is, we judge by correspondence with the facts. 
One might urge that his assertion, being contrary to his belief, 
was not a judgment at all, but a form of words intended to 
produce action in another's. This I think is true. a But it 
does not seem to me to destroy the point of the instance. 
Why could a form of words, corresponding with the facts, be 
in his mouth nothing but a lie ? Because it was contrary to 
his belief ? But what does that mean ? Belief is not a chance 
thing, sprung from nowhere. It means that it was contrary 
to the system of his knowledge as determined by his whole 
experience at the time. 

stating (2) Take another case the so-called true conclusion from 

may be one or more feke premisses. Here again we have truth, if 

an error, judged by mere correspondence with the hard fact. For 

example, on a local railway I know, the signals are down all 

Sunday. A stranger unaware of this practice might infer 

that a train is due. And it might well happen, three or four 

times in the day, that at the moment of speaking a train was 

in fact due. Judging by hard fact this judgment would be 

a See above, i, p. 34. 



CHAP, ix] False ground, false judgment 283 

true. But would the man be right in his judgment ? It is 
a point on which probably his companions might wrangle 
with him ad nauseam. He seems to have got a truth which 
he had nobusiness to have got. If he had known a little more 
possessed a little more truth he would not have got -it. And 
the truth, as he possesses it, is felt to be unsatisfactory, and 
half or more a falsehood, because its dependence is wrong: that 
is, it is judged, as a truth, in part at least, by the system of 
judgment with which it is connected. And more than this ; 
it is infected, in its own nature, by the faults of this system. 
Its logical stability is highly incomplete ; it would be upset 
by a second trial ten minutes later, or by a most trifling bit 
of additional knowledge. But logical stability incapability 
of being confronted with a contradictory experience is, we 
shall see, the very core of truth. 

In the closer tissue of a science, this defect amounts more 
obviously to actual falsehood. The ' true ' conclusion partici- 
pates so definitely in the character of the system from which 
it issues. Those theorists who held that agriculture is 
especially and peculiarly a desirable industry held, in this 
view, I suppose, what corresponded to an indubitable fact. 
But when they deduced it from the view that wealth is not 
genuinely produced in any other occupation, they connected 
it with grounds .which destroyed its value, and made it a 
dangerous falsehood, by including in it an unjustified pre- 
sumption against other forms of industry. 

Strictly speaking, there is no reason for dropping the 
premisses in stating a conclusion. And if they, being false, 
are retained, the falsehood of the conclusion, though apart 
from this corresponding with facts, is exhibited on the face 
of it. Here again, it is obvious that the truth or falsehood 
of a judgment depends not merely on correspondence to a 
complex, but on the completeness and comprehensiveness of 
the system with which it is connected in the mind. a Its truth 
is threatened, we have seen, both if it is at variance with the 

a You may say there is nothing in this but that one judgment about 
one complex is true, while another about a fuller complex including 
the first is false. But what is shown is that correspondence to its 
complex is not enough to make the first judgment true. 



284 Truth and Coherence [BOOKII 

system, and if this system fails to give true connections, 
prima facie outside the judgment directly in question. 
How we (3) Now let us take the strongest instance in favour of 
come by nO n-dependence on the judging mind. This, it appears to 
facts. me, is to be found in the current knowledge of facts currently 
admitted, forming the stock-in-trade of daily life and con- 
versation, and considered out of the context of science or of 
any critical analysis. 3 - ' Charles I died on the scaffold/ 
This judgment most people would describe pretty much in the 
language cited at the beginning of this section. It is true, 
they would say, because it corresponds to a complex of terms 
and their relation, which are or were facts or things. There 
is or was such a complex of things and such a relation between 
them, and therefore the judgment which expresses the mind's 
relation to it is a true judgment. What the facts are or were 
is taken as a matter of general agreement ; it would be held 
pedantic to ask where we get at them, how we apprehend them, 
what precisely they are or were, what meaning the judgment 
actually carries with it. Our intellectual outfit for everyday 
use consists of ' facts ' postulated in this way the normal 
furniture of our mind ; what Plato called the world of opinion. 
We take the material hurriedly from authority and tradition ; 
or from negligent perception interpreted by authority and 
tradition.* We do not pursue their context. We do not fix 
their limits or analyse their detail. Thus we let them shrink 
and harden into isolated counters dealt with by our thought, 
worn and defaced by rapid and careless exchange. And it 
is of these current counters that our world of fact is constituted, 
which we take to be self-existent, independent of our minds, 
each fact independent of the others, related to them but 
unaffected by their relation, complexes which are the standard 
of truth to our judgment. If our judgment corresponds to 
facts as presented to us in these current counters in which 
we commonly believe, that is all we ask. 

* It is such facts, I suppose, which another school would consider 
to have received Social endorsement, and to be made true by answering 
their purpose. 

b Could even a scholar, for instance, as a rule, exhibit a convincing 
argument that the works ascribed to the ancient authors were really 
written at such times and by such persons as is commonly supposed ? 



CHAP, ix] System of mind, and of things 285 

(4) Now I am not suggesting that these facts are not The facts 
actual, and that the judgments which correspond to them are are ^ OTG 
not true, in a sense sufficient for their purpose. My con- than 
tention does not tend to making less of the facts, e.g. to' simple> ' 
reducing them to mere ideas, but to making more of them, 

i. e. to showing that as realities they cannot stop at the arbitrary 
point we have adopted. And, no doubt, it follows that the 
mind has had much to do with them already and must 
have much more to do with them as they proceed. As they 
stand, they are a selection out of reality lor everyday use, 
carelessly handed down or observed, clipped, woin, their 
interconnection neglected. But they do well enough as a 
standard for everyday truth, and our judgments, which we 
take to * correspond ' with them, do well enough as everyday 
truth. 

But, even within this world of what we conceive as corre- 
spondence to hard fact, we do acknowledge differences of 
truth, or, if this language is preferred, degrees of correspon- 
dence to fact, according to the furnishing of the mind. 
* Charles I died on the scaffold/ we commonly assume is not 
so true in the mouth of a child who has just learned it by 
heart as in the mouth of a schoolboy who knows something 
of the history and significance of the seventeenth century. 
And in neither's mouth is it so true as in that of a historical 
student to whom the seventeenth century is a familiar world 
and a living interest. It is not a thing which is true or false 
by touching or not touching. a From the first, it is an apprecia- 
tion of elements in a system, and of their determination by 
the system, and is a matter of degree. Our ordinary estimate 
of truth fully admits this to be the case. 

We have been urging so far that the system ot the judging 
mind is an element in truth, and also, in the last paragraph, 
we come in sight of an inference affecting the actual things 
or facts which are taken as the standard. 

(5) I will pass to an instance which clinches both these in the full 
points. facts the 

When we come to consider the knowledge of any leading facts are 
historical authority on the period of Charles I, we find two lost ' 
ft See Aristotle, Metaph., 1072 b 21 Oi-ff&vwv icai vowv. 



286 Truth and Coherence 

remarkable things. First, quite undoubtedly, and in all 
common usage, such a man's judgment ' Charles I died on 
the scaffold ' is far truer than that of the child or the schoolboy 
or the ordinary conversationalist. This shows how much 
depends on the mental system of the judging mind. 

Secondly, when at this level we begin to look for the single 
standard of fact which we are accustomed to rely on, it is 
not to be found.* At first sight, it is absorbed into the great 
historian's knowledge. For us, something picked out of that 
knowledge is the standard. Our ' facts ' as we used to call 
them, now show as little bits or threads of reality, which we or 
others for us have selected out of the huge web of the world as 
known by such an authority as this. Of course the facts have 
not turned into any one's mere mental system. But they seem 
essentially continuous with mental systems. We do not mean 
to deny that they as much of them as is warranted on good 
authority are real facts. What we are saying can only 
mean that he helps us to get at them. That is all very true ; 
but then, when we get at them through his knowledge they 
are much developed from what they seemed when we were 
readily passing them from hand to hand among each other. 
Now we see that even in their discovery they are not simple 
or independent. They depend for being discovered and 
warranted on an enormous constructive work of criticism, 
starting from present experience, and continued through heaps 
and heaps of testimony and evidence all of which is instrumental 
to that view of facts which will give the highest degree of 
coherence to the system so constructed. 11 Yes,but ' the facts *, 

a Compare with this the difficulty which the layman often has in 
asking a question such as a scientific man can answer. To the layman 
a point appears simple and single which to the expert is full of distinc- 
tions and reservations. The writer once procured a meteorological 
record of temperature with a view to its bearing on a stoppage in the 
building trade. But he found, of course, differing readings of several 
instruments under different conditions, and could not tell, without 
further enquiry, which of the temperatures was important for his 
purpose. The simple ' fact ' vanishes as you come nearer, as a headland 
breaks up into an intricate outline of planes and edges as you approach 
it, or if you try to read a book with a microscope. 

b Cp. The Presuppositions of Critical History: F.H.Bradley. Parker, 
1874. 



CHAP, ix] The real facts, where and what ? 287 

it will be urged. All this is getting at ' the facts ' ; but the 
facts were there all the same, however hard to get at ; and 
when got at, by whatever means, can be and are the standard 
of truth. Well ; but we must consider the point that the facts 
are not to be foundsimple of themselves,as we incline to imagine 
in our everyday exchange of them. They are not and cannot 
possibly be the working standard of first-grade thought. You 
may copy them in your judgment, when the historian has 
found them out for you. But the working standard, which 
determines them, is not themselves, but his immense critical 
construction. Accounts of eye-witnesses, e.g. are nothing but 
material ; and, as a rule, very contradictory material. 

The facts, then, though bits of reality, are mediated to 
us by an immense mental construction, and are not really 
separable from this. They are not and cannot be, as simple 
and isolated, the first-hand standard of truth. We may select 
certain results and make them up into a standard for a certain 
level of truth, e. g. one good enough for examination purposes, 
and that different for different examinations. But that is 
simply an artificial extract. 

That is one point. The facts, in history at any rate, are 
not simply there, so that they can act as a given standard, 
correspondence to which is truth. The primary working 
standard is critical system, or, what is the same thing, 
scientific investigation. 8 - 

(6) But then there is another thing. When we get our The full 
facts, our results, what we take to be real, it is something c ^p^!? 
much beyond what we were wont to take as facts. It is a hensive 
commonplace that in the higher knowledge we are beyond sys ems ' 
what is commonly called fact. b We may say that our current 
counters were fact, but they were neither the whole fact, nor 
yiothing but the fact. What is the full significance and 
implication of the death of Charles I ? And could we seriously 
say that a judgment about it is true in which its full significance 
and implication is ignored, more especially as on the other 
hand the picturesque and immediate aspect of the event is 

* See, for an example of what is involved in a simple measurement, if it 
is to be precise, Knowledge and Reality, pp. 330-1. 
b See e.g. Bradley 's Logic, pp. 92-3. 



288 Truth and Coherence [BOOKII 

certainly not affirmed ? The facts are not ' in the end * 
isolated and independent. There is a stage when they seem 
so, but you cannot arrest them at that stage. As coherence 
with a system is the standard by which we establish facts, 
so the part they play in a system of reality, their influence 
and importance, which imply a further transformation, is 
the standard by which we judge their degree of reality, and 
therefore the degree of truthfulness of the judgments that 
affirm them. Ultimately, these two systems are one, the 
system of experience, a critical system which is always trans- 
forming the facts, as we know them and rank them, towards 
a higher logical stability. 

Of course these remarks contain nothing that is new. a But 
I hope they clearly explain my view about the relative places 
of correspondence and coherence in the meaning of truth, 
and about the alleged independence, both as regards mind, 
and as regards each other, of the things or facts of the real 
world. 

Coher- 4- The standard of system or coherence is a standard 
nothnply a PP licable to discursive thought. It is the standard of truth, 
corre- which itself does not pretend to be the perfect or all-inclusive 

spon- experienced 
dence. z . 

A judgment is true, as I understand the term, when or in 

as far as its self-maintenance as a judgment is perfect. That 
is, in other words, when the whole system of the judgments f 
which experience forces upon the mind which makes it, con- 
tains less contradiction in case of its affirmation than in case 
of its denial. Such a judgment is ' true ' because on the whole 
it cannot be denied not, that is, till there is a change, other 
than its denial, in the body of experience. 

* The line of the discussion is closely akin to that of Plato's discussion 
of trueness and reality, which agree in the character of logical stability* 
See Companion to Plato's Republic on 479 ff., 509 ff. 

b It is perhaps hardly necessary at this time of day to say that I have 
now in principle adopted Mr. Bradley 's view of the relation of thought 
to reality, with which the ideas of my early work, Knowledge and 
Reality, were more or less in conflict, I shall refer below to a reserva- 
tion on this view which I still entertain, and which I think is consistent 
with the attitude of this work. The point is merely that there is more 
analogy between the work of thought and solid and complete reality, 
than Mr. Bradley, treating thought as solely discursive, seems to allow. 



CHAP, ixj No Archetype of ' Coherence ' 289 

i. Stated in this way, which appears to me to be the right Coher- 
way, the doctrine that truth consists in the self-maintenance ^fal? 6 
of judgments, which again consists in their systematic coher- back on 
ence, does not seem to me to fail quite in the way which has !~ 
recently been imputed to it. a Judgment professes to express dence. 
the nature of the real so far as it can be uttered in a system 
of predicates and relations. It does not propose or suggest, 
so far as I can see, that the real is another system of predicates 
and relations, which that constituted by judgment pretends 
to reproduce or to resemble. Therefore its failure is one and 
decisive, simply consisting in the fact that it is not, like the 
higher experience which we suppose to be the sum and sub- 
stance of all Reality, solid and immediate as well as perfectly 
individual and non-contradictory. It does profess to qualify 
Reality, to tell us about the nature of Reality ; and in as far 
as it arranges content in a non-contradictory system it does 
so tell us and qualify Reality. It sets out the content of the 
real in a shape of special interconnection and emphasis, the 
definiteness and varied accentuation of which in the diverse 
worlds of knowledge constructed from different centres, 
obviously proffers a side of the whole without which the perfect 
experience would in certain respects fall short of perfection. 
In the dissociation of the perfect experience involved in 
finiteness, this side appears alone. b 

But, so far as thought is discursive, it does not profess 
to furnish any appearance of Reality but its own, and if it 
is said to be" about ' the ' other ' of thought, that involves 
no claim to represent the fuller experience in its own character. 
Reality is operative in truth. The nature of the latter's 
self-maintenance as tested by the principle of coherence, non- 
contradiction, or individuality, (all of them expressions for 
the same character) leaves no doubt of that. But the claim 
to have Reality at work in it, subject to special conditions, 
involves no appeal to correspondence, though correspondence 
in a sense must result. 4 And in my view the fallacy above 

* Joachim, Nature of Truth. 

b That is, markedly distinct in character. No side of experience is 
ever really alone. 

c Joachim, pp. 170-2. d See above, p. 267. 

1387-2 U 



Truth and Coherence 



[BOOK 1 1 



signalised a sort of post hoc ergo profiler hoc is involved 
in the assertion that ' current Logic, consciously or uncon- 
sciously employs the nature of truth as correspondence, and 
if that notion is challenged throws the burden of justification 
on metaphysics '. a 

The failure or limitation of the coherence theory of truth 
lies then, I urge, simply in the fact that judgment, to which 
it belongs, is an appearance of reality in relational form, doing 
its best to attain individuality in that form, which up to a 
certain point it achieves, b but which, because it is relational 
and points endlessly beyond itself for completion, it can never 
thoroughly attain. But it possesses, as we have suggested, 
merits of its own, clearness, special interconnection, emphasis, 
apart from which it is easy to divine that the ultimate Reality 
would lack an element. 

ii. Thus I suggest that the enquiry I am referring to leaves 



No'ap- 

t l Q ( n X ' lma " * ts own true track in emphasising the impossible demands 

to an 

original. 



of perfect coherence, as an attribute or essential of perfect 
truth ; instead of adhering throughout to the position that 
the perfection of truth is not within its own character, but 
must lie in a reality different in kind. The importance of this 
point is that in this way an imaginary perfect type of truth 
and coherence is set up, by their ' approximation ' to which 
actual truth and coherence are to be judged. The term 

ft Joachim, pp. 119-20. This suggestion seems to me quite fatal to 
a working logic. 

h I shall return to this question, in speaking of the reservation above 
alluded to. 

Ibid., pp. 170-2. 'A theory of truth as coherence, if it is to be 
adequate, must be an intelligible account of the ultimate coherence in 
which the one significant whole is self-revealed ; and just before " any 
partial experience", e.g. human knowledge, is "true" more or less, 
according as it exhibits a character more or less approximating to the 
complete coherence ' (my italics). I suggest that the ' ultimate ' or 
' complete coherence ' is not an intelligible expression. Coherence is 
the substitute, possible only in a system of predicates and relations, for 
the immediate unity, transcending mediateness, which we are compelled 
to ascribe to a perfect Reality. I repeat that the affinity of two 
exhibitions of a principle, or of two kindred principles, has nothing to 
do with correspondence in this discussion, which means correspon- 
dence of a copy with the original by which it is to be judged. The 
application of it in other senses in this context involves the fallacy 
of post hoc ergo propter hoc. 



CHAP, ixj Point is the immanent standard 291 

approximation, I take it, involves the correspondence theory 
to which accordingly at this point the enquiry harks back. 
Thus we lose the immanent standard, and with it the whole 
merit of the coherence theory. But reality in all its forms 
and phases can defend and maintain itself according to the 
principle of non-contradiction. It never depends for its 
relative logical stability upon approximation or correspon- 
dence to anything else. 

iii. And further I suggest that it is a confusion to use the The 
conception that even truth is not quite true to suggest a ultr ^". 
recurrence to a correspondence theory.* The meaning of not truth, 
this conception is very simple when we once have grasped 
the point that no experience short of perfect realityis altogether 
itself. It is in that sense, that even the truest truth, such 
as the coherence theory of truth, is not quite true ; that is 
to say its fullest completeness lies in something, a more perfect 
form of experience, which is beyond itself ; and we may call 
this, to emphasise the relation of transcendence, a truer 
truth. 

But it is not truth in the form of truth, and there can be 
no question of truth in its own form possessing correspondence 
or approximation to its character. Truth stands on its own 
ground, as a fulfilment under its own conditions of the nature 
of reality; and it can be tested as truth under these conditions 
and under no others, and therefore, as we have seen, by itself 
only and by nothing else in the universe. There is no meaning 
p the suggestion that ' the coherence-notion of truth on its 
own admission can never rise above the level of knowledge 
which at the best attains to the truth of correspondence '. 

The coherence-doctrine is a theory, and so far is only truth. 
But coherence does not further and doubly fall short not 
merely by being only truth, but by resting its claim to be 
truth on imperfect correspondence. It rests its claim on the 

a Joachim, p. 1 74. ' Since all human discursive knowledge remains 
thought " about " an Other, any and every theory of the nature of truth 
must itself be " about " truth as its Other ; i. e. the coherence-notion of 
truth on its own admission can never rise above the level of knowledge 
which at the best attains to the " truth " of correspondence. Assuming 
that the coherence-notion of truth is sound, no theory of truth as 
coherence can itself be completely true,' &c. 



292 Truth and Coherence [BOOKII 

working of reality within it, and not on any correspondence 
that may result from this ; and to get away anything truer 
you would have to pass beyond truth into another form of 
reality. This may seem a nr sdless subtlety ; but it is impor- 
tant to avoid the implication that truth as such is something 
away and beyond, which the coherence-notion ought to corre- 
spond to, but does not quite succeed. If this is admitted we 
lose our immanent standard. 

Our 5. One reservation, it seems to me, must be made upon the 

solid 1 doctrine that thought is essentially discursive and relational. 

world. It points only to an anticipation of the fuller experience, and 

as I am quite aware, not to an achievement of it. But it 

appears to me suggestive, and more than that, I cannot see 

my way out of it. 

It is nothing more than the recognition that the worlds 
we severally live in, with the spatial world of each of us, have 
been fundamentally transformed and reconstructed by thought 
working in and on perception and general experience. They 
are now, as for example our spatial world with its full pro- 
perties and qualities, worlds all different and peculiar, and 
yet solid and individual in an appreciable degree, possessing 
up to a point existence and quality in one. The interest is, 
that if this is so and I cannot open my eyes without finding 
it so- we have created for ourselves by thought originally 
discursive, a new immediacy, a new ' given ', a new basis 
of feeling and object-matter of simple apprehension. Nothing 
is more various, more relative, more progressive and personal, 
than the so-called simple apprehension of objects which we 
roughly postulate to be the same. For if we are to admit 
such a thing as ' simple apprehension ', we must take it as 
purely relative. Its object is a phase of our experience and 
not a stratum of it. a Our worlds are all different, and yet all 
apparently solid, and clothed in inseparable contents, which 
nevertheless are of our own discrimination and attribution. 
And these are not as a rule taken as predicates. They are 
taken as belongings of the quasi-subjects or rather quasi- 
substantive objects, although we can separate any of these 
contents and make them into predicates. The objects of our 
ft See below, chap, x, passim, 



CHAP, ix] Thought not wholly discursive 293 

world, which are thus admitted as concrete subjects, are of 
course affirmed in the general judgment which sustains the 
everyday reality which we accept. But they are as I said 
just now not naturally subjects in the sense of dividing them- 
selves according to an S P relation, The judgment which 
affirms them takes most naturally an impersonal or existen- 
tial form. 

When treated as subjects, they are not naturally taken 
as subjects of their nearest habitual predicates. These have 
qualified and clothed them, and are presupposed, not ex- 
plicitly affirmed, in judgment. It is only in textbooks of 
Logic that we say ' Man has two legs '. ' The grass is green ' 
and the like. All this belongs in usage to the solid starting- 
point, not to an S P judgment proper. But these starting- 
points, though relatively given, are really artificial, and in 
some degree different for every mind. 

These relative data or quasi-individuals are indeed the 
so-called subjects which were to count as a plurality of things a . 
But the interesting point about them is their relativity. 
Thought has made them, and as may be seen in any criticism 
of their solidity, can unmake them. And to speak more 
obviously and without reference to abstruse speculation, we 
can see that it is always remaking them. 

This is all I desired to point out ; that a quasi-real world, 
apparently solid and individual, is always being deposited as 
part of the work of thought. I draw no general conclusion 
but this, that thought which can thus deposit an apparent 
solid individual, is not so far removed from the nature of the 
fuller experience as an exclusive study of the discursive S P 
judgment tends to make us suppose. This was the side of 
thought which e. g. to Green seemed characteristic and im- 
portant^ I do not in the least care to enter into a verbal 
controversy whether it is more properly called thinking or 
something else. But that our discursive judgment itself is 
always building up a world which its operation then presup- 
poses the world in which each of us lives, and takes it as 
actual this I do think is an important part of its character 
and a striking analogy between it and ultimate reality. 

* p. 277 above. b e.g. Works, iii. 144-5. 



294 Truth and Coherence 

oes 6. One word more. This quasi-real world of our own 

ruth this making is always passing at its edges into the discursive 
orld? S P process of science and synthetic judgment. And on this 
S 1 * 0111 ^ it ma y be objected to our view of coherence and cor- 
respondence ; ' But here you have a real and immediate 
world, actual in your experience, and your synthetic judgments 
are about it. Does not this mean that your truth is corre- 
spondence the right representation of your relatively real 
and solid world ? ' And I answer, ' emphatically, no. 1 For 
our ' given ' solid immediate and real world, in which all these 
characters are merely apparent, is absolutely plastic,* as in all 
immediate judgment and every object of simple apprehension. 
It is just as likely that it may have to yield to Science or 
Speculation as that they may have to yield to it. Nothing in 
the whole field is a fixture to which all other elements have to 
correspond. Nothing is certain except the necessity that the 
whole should be coherent. 

ft This is not plasticity of ultimate Reality, but may perhaps have 
been mistaken for it. 



CHAPTER X 

THE RELATION OF MENTAL STATES TO JUDGMENT 
AND TO REALITY 

IT seems desirable, for the reason stated in the Preface, The 
to conclude with a brief discussion of the sense in which, if 
at all, mental states enter into judgment and into the real question, 
world. 

By mental states or facts in this connection I mean such 
as are taken to be concerned with judgment, and not volitions 
or emotions, unless of course these happen to be the content 
of judgment. 

I. The view of the relation of mental states to Judgment a Doctrine 
which has been adhered to in the present work consists of two p^^t 
principal considerations, work. 

First, a, that no mental states in a human consciousness are 
mere mental states, but all contain matter that has been and 
may be significant ; but secondly, /j, therefore, that the differ- 
ence between mental states and ideas with a meaning lies in 
the ' use ' of the former. 

a. In the first place, then, all sensational or perceptual con- A H sense- 

. , . . , . i xi j. content 

tents, at least in a human consciousness, bear the stamp of signifi- 

some symbolic relations and hold their place in the systematic cant and 
judgment which affirms our world. There are no ideas which may be- 
are not directly or indirectly affirmed of reality, and therefore ? ome * 
a fortiori none which are not symbolic or significant. mind. 

In taking this view from the beginning, 13 I was strongly 
influenced by a fact almost too elementary to mention, but 
one which I am glad, nevertheless, to see plainly referred to in 

* The view was suggested to me, of course, by Mr. Bradley 's Principles 
of Logic. But he is absolutely without responsibility for my account 
or defence of it. I ought perhaps to refer to his footnote in Mind, N. S. 
60. 445-6, which indicates that he has intentionally modified the ex- 
pression of his views on ideas since his Logic was written. 

b See vol. i, p. 69 ff., and Knowledge and Reality, p, 142 ff., on ideas 
in fiction. 



296 Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOK n 

a very valuable recent argument.* It is the fact that for a 
human consciousness at all events, there is, in the main, no 
storehouse of mere unapplied psychical material, no sensations 
which are unattached subjective states, nothing psychical 
which is not stamped and figured within its own sensuous 
being by divisions, relations, intensities, all relative to its 
meaning as signifying some object of thought. There is in 
the main nothing psychical analogous to a painter's colours 
on the palette, before he uses them to represent objects. It is 
a question for psychology whether sensational states can ever 
escape the despotism of significance, and be a something in 
the mind which belongs to and suggests nothing more than 
itself. b I believe that if they could be proved to do so, it 
would be little more than a curiosity of research. These 
would be, so to speak, immediate, or mere mental states, 
because they had not attained objective determination ; 
because they were, crudely speaking, below objective appre- 
hension and nearer to what we might conjecture of some non- 
human consciousness, in which, however, lacking the contrast 
to the objective, they could not be distinctively ' subjective '. 
But it follows from the point of view we are now drawing out 
that the existence of immediacy, of mental states or psychical 
facts, does not depend on the reality of such limiting cases c . 
Immediacy is a character that may be assumed by any 
mental complex or object, however logically articulate or 
external and independent of mind it may appear under certain 
conditions. And no complex or object is altogether beyond 
it. Every one has its immediate mental aspect. Thus, on 
the one hand, there is no mental state to be applied in judg- 

a Professor Stout in Mind, January 1911. The present chapter has 
been influenced by this very valuable article. Only, if I understand it 
right, it says that the sensational nuances are part of an immediate 
stratum, beyond which is the meaning to which thought is directed 
through them. Thus you get so it seems to me a dualism, which I 
wish to deny, between the shaped and nuanced sensation, and the object. 

b As I have asserted to be exceptionally the case, i, p. 71. I 
suppose it may be possible to have a sensation without taking it as 
meaning anything but just itself. I do not believe it is a common 
experience, even, say, with pain or emotion ; see below, p. 300, and cp 
Hoernle in Mind, 61, pp. 75-6. 

See the other alternative specified, i. 71, above. 



CHAP. X] Anything may become psychical 297 

ment, which is not already organised as part of a significant 
structure, an object of thought, to the nature of which, as we 
saw, its actual sensuous detail and constitution is subdued. 
On the other hand, there is nothing in this to prevent it from 
becoming completely and emphatically, what it always and 
necessarily is in some degree, a part of our psychical being, 
a particular mental state or occurrence, one with us in feeling 
and active in the total life of our mind. And as we are con- 
vinced that there is nothing or almost nothing absolutely and 
finallyimmediate orwhollybelowmediation and determination, 
and yet immediacy is certainly a large element in the mind, 
it follows that this, viz. psychical immediacy as one side of all 
ideas whatever, not only may be but must be a fact. Imme- 
diacy is not a stratum of our consciousness, but a phase which 
all or any of its objects participate in and may totally pass 
into. No doubt, what is an object of thought cannot in so far 
be an immediate state of ourself, and vice versa. But it is 
always in some degree both, and there is nothing in its being 
an object of thought ever so determinate and elaborate to 
prevent its falling back into an almost complete immediacy, 
in which case it carries within it the full detail of the content 
which it possessed as an object of thought. When we feel 
ourselves most at one with art or nature we are also furthest 
from being deprived of the qualities and distinctions of the 
content ; rather we then live in them with the most sensitive 
completeness. It is the objective relation the externality of 
the cognised object which is then in abeyance so far as 
immediacy is complete. The content has really become all 
but a subjective state. 

In a word, immediacy, or psychical existence, or being 'as 
a mental state, is a condition into which the whole mental 
content may pass, and into which it is capable of passing as 
a whole, the marks of thought and the stamp of objective 
relations being in no way obliterated by the transition. This 
is the old contention that sensation is full of the ' work of 
thought ', as e.g. notably in the perception of distance, which 
is demonstrably not given in the peculiar sensation of the optic 
nerve, and yet is seen in a way prima facie indistinguishable 
from any visual sense-perception. We cannot separate 



298 Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOK n 

sensation from thought, and it is not sensation only that 
can become immediate. Immediacy, as was said above, is 
a phase and not a stratum of our experience, and mental 
states, and existence as a mental occurrence, are the same 
thing as immediacy. 

The 'use' /3. Secondly then ; it follows from this consideration that 
tents'as for P ract * ca * P ur poses the difference between mental states, or 
ideas. particular existent mental contents or occurrences, and ideas 
with a meaning or universal thoughts of real objects (universal, 
because all real objects are universal, as persistent elements 
of reality) lies in the ' use ' of the former. I will put what I 
mean as frankly as I know how, to assist, if possible, both 
readers and critics rather than to guard myself. There is, we 
have agreed, no great storehouse or constant new production 
of psychical states or psychical material such as to be primarily 
subjective, non-significant, mental existences or occurrences, 
waiting for obj edification through a sort of christening and 
name-imposing process. a But, all the same, we proceed in 
judgment as if there were. Our world of known objects, of 
apprehension, sensation, perception, contains within it a mass 
of psychical stuff ; and the fact that, as we have said, all this 
is stamped and appropriated db initio does not in the least 
interfere with our treating it as a storehouse of such stuffs 
and using or appropriating it over again, and modified, in 
every new psychical production. I hear a noise in the room 
overhead. It is perfectly significant and I know exactly what 
it is ; it is the patent roller-broom. But the fact that it is 
thus appropriated in judgment does not in the least prevent 
me from using it to think of a cab coming to the door. 'A cab 
sounds just like that/ and this change of application of its 
content necessarily implies the recognition in it of an immediate 
or existential side, a treatment of it as something which is an 
occurrence in my mind and can be used to qualify a subject 
quite other than that which it qualified before. In this use 
its previous structure and nuance are partly disregarded and 
partly modified. 

Is this term ' use ' a mere word ? Can we not get nearer the 
fact which it indicates ? 

a Cp. explanation, Introd., p. 17 note. 



CHAP, x] The ' use ' of a content 299 

Mr. Hoernte a has warned psychologists against the idea that 
the complex of word-meaning is formed by mere association. 
I suppose we may generalise his remark, and say that mere 
association is not enough to develop meaning. It is different 
to think first of one thing and then of another, and to treat 
the one as a qualification or character of the other. No doubt 
this is true. But we have surely learned of late that every 
association is at bottom a pure connection of judgment, and 
where judgment affirms a character of a subject you certainly 
have meaning. This seems to give us the distinction we want. 
A content is ' used ' when, in judgment, it qualifies a real 
world ; when its nature, carrying us beyond its mental exis- 
tence, makes us attend not to the latter, but to a quasi-inde- 
pendent subject, ultimately a condition under which that 
nature is true of reality. It is the work of thought as opposed 
to feeling ; of what we know to what we are ; if only we 
remember that thought adds no element to feeling, but merely 
re-organises its matter. 

Thus we use our stores and our fresh production of psychical 
stuff, in their original and acquired content, b or any part of 
it, to qualify subjects independent of those whose stamp and 
figure it bears ab initio within itself. And this is possible 
because it is after all in one aspect and more or less completely 
a psychical existent, and as such is not tied down to any 
significant structure, although primarily appropriated by one 
or another. 

And it should be observed as a general principle of j udgment c 
that subject qualifies predicate no less than predicate subject ; 
for the judgment is a brief expression of the same unity 
which is more fully uttered in inference, where premisses 
qualify conclusion just as conclusion qualifies premisses. This 
explains how a psychical content may appear to become more 
in meaning than it was as a content, when it is synthesised 
with a relatively d self-existent subject. 

a Mind, 6 1, p. 76. 

b See vol. i, p. 69, note, with reference to Professor Stout's paper in 
Aristotelian Proceedings, 1903. 

c See Appendix to ii, chap, i, p. 41 note c , and vol. i, p. 69. Cp. 
previous note. 

d No finite subject ib more than relatively belf-existent. On the 



3oo Mental States in Relation to Judgment LBOOK n 

The term ' use ' in short, implies the distinction between the 
existence and the content of a mental state. When we take 
a character out of one complex and apply it to qualify another 
we may be said to f use ' it. It is a case of the law of thought 
by which the nature of an existent carries us beyond it. 
In being ' used ' it becomes part of the clothing, so to 
speak, of a determinate subject in the world which judgment 
sustains ; and in becoming this it is penetrated by new 
relations, and takes on a new stamp and new articulations 
in response to the nature of the subject which stands 
ready to receive it. ' The coat is rough/ ' The road is 
rough/ ' The sea is rough/ ' The man is rough. 1 In each 
of these predications the common content which has become 
one with the word say ' unevenness ' has taken on from its 
subject a special nuance and articulation. But what is one 
with the content is itself a variable amount, and is affected 
by usage and by the nuances and articulations which it is 
in the habit of taking on. The psychical existent or immediate 
is not a part of our mental formation but a phase of -it. 
What is acquired enters into it as much as what is given, if 
indeed there is any sense in speaking of the given when it is 
impossible, finally and in principle, to draw a line between 
the given and the acquired. Any content of apprehension or 
comprehension may become a state of our mind. 

The result of our discussion amounts to this. 

All mental states are phases into which our objective 
apprehension under certain conditions may fall. All our 
objective apprehension is something which is capable of taking 
the shape of a mental state, i.e. of becoming immediate. I may 
add as to the former point that none of the cases commonly 
alleged as cases admittedly of mental states or states of the 
self, e. g. the experience of pain and pleasure, are wholly free 
from objective reference, A great part of the horror of pain 
depends upon this ; that something seems to be devouring 
you, or growing within you, or crushing you, or piercing you, 
or tearing you. The mental state in virtue of its content passes 

fresh determinations acquired by a content in use see Professor Stout, 
Ar. Proc., 1903. And on the self -transcendence of the existent, cp. 
Hoernle, p. 75, who finds a difficulty in it. 



CHAP. xi Mental States and the Real 301 

into affirmation, as affirmation in virtue of its existence passes 
over into the mental state. You cannot find a kind of ex- 
perience whichis necessarily amentalstateandno more; nor can 
you find one which necessarily involves an apprehended object 
and no less. It is a fundamental error of principle to look for 
either. Immediacy is a phase and not a stratum of experience. 

2. Having thus discussed the relation of states of the self The Real 
to judgment, it remains to draw the consequences of this n ^. , 
relation in its bearing on the real world to take a test case, by sub- 
though not the most important case, on physical reality. traction. 

The full detail of such a discussion as Mr. Richard has 
recently devoted to Kant's Theory of Knowledge, goes beyond 
the purpose of a treatise on systematic Logic. I am only 
anxious to explain the attitude to the ideal construction of 
reality which underlies the present work, and for that purpose 
I shall refer to some of Mr. Prichard's arguments. 

I place in the forefront of my observations a principle, 
which I take to be fundamental, and to which I have already 
more than once referred. The significance of judgment and 
knowledge as of experience in all its forms lies always on 
ahead, and not behind ; that is to say, in attempting to discern 
the real reality which justifies any experience you must 
go forward from it to the more concrete and more complete, 
and not retire upon something from which an element has been 
withdrawn. This is the well-known principle that the truth is 
the whole ; the same is true of the reality ; and it is in ap- 
proximation to the whole, and not by disruption of the 
organism of experience into two opposing sides, that truth and 
reality corroborate one another. So far as the Realist move- 
ment of to-day is a reaction towards naive realism, it is a 
contradiction of this fundamental principle an outcome of 
theoretical timidity and pessimism, which prefers in a difficult 
situation to seek safety in retrogression rather than success 
in advance. For the moment, I believe that this character 
is uppermost in it. But it must be, of course, at this time 
of day, naive realism with a difference ; and I hope to in- 
dicate in passing that of necessity it carries elements within 
it which point to a real philosophical reform. 

I will briefly observe on three points in which current 



J02 Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOK n 

theory seems to affect the notion of apprehension and 
comprehension by the mind in relation to reality. 
I understand it to be maintained : 

a. That external objects, spatial and physical objects, are 
not in any sense or degree states of the mind ; for in the first 
place, there is no need that they should be so in order to be 
known ; and in the second place, if they were so, they could 
ex hypothesi not be known as apart from the knowing self ; 
and it is an axiom that they are so known. And as a sub- 
contention to remove the apparent contradiction of the main 
doctrine, it is urged that knowledge is an activity sui generis 
and cannot be explained. 

. It would follow that the present writer is wrong in 
attaching considerable value to subjective idealism as a 
propaedeutic a and a partial truth. 

y. It is dangerous to say that judgment sustains the world, }) 
and untrue to say that we relate Predicate to Subject ; that 
inference is a process of ideal construction, or that we ideally 
construct reality.* 5 

In my view, all these opinions depend on the one central 
fallacy pointed out above, that to find the reality independent 
of experience you must have recourse to a reality apart from 
experience. 

Know- a . \Ve have seen that all judgment and its elements, not 
involves to mention sensation and feeling, are in certain aspects always, 
Mental an< i i n certain phases completely, states of the self. 
Reality ^ u * ^ * s ur e d thai the objects thus known or the 
lies experiences thus experienced are not dependent for their 
notice- qualities, for elements of their real being, upon judgment, 
hind. sensation, and feeling ; and therefore, though all these involve 
mental states, yet the objects known or the phases experienced 
in them have none of their reality in these states. 

I note at starting the extraordinary contention which this 
view makes necessary, that colours, sounds, smells, tastes, and 
sensations of touch are not qualities of things ; d and with 
this, the attempt to show that because we know space to have 

a Essentials, p. 20. b Caird, Proc. Brit. Academy, vol. I, 

p. 106. Prichard, 242-5. 

d Prichard, 86-7. To be on all fours with the other cases it should 
be what you feel in sensations of touch, 



CHAP, xi Reality lies ahead 303 

three dimensions, though we can never see it so, therefore we 
know space as it is independent of perception. This latter 
argument precisely illustrates the tendency which I call going 
backward instead of forward to look for reality. To know 
what space is involves perceptions of more than one kind, not 
merely visual, and, on the top of that, inference, i.e. a mode 
of conception which resolves the contradictions of perception. 
And because the knowledge of the nature of space involves 
the work of a percipient plus that of an intelligence, i. e. 
because the apprehended nature of space is a reconciled 
perception, going beyond the possibilities of actual per- 
ception into the realm of thought, we are told that the 
properties of Space do not involve a percipient at all. a The 
fact is that they imply an intelligent percipient (if this needs 
to be formulated as though a percipient could be not 
intelligent) ; and that, just as the contradictions of perception 
have forced us to go beyond perception to something not 
presented in any actual perception, so the further employ- 
ment of intelligence, in removing the contradictions of its 
primary constructions, may force us to assume as reality 
something which excludes the ultimate reality of any space 
at all. You can only correct a perception by going forward 
in the positive process of removing contradictions. You 
destroy all positive reality if you attempt to go back by simple 
subtraction to a point anterior to perception and say that the 
the real is, what it is when perception is withdrawn a pre- 
dicate in this case involving, though not wholly given in, percep- 
tion. We see here the abstractions to which we are driven 
if we refuse to look for the self-existent reality in the inclusive 
whole which the effort to think things completely forces us 
to assume. If we turn back in search of independence gained 
by omission, we cannot avoid committing arbitrary acts of 
abstraction like the foregoing at every step. 

(2) Now we can see the explanation of the doctrine which Truth in 
we find ascribed to a mere assumption. 1 * It is held, we are c ^"J^i v 
told, that the mind can only apprehend what belongs to its appre- 
own being, and that this is a gratuitous assumption. It is, 
if taken in one sense, a false assumption, but it is, as against 

a Prichard, p. 91. b Prichard, p. 118. 



304 Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOK u 

the opposite error, not at all gratuitous. It starts from the 
obvious fact, now coming to be admitted even by realists,* 
that the object apprehended, say, in sense-perception or in 
thought, forms an integral part of our mental life and emotions, 
contributes influence to it, and derives predicates from it. 
But so long as this obvious fact is denied by a realism which 
so far remains naive (owing as I must believe to a very simple 
and popular fallacy which I will point out directly), any 
philosophy which respects the facts while bluffed into accepting 
this denial, must necessarily say that the objects of appre- 
hension are simply psychical states and nothing more. Sub- 
jective Idealism is the nemesis of realism. What is wanted 
is to go forward, amending and expanding the experience 
which progressively approximates to giving us things as they 
are, under the full conditions which enable them to be what 
they are. The reality thus attained altogether transcends at 
once our particular mental states and the thin abstractions 
which form the realist's actual world. We need no assumption 
that the mind can only apprehend what belongs to its own 
being. We need only to recognise the obvious fact that what 
it apprehends at least participates in its own nature, a fact 
which the realist is forced to admit, both by the degree in 
which be truncates reality when he withdraws from it what 
he believes to belong to the mind ; b and by the degree in 
which the remainder which he is forced to leave to it still 
distinctly exhibits a living logical nature far transcending 
what can be ascribed to a physical object as physical. 
Thus, he tells us, ' gold ' is by itself and apart from mind 
' a connection of universals ' i.e. it obeys the law of the self- 
transcendence of finite experience and embodies in itself a 
complex of conations. And if we refuse to recognise this fact 

a Who, so far as they admit it, are no longer naive realists. 

b Prichard, pp. 116-8. 

c (Prichard, pp. 242-4). We shall see, too, below that inferential 
connection is to be a character of external reality per se. Unless it 
is so, it is nonsense to speak of merely discovering connections. You 
can only discover conjunctions of fact. Necessary connections must 
be inferred by intelligence, unless they infer themselves. I am per- 
fectly certain that the present so-called realism, which does not yet 
understand whether it is natve or not, will have to hark back to an 



CHAP, xj Fallacy of Apartness 305 

in our theory of the reality beyond our particular mind, it 
must compel us falsely to concentrate the real into mere states 
of the finite centres themselves. 

(3) I note the same retrogressive impulse in the idea that What ex- 
explaining a thing means explaining it away, i. e. deriving it means, 10 " 
from what is not itself.* To explain a thing, surely, is to think viz. corn- 
it in terms of the whole. A good explanation makes more, thinking, 
not less, of what it explains. It draws the outline of its full 
individuality which only its relation to the whole can exhibit 

and calls attention to the law of its being. Even an aesthetic 
product can be enhanced in value by good explanation. But 
I fully agree that it is impossible to have a theory of cogni- 
tion, if that means a theory of cognition apart from a theory 
of reality, because to omit either is to omit what is essential 
to the full individuality of the other. 

(4) And now we come to the supposed axiom of independent Fallacy 
reality, and what I take to be the fallacy on which it rests. 1^!*" 
' Knowledge unconditionally presupposes that the reality dent of 
known exists independently of the knowledge of it, and that 

we know it as it exists in this independence/ b If we construe 
' independence ' as = ' being apart from ' I am quite sure that 
this statement is false. Knowledge has no such presupposi- 
tion. We have no such conviction. The presupposition of 
knowledge, and our conviction, may be stated c in the first 
place briefly : ' So far as we know things, we know them as 
they are ; ' and then more precisely, ' Knowledge presupposes 
tlr..t the system of judgments in which it consists can maintain 
itself against any contradiction, and that the reality known is 
unmodified by knowledge except in the direction of being 
revealed as more completely itself.' Thus the axiom as first 
stated rests on a plain fallacy a dicto secundum quid ad dictum 
simpliciter. The nature of reality is not differentially depen- 

outrageous form of Hegel's extreme doctrine, that every ' thing ' is a 
judgment and a syllogism. 

a Prichard, p. 124. 

b Prichard, p. 118. ' Independent ' seems to -' apart from ', p. 119. 

A difference of opinion about the statement of essential functions of 
knowledge is not at all a surprising tiling. The functions are relative 
to the whole, and our view of them depends on our view of it. Cp. 
vol. ii, p. 229. 

1337-2 X 



306 Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOK n 

dent on knowledge ; but it is a fallacy to go from that to the 
statement, 'Reality is what it is apart from knowledge/ unless, 
as seems to be partly the case,* you are relying on the contrast 
between knowledge and other forms of experience. It is 
a plain fallacy to say that because the difference between 
a, b, and c is not due to x, therefore a, b, and c can be what 
they are if x is withdrawn. 

And it does not suffice to suggest that to the special nature 
of any reality may be annexed the additional characteristic 
of being known. b The point is that the nature common to 
every reality say, for instance, the admitted fact that it is 
a connection of universals, involves its sharing the life and 
characteristics of experience. If it is argued that you must go 
to the special nature of every reality to determine whether 
or no it is dependent on mind (or, to put it more truly, and 
in a way that avoids subjective idealism, ' whether it partici- 
pates in the life of experience'), the answer is that that question 
has long been considered and the result is not doubtful. 
The admission that the secondary qualities have special 
natures dependent upon mind is enough by itself to break 
down the principle that qualities of things must be inde- 
pendent of perception.* And if independence breaks down 
here, it cannot be maintained with apprehension and with 
knowledge. The nature of reals is fatal to the axiom that 
we know things as they are apart from cognition. The essence 
of this axiom is to look for leality in abstraction and isolation; 
lightly to accept the thing-in-itself as being what we know it 
to be ; but without a shadow of justification or probability to 
assume that the being of the thing in itself is compatible 
with isolation instead of demanding as a condition of its exist- 
ence the full context and interconnection of experiential life. 

(5) This inclination is natural, because it promises to 

a Prichard, p. 118. Of cour&e we do not say that knowledge is the 
only form in which Reality can appear, nor the most adequate. But 
we do say that reality is inseparable from experience, and that is enough 
to negative the contention that it is what it is apart from mind. The 
only plausible case of being apart from knowledge is that in which, like 
pain, it is plainly not apart from mind, but another kind of experience 
takes the place of knowledge. 

b Prichard, p. 116. c See above, p. 304. 

d Prichard, p. 120 ff., cp. 86 ft 



CHAP.X] Apart from knowledge minus the organ 307 

common-sense a simple ultimate real, ensuring facility of A simple 
treatment and finality in apprehension. But the anticipation djjijwte 
of facility and finality in contact with the real is, I am certain, mental 
fundamentally vicious, and any theory which is guided by bem S- 
it stands ipso facto self-condemned. We have noted the 
involuntary recognition of this truth by the modern realist.* 
But as recognised under his dualistic assumption it becomes 
false. It tends to ascribe a psychical character to things 
apart from the mind. But what we want, and what an un- 
distorted view of the presupposition of knowledge affords us, 
is not a psychical character of things apart from the mind, 
but a logical character of reality as revealed through the mind 
self-revelation being essential and inherent in the real, 
whose nature apart from it is self-contradictory. 

(6) And in the proposition that the real is for knowledge if inde- 
the same that it is apart from knowledge I note an old elemen- Pe ndent 
tary difficulty which seems to me insuperable. How can you from, 



separate the cognitive apprehension of an object from the 
operation of the organ of sense upon it ? Grant, for the sake objects 
of argument, that if, per impossibile, you could compare a ^^f or 
mind's cognitive consciousness of a perceived object with appre- 
the full report of the living and healthy organ of sense directed hensiou - 
upon it but minus consciousness, you would find that the 
bare addition of cognitive consciousness had not falsified 
the report, and therefore that the cognition had in no way 
modified the apprehension of the full object ; the full 
object being the object of perception plus the modification 
effected in its physical operation by the organ of sense. 
Then (omitting ex hypothesi the fact that in the absence of 
consciousness apprehension would not have taken place at 
all) under the impossible condition which I have granted you 
would be entitled to say that the intervention of cognitive 
consciousness left the object the full object precisely as it 
would be apart from such intervention. 15 

a Professor Alexander's contention, e. g. Ar. Proc., 1908-9, that what 
are commonly called psychical objects arc physical, cannot be carried 
through without a rapprochement between what are commonly called 
physical objects and the psychicaU The comment of the text seems 
to me to apply to his view. 

b I omit for the sake of argument such matters as the influence of 

X2 



308 Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOK n 

But this, I take it, is not by any means the case which is 
in question when we are told that the object of knowledge 
is for knowledge the same that it is apart from knowledge. In 
this doctrine I presume we are comparing the object as per- 
ceived through the organ of sense plus cognitive consciousness 
with the same as it is when withdrawn, not merely from 
the operation of cognitive consciousness, but from that of the 
organ of sense as well. But that the object should be the 
same under these two conditions, of being known after trans- 
mission through a sense-organ, and of neither being known 
nor transmitted through a sense-organ, is surely a physical 
impossibility. A physical object cannot be the same when a 
complex physical condition is superadded to it and when 
that condition is withdrawn. And the superadding of this 
complex physical condition is in every case inseparable from 
the apprehension of the object; therefore it cannot conceivably 
be the same when apprehended and apart from apprehension.* 

For us this has no difficulty. We do not doubt that the 
thing really is as it is apprehended, because its reality for 
us is its full self-maintenance under the completed conditions 
of experience. But it seems to me absolutely fatal to the 
axiom of knowledge which was criticised above. You may 
throw overboard, as appeared to be practically done by the 
view in question, the secondary qualities, b but you cannot in 
the full sense of the axiom secure even the primaries. And 
I must insist that with the abandonment of the secondary 
qualities the axiom is absolutely surrendered. If the real 
world apart from knowledge has no secondary qualities, it 
has hardly anything of what we care for. It is not recognisable 
as our world at all. 

It may be argued that the nervous disturbance, or whatever 
the result of the sense organ's operation may be, is not the 

apperception, and allow the hypothesis that cognition should bring no 
modifying influences with it to the report of the organ of sense. 

a Note that in one place the theory we are discussing makes the real 
qualities of a thing exist independently not merely of knowledge but of 
perception and sentience (p. 86). Thus sentience cannot be appealed 
to as presenting the complete physical object as it is apart from 
knowledge. The real must be apart from sentience no less than 
from knowledge. But cp. 306 sup. and reff. b Prichard, p. 86. 



CHAP. X] Continuity of matter and mind 309 

object of perception, and we are never so much as aware of it. 
That is a very good argument against saying that what we 
perceive are neural tremors and nothing more. But it is 
wholly irrelevant to the point that a vibrating violin-string is 
not sonorous in the absence of a hearing ear, and a candle 
is not a source of light in the absence of a seeing eye. These 
are simple physical facts ; and they suffice to overthrow the 
doctrine that objects are the same for cognitive apprehension 
that they are apart from it. a 

In conclusion, then, the true axiom of knowledge is that we 
can know things as they really are. And that means, that 
we know them in theirfull self -maintenance. There is no axiom 
that warrants us in arguing directly from the reality of full 
experience to the reality of abstraction, and if we adopt this 
procedure we must do it on the special ground that what we 
exclude is ad hoc irrelevant, a contention which always leaves 
us exposed to some degree of risk. 

And as to mental states, our conclusion so far is certainly 
not that the reality which we know either must or does 
consist solely of the mental states of particular minds. But, 
we urge, this proposition is false only because it would identify 
the real with a particular phase or character of mental being, 
and with that, moreover, as it is in each mind taken apart. 
Our conclusion is, therefore, that the stuff of our mental states 
does really and truly characterise and belong to external 
objects, although, as characterising such objects, it ceases to 
b'J a mere mental state. It follows that the nature of external 
objects is continuous with that of the stuff of mind, and is 
physical, i.e. has variations relative to those of other objects, 
as well as psychical. Physical or spatial objects are just as 
we know them, and truly have the characters which our 
knowledge (so far as it is knowledge, i. e. so far as it is consistent 

a Professor Stout's doctrine as stated in Mind, 77. 12-13, seems to 
me not to be open to this objection, because, >\hile holding that in 
presentation we have a glimpse of matter as it really is, yet in answer 
to the further question, ' What matter ? ' he replies, as I understand, 
1 the matter of our body, and of other things only as affecting that,' 
not, as I read him, the matter of other things in so far as they do not 
affect that of our body. I should not have thought that in this latter 
point Mr. Moore would agree with him, as implied on p. 9. 



3io Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOK n 

with itself and with experience) attributes to them. The stuff 
of mental states, therefore, enters into them, and though the 
stuff of each particular mind is only a very small contribution 
to the real world, yet it is a contribution, and is capable, in 
principle, of furnishing some element which no other particular 
mind supplies. 

Objects then are only not mental states of particular minds 
first because they are not states of mind, but interdependent 
with minds and characterised by the stuff which is also 
experienced in states of mind ; and secondly because if 
they were states of mind it would not be the states of 
any particular mind but the states of all minds. It 
follows that the destruction of a single mind with its states 
neither destroys the objects apprehended by it, nor again 
makes no difference to their existence. It diminishes, in 
principle, their amount of reality, and presumably moreover, 
in doing so, deprives them of some character which no other 
mind sustains in them, and the loss of which therefore is a 
genuine loss of being to the object. So far mental states of 
particular minds are the material of objective reality, not 
merely as themselves psychical facts, but as facts which are 
necessary to the nature of real objects. 

The ob- (7) The same tendency to seek truth by omission is ex- 
TMrcep- em pWfi e d * n the desire to treat perception as essentially less 
tion *$ than judgment, and to deny it the right to use the word ' is ' ; 
ttanaiiy sett i n g down the expression c is for me ' as a contradiction 
'forme*, in terms. a 

' The assertion that something is so and so implies that it 
is so and so in itself whether it be perceived or not, and 
therefore the assertion that something is so and so to us as 
perceiving though not in itself, is a contradiction in terms.' 
The truth about this seems to me quite simple. Everything 
is what it is under conditions. It is itself under full, normal, 
or typical conditions, the distinction of which from any 
partial or transient conditions is a matter of degree of 
convenience for science or for common sense. We cannot 
possibly attain a right conception of ' itself ' by the with- 
drawal of all conditions. That is the fallacy signalised above. 

a Prichard, pp. 72 ff., 99 ff. 



CHAP, x] Value of Subjective Idealism 311 

In perception, as in any other judgment, you may fail to 
be aware of the conditions to which your judgment is subject. 
In that case, judging unconditionally of what is conditional, 
you fall into error. But if you name the conditions, or indicate 
by a phrase of relation like ' for me ' that you are aware of 
conditions though you cannot or will not mention them, the 
predication ' is ' becomes appropriate at once. Everything 
is what it is under conditions, and what it is ' in itself ' is only 
distinguished by being under conditions which you accept as 
normal. The thing which looks pink to a colour-blind man is 
pink to him. a The condition of its being pink is present ; 
that of its being blue is absent, and if it were not pink under 
the existing condition it would have to be other in itself than 
it is. The unconditional judgment of knowledge, interpreted 
as about the thing apart from knowledge, is false precisely 
in the same way as the judgment of perception is apt to be. 
An unconditional judgment must be false unless you interpret 
it to mean * presupposing the normal or typical conditions '. 

)3. I am therefore constant in the opinion b that Subjective Sub- 
Idealism is a valuable propaedeutic to philosophy and especially i 
to Logic. I understand it to mean that we know nothing insists on 
but states of our own minds. It is not actually true, but it t2Sity*of 
is truth of a higher order than that of naive realism. Na'ive universe, 
realism I understand to deny that qualities which depend on 
minds can be qualities of objects ; for it is essential to it that 
objects should be what they are apart from minds. This 
doctrine conditions leality by the withdrawal from experience, 
and so cuts the universe in two. Subjective Idealism is its 
nemesis. The latter urges that the qualities of reality are 
continuous with the psychical, and then, if and because you 
say that reality can have no psychical qualities, it repudiates 
the dead reality so offered, and limits the real world to what 
is admittedly self-maintaining in the context of a vital whole. 

Thus it insists on the fundamental truths of the continuity 
of nature throughout the real, and the dependence of its being 
in some degree on every particular mind. It is this continuity 
and this dependence the life and wholeness of things which 
appear more especially distasteful to realism, and which it 

* Ibid., p. 72 note, b Essentials, 19 ff. 



312 Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOK n 

avoids by the ignava ratio of withdrawing reality from any 
essential participation in the whole of sentience and intelligence. 
Against this logical quietism profoundly connected, I am 
convinced, with the timidity and pessimism of the daythe 
subjective Idealist raises an audaciously exaggerated protest. 
Whatever the object of knowledge may ultimately be, he 
contends, it can only attain or sustain what is worth calling 
reality in and through a share in the full and continuous life 
of feeling, sensation, and intelligence. His error is to confine 
the life in question to the particular mind, and to redtice the 
real world to a mere combination of its states. But this error 
means not that he is too idealistic, but that he is not idealistic 
enough. He accepts the false doctrine which tells us that 
a real world independent of knowledge must be complete 
apart from knowledge, and rightly rejects a real world so 
defined. He cannot therefore suggest the only solution which 
can satisfy the logical need, a real world furnishing out of 
its self-dependent being a content to knowledge and experi- 
ence, but of a nature continuous with theirs, and one in which 
self-revelation is inherent. Nothing but this can satisfy the 
logical and metaphysical postulate that truth and reality lie 
in approximation to the whole. And this postulate, which 
is one with the law of contradiction, lies at the root of Logic. 
Anything ultimately atomic, or independent, or non-plastic 
any truth or reality not relative in respect of its qualities to 
its degree of participation in the whole, is irreconcilable 
with this postulate, and with a system of Logic resting on the 
conception of logical stability. a 

It is this fundamental principle that Subjective Idealism 
maintains, when it treats the real world, however erroneously, 
as a mere outgrowth or complex of mental states, and as 
dependent for its being on particular minds. It thus emphasises 
what I may call the arduousness of reality, both of its theoreti- 
cal conception and of its detailed apprehension. Its conception 
demands to be maintained always on the level of the life of 
mind ; that is, when we think of what we mean by reality 
we have also to think of feeling, sentience, and intelligence in 
their various grades of perfection as actually involved and 
a Cf. p. 288 above. 



CHAP, x] Sustaining the world 313 

operative in sustaining the real in corresponding degrees. And 
its detailed apprehension in the same way depends for its 
completeness, not on mere adjustment to a hard datum, but 
on the degree in which the whole is brought to bear upon the 
given. Therefore there can be no simple apprehension (except 
in the arbitrary sense that we may accept a certain level of 
insight as satisfactory ad hoc), and no such thing as a receptive 
attitude to data. The most obvious of perceptions involves 
the beginning of a critical process, progressive, arduous, and 
never finally accomplished. All this is the logical lesson of 
subjective idealism ; and therefore in spite of its failure to apply 
its doctrine to the self-dependent real object, I welcome it 
as a logical propaedeutic. 

y. ' When an idealist speaks of the judgment by which Sustain- 
we sustain the world,* however adequate may be his explana- con_ am 
tion of such language, it is apt to excite a suspicion that his structing 
theories, if they were completely worked out, would lead to wo 
the individual being regarded as his own universe and his own 
God.' b 

' When it is said that our world, or the world for us, is due 
to our activity of thinking, and so in some sense made by us, 
all that should be meant is that our apprehending the world 
as whatever we apprehend it to be presupposes activity on 
our part ' ' Nothing is implied to be made. If anything is 
said to be made, it must be not our world, but our activity 
of apprehending the world.' ' Again, in judgment we cannot 
be said to relate predicate to subject. . . . We must say that 
in judgment we recognise real elements as related or combined.' 
' Again, when we infer, we do not construct, ideally or other- 
wise/ ' Ideal construction is a contradiction in terms, unless 
it refers solely to mental imagining, in which case it is not in- 
ference.' . . . ' Inference would cease to be inference, if by 
it we made and did not apprehend a necessity of connection.' c 
* The very nature of knowing presupposes that the thing known 
is already made, or, to speak more accurately, already exists.' {} 

a Cp. e. g. vol. i, p. 84 above. 

b E. Caird, ' Idealism and the Theory of Knowledge,' Proceedings of 
British Academy, vol. i. 

c Prichard, pp. 242-5. d Ibid., p. 235. 



314 Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOK n 

The points raised in the statements here quoted are 
primarily metaphysical, and as such go beyond the scope of 
this work. But they are greatly affected by a precise con- 
sideration of what we actually do in judgment and inference, 
and so far it seems necessary to offer some explanation in 
regard to them. And if this explanation involves a word or 
two of indication as to where we stand, in a philosophical 
logic, with reference to the subject-matter of metaphysic, 
perhaps at the close of a logical treatise such an indication 
is permissible. The underlying question seems to be whether 
in cognition we are co-operating in the self-maintenance of 
reality, as ourselves organs within it ; or are apprehending 
ab extra something finished and complete apart from us. 
Of these types of view it is the former that has prevailed 
in my treatment. I am aware that it needs careful statement, 
and will endeavour to state it with due precision in what 
follows. 

How much then is meant and implied by saying (i) that our 
judgment sustains the universe, and (2) that in judgment and 
inference we make or construct reality ? a 

Judg- (j) jhe expression in question was primarily employed to 

volves a emphasise the idea of a total affirmative attitude to our world 

owe world 1 as Distinct fr m * e isolated judgment or proposition as 

' commonly regarded in logic, qua selected and detached in 

abstract thought or in language. 

There were two things, as it seemed, to be insisted on, in 
conceiving such an affirmation as the genuine type of judgment. 
One was the overwhelming impression, conveyed alike by 
thought and by perception, of an affirmative and not merely 
receptive attitude in presence of our whole connected world. 
Everything, it seemed, had on it the stamp of meaning ; and 
everything that had on it the stamp of meaning was ipso facto 
affirmed as soon as our thought rested, or our eyes were 
opened, on a whole including it. The point was not in any 
new account of affirmation ; but that whatever we meant 
by affirmation in the fullest sense as applied to a definite 
judgment is true of our attitude to the world as a whole with 
all its inter-connected detail. The example which seemed 

* Cp. with citations above, i. 42, 



CHAP. X] Our affirmation as a whole 315 

peculiarly insistent was the field of vision. It contained, as 
it seemed, innumerable judgments of magnitude and spatial 
inter-relation and other properties and relations, all affirmed 
at a stroke and so to speak as a solid whole on the simple 
opening of one's eyes. If the experiment is made of denying 
any ohe of them, any property or relation appearing within 
the field of vision, we discover beyond a doubt that we have 
affirmed it, seeing that we must either defend it by argument 
or admit that we were in error. 

And the second matter was the underlying wholeness and 
unity of this enormous world of affirmation. a Everything in 
it is affirmed, but affirmed subject to being a part in the whole, 
and the consciousness of this reservation is essential to the 
affirmation. Every detail is asserted as in its way true and 
real, but only in its way, being modified by a huge co-ordinate 
affirmation, shading off into an undefined underlying unity, 
merely implied, but none the less affirmed. b 

This world of our affirmation, with its double aspect of 
innumerable detail and implied unity, seemed to be the world 
we practically lived in, and undoubtedly to be dependent 
upon our energy and capacity not for the nature of its content, 
but for being, so far as we had to do with it, more or less of 
.itself. This was the primary sense in which our judgment 
could be said to sustain our world. Its point was that our 
world was all in judgment, none of it in mere reception ; and 
the amount of it so to speak, depended on was coincident 
with the amount of our particular mind. 

This is the meaning of ' sustaining our world ' with which 
logic is concerned. It is merely an expansion of the customary 
application of the term ' judgment ', demanded by consistency. 
It has the strictly logical advantage of putting in a strong 
light the unimportance of grammatical subject and predicate, 
which can hardly be found in the judgment so described, 
the ultimate subject being as always Reality ; and also of 
emphasising the abstract and conditional character of the 
detached judgments which we make explicit as fragments, 

ft See i. 84 above, and Essentials, p. 33 ff., and cp. Stout, Mind, 77, 
pp. 5 and 6. 

b Cp. Essentials, loc. cit. 



316 Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOKII 

attempting to compensate for their abstractness by precision 
of connection. 

But if this meaning is challenged on metaphysical grounds, 
and we are asked how far we, we as finite fragmentary minds, 
can be said really to sustain the universe, we have not to 
disown anything that we have said. We are only driven a 
little nearer to metaphysic ; and the answer is that we sustain 
the universe not only for ourselves, in the sense that it is 
through our own experience, and under its limitations, that 
we have to play our part in it, but in the more metaphysical 
sense that supposing a given mind and its states not to be, a 
the universe would actually be the poorer, however inappreci- 
ably, by certain elements of its self-revelation peculiar to the 
experience of that finite mind. b 

The former of the above views is all that strictly belongs to 
Logic, if we are at all to distinguish Logic from Metaphysics. 
What Logic aimed at c was to show by what characters, 
exhibited in the structure of cognition, the object of cognition 
is revealed as more or less of itself and as possessing more or 
less of reality or logical stability. 

Metaphysic would have a return game to play. It would 

show that finite minds which for Logic sustain the universe, 

are ultimately organs moulded by it and through which it 

sustains itself. Both points of view are true, and it is the test 

of a philosophy to succeed in combining them/ 1 

Both (2) To say that before we know or apprehend an object it 

Realists mus t ex ist, or its making must be finished, complete and apart 

ft We must not say ' to perish ', or ' cease to be '. That would raise 
the question whether such events were not mere appearance whether 
anything could be lost to the universe. 

b Not merely by lack of the mind as a member of the whole, as by 
lack of an unconscious creature, but by lack of its view of the whole. 

c i. 3 above. 

d In this respect the relations of Logic and Metaphysic are not unlike 
the relations of morality and religion. In morality, too, the ' individual ' 
seems to sustain the weight of the world. All is on his shoulders ; he 
acts out of himself ; all turns upon what he does next. So it does, and 
the point of view is a true one. But if we go on to ask what the ' indi- 
vidual ' is, and how far he is really and truly an isolated and independent 
creature, then we get into the provinces of society and religion, which 
modify without annihilating the purely moralist point of view. 



CHAP. X] Pure cognition v. pure creation 317 

from the knowing or apprehending, is a very simple and and 
natural version of the presupposition of knowledge which we 
referred to above. a It will serve, indeed, as a first approxima- put us 
tion to the true relation between knowledge and ' making ' 
which I hope to suggest. It assumes, I repeat, a reality given 
as self-complete, and that apart from the apprehensive organ 
or process. We, the knowing mind, stand outside a reality 
which is complete without us ; without us, at least, qua cogni- 
tive subjects. And I believe that to be consistent it would 
be necessary to add, without us as sentient beings either. 

It may help us to discern the true relation of the process 
and object in question, if we first turn to the extreme opposite 
of the above theory of apprehension, an opposite with which 
I, quite as much as the new realists, am at war. It might be 
expressed by saying that in knowledge we create, and create 
not only truth but reality. We make it, that is, out of nothing, 
and by means of nothing. We do not make it by the law 
of the universe or of our minds or of the two together or of 
anything at all, out of anything that was given. Against any 
idea of this type the reproach would be flung ' Then tout 
est donne.' 

This view presupposes a modifiable ultimate reality, outside 
which, in some strange fashion, we stand, with a miraculous 
power of adding new determinations to it in virtue of no 
existing nature, either of it or of our own. b It is strange and 
suggestive that both the one-sided attitudes necessarily place 
the mind outside the reality ; in the former case that the 
mind may not dictate to the real ; in the latter, that the real 
may not dictate to the mind. 

Now we can discern what our attitude must be. We have 
rejected all ideas which make truth depend on copying or 
correspondence. But again, we hold continuity and intel- 
ligibility to be destroyed if pure creation is possible if, that is, 
ultimate reality is modifiable ; if, that is, once more, the real 
is modifiable otherwise than by its own law. 

a p- 305. 

l) It does not matter, I think, whether these consequences are accepted 
by the theorists in question or not. The test is the rejection of con- 
tinuity. 



318 Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOK n 

For us, the universe is undoubtedly the object of apprehen- 
sion and knowledge, prior to them and determining them. But 
it is not an object given and complete as a whole apart from 
apprehension and knowledge, still less, of course, from experi- 
ence. a And the relation of apprehension to it is neither 
copying on the one hand, nor creation on the other. These 
are fit expressions for the working of a mind from the outside 
upon a hard and self-complete real, or upon one unfinished 
and incapable of self-determination respectively. But for us 
the mind is a constituent of a living and self-determining real. 
We might apply to its activity the term apprehension, with 
explanations, or perhaps even the term creation, again with 
explanations. But it will be best to look first at the nature 
of our object, and to judge for ourselves how the relation of 
knowledge to it should really be described. 
Nature of (3) The object of cognition, then, is not a simple object. It 

togm* 01 is not a11 & iven ; and Jt is not S iven as a wll ole. If we try to 
tion. get at it on the assumption that it is given, we find it eluding 
us, and extending into an infinite succession or extension of 
particulars in space and time. And with all our trying we 
find in the end that even these particulars are not directly 
given. Now strictly speaking nothing but a given fact can 
be ' apprehended '. Therefore it is clear that our universe, 
qua object of cognition, cannot be in the strict sense ' ap- 
prehended '. To know it as we presume it to be, that is, as 
a whole and a system, we must ' apprehend ' what is not 
given ; and this qualification of the object at once modifies 
the idea of apprehension. It is just as when we read in Plato 
and Aristotle about ' imitation '. It seems simple enough at 
first, to imitate a given object directly. But then we find that 
one can ' imitate ' a moral character with paint-brush or 
chisel, or even, perhaps, one can imitate what is not but 
ought to be. Such qualification of the object must expand 
the meaning of the verb ; and so in knowledge the nature of 
our object changes the meaning of apprehension and cognition, 

a If this latter point is to be taken as admitted by the new realists, 
it appears to me that the whole question is decided. It is impossible 
seriously to admit into the reality of the existent universe some forms 
of experience, and exclude others, prima facie of a completer kind. 



CHAP. X] Can you apprehend what is not given ? 319 

If you are to ' apprehend ' an object by far the greater part 
of which has to be got at by inference, and all of which is 
continuously transformed as apprehension proceeds, you can 
only interpret the term apprehend in a way which has some- 
thing to do with making. I suggest as the key to the required 
meaning some such word as ' elicit '. Your object of knowledge 
has in a great measure to be elicited from the given. For 
the object is a whole, but not a given whole, and is always 
beyond itself, and is offering more to your apprehension than 
is already there for you to apprehend. 

If we are substantially agreed on this character of the 
object, it becomes a verbal question whether we say that we 
construct a reality, that we relate a predicate to a subject in 
judging, that we make an inference, or that we apprehend 
the given and fragmentary facts with such modifications as 
logical necessity requires, and so again apprehend the necessity 
with which a predicate, not given, belongs to its subject, or a 
conclusion, ex hypothesi not given, belongs to its premises, 
or by which one factor of reality, given per se, conditions 
and is conditioned by another, also given only perse. In 
the latter case it is fairly certain that some corners of the 
given will have to be cut off through the operation of the 
conditioning necessity. 

Now strictly, I repeat, it is misleading to say ' I apprehend ' 
anything but a fact or a given conjunction of facts. If you 
say ' I apprehend ' the product of two numbers of five places 
each, I think it would be held that you must be a calculating 

a I have myself commented on the term * construct ' as properly 
expressing only the auxiliary employment of mental imagery in inference 
(ii. 33), and there is a verbal inconsistency between that passage and 
the earlier one which speaks of the construction of reality, i. 42. What 
I meant to urge was that the metaphor from physical construction does 
not really explain the construction of reality. It is the latter that is 
the true construction, and the former derives its significance from it. 
You only construct even physically if you follow a principle and make 
what you meant. Mental construction is mere imagining only if you 
slide from the relevant to the irrelevant content. But if, being in 
possession of a mass of conflicting evidence concerning, say, a historical 
event, you frame a conception which harmonises a great part and 
explains the contradictions of the rest the typical process by which 
we learn what reality is I hardly see what to call the process if not 
construction. 



32O Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOK n 

boy. But if we like to say ' apprehend ' in the sense that 
possessing the given and the law of its system, and operating 
on it accordingly, we are able to apprehend it with modifications 
which belong to it, of course we may say so. But any distinc- 
tive implication as to the priority of the special object of 
apprehension appears in that case to have vanished. 

Thus it may be urged that all critical systems which support 
and elucidate ' facts ' by bringing them into a coherent whole 
e. g. the facts of history a all ' laws of nature ' and ap- 
preciations of necessary connection, all intelligibility by which 
the given itself is known and framed in inter-connections and 
inter-dependences which are not and cannot be given, are 
ultimately ' found ' in the universe and not ' made ', and so 
are ' apprehended ' and not ' constructed '. But surely this 
is to go back to the naive empiricism which so much pains 
and labour have been spent in transcending. If anything at 
all has been made clear in the history of philosophy, it is 
surely that as we get to truth, especially of the higher orders, 
we get away from facts. It is not a contention especially of 
philosophical idealism. It is as true for Mill and Jevons and 
Mr. Bertrand Russell b as for Lotze, Green, and Bradley, not 
to speak of earlier philosophers. No working Logic can be 
put together upon any other basis. 

Now of course the predications in question are presupposed 
to be true of the universe. It is their general presupposition 
and prior object. But it, if you omit from it mind as a 
constituent, does not furnish a given object of apprehension 
which corresponds to them or which they can be said to copy. 
You may say our higher knowledge is a shorthand for innumer- 
able facts. That is, of course, extreme empiricism, and leads 
to the denial that the universe is a whole. But this position 
is so far sound, that if you contend that judgments to be true 
must reproduce facts that are simply found, then our higher 
knowledge must be mere shorthand, or false. If these higher 

a Cp. Mr. F. H. Bradley's Presuppositions of Critical History. 

l) That is to say, so far as I can follow, all Mr. Russell's higher truths, 
viz. those of Logic and Mathematics, are truths of implication and in 
no way deal directly with particulars. Mr. Russell would not, I pre- 
sume, assent to the consequences which I suggest. 



CHAP. X] Knowledge is an activity of the Universe 321 

truths are ' found ' in the universe, they are only found as the 
statue is in the marble, that is, in such a way that the process 
has more to do with the result than the matrix material. In 
the controversy about the relations of knowledge and practice 
it has become clear beyond dispute not only that practice, 
besides making the product always finds the real, but that know- 
ledge, besides finding the real, always modifies the given. To 
know the truth of anything, you always go further afield. Even 
if you ask, ' Is the sensation of touch A a sensation of touch? ' 
you mean to ask about it something further, e.g. 'Is something 
more to be detected than I have apprehended, which will 
be decisive that what I feel is a sensation of touch ? ' a This 
is the beginning of construction ideal construction which 
rests on the fact that all finite reality goes beyond itself, and 
is completer and completer in more and always more of its 
connections. By this ideal construction it has to borrow 
a phrase from another context its own nature progressively 
communicated to it. 

But do we ' make ' the construction ? Is it not there as a 
whole, though unknown to us at first, and we apprehend it ? 
Does not making exclude knowledge ? The answer has been 
offered in the whole preceding argument, and it is for the reader 
to judge. What seems to us is, that we certainly do not 
create the construction, but no less certainly do not in any 
natural sense ' apprehend 'it. It is true conditionally true 
of our universe ; and in that sense, is ' there ' before we make 
it. But it is not given before we make it, and this does not 
apply to individuals because of fortuitous ignorance, but to 
the whole nature of what can be given compared with what 
can only be inferred. If we rule out of the universe the living 
power of mind which alone can complete the given into a 
coherent whole, a systematic construction, modifying the 
facts with a view to their inter-connection, could never come 
to be given at all. It has not only less less irrelevancy 
but more more relevancy than what can be given or found, 
and can never be adequately described as found or given. 
A necessary connection even between two given terms is a 
reciprocal inferential relation, 1 * implying a system beyond 

* Cp. Nettleship, Remains, i. iSoff. b Cp. e.g. vol. ii, p. 8 above. 

1337-2 Y 



322 Mental States in Relation to Judgment [BOOK n 



either, and not present in the apprehension of each alone or 
of both together. 

It is only by a misapprehension, as I have tried to point 
out, that such an interpretation of knowledge seems to conflict 
with its presupposition. Knowledge is an essential form of 
the self -revelation of the universe ; experience as a whole 
is the essential form. In knowledge, the universe reveals 
itself in a special shape which reposes on its nature as a 
whole, and is pro tanto proof against contradiction. It is, 
like the whole wealth of life and of history, elicited from a 
relatively given by the forming and interpreting activity of 
mind, which in this activity is an organ of the universe itself. 
Plainly, if you hold that to be a part of the universe disqualifies 
knowledge from being true (because without it or prior to 
it the universe is not completely there) you must, as I said, 
to make knowledge capable of truth make it external and 
additional to the universe. 

But the detail which it presents in the form of cognition 
is true of the universe, although falling within it, because the 
universe, qua object of cognition, in its self-maintenance 
against self-contradiction in that form shows that it must 
take the detailed shape which it does take and no other, and to 
know is to endow it with that form, making the given more 
and more of itself. 

And in Logic we study the character of the universe or the 
reality with reference to the degrees of stability, which, if we 
postulate bona fide employment, attach to the various frame- 
works at different stages of the structure arising from its 
self -utterance in that form. 

The ' driving force of Idealism ', as I understand it, is not 
furnished by the question how mind and reality can meet 
in knowledge, but by the theory of logical stability, which 
makes it plain that nothing can fulfil the conditions of self* 
existence except by possessing the unity which belongs only 
to mind. External objects, therefore, are fragmentary and 
dependent. 



INDEX 



Absolute Necessity, a contradic- 

tion, ii. 215. 
Absolutism, ii. 251 ff. 
Abstract Number, i. 161. 
Abstraction, i. 61 ; ii. 20 ft. 
Abstraction and Necessity, i. 1 34 ff. 
Adaptationism, in Genetic Logic, 

ii. 272. 

Added Determinants, ii. 67. 
Addition and Multiplication, ii. 58. 
Addition and Multiplication of In- 

dices, ii. 59 ff. 
' Aesthetic necessity 'criticised, ii. 

233 ff- 

Affirmation and Negation, i. 279 ff. 
Albertus de Saxoma, on ' a 

priori ' and ' a posteriori ', ii. 

225 note. 

Alexander, Prof. S., ii. 307. 
All, meaning of, in Judgment, i. 

152. 

Allness and Necessity, i. 211. 
Alternative Classifications, i. 61. 
Analogical Judgment, i. 212 ff. 
Analogy, True and false basis of, ii. 

99 ff. 

Analytic, i. 91. 
Annual rings in trees, i. 219. 
ci7r<J<^>ao"is, dist. (rreprjcris, i. 3 I 5- 
A priori, ii. 224. 
Aristotle, i. 9, ii, 14 note; on 

prjfj,a 19 note, 23, 256, 281-2, 

315 ; ii. 151, 171, 213, 246 note, 

269 note. 

Arnold, Mr. Matthew, ii. 236 note. 
Association of ideas, ii. 14, 225. 
Atomic weights, theory of, ii, 226. 
Axioms, ii. 208. 
Axioms, as Postulates, ii. 208. 

Bacon, ii. 121. 

Bare Denial, i. 281. 

Bee Ophrys, ii. 124. 

Bergson, Evolution Creatrice, ii. 



Bradley, ' Principles of Logic,' i. 
13 note, 29 note, 32 note, 33 



note, 44 note, 46 note, 47 note, 
57, 69 note, 74 note, 100 note, 
139 note, 141 note, 142 note, 
235 238, 263, 265-6, 270 note, 
280, 305 ff., 313, 315, 324, 352, 
361, 379 note; ii. 37 ff., 65, 
112, 133, 176, 184, 254, 261, 
287 ; Mind, i. 131, 293 note; 
ii. 183, 250, 295 ; Appearance 
and Reality, i. 248, 293 note ; 
ii. 15 note, 253, 278; Pre- 
suppositions of Critical History, 
ii. 286, 320. 

Braid, i. 13 note. 

Brown, Dr. Thomas, ii. 66. 

1 Budget of Paradoxes,' De Mor- 
gan, i. 374 ; ii. 120. 

Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy, 
ii. 280 ; Ethics of Aristotle, ii. 
269 note. 

Caird, E., Proceedings of British 
Academy, ii. 302, 313. 

Calculation, ii. 29. 

Categorical and Hypothetical, i, 
87 ff., 269. 

Categories of Sense, i. 1 88. 

Causation, law of, ii. 215. 

Cause, i. 250 ff. 

Chances, statement of, i. 336. 

Change and Difference, i. 131. 

Characteristic Ratio, i. 123. 

Characters, * important,' ii. 94. 

Chicago University Decennial Pub- 
lications, Miss Thompson, i. 43 
note ; ii. ch. ix. 

Chronological indications, i. 1 99. 

Class, inclusion of subject in, ii. 
256. 

Classifications, alternative, i. 61. 

Clifford, on Causation, i. 250 ; ii. 
153 note. 

Coherence Theory of Truth, i. 2 
note ; ii. ch. ix. 

Collective names, i. 54. 

Colligation of facts, ii. 155. 

Colour-match, i. 195. 



324 



Index 



Companion to Plato's Republic 

(Bosanquet), i. 293 note. 
Comparative Judgment, i. 108. 
Comparison proper, h. 19. 
Complete Enumeration, 11. 55. 
Complex Enumeration, ii. 58 ft. 
Conception, test of truth, ii. 227 ff. 
Concepts, i. 29. 

Condition and Conditioned, i. 248. 
Conditional dist. Hypothetical 

Propositions, i. 234 note. 
Conjunction and Disjunction, i. 

330. 

Consciousness and Energy, ii. 79. 
Constitutive Equation, ii. 71. 
Construction, ii. 33, 313, 319. 
Continuous magnitude, i. 149. 
Contradiction, law of, ii. 211. 
Contraposition, i. 314. 
Contrariety and Contradiction, i. 

290 ff. 

Conversion, i. 307. 
Copula, i. 75. 
Copying and Truth, i. 42 note ; n. 

ch. ix. 

Corporate Judgment, i. 199. 
Counting analysed, i. 146 
Counting mediate, i. 159. 
1 Criticism of life/ n. 236. 
Cross -fertilisation, ii. 129. 

Daitoii, ii. 227. 

Darwin, Origin of Species, i. i ; 
Fertilisation of Orchids, ii. 102, 
126 ff. 

Day cause of Night ? i. 259. 

De Morgan, * Budget of Para- 
doxes/ i. 374 ; ii. 120, 156, 231. 

Designation, ii. 261 note. 

Designative, dist. Significant, i. 
1 20 note. 

Determination, Generalisation by, 
ii, 163. 

Dewey, Prof., in Chicago Publica- 
tions, ii. 270 ff . 

Dicey, Prof., ' Law of the Consti- 
tution/ ii. 18. 

Difference and Change, i. 131. 

Difference needs a standard, i. 1 18. 

Discovery, ii. 8. 

Discrete Magnitude, i. 149. 

Discrimination, ii. 24. 

Disjunction and . Conjunction, i. 
330. 

Disjunctive Judgment, i. 322. 

Pistinction, i. 21. 



Double Negation, i. 302. 
Driesch, Gifford Lectures, ii. 180. 
Dualism, in Genetic Logic, ii. 270. 

Ehrenberg, i. 299. 
Elements (formative), i. 19. 
Enumerative Judgment, i. 1456. 
Enumerative Induction, ii. 50. 
Equation, ii. 31. 
Equation, Constitutive, ii. 71. 
Equation and Judgment, i. 191. 
Equational logic, ii. 31. 
Essentials of Logic (Bosanquet), i. 
297 note, 361 ; ii. 267, 302, 311, 

315. 

Exception, i. 370. 
Excluded Middle, law of, ii. 213. 
Exhaustive Judgment, i. 157, 212. 
Existence of geometrical figures, 

i. 181. 
Existential meaning in Generic 

Judgment, i. 223. 
Experiment, ii. 143. 
Extension, see Intension. 
External Proportion, i. 128. 

Figures ol Syllogism, ist, n. 185 ; 

2nd, ii. 87 ; 3rd, ii. 50, 112. 
Final Cause, in Plato, ii. 187 note. 
Fmberg's Turner, ii. 243. 
Formative elements, i. 20. 

Generalisation, kinds of, ii. 163 ff. 
Generic Judgment, i. 210. 
Genetic Theory of Logic, i. 2 note, 

7 note ; ii. 238 ff. 
Green, Prof. T. H., ii. 155, 241, 

270. 
Ground, i. 238 ff. 

Hamilton, Sir W., ii. 57. 

Hegel, i. i, 74, 163, 381 ; ii. 54, 

66, 74, 85. 
Helmholtz, Popular lectures, ii. 

147. 

Herbart, i. 141. 

Herschel, Sir J., in Mill, ii. 226. 
History and Science, i. 261. 
Hoernle, Prof., i. 69 note; ii. 296 

note, 300. 
Huxley, Prof., n. 108 note, 216 

note. 

Hypnotism, degrees of, i. 380. 
Hypothesis, dist. Postulate, ii. 1 5 1_ 
Hypothetical, i. 88 ff., 238 ff., 268. 



Index 



325 



Idea, i. 44. 

Idealism, true driving force of, ii. 
322. 

Ideas, Locke on, i. 68. 

Identification, i. 25 ; ii. 24. 

Identity, i. 13, 25 ; Locke on, ii. 
210 ; Law of, ii. 210. 

Imagination and Conception, ii. 
229. 

Imitation, ii. 241 ff. 

Imperative, i. 100 note. 

Impersonal Proposition, i. 101. 

Indices, ii. 59 ff. 

Individuality and Proportion, i. 
125. 

Individuality and Reality, i. 135. 

Individuals, finite not self-existent, 
ii. 257. 

Induction, Essence of Perceptive, 
ii. 132 ; not a species of Infer- 
ence, ii. 171. 

Inductive Syllogism, ii. 13, 50. 

Inference, Nature of, ii. I, 3 ; 
Ultimate Conditions of, ii. 203 
tt. ; Conditions of, compared 
with Syllogism, ii. 204 ff. 

Infinite Judgment, i. 281. 

Infinite Series, i. 161, 185 note. 

Infinity, numerical, i. 163. 

Instance, i. 370. 

Intension, i. 44 ff., 57 ff., 64 note. 

Intensive Equation, ii. 32. 

Interjection, i. 99. 

Internal Proportion, i. 128. 

Interest or Purpose of Judgment, 
i. 22 and note. 

Jenkinsou, Experimental Em- 
bryology, ii. 1 80 note. 

Jevons,i. 47, 35 1 ; " 3*> H2, 118, 
141, 150, 156, 159, 169 ff. 

Joachim, H. H., Nature of Truth, 
ii. 267 note, 289 ff. 

Johnson, Prof., i. 234. 

Joseph, H. W. B., Introduction to 
Logic, ii. 174, 182, 184. 

Judgment, i. 31, 67 ff., 142 note ; 
and Equation, i. 191. 

Kant, i. 93, 281, 363 ff. ; ii. 85, 183. 

Keyiies, J. N., Formal Logic, i. 29 
note, 51 note, 57, 234, 244, 247 
note, 288 note, 297 note, 355 ff. 

Kind and Quality, i. 115. 

Kirchoff, on Iron in the Sun, ii. 
170. 



4 Knowledge and Reality ' (Bosan- 
quet), i. 148 note, 150 note, 153 
note, 247 note, 274 note ; ii. 66, 
150, 171, 266. 

Lang, Custom and Myth, ii. 157 ff. 

Laws, ' Formal ' laws of Thought, 
ii. 208 ff. 

Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity, 
Sir James F. Stephen quoted, 
i. 191. 

Limitation, conversion by, i. 310. 

Lindsay, A. D., Philosophy of 
Bergson, ii. 184. 

Linnaean classification, 1.9; ii. 124. 

Locke, i. 68, 91 note, 171 note ; ii. 
210 note. 

Logical Stability, ii. 45, 283, 288, 
312, 316, 322. 

Lotze, Logic, i. 15 note, 17 note, 
21 note, 29 note, 30 note, 57, 
63, 78, 92 note, 99 note, 141 
note, 198 note ; 11. 53, 62, 73, 
112, 151, 202, 224,233; Meta- 
physik\i. 13 note; Mikrokosmus, 
i. 218. 

Machinery, double import of, in 
Logic, i. 219 ; ii. 187. 

McTaggart, J. E., Commentary ou 
Hegel's Logic, ii. 99. 

Major Premise, ii. 52, 64. 

Material truth, ii. 167. 

Mathematics, truth oi, h. 48-9. 

Measurement, i. 120. 

Mechanism, i. 189 ft. 

Mediate enumeration, i. 159. 

Mill, i. 8, 13 note, 44, 141 note, 
265, 382 ; ii. 76, 88, 95, 100, 
118, 121, 153, 156,224. 

Mill and Lotze, i. 141. 

Miracle, ii. 217. 

Mommsen, i. 1 1 note. 

Moore, G. E., ' Refutation oi 
Idealism,' ii. 276 note ; Prm- 
cipia Ethica, ii. 261 note. 

Morphology, i. i ; as weakened 
Teleology, ii. 94. 

Mortality, i. 344. 

' Mouse * families, hypothesis re- 
garding, ii. 157- 

Muller, T. B., in Mind, i. 306. 

Naming, i. 7, 21. 
Necessity, a real, ii. 190. 
Necessity and Abstraction, i. i 34 tt. 



326 



Index 



Necessity and Allness, i. 211. 

Necessity : see ' Absolute *, ' Aes- 
thetic '. 

Negation, i. 277 ff. 

Negative Instance, ii. 1 15 ff. 

Nettleship, R. L., i. 66 note, 69 
note ; ii. 321. 

Night cause of Day ? i. 259. 

Number (see counting), i. 146. 

Objectification, not presupposes 
pure subjective states, i. 17 
note. 

Occasionalism, in Genetic Logic, 
11. 271. 

Omission, how related to Abstrac- 
tion, i, 58 ff. 

Ophrys ap^fera y ii. 124. 

Opposition of Judgments, i. 294. 

Organon (Aristotle), i. 256, 315, 

Particulars to Particulars, ii. 27, 

5i- 

Parts and whole, i. 93 ff. 
Personal era, i. 199. 
Physical Alternatives, i. 337. 
Physiology, i. 2. 
Plasticity, of ultimate Reality, ii. 

294. 
Plato, i. 9 if., 25, 30 note, 84 ; ii. 

187, 197, 235 note. 
Plurality of Causes, in Mill, i. 252. 
Possibility, i. 367. 
Posterior Analytics, i. 256 note ; 

ii. 171 note. 

Postulate, dist. Hypothesis, ii. 151. 
Pragmatism, ii. 247 ff. 
Prantl, Geschichte der Logik, ii. 

225. 
Predicate, i. 77 ; (in Aristotle), i. 

19. 

Predication, i. 76. 
Premises of Inductive Syllogism, 

11. 13- 
Prichard, H. A., ' Kant's Theory 

of Knowledge,' ii. 301 ff. 
Privation, i. 315. 
Proper Name, i. 47 ; dist. Generic 

Name, i. 213. 
Proportion as Inference, ii. 73 ff. ; 

as Individuality, i. 127. 
Proposition, dist. Judgment, i. 74. 
Pure Case, i. 245. 

Quality and kind, i. 1 17 ; meaning 
of,i. 98. 



Quantity, category of, i. 193. 
Question, i. 33, 366. 

Ratio, i. 151. 

Real world and my world, i. 77. 

Realists, ii. 276. 

Reality and Individuality, i. 139 ; 

in Judgment, i. 71. 
Recognition, ii. 22 ff. 
Reduction, in the true sense, ii. 

205. 

Relative, i. 23. 
p>?/Lui, i. 19. 
prjfta a6pi<rrov, i. 281. 
Republic, Plato's, ii. 183 note, 197, 

235- 

Ross, G. R. T., i. 355 ff. 

Royce, Prof., World and Indi- 
vidual, i. 163. 

Russell, Hon. Bertrand, i. 164 ; 
ii. 40 ff., 251 ff., 276 ff. 

Scheme of Arguments, ii. 42 ; of 

Judgments, i. 92. 
Schopenhauer, on Euclid, i. 237 ; 

Seynsgrund, 251 ff. ; on the 

Understanding, 11. 82, 215. 
Science and History, i. 261 . 
Self -fertilisation, ii. 124. 
' Sense ' of a relation, ii. 281. 
Sigwart, Prof., i. 33 note, 45 note, 

61 2, 140 note, 277 note, 278, 

305, 315, 3<53> 379 note ; ii. 20, 

159, 169. 

Singular Judgment, i. 196. 
Srcpijcri?, dist. aTro^acrts-, i. 315. 
Stewart, Prof., Notes on ' Kthicb ', 

ii. 246. 
Stout, Prof., i. 69 note, 114 note ; 

ii. 179, 184, 244 note, 251, 296 

note, 309. 
Structure and Individuality, i. 

128. 

Subject, i. 76. 
Subjective States, i. 38 note, 39 

note. 
Subjectivity of Space and Time, i. 

186. 

Substitutive Inference, ii. 62. 
Subsumption, ii. 28. 
Sufficient Reason, law of, ii. 215. 
Supposition, ii. ii. 
Syllogism, fig. i, ii. 185 ; fig. 2, ii. 

87 ; fig. 3, ii. 50 ; traditional, 

ii. 204 ; as reasoned judgment, 

ii. 206. 



Index 



327 



Symbolic Ideas, i. 70. 
Symbolic Logic, ii. 40 ff. 
Synthetic, i. 91. 

Tarde, Les Lois de limitation, ii. 
174. 

Taylor, Professor, i. 165 ; Arist. 
Proceedings, ii. 251 ff 

Tense, i. 105, 203. 

' Thermometer of Probability, 1 i. 
374- 

Thing, what is a, i. 129. 

Thompson, Miss, i. 43 note, 
97 note ; ii. 263 ff. 

Three Terms, ii. 12. 

Time, Constancy of, i. 170 ; Judg- 
ment in, i. 79 ; in Predication, 
i. 203 ; of Predication, i. 203 ; 
Reality of, i. 257. 



r6 naff CKCUFTOV, in Inductive Syllo- 
gism, ii. 13. 

Totems, hypothesis of, in Greece, 
ii. 160. 

Understanding, the, ii. 85. 
Universal Judgment, i. 207 ff. 

Venn, Logic of Chance, i. 344 ft . 

Waitz (Aristotle's Organon), i. 

315. 

Whateley, on Privative and Ne- 
gative Terms, i. 315 note. 

Whewell, i. 382 ; ii. 16, 156, 224. 

Whole and parts, i. 93 ff . 

Word, no Greek term for a, i. 1 1, 

Wundt, i. 56, 62, 141 ; on Con- 
stancy of Energy, ii. 79. 



OXFORD : HORACE HART, M.A. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 



