LOTZE'S   SYSTEM   OF    PHILOSOPHY 
PART    I 

\ 

LOGIC 


Hon&on 

HENRY    FROWDE 


0XPQBD     UNIVEBSITY    PBESS     WABEHOUSB 
AMEN   CORNER 


Clarenimn 


LOGIC 


IN  THREE  BOOKS 


OF   THOUGHT,    OF   INVESTIGATION,   AND    OF 


BY 


ENGLISH    TRANSLATION 

EDITED    BY 

BERNARD    BOSANQUET,    M.A. 

FELLOW  OF  UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE,  OXFORD 

MflLAYIS  CHWA6H  ftLI'S 
Hawab  Az«a  T*f  Jung  Eahatte 


Bought  in  l&lSfttf1  tfae  &t$ie 

.................  -4-  —  «*•»*••-••••••  —  !  -  "*-*• 

©XtOttl 

AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 
1884 

[All  rights  resei~ved  ] 


-EDITOR'S   PREFACE. 


SINCE  the  present  Translation  of  Professor  Lotze's  'System 
der  Philosophic  5  was  begun^  both  the  author  himself,  who 
cordially  welcomed  the  undertaking,  and  Professor  Green, 
who  first  definitely  proposed  it,  have  been  removed  by  death, 
These  two  distinguished  men,  however  different  In  method 
and  style  of  thought,  had  some  fundamental  tendencies  in 
common ;  and  it  may  be  of  interest  to  Professor  Lotze's 
admirers  in  this  country  to  know  that  Professor  Green  not 
only  executed  an  important  part  of  the  Translation  \  but 
intended  to  take  upon  himself  the  task  of  revising  and 
editing  the  whole  2,  which  was  not  entrusted  to  the  present 
Editor  till  after  Professor  Green's  death* 

The  Translation  of  the  Logic  has  been  throughout  adapted 
to  the  second  edition.  But  the  Author's  intended  revision  of 
the  Metaphysic  was  not  carried  out,  and  the  projected 
Part  III  of  the  c  System  der  Philosophic '  was  never  written. 
What  the  Author  made  known  of  his  intentions  in  these 
respects  is  mentioned  in  the  Prefaces  to  the  Metaphysic. 

The  translation  of  Part  I,  the  Logic,  has  been  executed  by 
several  hands ;  the  whole  of  Book  I  by  Mr.  R.  L.  Nettleship, 
Fellow  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford ;  Book  II,  chapters  i~v  (in- 
clusive), by  Mr.  F.  H.  Peters,  Fellow  of  University  College, 
Oxford  (with  the  exception  of  the  'Note  on  the  Logical 
Calculus/  which  was  translated  by  the  Editor) ;  chapters  vi-ix 
(inclusive),  by  Mr.  F.  C.  Conybeare,  Fellow  of  University 

1  See  Preface  to  the  '  Metaphysic, ' 

2  He  said  to  the  present  Editor :  '  The  tirne  which  one  spent  on  such  a  book 
as  that  (the  "  Metaphysic")  would  not  be  wasted  as  regards  one's  own  work.' 


vi  Editor '$  Preface. 

College;  and  chapter  x  by  the  Editor ;  and  the  whole  of  Book 
III  by  Mr.  R.  G.  Tatton,  Fellow  of  Balliol  College. 

The  Editor  has  revised  the  whole  translation,  and  is 
responsible  in  all  cases  for  the  rendering  finally  adopted. 
He  has  to  thank  Mr.  J.  C.  Wilson,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College, 
Oxford,  for  the  most  cordial  and  ample  assistance  in  dealing 
\vith  the  numerous  passages  in  which  mathematical  knowledge 
was  required.  It  is  believed  that  the  translation  of  these 
passages  will,  owing  mainly  to  his  help,  be  found  on  the  whole 
correct  and  intelligible. 

The  Table  of  Contents  was  furnished  by  the  several  trans- 
lators for  their  respective  portions.  It  should  be  observed 
that  the  original  Table  of  Contents  supplies  a  few  headings 
(in  Book  1  only),  besides  those  of  the  chapters.  These  arc 
distinguished  from  the  headings  supplied  by  the  translator 
by  being  printed  in  italics.  The  Index  was  added  by  the 
Editor. 

No  endeavour  has  been  made  to  introduce  uniformity  of 
style  into  the  different  portions  of  the  translation.  But  in 
the  case  of  a  few  important  technical  terms  it  has  been 
thought  advisable  to  introduce  renderings  as  nearly  uniform 
as  the  context  would  allow.  Unavoidable  variations  in  the 
translation  of  a  German  word,  or  ambiguities  in  the  employ-  ' 
nient  of  an  English  one,  are  pointed  out,  to  some  extent,  in 
the  Notes  and  Index ;  and  in  all  cases  references  are  freely 
given  to  any  passages  that  explain  the  precise  point  of  the 
Author's  choice  of  words.  It  is  hoped  that  by  this  means 
the  reader  may  be  assisted  to  master  the  somewhat  subtle 
distinctions  which  govern  the  Author's  usage,  without  the  aid 
of  a  Glossary,  which  could  indicate  them  but  roughly.  Still 
Professor  Wallace's  observations  on  the  meaning  of  some 
German  terms,  prefixed  to  his  translation  of  Hegel's  shorter 
Logic,  will  be  found  useful  by  many  readers. 

In  the  case  of  two  of  the  sections  which  treat  of  mathe- 
matical questions  (234  and  $37)  the  Editor  found  himself  in 
a  perplexity  which  could  have  been  removed  if  the  Author 


Editor 's  Preface.  vii 

had  been  still  living.  The  reasoning  of  sect.  234  seemed 
more  than  doubtful ;  while  the  Author  himself  had  requested 
the  suppression  of  sect.  237  as  '  wholly  erroneous,5  regretting 
that  he  had  put  forward  such  '  nonsense,'  and  explaining  that 
he  had  been  c  misled  by  the  error  of  a  text-book.' 

This  unqualified  condemnation  seemed  on  consideration 
hardly  to  apply  to  sect.  237,  and  to  be  such  as  might  have 
been  intended  for  sect,  234 ;  but  as  the  Author  mentioned 
not  only  the  number  of  sect.  237,  but  the  pages  on  which  it 
stands,  the  hypothesis  of  a  mere  clerical  error  is  almost 
excluded.  It  is  nevertheless  conceivable  that  there  may  have 
been  some  misapprehension ;  and  therefore  it  has  been  thought 
advisable  not  to  withdraw  sect.  "237  entirely,  but  to  print  it 
as  an  Appendix. 


AUTHOR'S    PREFACE. 


THOUGH  1  venture  to  describe  the  present  work  as  the 
first  part  of  a  System  of  Philosophy,  I  hope  that  this  designa- 
tion will  not  be  supposed  to  indicate  the  same  pretensions 
which  it  was  wont  to  herald  in  times  gone  by.  It  is  obvious 
that  I  can  propose  to  myself  nothing  more  than  to  set  forth 
the  entirety  of  my  personal  convictions  in  a  systematic  form ; 
such  a  form  as  will  enable  the  reader  to  judge  not  only  to 
what  degree  they  are  consistent  with  themselves,  but  also 
how  far  they  are  capable  of  serving  to  unite  the  isolated 
provinces  of  our  certain  knowledge,  in  spite  of  the  great 
gaps  that  lie  between  them,  into  a  coherent  view  of  the 
world  bearing  the  character  of  completeness.  In  the  present 
volume,  which  begins  my  exposition,  I  have  been  guided, 
as  I  shall  be  in  the  others,  by  this  purpose. 

In  the  First  Book,  although  entirely  rewritten,  I  have 
followed  in  essentials  the  line  of  thought  of  my  short  work 
on  Logic  of  1843,  which  has  long  been  out  of  print.  I  have 
not  seen  reason  to  depart  from  this  line,  to  which  my  own 
interest  in  the  exposition  of  Logic  is  as  much  confined  now 
as  it  was  then.  Now,  as  then,  I  consider  it  useless  labour 
to  attempt  extensions  and  improvements  of  the  formal  part 
of  Logic,  within  the  limits  of  the  general  character  which 
in  fact  and  of  necessity  attaches  to  it ;  but  whatever  in  it 
appeared  worth  knowing,  if  only  as  belonging  in  a  certain 
sense  to  the  history  of  culture,  I  have  to  the  best  of  my 
belief  conveyed  without  omission,  and  have  taken  pains  to 
do  so  as  simply  as  possible. 


x  Author  s  Preface. 

The  Second  Book  needs  no  preface ;  it  Is  quite  free  from 
the  bonds  of  system,  and  simply  puts  together  whatever  I 
thought  useful.  The  selection  of  matter  might  be  different 

in  many  parts,  a  great  deal  might  be  added,  and  a  great  deal, 
it  will  be  thought,  might  be  spared.  The  reader  should 
regard  it  as  an  open  market,  where  he  may  simply  pass 
by  the  goods  he  does  not  want. 

The  original  purpose  of  the  Third  Book  has  not  been  car- 
ried out.  It  was  meant  to  treat  of  the  subjects  with  which 
it  does  in  fact  deal,  on  the  method  of  a  historico-critical 
exposition  of  systematic  logical  views — the  views  which  have 
appeared  both  in  Germany  and  in  several  other  countries  in 
a  variety  of  forms  that  demand  a  high  degree  of  interest 
and  appreciation.  But  it  became  clear  on  making  the  at- 
tempt that  such  a  task  could  not  be  achieved  within  the 
limits  of  the  present  treatise,— not,  that  is  to  say,  with  the 
thoroughness  due  to  the  valuable  works  in  question.  Another 
opportunity  may  possibly  be  found  for  it ;  but  in  the  mean- 
time I  was  induced  by  the  failure  of  this  plan  to  dispense  for 
the  present  with  all  reference  to  doctrines  which  are  hot  my 
own,  and  to  put  forward  nothing  but  what  either  is  common 
property,  or  belongs  to  my  own  individual  mode  of  viewing 
the  subject.  1  trust  that  the  whole  of  my  doctrine  is  not 
merely  of  this  latter  kind  ! 

GtJ'rriNdEN  ;  June  10,  1874. 


The  present  (and)  edition  contains  a  number  of  improve- 
ments in  detail,  and  a  single  addition  of  some  length,  the  **  Note 

on  the  Logical  Calculus,'  p.  aoH.  I  may  remark  with  reference 
to  p.  223  that  Jevons  speaks  of  Potassium.  Perhaps  the 
reader  can  conjecture  why  1  have  preferred  to  speak  of 
Sodium. 

GOTTINGEN  ;  September  6*  1880. 


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS. 

BOOK  I. 

Of  Thought  (Pure  Logic). 
INTRODUCTION. 

PAGE 

Section  L  Coherent  and  coincident  ideas i 

„       II.  Necessary  connexion  of  ideas  generally           .....  I 

„     III.  Connexion  of  ideas  established  by  thought    .         .         ...  2 

,,      IV.  Is  thought  an  activity  rather  than  an  event  ?          ....  3 

„       V.  Or,  if  an  activity,  has  it  any  specific  function  in  giving  truth?        .  3 

„     VI.  Thought  in  man  compared  with  the  other  animals         ...  3 

„    VII.  Thought  adds  the  notion  of  coherence  to  connected  ideas      .         .  5 
„  VIII.  Have  the  forms  of  thought  a  real  validity  ?    .         .         .         .         .6 

""",>•- -IX.  Provisional  answer,  assuming  thought  to  be  a  means  to  knowledge  6 

„       X.  Logical  distinguished  from  Psychological  enquiries         ...  7 

„     XL  Order  of  enquiry.     Pure  or  formal  logic         .....  8 

,,    XII.  Applied  logic        ....         .                 ....  8 

,,XIII.  Knowledge 9 

CHAPTER  I. 

THE   THEORY   OF   THE  CONCEPT. 
A.    The  formation  of  impressions  info  ideas. 

1.  Conversion  of  impressions  into  ideas  the  first  work  of  thought  .  .10 

2.  This  is  effected  by  the  logical  act  of  naming     .         .        .         .  .  .10 

3.  Which  may  be  called  an  act  of  object ifi cation  .         .         .         .  .  .11 

4.  In  the  specific  forms  of  the  parts  of  speech       .         .         .         .  .  .12 

5.  Relation  of  substantive,  verb,  adjective,  to  substance,  event,  property  .     13 

6.  Relation  of  thought  to  its  linguistic  expression  .       .         .         .  .  ,14 

7.  The  other  parts  of  speech.     Prepositions  and  conjunctions        .  .  .15 

8.  Judgment  not  rightly  treated  in  pure  logic  before  conception  .  .  1 7 

B.  Position,  distinction,  and  comparison  of  the  matter  of  simple  ideas. 

9.  Further  reaction  of  thought  in  positing,  distinguishing,  and  comparing 

ideas .     18 

10.  'Position';  practically  inseparable  from  '  objectification  '  (§  3)         •         .19 

11.  Position  implies  and  renders  possible  distinction 19 


xii  Table  of  Contents. 

PAGE 

12.  Comparison ;  supposed  to  involve  falsification  of  impressions  by  genera- 

lisation       ............     20 

13.  Such  a  view  ignores  the  true  logical  import  of  the  act      .        .        .        .21 

14.  Comparison  implies  a  '  universal ' ;  this  not  a  universal  *  concept'     .        .     22 

15.  Like  all  nniversals,  it  is  not  strictly  an  'idea'          .        .         .        „        -23 

16.  Distinction  of  instances  of  a  universal  implies  idea  of  more  and  less  .        .     24 

17.  Also  those  of  unity  and  multiplicity,  and  greatness  and  smallness    .        .     25 

18.  Logic  is  not  concerned  with,  the  origin  of  these  ideas,  or  with,  deductions 

from  them  .        „        .        .        .        .        ,         .        „        .  .     25 

19.  In  the  operations  of  (B)  as  compared  with  those  of  (A)  thought  may  be 

called  receptive   ...........     26 

C.    The  formation  of  the  concept* 

20.  Synthesis  in  consciousness :  its  various  forms    .        .         .        .         .         .     28 

21.  The  form  of 'conception'  implies  the  idea  of  a  groundtei;  the  synthesis  „     29 

22.  Comparison  of  different  instances  and  observation  of  the  same  instance 

under  different  circumstances       ........    30 

23.  'Abstraction1  involved  in  comparison  does  not  mean  mere  omission  of 

differences    . 31 

24.  The  formation  of  the  second   universal  (logical  concept)    implies   the 

first  (§14) 32 

25.  Terminology:  'content,'  'extent/  'co-ordination,'  'subordination,3  'sub- 

sumption1   ............  33 

26.  '  Concept '  is  rightly  applied  to  individual  things  ....  34 

27.  Universal^  not  necessarily  concepts ;  they  may  be  general  images    .        .  34 

28.  Marks  not  merely  co-ordinated,  but  also  mutually  determined,  in  a  concept  35 

29.  Subordination  of  species  to  genus,  and  subsumption  of  species  and  genus 

under  a  mark       ...........    36 

80.  Species  =  a  universal  which,  can  be  imaged,  genus  ~  one  which  can  only 

be  formulated      ...........    37 

31.  Inverse  ratio  of  content  and  extent,  how  far  true  or  important  .  .  •  3^ 
32.,  Kinds  of  marks:  'differentia/ 'property/ 'accident*  .  .  .  .40 

33.  Idea  of  a  complete  system  of  concepts     .        .        .        .        ,        ,        .    41 

Transition  to  the  Form  of  the  Judgment. 

34.  Change  makes  such  an  idea  un realisable,  and  leads  from  conception  to 

judgment    .....         .  .....     42 

35.  Conception  itself  involves  questions  which  also  lead  to  judgment      .        .     42 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE  THEORY  OF  THE  JUDGMENT. 
Preliminary  observations  on  the  meaning  and  customary  division  of  judgments. 

86,  Judgment  expresses  a  relation  between  the  matter  of  two  ideas        ,        ,    44 

37,  This  is  indicated  in  the  terms  Subject,  Predicate,  and  Copula  .        .        •45 

38.  Judgments  differ  according  to  the  different  senses  of  the  copula        .        .    45 
89,  The  logical  sense  of  the  copula  is  not  affected  by  the  quantity  of  the 

judgment     ............    46 


Table  of  Contents,  xili 

PAGE 

40.  Nor  by  its  quality    .         .         .        .        „         „        .        .         ,         „         -47 

41.  Nor  by  its  modality,  as  ordinarily  understood  .        .         .         .         .         .48 

42.  True  apodeictic  modality  is  found  in  the  three  forms  of  relation       .        ,     49 

43.  Not  of  course  that  any  form  of  judgment  can  guarantee  its  material  truth      50 

44.  So-called  problematic  judgments   are  not   truly  problematic,   nor  are 

questions  or  prayers .     51 

45.  The  only  true  problematic  modality  is  expressed  by  particular  and  singular 

judgments   ............     52 

46.  The  ordinary  classification  omits  or  confuses  many  modal  distinctions      ,     53 


THE  SERIES   OF  THE  FORMS  OF  JUDGMENT. 

A.    The  impersonal  judgment.     The  categorical  judgment. 
The  principle-  of  identity. 

47.  The  categorical  judgment  is  logically  preceded  by  the  impersonal     .         .  54 

48.  Which  does  not  express  mere  perception,  but  implies  logical  activity        .  54 

49.  Relating  a  present  perception  to  a  permanent  though  unexpressed  subject  55 

50.  Difficulty  as  to  the  logical  import  of  the  categorical  judgment          .         .  56 

51.  It  does  not  mean  the  identity  of  the  subject  and  predicate       .      .  .        .  56 

52.  Nor  is  it  explained  by  saying  that  the  one  is  predicated  of  the  other          .  57 

53.  Nor  by  reference  to  the  metaphysical  relation  of  substance  and  attribute  .  58 

54.  In  fact,  the  judgment  is  indefensible  against  the  principle  of  identity         .  59 

55.  The  logical  interpretation  of  that  principle       ......  59 

B.  The  particular  judgment;  the  hypothetical  judgment ;  the  principle 
of  sufficient  reason. 

56.  The  difficulty  applies  to  analytical  as  welt  as  to  synthetical  judgments      .  61 

57.  The  justification  of  categorical  judgments  is  that  they  are  really  identical  62 

58.  Illustrations     ............  62 

59.  But  in  that  case  they  are  nx&  judgments  at  all  in  the  real  sense         .        ,  65 

60.  This  dilemma  is  met  in  the  hypothetical  judgment  by  making  the  identity 

conditional ............  66 

61.  The  idea  of  a  condition  implies  the  assumption  of  a  general  coherence  of 

things .  66 

82.  Logical  possibility  and  meaning  of  such  coherence :  cause  and  reason      .  67 

63.  True  formulation  of  the  *  principle  of  sufficient  reason '     .        .        .         .68 

64.  The  principle  of  identity  alone  is  no  source  of  knowledge         .        .        .69 

65.  The  princ,  rat.  suff.  not  a  necessity  of  thought,  but  a  fact  of  all  mental 

experience 70 

66.  Responsiveness  of  thinkable  matter  to  thought  illustrated  from  §  19         .  72 

C.    The  general  judgment ;  the  disjunctive  judgment ;  the  dictum  c*e 
omni  et  nullo  and  the  principium  exclusi  medii. 

67.  The  connexion  between  reason  and  consequence  must  be  universal    .        .  72 

68.  This  universality  is  expressed  in  the 'general' judgment  .         .        .        »  7& 

69.  Further  determination  of  the  predicate  in  the  disjunctive  judgment  .        .  74 

70.  True  formulation  of  dictum  de  omni  et  nitlfa    ......  75 

71.  Princ.  cxcL  med.  is  only  one  case  of  the  Maw  of  disjunctive  thought*       .  75 

72.  Its  true  logical  formulation      .........  76 


xiv  Table  of  Contents. 

PAGE 

73.  Incompatibility  of  contrary,  and  compatibility  of  disparate,  predicates  .       77 

74.  The  disjunctive  judgment  leads  on  to  inference     .        ....       79 

Appendix  on  immediate  inferences, 

75.  Inference  ad  mbaltcrnatam  80 

76.  Ad  subalternantem        .         .         *         *  ......       So 

77.  Ad  contradictor iam      .         .         .         .  .         .         .         .         .         .81 

78.  Ad  contrariani  and  ad  subcontrariam  .  .         .         .         .         .         .81 

79.  Inference  by  conversion        .         .         .  .         .         .        .         .         .81 

SO.  Conversion  of  universal  judgments        .  .        .         .         .        .         .82 

81.  Conversion  of  particular  judgments       .......       83 

82.  Conversion  by  contraposition        .......         .84 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE  THEORY   OF   INFERENCE  AND  THE  SYSTEMATIC   FORMS. 
Preliminary  remarks  'Upon  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  of  Syllogism. 

83.  Formation  of  the  four  figures       ........  85 

84.  General  conditions  of  valid  inference  in  them        .         ....  86 

85.  Special  conditions  in  each  figure.     The  first  figure        .  .         .86 

86.  The  second  figure         ..........  87 

87.  The  third  figure,  when  both  premises  are  affirmative     .        ...  88 

88.  The  third  figure,  when  the  premises  are  mixed      ,        .         .         .         .  £8 

89.  The  third  figure,  when  both  premises  are  negative        .        .        .  89 

90.  The  fourth  figure  is  superfluous    ........  89 

91.  Superiority  of  the  first  to  the  other  figures 90 

92.  Reduction  of  the  other  figures  to  the  first 91 

93.  Syllogisms  with  hypothetical  premises  involve  no  new  principle    .        .  92 

94.  Difference  of  the  relation  between  reason  and  consequence  from  that 

between  cause  and  effect   .........  93 

95.  Syllogisms  with,  disjunctive,  copulative,  or  remotive  premises        .        ,  94 

96.  Chains  of  inference  ...........  95 

A,    Syllogistic  inferences;  inference  by  subsumption;  inference  by 
induction;  inference  by  analogy. 

97.  The  Aristotelian  or  subsumptive  syllogisms  merely  make  explicit  what  is 

implied  in  the  disjunctive  judgment 96 

98.  Such  inference  by  subsumption  involves  a  double  circle         «        .  97 

99.  Illustrations  when  the  premises  are  (i)  analytical,  (2)  synthetical         .  97 

100.  It  must  be  possible  to  establish  (i)  major  and  (2)  minor  premises  with- 

out full  knowledge  ..........  99 

101.  Inductive  inference  as  solution  of  the  first  requirement  ,        .        .        .100 

102.  The  defect  of  induction  (as  of  subsumption)  lies  in  the  practice,  not  the 

principle,  of  it ,  101 

103.  Inference  by  analogy  as  solution  of  the  second  requirement  .        .        .103 

104.  Defect  and  justification  o(  analogical  inference     .....  103 


Table  of  Contents.  xv 

B.  Mathematical  inferences ;   inference  by  substitution ;    inference 

by  proportion ;   constitutive  equation. 

105.  The  previous  forms  of  inference  deal  only  with  universal  subjects  and 

predicates         ...........     104 

106.  Thus  do  not  satisfy  the  needs  of  real  thinking,  which  requires  them  to 

be  specific 105 

107-  They  are  in  fact  inferences  from  the  extent,  instead  of  from  the  content, 

of  concepts       ...........     106 

108.  Inference  from   content,   though,  implying  experience,   yields    results 

for  logic  ............  106 

109.  It  implies  sttbstitzttion  of  an  analysed  for  an  unanalysed  middle  term     .  107 

110.  Remarks  on  the  symbolisation  of  logical  relationships  .         .         .         .  108 

111.  Inference  by  substitution  is  only  strictly  applicable  to  pure  quantities   .  109 

112.  Still,  as  an  ideal  of  thought  in  general,  it  has  its  place  in  logic     .         .  no 

113.  Extension  of  it  to  incommensurable  objects  in  the  form  ol  proportion   .  in 

114.  Illustration  from  Geometry  .         .         .         .         .        .         »         .         .112 

115.  Limitation  of  inference  by  proportion.     Ultimate  disparity  of  things     .  113 

116.  Proportion  between  marks  is  modified  by  the  constitution  of  the  whole 

subject .         .114 

117.  Inference  by  proportion  thus  leads  to  the  idea  of  constitutive  concepts    .     115 

118.  Which,  however  are  only  fruitful  in  Mathematics,  where  all  is  com- 

mensurable      .         .         .  .         .         .         .         .         .         .116 

119.  To  deal  with  disparate  marks,  we  must  go  on  to  classification      .         -117 

C.  The  systematic  forms :  classification  ;  explanatory  theory ;  the 

dialectical  ideal  of  thought. 

120.  *  Concept '  =  not  a  mere  sum  of  marks,  but  a  sum  connected  according 

to  a  rule 117 

121.  Many  such  concepts  are  formed  unconsciously  by  *  psychical  mechanism  *  1 1 8 

122.  Hence  the  idea  that  any  group  of  common  marks  forms  a  concept         .  119 

123.  Whereas  the  true  concept  is  found  only  in  the  union  of  essential  marks  119 

124.  The  distinction  of  essential  from  unessential  leads  to  comparison  and 

classification     .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .120 

125.  Artificial  or *  combinatory '  classification       .         .         .         .         .         .121 

126.  Its  defects.    It  may  include  more  than  the  facts 122 

127.  Or  less  than  the  facts 123 

128.  And  it  takes  no  account  of  the  different  values  of  marks  in  the  concept      323 

129.  Logical  classification  aims  at  'constitutive'  concepts,  or  'ideas'  .        .125 

130.  Which  naturally  connect  with  the  notions  of  active  tendency  and  purpose     1 26 

131.  And  so  with  that  of  more  and  less  perfect  species         .        .         .        .127 

132.  Illustrations  from  Mathematics  of  the  gradation  of  species    .         .         .128 

133.  The  logically  most  perfect  species  is  that  in  which  all  the  marks  are  at 

the  highest  value  allowed  by  the  genus 130 

184.  But  each  genus  may  itself  have  its  standard  of  perfection  in  a  higher 

genus 131 

135.  And  so  lead  ultimately  to  a  highest  genus  which  governs  the  develop- 

ment of  all  the  rest  „  132 

136,  Thus  we  get  the  ideal  form  of  natural  classification       .        .        ,         .  1 33 
187.  Stationary  and  progressive  perfection  of  species.    *  Type '  and  *  Ideal T  .  134 
138.  The  form  of  classification  by  development  (like  other  logical  forms)  is 

only  an  ideal    .        .        *        .        .        .        .        .        -        •        .    1 34 


xvi  Table  of  Contents. 

PAGE 

139.  The  development  of  concepts  Is  conditioned  by  something  other  than 

the  concepts  themselves    .        .        .        .        ..        .        .        .  135 

140.  This  condition  must  find  a  place  in  a  complete  logical  system      .        .     136 

141.  No  theory  of  *  emanation  *  of  one  concept  from  another  can  dispense 

with  it     .  .137 

142.  And  indeed  classification  itself  leads  heyoncl  the  particular  concept  to 

universal  laws  of  connexion  between  its  marks         .        .         .  1 38 

148.  This  does  not  contradict,  but  confirms,  the  previous  representation  of 

the  concept  as  determining  the  connexion  of  its  marks     .         .        .139 

144.  A  thing  is  the  result,  according  to  universal  laws,  of  the  sum  of  its 

conditions 140 

145.  This  view  dominates  modern  science,  which  explains,  in  contrast  with 

ancient,  which  classifies.     Mechanical  character  of  the  former  .        .     140 

146.  Unsatisfactoriness  of  its  ideal       ........     142 

147.  Antagonism  between  aesthetic  and  scientific  view  of  things.     Possible 

reconciliation  .         .         .        ,         .         .         .        .         .        .        .  143 

148.  'Laws'  are  not  external  to  reality,  but  constitute  its  very  nature  .        .  144 

149.  Form  of  the  ultimate  ideal  of  thought  .         ......  145 

150.  Supposed  analogy  of  the  living  organism.   Hegelian  ism.  'Speculation*  146 

151.  Value  of  the   'speculative'   ideal.      It  belongs  to  logic,  but  points 

beyond  it         .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .147 


BOOK  II. 

Of  Investigation  (Applied  Logic)* 
152-3.  Prefatory  Remarks   .        .        .        .        .        ,        .        .        .        .149 

CHAPTER  I. 
THE    FORMS    OF    DEFINITION. 

154.  Ideas,  how  communicable    .        . 153 

155.  Poetry  and  rhetoric       .        .         .        .        ,         .        »        .        .        .152 

156.  Uncertainty  of  communication 153 

157.  Explanation  by  abstraction  .         .        .         .        .        „        .         .        .154 

158.  This  the  only  method  for  simple  ideas  ,        .        ,        .        .        ,        .     155 
150,  Explanation  by  construction.     Description    .        .         .         ,         ,         -156 
160-1.  Description  and  definition         .         „         .        .         .         .         .        .157 

102.  Nominal  and  real  definitions         .         .         .         .        .         .         ,        .     ifxs 

163,  Three  faults  to  avoid    . 161 

164,  Elegance  and  brevity   ..........     162 

105.  Evil  of  superfluity        .•*........     164 

166,  Popular  definitions       .         .        .        .        .        ,        .        .        .        .165 

167,  Genetic  definition         .        „        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        «     166 

188.  The  end  of  definition  is  the  conception         ......     167 

CHAPTER  II. 

OF  THE  LIMITATION  OF  CONCEPTIONS. 

189-70.  We  must  start  from  the  conceptions  already  expressed  in  language  .     169 
171.  Disparate  groups  of  sensations     .        .        .        .        ,        .        .        .170 


Table  of  Contents,  xlx 


PAGE 

253.  The  universality  of  a  pure   connexion  or  its  character  as  a  law   of 

nature  guaranteed  by  the  law  of  Identity   .        .         .        .         .        .299 

254.  The  raw  matter  of  Inductions  consists  not  of  passive  impressions  but 

of  perceptions  already  articulated  by  thought  as  subject  and  predicate 

and  ranged  under  general  conceptions         .        .        .         ,         .         .300 

255.  They  are  so  ranged  by  an  incomplete  analogy,  based  on  a  distinction 

of  essential  from  non-essential  remarks,  which  logical  theory  cannot 
assist 302 

256.  In  reaching  universal  inductions  we  must  argue  ad  subalternantem        .     305 

257.  The  truths  of  Geometry  are  universal  because  the  diagram  is  used  as  a 

symbol  only  of  our  conception  .........     306 

258.  The  highest  inductions  not  categorical  but  hypothetical  judgments       .     308 

259.  Terms  which  are  exclusively  cause  and  effect  of  each  other  are  related 

as  ground  and  consequent  .........     309 

260.  Experiment  merely  subsidiary   to   observation   and   has  no  peculiar 

virtue  of  its  own         .         .        .         .         .         .         .         ,         .         .310 

261.  Typical  cases  of  the  relation  in  which  two  phenomena  C  and  E  may 

stand  to  one  another          .         .         .        .         .        .         .         .         .312 

(1)  C  and  JS  Co-Exist  always. 

(2)  C  and  JS  frequently  concur. 

(3)  Absence  of  C  not  involving  absence  of  JS.     Criticism  of  the 

canon  '  cessante  causa  cessat  et  effectus.' 

(4)  Presence  of  C  not  involving   presence   of  2?.    Difference  of 

relation  of  cause  and  effect  and  of  ground  and  consequent 

(5)  Absence  of  C  involving  absence  of  JZ. 

(6)  Presence  of  E  involving  presence  of  C.     Criticism  of  Newton's 

canon  'effectuum  naturalium  ejusdem  generis  eaedem  surit 
causae.' 

(7)  Absence  of  JS  involving  absence  of  C. 

262.  Whether  the  phenomenon  C  is  or  only  contains  the  cause  of  E  can  only 

be  decided  by  analysis  of  both  into  their  elements  and  observation  of 
which  elements  of  the  one  involve  which  elements  of  the  other. 
Typical  examples  of  such  analysis  .  .  .  .  .  .  .320 

263.  The  exact  nature  of  the  causal  nexus  inferred  from,  any  of  the  above 

relations  to  exist  between  C  and  E  can  only  be  apprehended  by 
observation  of  the  quantitative  changes  they  cause  in  one  another. 
Examples  of  such  quantitative  correspondences  ,  -  .  .  .326 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

THE     DISCOVERY    OF    LAWS. 

264.  Science  not  content  with  discovering  a  mere  connexion  between  two 

phenomena  seeks  to  know  the  law  of  this  connexion  .        .         .        .     332 

265.  Laws  of  nature  are  universal  hypothetical  judgments  and  not  assertions 

of  universal  matters-of-fact .         -333 

266.  A  law  expresses  an  objective  and  intelligible  connexion  of  phenomena, 

a  rule  is  a  mere  subjective  method  of  thought 335 

267.  The  ultimate  criterion  of  sense-perception  to  be  found  in  sense  itself     .    336 

b  3 


®f  Contents. 

XX 


»w..«?3ff£iS»ifr-r 

a,  ^srs«  rffiir-r^.r  -  - 


-  - 


^^S^'&XX?". 


Table  of  Contents.  xxi 

PAGE 

as  compared  with,  the  sum.  of  its  alternatives,  not  as  compared  with 

any  one  of  them         .         .        .         .        .         .         .        .         .         «     379 

285.  Success  of  attempts  made  to  test  by  experiment  the  calculus  of  chances     381 

286.  Such  successful  results  not  fraught  with  intelligible  necessity,  but  the 

result  of  constant  conditions  operating  among  variable  ones,  which  in 

the  long  ran  neutralise  each  other      „        .         .         .        .         .         .     383 

287.  Use  of  the  calculus  in  cases  where  constant  and  variable  causes  of  an 

often  repeated  event  are  unknown.   Nature  of  so-called  statistical  laws     386 

288.  Use  of  the  calculus  in  determining  the  probable  accuracy  of  our  observa- 

tions of  magnitude.     The  method  of  the  least  squares        .        .  388 


CHAPTER  X, 

OF  ELECTIONS  AND  VOTING. 

289.  Conditions  presupposed  by  a  logical   treatment  of  the  problem   of 

expressing  a  collective  will         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         -393 

290.  Defects  of  absolute  majority         ........     393 

291.  The  weight  of  votes.    A  majority  of  majorities  may  be  a  minority  of 

the  whole  constituency        .........  394 

292.  Voting  so  as  to  express  intensities  of  Volition 397 

293.  Election  by  elimination        .........  400 

294.  When  order  of  putting  proposals  to  the  vote  is  important     .        .        .  401 

295.  Rejection  of  innovations  as  such.     *  Order  of  the  day '  ....  402 

296.  Amendments  and  substantive  motion.     Order  of  putting  proposals 

to  the  vote         ...........    403 


BOOK   III. 
On  Knowledge  (Metliodology)B 

INTRODUCTION. 

297.  Analytic  and  Synthetic  methods  practically  inseparable         .         .        .    406 

298.  Correspond  respectively  to  Investigation  and  Exposition;   are  more 

general  than  *  methods '  of  applied  Logic  ......  408 

299.  But  applied  Logic,  like  common  thought,  rests  on  untested  bases         .  409 

300.  And  so  does  science  as  we  have  it 410 

301.  Methodology  however  as  treatment  of  Knowledge  is  enquiry    into 

sources  of  certainty    .        .        .        .        .         .        .        ,         ,         .411 

CHAPTER  I. 

ON   SCEPTICISM. 

802.  Scepticism  presupposes  Truth  and  Knowledge      .        .        .        .        ,414 

303.  But  doubts  whether  our  Knowledge  is  Truth.     Descartes    .        .        .416 

304.  This  doubt  involves  the  assumption  of  a  world  of  things  which  our 

thought  should  copy .        .        .  "418 


xxli  Table  of  Contents. 

PACK 

305.  But  any  decision  postulates  the  competence  of  thought         .        .        .    420 

306.  Which  can.  only  be  guided  by  conceptions  in  our  minds         .        .         .421 

307.  Our  delusion  could  only  be  revealed  by  fresh  knowledge        .         .        ,422 

308.  Which  must  be  related  to  the  old.    Things  are  not  knowledge  of  things     424 

309.  That  Things  may  not  be  what  they  seem,  as  a  mere  general  doubt, 

Is  self-contradictory   .         .         .        .         .        .         .        .        .         .426 

310.  Sceptical  arguments  in  Sextus  Empiricus 427 

311.  They  involve  the  above  difficulties        .......     429 

312.  Error  in  '  we  only  know  phenomena '    .......    431 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE   WORLD  OF    IDEAS. 

313.  Genesis  of  Plato's  doctrine  of  '  Ideas '.......  433 

31.4.  The  Ideas  as  Universal  conceptions       .......  435 

315.  Possible  knowledge  of  Ideas  apart  from  question  of  Things          .        .  436 

316.  Distinction  between  Existence,  Occurrence,  Validity     .  437 

317.  Confusion  of  Existence  and  Validity  in  case  of  the  Ideas       .        •         •  44° 

318.  Ideas  in  what  sense  eternal,  and  independent  of  things           .        .         .  441 
310.  Aristotle  on  the  Ideas.     His  universal  too  is  ovaia        ....  443 

320.  Modern  counterparts  of  the  Ideas.     Validity  a  difficult  notion        .         .  445 

321.  6  Ideas  impart  no  motion '  criticised;  importance  of  Judgments  .         .  446 


CHAPTER  III, 

THE  A  PRIOR!    AND   THE   EMPIRICAL   METHODS, 

322.  Judging  of  knowledge  by  our  notions  of  its  origin  an  illusion       .        .  450 

328.  Attempt  to  find  a  starting-point  For  knowledge.     *  Cogito,  ergo  sum1  .  452 

324.  Innate  Ideas;  but  are  they  true  ? 454 

325.  Action  of  one  thing  on  another  implies  Spontaneity  in  order  to  Re- 

ceptivity   .............  456 

326.  Nature  of  mind  is  contributory  in  all  elements  of  knowledge         .         .  457 

327.  Both  in  simple  Perception  and  in  such  ideas  as  that  of  causal  connexion  458 

328.  External  reality  must  be  criticised  on  ground  of  knowledge  .        .        .  460 
320.  Universality  and  Necessity  as  marks  of  a  priori  knowledge  .         .         .  462 
330.  Universal  validity  not  derivable  from  repeated  perceptions  alone  .         .  463 
381.  There  may  be  spurious  self-evidence,  which  is  tested  by  thinking  the 

contradictory     ...........  465 

332.  Use  of  psychological  analysis  in  establishing  first  principles          ,         .  467 

33  3»  Even  modern  Psychology  hardly  helps  Logic        .....  468 


CHAPTER  IV. 

REAL  AND   FORMAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF    LOGICAL  ACTS. 

334,  Thought  must  have  some  Real  significance  ...*..  47^ 

835.  Comparison  and  distinction  as  acts  resulting  in  Relations      ,        .        .  475 

336.  Thought  is  symbolic  and  discursive      »..».*.  475 

337.  How  can  a  relation  of  zVtWJ  be  objective       ......  477 

338.  Only  as  independent  of  individual  mind.    The  case  of  Things       .        .  4?^ 


Table  of  Contents.  xxlli 


PAGE 


839.  A  universal  cannot  be  realised,  but  has  objective  validity      .         .         .481 

340.  Nominalism  and  Realism  confuse  Existence  and  Validity      .         ,        -483 

341.  The  Reality  of  general  notions  is  only  validity      „  484 

342.  Conception  not  akin  to  object  in  structure,  but  In  net  result  .         .         .     485 

343.  Degrees  of  subjectivity  in  kinds  of  Judgment         .....     488 

344.  Subjective  character  of  Syllogism  and  Induction    .....     490 

345.  Terms  antithetic  to  *  Subjective '  and  '  Formal '     .        .        .         .        .    492 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE  A  PRIORI   TRUTHS. 

346.  The  world  of  Knowledge  and  the  world  of  Things        ....  495 

347.  '  Actual  Reality ';  adequacy  of  Judgments  to  it    .  497 

348.  Applicability  of  thought  to  the  course  of  events  involves  (i)  Some 

given  reality,  which  thought  cannot  create          .....  499 

349.  (2)  The  Universality  of  Law  in  the  Real  world ;  ultimately  a  matter 

of  faith      ............  500 

350.  And  (3)  synthetic  judgments  a  priori,  as  basis  of  knowledge  of  parti- 

cular laws          ...........  503 

351.  Hume's  restriction  of  judgment  destroys  ^//judgment    ....  504 

352.  Mathematical  reasoning  is  not  covered  by  the  Law  of  Identity      *         .  505 

353.  Illustration  by  Kant's  arithmetical  instance  ......  507 

354.  And  by  his  geometrical  instance   ........  509 

355.  Meaning  and  value  of  apprehension  a  priori          .         .         .         .         .511 

356.  Self-evidence  of  universal  Truths 513 

357.  Intuition  is  opposed  to  discursive  thought — means  immediate  appre- 

hension       514 

S58.  Self-evident  Truths  require  to  be  discovered  by  help  of  analysis    .         .  516 

359.  Pure  Mechanics  in  what  sense  a  priori         .         ,         ,         .         .         ,  517 

360.  Gradual  formation  of  pure  ideas  of  Motion  and  Mass    .         ,         .         ,  519 

361.  Mechanical  principles,  like  those  of  Arithmetic  and  Geometry,  at  once 

identical  and  synthetic        .        .        .        .        .         .        .        .         .  522 

362.  In  higher  Mechanics,  Proof  is  one  thing,  and  the  Ratio  kgis  another     .  524 
863.  Analytical   Knowledge  as  the  ideal,  means  the  simplest  synthetical 

knowledge -.  526 

364.  The  simplest  ultimate  Truth  need  not  be  a  mere  datum  of  experience, 

though  it  must  be  Synthetic       .        .        .        .         .        .        .         .528 

365.  A  synthetic  yet  necessary  development  the  supreme  goal  of  science       .  529 

APPENDIX 531 

INDEX 533 


ERRATA. 


P.  113,  1.  9  from  bottom,  for  'qualitative/  read  *  quantitative.9 

P.  270.,  1.  4  from  bottom,  after  *  narrower  limits,5  insert  *  if  we  apply  the  im- 
>rtarit  general  principle,  that  objective  conditions  arc  independent  of  variations 
our  cognitive  procedure,'     [An  addition  in  Ed.  2,  overlooked  in  adapting  the 
anslation  to  it.] 

P.  421, 1.  10  from  bottom.,^;" '  Ideas/  read  *  ideas.' 
P.  429, 1.  2  from  bottom, for  *m,'  read  'of.' 


BOOK  I. 

OF  THOUGHT  (PURE  LOGIC). 


INTRODUCTION. 

I.  AT  almost  every  moment  of  our  waking  life  our   senses  are 
giving  rise  to  various  ideas,  simultaneous  or  immediately  successive. 
Among  these  ideas  there  are  many  which  have  a  right  thus  to  meet 
in  our  consciousness,  because  in  the  reality  from  which  they  spring 
their  occasioning  causes  always  accompany  or  follow  one  another ; 
others  are  found  together  in  us  merely  because,  within  the  external 
world  to  whose  influence  we  are  accessible,  their  causes  were  as  a 
fact  simultaneous  though  not  so  inwardly  connected  as  to  ensure 
their  similar  combination  in  every  recurring  instance.     This  mixture 
of  coherent  with  merely  coincident  ideas  is  repeated,  according  to  a 
law  which  we  derive  from  self-observation,  by  the  current  of  memory. 
As  soon  as  any  idea  is  revivified  in  consciousness,  it  reawakens  the 
others  which  have  once  accompanied  or  succeeded  it,  whether  the 
previous  connexion  was  due  to  a  coherence  in  the  matter  of  the  ideas, 
or  to  the  mere  simultaneity  of  otherwise  unconnected  irritants.     It  is 
upon  the  first  fact,  the  recovery  of  what  is  coherent,  that  our  hope  of 
arriving  at  knowledge  is  based  :   the  second,  the  ease  with  which 
coincident  elements  hang  together  and  push  one  another  into  con- 
sciousness, is  the  source  of  error,  beginning  with  that  distraction 
which  hinders  our  thoughts  from  following  the  connexion  of  things. 

II.  The  ever-changing  whole  of  processes  which  results  from  this 
peculiarity  of  our  psychical  life  is  what  we  call  the  current  of  ideas. 
If  it  were  in  our  power  to  observe  this  whole  with  omniscience,  we 
should  discover  in  every  instance  of  it,  in  the  sober  course  of  waking 
thought,  in  the  dreams  of  sleep,  in  the  delirium  of  disease,  a  necessary 
connexion  between  its  members.     The  application  of  universal  laws, 
which  hold  good  of  all  souls  alike,  to  the  particular  conditions  which 
are  found  to  vary  in  each  single  instance,  would  exhibit  the  course  of 

B 


2  Introduction.  CBOOKI. 

these  inner  processes  in  the  light  of  an  inevitable  result.  If  we  knew 
the  permanent  characteristics  of  a  single  particular  soul,  if  we  had  a 
view  of  the  form  and  content  of  its  whole  current  of  ideas  up  to  the 
present  time,  then,  the  moment,  it  had  produced  a  first  and  a  second 
idea  on  occasion  of  external  irritants,  we  should  be  able  to  predict  on 
the  basis  of  those  universal  laws  what  its  third  and  fourth  idea  in  the 
next  moment  must  be.  But  in  any  other  soul,  whose  nature,  past 
history,  and  present  condition  were  different,  the  same  first  and 
second  idea,  developed  at  this  moment  by  a  similar  external  irritant, 
would  lead  with  a  similar  necessity  in  the  next  moment  to  an  entirely 
different  continuation.  An  investigation  of  the  subject  would  there- 
fore have  to  recognise  that  any  given  current  of  ideas  was  necessary 
for  that  particular  soul  and  under  those  particular  conditions ;  but  it 
would  not  discover  any  mode  of  connexion  between  ideas  which  was 
universally  valid  for  all  souls.  And  just  because,  under  their  re- 
spective conditions,  every  such  series  of  ideas  hangs  together  by  the 
same  necessity  and  law  as  every  other,  there  would  be  no  ground  for 
making  any  such  distinction  of  value  as  that  between  truth  and 
untruth,  which  would  place  one  group  in  opposition  to  all  the  rest. 

III.  Universal  validity  and  truth  are  the  two  prerogatives  which 
even  ordinary  language  ascribes  and  confines  to  those  connexions  of 
ideas  which  thought  alone  is  supposed  to  establish.  Truth  is  fami- 
liarly defined  as  the  agreement  of  ideas  and  their  combinations  with 
their  object  and  its  relations.  There  may  be  objections  to  this  form 
of  expression,  which  this  is  not  the  place  to  consider ;  but  it  will  be 
innocuous  if  we  modify  it  and  say,  that  connexions  of  ideas  are  true 
when  they  follow  such  relations  in  the  matter  of  the  ideas  as  are 
identical  for  all  consciousness,  and  not  such  merely  empirical  co- 
incidence of  impressions  as  takes  one  form  in  one  consciousness, 
another  in  another.  Now  our  ideas  are  excited  in  the  first  instance 
by  external  influences,  and  this  leads  us  to  regard  thought  as  a  re- 
action of  the  mind  upon  the  material  supplied  by  those  influences  and 
by  the  results  of  their  interaction  already  referred  to.  The  thinking 
mind  is  not  content  to  receive  and  acquiesce  in  its  ideas  as  they  were 
originally  combined  by  casual  coincidence  or  as  they  are  recombined 
In  the  memory:  it  sifts  them,  and  where  they  have  come  together 
merely  in  this  way  it  does  away  with  their  coexistence :  but  where 
there  is  a  material  coherence  between  them,  it  not  only  leaves  them 
together  but  combines  them  anew,  this  time  however  in  a  form  which 
adds  to  the  fact  of  their  reconnexion  a  consciousness  of  the  ground 
of  their  coherence, 


BOOK  L]  Introduction,  3 

IV.  I  will  connect  the  indispensable  explanation  of  what  I  have 
just  said  with  the  elucidation  of  some  obvious  objections.     It  is  not 
without  a  purpose,  which  I  admit,  that  while  I  have  represented  the 
rest  of  the  currenj^^  of  events,  which  happen  In 
us  and  to  us  according  to  universal  laws  of  our  nature,  I  have  repre- 
sented thought  as  an  activity  which  our  mind  exercises.     There  have 
been  persons  who  doubted  whether  this   opposition  has   any  real 
significance,  either  in  itself  or  in  relation  to  thought ;  whether  every- 
thing that  we  are  in  the  habit  of  calling  activity  is  not  rather  one 
amongst  the  events  which  simply  take  place  in  us.     So  wide  a  ques- 
tion does  not  of  course  admit  of  being  decided  here :  if  therefore  I 
hold  to  the  significance  of  the  opposition,  and  expressly  describe 
thought  as  an  activity,  this  must  be  regarded  'as  a  presupposition 
which  awaits  proof  elsewhere,  but  is  at  present  open  to  dispute.    It  is 
necessary  for  the  connexion  of  the  whole  to  which  I  wish  this  view  of 
thought  to  serve  as  an  introduction ;  and  it  seems  to  me  to  be  per- 
missible, because,  while  it  will  determine  decisively  the  general  colour 
of  my  exposition,  it  will  not  alter  unnaturally  the  internal  relations  of 
its  subject-matter. 

V.  It  is  more  profitable  to  meet  another  form  of  the  same  ob- 
jection, which  allows  the  general  validity  of  the  opposition  in  question, 
but  holds  that  there  is  no  occasion  to  apply  it  here.     The  connexion 
of  the  coherent  (it  is  said),  that  is  to  say,  Truth,  is  brought  about  in 
the  same  way,  only  not  quite  so  soon,  as  the  erroneous  conjunctions 
of  the  casually  coincident.     The  course  of  things  itself  ensures  that 
those  events  which  are  inwardly  connected  exercise  their  combined 
effect  upon  us  with  incomparably  greater  frequency  than  those  which 
have  no  inward  bond,  but  are  variously  thrown  together  by  chance. 
Owing  to  this  more  frequent  repetition  the  connexion  of  what  is 
coherent  becomes  fixed  in  us,  while  that  of  the  merely  coincident  is 
loosened  and  disturbed  by  its  want  of  uniformity.    In  this  way  the 
separation  of  the  coherent  from  the  incoherent,  which  we  thought  it 
necessary  to  ascribe  to  a  special  reaction  of  the  mind,  is  effected  by 
the  current  of  ideas  itself;  and  thus  brutes,  like  men,  acquire  the  mass 
of  well-grounded  information  which  regulates  the  daily  life  of  both. 
It  would  be  superfluous  to  point  out  that  this  account  is  perfectly 
correct  if  it  purport  to  be  no  more  than  a  history  of  the  acquisition 
just  mentioned;  but  I  think  it  can  be  shown  that  this  acquisition  is 
just  what  neither  characterises  nor  exhausts  the  specific  work  of 
thought. 

VI.  There  is  a  common  opinion  which  reserves  the  faculty  of 

B  2 


4  Introduction, 

thought  to  man  and  denies  it  to  brutes.  Without  seriously  deciding 
for  or  against  this  view,  I  will  use  it  for  the  convenience  of  my  ex- 
planation. In  the  soul  of  a  brute,  which  on  this  theory  would  be 
confined  to  a  mere  current  of  ideas,  the  first  impression  of  a  tree  in 
leaf  would  only  produce  a  collective  image;  there  would  be  no  power 
or  even  impulse  to  seek  for  any  special  coherence  between  its  parts. 
Winter  strips  the  tree  of  its  leaves,  and  on  a  second  observation  the 
brute  finds  only  a  part  of  the  former  collective  image,  which  tries  to  re- 
produce the  idea  of  the  rest,  but  is  hindered  by  the  present  appearance. 
When  the  return  of  summer  restores  the  old  state  of  things,  the  renewed 
image  of  the  whole  tree  in  leaf  may  not,  it  is  true,  have  the  simple  un- 
questioning unity  of  the  first  observation  ;  the  recollection  of  the  second 
intervenes,  and  separates  it  into  the  part  which  remained  and  the  part 
which  changed.  I  do  not  think  we  can  say  what  precisely  would  take 
place  in  the  soul  of  the  brute  under  these  circumstances ;  but  even  if 
we  ascribe  to  it  the  additional  faculty  of  comparing  and  surveying 
the  current  of  its  ideas  and  expressing  the  result,  the  expression  could 
not  say  more  than  the  fact  that  two  observations  were  at  one  time 
together,  at  another  not.  Now  it  is  true  that  the  man,  when  he  gives 
the  name  of  leafy  and  leafless  tree  to  the  same  observed  objects,  is 
only  expressing  the  same  facts;  but  the  apprehension  of  the  facts, 
which  is  indicated  by  these  habitual  forms  of  speech,  involves  a 
mental  operation  of  quite  a  different  kind.  The  name  of  the  tree,  to 
which  he  adds  and  from  which  he  takes  away  the  descriptive  epithet, 
signifies  to  him,  not  merely  a  permanent  as  opposed  to  a  changeable 
part  in  his  observation,  but  the  thing  in  its  dependence  on  itself  and 
in  opposition  to  its  property.  The  effect  of  bringing  the  tree  and  its 
leaves  under  this  point  of  view  is,  that  the  relationship  of  thing  and 
property  appears  as  the  justification  both  for  separating  and  for  com- 
bining these  ideas,  and  thus  the  fact  of  their  coexistence  or  non- 
coexistence  in  our  consciousness  is  referred  to  the  real  condition 
upon  which  their  coherence  or  non- coherence  at  the  moment 
depends, 

The  same  consideration  may  be  extended  to  other  instances.  In 
the  soul  of  the  dog  the  renewed  sight  of  the  raised  stick  recalls  the 
idea  of  his  previous  pain :  the  man,  when  he  makes  the  judgment,  'the 
blow  hurts/  does  not  merely  express  the  fact  of  connexion  between 
the  two  occurrences,  but  justifies  it.  For  in  representing  the  blow  as 
the  subject  from  which  the  pain  proceeds,  he  clearly  exhibits  the 
general  relationship  of  cause  and  effect  as  the  ground,  not  of  the  mere 
coexistence  of  the  two  ideas  in  us,  but  of  their  right  and  obligation  to 


BOOK  LI       .  Introduction,  5 

follow  one  another.  Lastly,  the  expectation  of  pain  in  the  dog  may 
be  accompanied  by  the  recollection  that  by  running  away,  to  which 
he  was  led  before  by  an  involuntary  instinct,  the  pain  is  diminished ; 
and  this  fresh  conjunction  of  ideas  will  doubtless  make  him  repeat  the 
salutary  operation  as  surely  as  if  he  reflected  and  concluded  that 
threatening  blows  are  prevented  by  distance,  that  a  blow  threatens 
him,  and  that  therefore  he  must  run  away.  But  the  man  who  in  a 
similar  or  more  serious  case  actually  frames  such  a  conclusion,  per- 
forms an  entirely  different  mental  operation  ;  in  expressing  a  universal 
truth  in  the  major  premiss,  and  bringing  a  particular  instance  under  It 
in  the  minor,  he  not  merely  repeats  the  fact  of  that  salutary  con- 
nexion between  ideas  and  expectations  by  which  the  brute  is  affected* 
but  he  justifies  it  by  an  appeal  to  the  dependence  of  the  particular 
upon  its  universal. 

VII.  These  examples,  which  embrace  the  familiar  forms  of  thought, 
concept,  judgment,  and  syllogism,  will  I  think  have  made  sufficiently 
clear  what  is  the  surplus  of  work  performed  by  thought  over  and 
above  the  mere  current  of  ideas ;  it  always  consists  in  adding  to  the 
reproduction  or  severance  of  a  connexion  in  ideas  the  accessory 
notion  of  a  ground  for  their  coherence  or  non-coherence.  The  value 
of  this  work  remains  entirely  the  same,  whatever  opinion  we  may  hold 
of  its  genesis :  if  we  preferred  to  regard  it,  not  as  the  outcome  of  a 
special  activity,  but  only  as  a  finer  product  of  the  mere  current  of 
ideas  operating  under  favorable  circumstances.,  we  should  then  con- 
fine the  name  of  thought  to  that  particular  stage  of  development  in 
the  current  at  which  it  gives  birth  to  this  new  achievement.  The 
peculiarity  of  thought,  then,  which  will  govern  the  whole  of  our  sub- 
sequent exposition,  lies,  not  in  the  mere  correspondence  of  our  ap- 
prehension with  fact,  but  in  the  production  of  those  accessory  and 
justificatory  notions  which  condition  the  form  of  our  apprehension. 
We  do  not  deny  that,  apart  from  thought,  the  mere  current  of  ideas 
in  the  brute  gives  rise  to  many  useful  combinations  of  impressions, 
correct  expectations,  seasonable  reactions ;  on  the  contrary,  we  admit 
that  much  even  of  what  the  man  calls  his  thought  is  really  nothing 
but  the  play  of  mutually  productive  ideas.  And  yet  perhaps  there  is 
still  some  difference  here.  The  sudden  inspirations  which  enable  us 
to  make  a  decision  in  a  moment,  the  rapid  survey  which  arranges  a 
complicated  material  in  almost  less  time  than  would  seem  sufficient 
for  the  bare  observation  of  its  parts,  the  invention  of  the  artist  which 
remains  unconscious  of  the  grounds  by  which  it  is  impelled,  all  these 
seem  to  us  to  be  effects,  not  of  a  current  of  ideas  which  has  not  yet 


6  Introduction.  i  BOOK  L 

become  thoughtj  but  of  abbreviated  thought.  In  the  cases  where 
these  surprising  operations  are  successful,  they  are  so  because  mature 
thought  has  already  in  other  cases  developed  into  full-grown  habits 
those  accessory  notions,  which  bring  the  impressions  under  universal 
principles  of  coherence;  and  this,  like  all  other  accomplishments 
which  have  acquired  the  ease  of  a  second  nature,  has  behind  it  a  for- 
gotten time  of  laborious  practice. 

VIII.  In  the  examples  which  I  have  employed,  the   accessory 
notions,   by  which  we  justify  the  connexions  of  ideas,  obviously 
coincided  with  certain  presuppositions  about  the  connexions  of  the 
real  with  which  we  cannot  dispense.     Without   the   opposition   of 
things  and  their  properties  by  which  the  whole  matter  of  perception 
is  articulated,  without  the  assumption  of  a  succession  of  effects  from 
causes,  and  without  the  determining  power  of  the  universal  over  the 
particular,  we  could  have  no  apprehension  whatever  of  the  reality 
which  surrounds  us.    From  this  point  of  view,  then,  it  seems  a  self- 
evident   proposition  that  the  forms  of  thought   and   the  accessory 
notions  which  give  them  vitality  are  immediate  copies  of  the  universal 
forms  of  being  and  its  connexions,  and  this  real  validity  of  thought 
and  its  operations  has,  in  fact,  been  frequently  maintained.    The  op- 
posite view  to  this,  which  as  its  exact  counterpart  we  might  expect  to 
find,  has  never  been  put  forward  so  unreservedly.    To  the  unpreju- 
diced mind  it  is  too  natural  to  regard  thought  as  a  means  of  compre- 
hending the  real,  and  any  interest  in  the  scientific  investigation  of  its 
processes  is  too  dependent  upon  this  presupposition  for  any  one  to 
assert  the  merely  formal  validity  of  all  logical  activity  in  the  sense  of 
denying  all  relation  between  it  and  the  nature  of  being.     Those, 
therefore,  who  have  regarded  the  forms  and  laws  of  thought  as  being 
primarily  peculiar  results  of  our  mental  organisation,  have  not  wholly 
excluded  their  correspondence  with  the  essence  of  things ;  they  have 
only  denied  the  off-hand  view  which  would  make  them  immediate 
copies  of  the  forms  of  being. 

IX.  In  regard  to  this  much  debated  question  an  introduction  can 
only  take  up  a  provisional  position.    We  shall  certainly  be  right  to 
confine  our  attention  at  starting  to  what  is  already  clear,  and  to  leave 
for  a  later  stage  the  decision  of  uncertainties.   Let  us  then  go  no  further 
than  the  natural  presupposition  which  regards  thought  as  a  means  to 
knowledge.     Now  a  tool  must  fulfil  two  conditions,  it  must  fit  the 
thing  and  it  must  fit  the  hand.    It  must  fit  the  thing ;  that  is,  it  must 
be  so  constructed  as  to  approach,  reach,  and  get  hold  of,  the  objects 
which  it  is  to  work  upon,  and  find  in  them  a  point  from  which  to 


BOOK  i.]  Introductic  'i,  7 

* 

operate;  this  requirement  is  satisfied  in  the  case  of  thought  if  we 
admit  that  its  forms  and  laws  are  no  mere  singularities  of  our  mental 
organisation,  but  that,  taken  as  they  are,  they  show  a  constant  and 
regular  adaptation  to  reality.  If,  again,  a  tool  is  to  fit  the  hand5  it 
must  have  such  other  structural  properties  as  make  it  easy  to  grasp, 
hold,  and  move,  having  regard  to  the  power,  attitude,  and  position  of 
the  person  who  is  to  use  it;  and  in  the  case  of  thought  this  second 
indispensable  requirement  limits  the  scope  of  the  previous  admission. 
Only  a  mind  which  stood  at  the  centre  of  the  real  world,  not  outside 
individual  things  but  penetrating  them  with  its  presence,  could  com- 
mand such  a  view  of  reality  as  left  -nothing  to  look  for,  and  was  there- 
fore the  perfect  image  of  it  in  -its  own  being  and  activity.  But  the 
human  mind,  with  which  alone  we  are  here  concerned,  does  not  thus 
stand  at  the  centre  of  things,  but  has  a  modest  position  somewhere  in 
the  extreme  ramifications  of  reality.  Compelled,  as  it  is,  to  collect  its 
knowledge  piece-meal  by  experiences  which  relate  immediately  to 
only  a  small  fragment  of  the  whole,  and  thence  to  advance  cautiously 
to  the  apprehension  of  what  lies  beyond  its  horizon,  it  has  probably 
to  make  a  number  of  circuits,  which  are  immaterial  to  the  truth  which 
it  is  seeking,  but  to  itself  in  the  search  are  indispensable.  However 
much,  then,  we  may  presuppose  an  original  reference  of  the  forms  of 
thought  to  that  nature  of  things  which  is  the  goal  of  knowledge,  we 
must  be  prepared  to  find  in  them  many  elements  which  do  not 
directly  reproduce  the  actual  reality  to  the  knowledge  of  which  they 
are  to  lead  us :  indeed  there  is  always  the  possibility  that  a  very  large 
part  of  our  efforts  of  thought  may  only  be  like  a  scaffolding,  which 
does  not  belong  to  the  permanent  form  of  the  building  which  it 
helped  to  raise,  but  on  the  contrary  must  be  taken  down  again  to 
allow  the  full  view  of  its  result  It  is  enough  to  have  thus  raised  a 
preliminary  expectation,  with  which  we  wish  our  subject  to  be  met ; 
any  more  definite  decision  as  to  the  limits  which  separate  the  formal 
validity  of  our  thought  from  its  real  significance  must  await  the 
further  course  of  our  enquiries. 

X.  I  have  purposely  avoided  postponing  those  enquiries  by  dis- 
cussions which  seem  to  me  to  encumber  unjustifiably  the  approach  to 
logic.  What  particular  tone  of  mind  is  required  for  successful  think- 
ing, how  the  attention  is  to  be  kept  up,  distraction  avoided,  torpidity 
stimulated,  precipitation  checked,  all  these  are  questions  which  no 
more  belong  to  the  field  of  logic  than  do  enquiries  about  the  origin 
of  our  sense-impressions  and  the  conditions  under  which  conscious- 
ness in  general  and  conscious  activity  is  possible,  We  may  pre- 


8  A  troduction. 


c  BOOK  i. 


suppose  the  existence  of  all  taese  things,  of  perceptions,  ideas,  and 
their  connexion  according  to  the  laws  of  a  psychical  mechanism,  but 
logic  only  begins  with  the  conviction  that  the  matter  cannot  end  here; 
the  conviction,  that  between  the  combinations  of  ideas,  however  they 
may  have  originated,  there  is  a  difference  of  truth  and  untruth,  and 
that  there  are  forms  to  which  these  combinations  ought  to  answer  and 
laws  which  they  ought  to  obey.  It  is  true  that  we  may  attempt  by  a 
psychological  investigation  to  explain  the  origin  of  this  authoritative 
consciousness  itself;  but  the  only  standard  by  which  the  correctness 
of  our  results  could  be  measured  would  be  one  set  up  by  the  very 
consciousness  to  be  investigated.  The  first  thing,  then,  that  has  to  be 
ascertained  Is,  what  the  contents  of  this  authoritative  conviction  are  ; 
the  history  of  its  growth  can  only  have  the  second  place,  and  even 
then  must  conform  to  requirements  of  its  own  imposing. 

XL  Having  now  said  all  that  seemed  necessary  by  way  of  intro- 
duction to  my  exposition,  I  will  add  a  preliminary  survey  of  its  order, 
The  examples  which  we  have  hitherto  employed  lead  naturally  to  a 
first  principal  part,  which,  under  the  name  of  pure  or  formal  logic,  is 
devoted  to  thought  in  general  and  those  universal  forms  and  principles 
of  thought  which  hold  good  everywhere,  both  in  judging  of  reality 
and  in  weighing  possibility,  irrespective  of  any  difference  in  the 
objects.  We  have  only  to  mention  concept,  judgment,  syllogism,  to 
see  how  naturally  these  forms  exhibit  themselves  as  different  stages  of 
one  and  the  same  activity;  and  in  treating  of  pure  logic  I  shall 
endeavour  to  emphasise  this  thread  of  connexion  somewhat  more 
strongly  than  is  usually  done.  The  various  forms  of  thought  will  be 
arranged  in  an  ascending  series,  in  which  each  higher  member  at- 
tempts to  make  good  a  defect  in  the  preceding  one,  due  to  its 
failure  to  satisfy,  in  regard  to  its  own  particular  problem,  the  general 
impulse  of  thought  to  reduce  coincidence  to  coherence.  This  series 
will  advance  from  the  simplest  formation  of  single  impressions  to  the 
conception  of  the  universal  order  in  which  this  general  impulse  would 
lead  us,  if  it  were  possible,  to  comprehend  the  world. 

XJL  Pure  logic  itself  will  show  and  explain  that  the  forms  of 
concept,  judgment,  and  syllogism  are  to  be  considered  primarily  as 
ideal  forms,  which  give  to  the  matter  of  our  ideas,  if  we  succeed  in 
arranging  it  under  them,  its  true  logical  setting.  But  the  different 
peculiarities  of  different  objects  offer  resistance  to  this  arrangement; 
it  is  not  clear  of  itself  what  sum  of  matter  has  a  claim  to  form  a  deter- 
minate concept  and  be  opposed  to  another,  or  which  predicate  belongs 
universally  to  which  subject,  or  how  the  universal  law  for  the  arrange- 


BOOK  LI  Introduction.  9 

ment  of  a  manifold  material  is  to  be  discovered.  Applied  logic  is 
concerned  with  those  methods  of  investigation  which  obviate  these 
defects.  It  considers  hindrances  and  the  devices  by  which  they  may 
be  overcome ;  and  it  must  therefore  sacrifice  the  love  of  systematisation 
to  considerations  of  utility,  and  select  what  the  experience  of  science 
has  so  far  shown  to  be  important  and  fruitful  The  boundlessness  of 
the-  field  of  observation  unfortunately  makes  it  impossible  to  exhibit 
as  completely  as  could  be  wished  this  most  brilliant  part  of  logic, 
which  the  inventive  genius  of  modern  times  has  made  peculiarly  its 
own. 

XIII.  The  third  part  will  be  devoted  to  knowledge, ',  that  is,  to  the 
question  which  our  introduction  touched  without  answering,  the  ques- 
tion how  far  the  most  complete  structure  of  thought  which  all  the 
means  of  pure  and  applied  logic  enable  us  to  rear,  can  claim  to  be  an 
adequate  account  of  that  which  we  seem  compelled  to  assume  as  the 
object  and  occasion  of  our  ideas.  The  currency  In  ordinary  minds 
of  this  opposition  between  the  object  of  our  knowledge  and  our 
knowledge  of  that  object  makes  me  employ  it  without  hesitation  to 
describe  in  a  preliminary  way  the  subject  of  this  third  section ;  it  may 
be  left  to  the  section  itself  to  disclose  the  difficulties  which  this 
apparently  simple  antithesis  involves,  and  to  determine  accordingly 
the  more  precise  limits  of  the  problems  with  which  it  has  to  deal. 


CHAPTER  I. 
The  Theory  of  the  Concept* 

A.     The  formation  of  impressions  into  ideas. 

1,  IT  is  in  relations  within  a  manifold  that  the  operations  of  thought 
usually  show  themselves  to  us,  and  we  might  therefore  expect  to  have 
to  look  for  the  most  original  of  its  acts  in  some  simplest  form  of  con- 
nexion between  two  ideas.    A  slight  reflexion,  however,  suggests  to 
us  to  go  a  step  further  back.     It  is  easy  to  make  a  heap  out  of 
nothing  but  round  stones,  if  it  is  indifferent  how  they  lie;  but  if  a 
structure  of  regular  shape  is  to  be  built,  the  stones  must  be  already  so 
formed  that  their  surfaces  will  fit  firmly  together.     We  must  expect 
the  same  in  the  case  before  us.    As  mere  internal  movements,  the 
states  which  follow  external  irritants  may  exist  side  by  side  in  us 
without  further  preparation,  and  act  upon  each  other  as  the  general 
laws  of  our  psychical  life  allow  or  enjoin.    But  if  they  are  to  admit 
of  combination  in  the  definite  form  of  a  thought,  they  each  require 
some  previous  shaping  to  make  them  into  logical  building-stones  and 
to  convert  them  from  impressions  into  ideas.    Nothing  is  really  more 
familiar  to  us  than  this  first  operation  of  thought ;  the  only  reason 
why  we  usually  overlook  it  is  that  in  the  language  which  we  inherit  it 
is  already  carried  out,  and  it  seems  therefore  to  belong  to  the  self- 
evident  presuppositions  of  thought,  not  to  its  own  specific  work. 

2.  Tiiat  which  takes  place  in  us  immediately  under  the  influence 
of  an  external  stimulus,  the  sensation  or  the   feeling,  is  in  itself 
nothing  but  a  state  of  our  consciousness,  a  mood  of  ourselves.    We 
do  not  always  succeed  in  naming,  and  so  making  communicable  to 
others,  the  manner  in  which  we  are  thus  affected;   sometimes  the 
formless  interjection,  the  exclamation,  is  the  only  way  we  can  find, 
though  with  no  certainty  of  being  understood,  to  give  sound  to  what 
cannot  be  said.     But  in  the  more  favorable  cases,  where  we  have  suc- 
ceeded in  creating  a  name,  what  exactly  is  it  which  this  creation 


The  Logical  Act  of  Naming. 

effects  and  indicates?  It  is  just  what  we  are  here  lookin§^&&  t 
conversion  of  an  impression  into  an  idea.  As  soon  as  we 
name  of  green  or  red  to  the  different  movements  which  waves  of 
light  produce  through  our  eyes,  we  have  separated  something  before 
tinseparated,  our  sensitive  act  from  the  sensible  matter  to  which  it 
refers.  This  matter  we  now  present  to  ourselves,  no  longer  as  a  con- 
dition which  we  undergo}  but  as  a  something  which  has  its  being  and 
its  meaning  in  itself,  and  which  continues  to  be  what  it  is  and  to 
mean  what  it  means  whether  we  are  conscious  of  it  or  not.  It  is 
easy  to  see  here  the  necessary  beginning  of  that  activity  which  we 
above  appropriated  to  thought  as  such :  it  has  not  yet  got  so  far  as 
converting  coexistence  into  coherence,  it  has  first  to  perform  the 
previous  task  of  investing  each  single  impression  with  an  independent 
validity,  without  which  the  later  opposition  of  their  real  coherence  to 
mere  coexistence  could  not  be  made  in  any  intelligible  sense. 

3.  We  may  describe  this  first  operation  of  thought  as  the  beginning 
of  an  olj edification  of  the  subjective ;  and  I  take  advantage  of  this  ex- 
pression to  guard  against  a  misunderstanding  and  so  illustrate  the 
simple  meaning  of  what  I  have  said  above.  It  is  not  objectivity  in 
the  sense  of  some  sort  of  real  existence  which  would  subsist  though 
nobody  had  the  thought  of  it,  that,  by  the  logical  act  of  creating  a 
name,  is  accorded  to  the  subject-matter  to  which  that  act  gives  rise. 
The  true  meaning  of  the  first  act  of  thought  is  best  exemplified  by 
those  languages  which  have  maintained  the  use  of  the  article.  The 
article,  which  had  everywhere  originally  the  value  of  a  demonstrative 
pronoun,  marks  the  word  which  it  accompanies  as  the  name  of  some- 
thing to  which  we  point ;  and  what  we  point  to  is  something  which 
admits  of  being  observed  by  another  person  as  well  as  by  ourselves. 
This  can  be  done  most  easily  with  things  which  have  an  actual 
position  in  space  between  the  speakers;  but  developed  language 
makes  an  object  of  any  other  matter  of  thought  in  the  same  way. 
Such  objectivity,  therefore  (which  in  these  cases  also  is  indicated  by 
the  article),  does  not  entirely  coincide  with  the  reality  which  belongs 
to  things  as  such ;  it  is  only  the  fact  of  their  claiming  such  a  reality, 
on  the  ground  of  the  distinctive  peculiarity  of  their  real  nature,  which 
language  has  met  and  expressed  in  their  names.  When  we  speak  of1 
1  the  tooth-ache/  '  the  day/  '  the  franchise/  we  do  not  imply  that  they 

1  [The  instances  in  the  text  are  der  Schmerz,  die  Helligkeit,  die  Freiheit,  but 
none  of  the  equivalents  are  used  in  the  required  sense  with  the  article  in  English. 
The  same  applies  to  the  instances  in  the  following  sentence,  das  Zwar,  das  Aber, 
das  Dennochl\ 


12  The  Theory  of  the  Concept. 

could  exist  if  there  were  no  person  to  feel,  to  see,  to  enjoy  them, 
respectively.  Still  less  when  we  talk  of  '  the  adverb '  or  '  the  con- 
junction/ do  we  mean  to  indicate  by  the  article  that  the  subject-matter 
described  by  these  words  has  any  sort  of  existence  outside  thought. 
We  only  mean  that  certain  special  forms  of  resistance  and  tension, 
which  we  feel  in  the  course  of  our  ideas,  are  not  only  peculiarities  of 
our  own  state  and  inseparable  from  it,  but  that  they  depend  upon  re- 
lations inherent  in  the  matter  of  various  ideas,  which  every  one  who 
thinks  those  ideas  will  find  in  them  just  as  we  do, 

The  logical  objectification,  then,  which  the  creation  of  a  name 
implies,  does  not  give  an  external  realiiy  to  the  matter  named ;  the 
common  world,  in  which  others  are  expected  to  recognise  what  we 
point  loj  is,  speaking  generally,  only  the  world  of  thought ;  what  we 
do  here  is  to  ascribe  to  it  the  first  trace  of  an  existence  of  its  own  and 
an  inward  order  which  is  the  same  for  all  thinking  beings  and  inde- 
pendent of  them :  it  is  quite  indifferent  whether  certain  parts  of  this 
world  of  thought  indicate  something  which  has  besides  an  inde- 
pendent reality  outside  the  thinking"  minds,  or  whether  all  that  it 
contains  exists  only  in  the  thoughts  of  those  who  think  it,  but  with 
equal  validity  for  them  all. 

4.  But  the  objectification  of  the  matter  so  first  constituted  is  not 
the  whole  of  this  first  act  of  thought;  consciousness  cannot  simply 
present  the  matter  to  itself,  it  can  only  do  so  by  giving  it  a  definite 
position ;  It  cannot  simply  distinguish  it  from  an  emotional  mood  of 
its  own,  without  accrediting  it  with  some  other  sort  of  existence 
instead  of  that  which  belonged  to  it  as  such  a  mood.  The  meaning 
of  this  requirement  (for  1  admit  that  my  expression  of  it  is  not  im- 
mediately clear)  is  most  simply  shown  by  the  way  in  which  language 
actually  satisfies  it.  It  is  only  in  the  interjection,  which  is  not  a  name 
of  definite  content,  that  language  retains  the  formlessness  which 
belongs  to  it  as  the  mere  expression  of  excitement ;  the  rest  of  its 
stock  of  words  is  articulated  in  the  definite  forms  of  substantives, 
adjectives,  verbs,  and  the  familiar  par  is  of  speech  in  general.  And  It 
is  hardly  necessary  to  insist  that  the  various  characters  thus  impressed 
by  language  upon  its  material  are  the  indispensable  condition  of  the 
later  operations  of  thought ;  it  is  obvious  that  neither  the  combination 
of  marks  into  the  concept,  of  concepts  into  the  judgment,  or  of 
judgments  into  the  syllogism  would  be  possible,  if  the  matter  of  every 
idea  were  equally  formless  or  apprehended  in  the  same  form,  if  some 
of  them  were  not  substantival  and  die!  not  express  fixed  and  inde- 
pendent points  of  attachment  for  others  which  are  adjectival,  or  if 


CHAPTER  i.]  Substantive,  Verb,  Adjective.  13 

others  again  were  not  verbal,  exhibiting  the  fluid  relations  which  serve 
to  bring  one  thing  into  connexion  with  another.  I  do  not  think  it 
advisable  to  separate  this  particular  conformation  of  the  matter  of 
ideas,  as  a  second  act  of  thought,  from  the  first  act,  to  which  we  as- 
cribed its  objectification ;  I  prefer  to  comprise  the  primary  activity  of 
thought  in  a  single  operation,  which  may  be  indifferently  represented 
as  that  of  giving  to  the  matter -of  ideas  one  of  these  logical  forms  by 
making  it  objective  for  consciousness,  or  as  that  of  making  it  ob- 
jective by  giving  it  one  of  these  forms, 

5.  The  three  parts  of  speech  which  I  have  noticed  remind  us  in- 
evitably of  three  concepts  which  are  indispensable  for  our  judgment 
of  reality.  It  is  impossible  to  have  even  an  expressible  idea  of  the 
world  of  perception,  without  thinking  of  things  in  it  as  fixed  points 
which  serve  to  support  a  number  of  dependent  properties,  and  are 
connected  together  by  the  changing  play  of  events.  If  metaphysic  is 
the  investigation,  not  of  the  thinkable  in  general,  but  of  the  real  or 
that  which  is  to  be  recognised  as  such,  these  concepts  of  thing, 
property,  and  event  are  metaphysical  concepts ;  not  perhaps  such  as 
metaphysic  would  finally  allow  to  stand  without  modification,  but  cer- 
tainly such  as  at  its  outset  purport  to  represent  immediately  the 
proper  essence  and  articulation  of  what  is. 

It  would  seern  at  first  sight  that  the  logical  forms  of  substantivity, 
adjectivity,  and  verbality  coincide  with  these  concepts :  but  a  second 
view  shows  the  same  difference  between  the  two  series  as  that  which 
separated  the  logical  objectification  of  an  idea  from  external  reality. 
Nothing  passes  with  us  for  a  thing  or  a  substance  which  has  not 
reality  outside  us  and  permanence  in  time,  producing  changes  in 
something  else  and  capable  of  undergoing  changes  itself;  but  we 
apprehend  as  substantives  not  only  things  but  their  properties ;  as 
substantives  we  speak  of  'change,7  'occurrence/  even  of  'nothing,' 
and  so  in  innumerable  cases  of  that  which  has  no  existence  at  all  or 
none  except  in  dependence  on  something  else.  Thus  the  substantival 
form  invests  its  content,  relatively  to  the  future  predicates  to  which  it 
is  to  serve  as  subject,  with  only  the  same  priority  and  independence 
as  belong  to  a  thing  in  contrast  with  its  properties,  conditions,  and 
effects,  but  by  no  means  with  that  concrete  and  independent  reality 
and  activity  which  place  a  thing  above  a  mere  object  of  thought. 

Verbs,  again,  express  most  frequently  an  event  which  as  a  fact 
takes  place  in  time  ;  but  when  we  say  that  things  'are,'  or  care  at  rest/ 
or  that  one  £ conditions'  or  'equals'  another,  it  is  clear  that  the  verbal 
form  too  does  not  universally  give  to  its  content  the  meaning  of  an 


14  The  Theory  of  the  Concept. 

event,  but  only  finds  it  there  usually.  In  order  to  conceive  fully  the 
sense  of  such  verbs  as  we  have  just  instanced,  we  have  to  connect 
several  distinct  contents  together  by  a  movement  of  thought,  and  this 
movement,  though  it  implies  time  for  its  execution,  is,  as  regards  its 
meaning  and  intention,  quite  independent  of  time.  In  a  word,  the 
general  sense  of  the  verbal  form  is  not  an  event,  but  a  relation 
between  several  related  points;  and  this  relation  may  just  as  well 
occur  between  contents  which  are.  out  of  time  and  coexist  only  in 
thought,  as  between  those  which  belong  to  reality  and  are  accessible 
to  temporal  change. 

Lastly,  while  it  is  true  that  radical  adjectives,  such  as  '  blue '  and 

*  sweet/  express  primarily  what  appears  to  our  first  apprehension  as  a 
real  property  of  things,  every  developed  language  knows  words  like 

*  doubtful/  'parallel,1  'allowable/  which,  as  the  least  reflexion  shows, 
can  no  longer  mean  in  the  same  simple  sense  as  the  former  a  property 
attaching  to  actual  things ;  they  are  abbreviated  and  condensed  ex- 
pressions of  the  result  of  all  sorts  of  relations,  and  it  is  only  for 
purposes  of  thought  that  we  represent  the  contents  of  such  adjectives 
as  related  to  those  of  substantives  in  the  way  in  which  we  imagine  an 
attribute  to  be  related  to  its  subject.     Speaking  generally,  then,  the 
logical  import  of  the  parts  of  speech  is  only  a  shadow  of  the  import 
of  these  metaphysical  concepts :  it  only  repeats  the  formal  character- 
istics which  the  latter  assert  of  the  real ;  but  by  not  confining  their 
application  to  the  concrete  external  reality,  it  loses  that  part  of  their 
significance  which  they  only  possess  in  that  application. 

6.  Lastly,  if  we  found  in  the  forms  of  the  parts  of  speech  the  most 
original  activity  of  thought,  we  must  also  understand  how  to  dis- 
tinguish this  from  its  linguistic  expression.  Now  that  man  has  come  to 
use  the  language  of  sounds  for  the  communication  of  his  thoughts, 
that  activity  is,  it  is  true,  most  clearly  manifested  in  the  forms  of  the 
parts  of  speech ;  but  in  itself  it  is  not  inseparably  bound  up  with  the 
existence  of  language.  The  development  of  which  the  ideas  of  the 
deaf  and  dumb  are  capable,  though  guided  in  the  first  instance  by 
those  who  can  speak,  is  enough  to  show  that  the  internal  work  of 
logic  is  independent  of  the  possibility  of  linguistic  expression,  That 
work  consists  merely  in  the  fact  that  we  accompany  the  content  of 
one  idea  with  the  thought  of  its  comparative  independence,  while  we 
think  of  another  as  requiring  support,  and  of  a  third  as  a  connecting 
link  which  neither  subsists  on  its  own  account  nor  rests  upon  some- 
\  thing  else  but  mediates  between  two  others.  No  one  doubts  the 
extremely  effective  support  which  language  gives  to  the  development 


CHAPTER  L]  Grammar  and  Logic,  1 5 

of  thought  by  making  the  formations  and  transformations  of  ideas 
vividly  objective  to  consciousness  by  means  of  sharply  defined  sounds 
and  their  regular  changes ;  still,  if  some  other  mode  of  communica- 
tion were  natural  to  man  instead  of  the  language  of  sounds,  the  same 
logical  associations  would  find  in  it  a  corresponding  expression 
though  of  a  different  kind.  And  if  in  some  languages  the  poverty  of 
forms  does  not  always  allow  these  associations  to  take  shape,  cannota 
for  instance,  distinguish  between  substantival  and  verbal  construction 
yet  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  mind  of  those  who  speak  them  main- 
tains the  logical  distinctions  while  forming  ideas  which  are  vocally 
undistinguished.  Wherever  there  is  this  inward  articulation,  there  is 
thought ;  where  it  is  wanting,  there  is  no  thought.  For  this  reason 
music  is  not  thinking ;  for  however  manifold  and  delicately  gradated 
are  the  relations  of  its  tones,  it  never  brings  them  into  the  position  of 
substantive  to  verb,  or  into  dependence  such  as  that  of  an  adjective 
on  its  noun  or  a  genitive  on  the  nominative  by  which  it  is  governed. 

7.  In  mentioning  hitherto  only  three  out  of  a  greater  number  of 
parts  of  speech,  the  three  without  which  the  simplest  logical  enun- 
ciation would  be  impossible,  I  do  not  wish  to  deny  the  value  of  the 
others.  But  the  road  which  we  have  to  traverse  is  too  long  to  allow 
us  to  make  further  circuits  into  the  attractive  field  of  philological 
enquiry,  circuits  which,  considering-  how  thought  has  just  been  said  to 
be  independent  of  its  mode  of  expression,  must  for  our  purpose 
remain  circuits.  The  articulation  and  usage  of  language  do  not  fully 
cover .  the  work  of  thought.  We  shall  find  later  that  they  frequently 
do  not  express  the  complete  structure  of  the  thought;  and  then  we 
have  for  the  purposes  of  logic  to  supplement  what  is  said  by  what  was 
meant.  On  the  other  hand  language  possesses  technical  elements 
which  do  not  depend,  or  only  depend  with  various  degrees  of  re- 
moteness, upon  characteristics  essential  to  logic  :  in  such  cases  we 
should  not  be  justified  in  distinguishing  a  different  logical  operation 
of  thought  for  every  grammatical  or  syntactical  difference  of  form 
presented  by  language.  There  are  not  only  interjections,  but  particles 
too,  which,  like  the  tone  of  the  voice,  hardly  indicate  more  in  ordinary 
usage  than  the  interest  which  the  speaker  feels  in  what  he  is  saying-, 
and  contribute  nothing  to  its  substantial  logical  meaning.  When 
language  introduces  the  distinction  of  gender  into  all  substantives  and 
adjectives,  it  follows  an  aesthetic  fancy  which  has  no  interest  for  logic ; 
when  on  the  other  hand  it  determines  the  gender  of  the  adjective  by 
that  of  its  substantive,  this  consistency  in  an  arbitrarily  adopted 
custom  points  back  to  a  logical  relationship  which  we  shall  become 


1 6  The  Theory  of  the  Concept. 

acquainted  with.  When  in  the  inflexions  of  the  verb  it  distinguishes 
the  person  speaking  from  the  person  spoken  to  and  the  third  person 
not  present,  it  emphasises  an  extremely  important  fact  in  a  way  which 
Is  indispensable  for  the  living  use  of  speech,,  and  yet  there  is  no  cor- 
responding distinction  in  logic  proper.  It  is  nothing  but  the  same 
reason  which  justifies  grammar  in  considering  pronouns  as  a  specific 
class  of  parts  of  speech :  logically,  the  personal  pronouns  must  be 
reckoned  entirely  among  substantives,  with  which  in  formal  position 
they  are  identical ;  the  possessive  and  demonstrative  we  have  no 
ground  for  separating  from  adjectives ;  the  relative  we  should  regard 
as  the  most  specifically  technical  element  in  language,  serving  only 
the  need  of  methodical  communication,  and  based  on  no  other 
logical  relation  than  its  counterpart  the  demonstrative,  Numerals 
are  treated  by  grammar  as  distinct  parts  of  speech;  in  the  actual 
usage  of  language  they  are  equivalent  to  adjectives,  and  that  logically 
they  belong  to  the  latter  we  cannot  doubt,  when  we  remember  that 
logically  the  form  of  adjectivity  belongs  to  all  characteristics  of  a 
subject-matter  which  are  not  self-dependent,  and  not  only  to  those 
which  attach  to  it  in  the  sense  of  properties.  Adverbs,  lastly,  stand 
in  precisely  the  same  relation  to  the  meaning  of  verbs  as  adjectives  to 
that  of  substantives,  so  that  logic  would  have  no  occasion  to  consider 
them  as  a  distinct  part  of  speech  or  a  peculiar  form  of  the  content  of 
thought. 

Thus  there  would  only  remain  prepositions  and  conjunctions  to  put 
forward  such  a  claim,  and  of  them  I  think  we  must  admit  that,  how- 
ever they  may  be  derived  linguistically,  they  form  an  indispensable 
-.element  in  the  world  of  our  ideas.  They  cannot  be  derived  from  the 
.concept  of  relation,  with  which  at  first  they  seem  to  be  connected : 
whenever  two  members  are  connected  by  a  relation,  there  is  involved 
the  thought  of  a  certain  position  which  those  members  occupy  within 
the  relation  itself,  and  this  position  need  not  be  the  same  for  both ; 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  generally  different,  the  one  embracing,  contain- 
ing, and  conditioning  the  other.  Now  it  will  be  found  upon  trial 
to  be  impossible  to  express  this  difference  of  value  between  the  re- 
lated points,  without  which  the  relation  has  no  meaning,  in  a  merely 
verbal  form :  somewhere  or  other  we  shall  need  a  preposition,  a 
conjunction,  or  at  least  one  of  the  various  case-forms  in  which  many 
languages  express  some  of  these  accessory  notions  still  more  shortly, 
In  what  linguistic  form  they  appear,  is  of  course  quite  indifferent  to 
logic ;  just  as  we  oppose  the  nominative,  as  that  which  conditions, 
sometimes  to  the  genitive,  as  that  which  is  conditioned,  sometimes  in 


CHAPTER  i.]  Concept  and  Judgment.  1 7 

a  different  sense  to  the  accusative,  so,  if  language  had  produced  or 
preserved  a  still  greater  wealth  of  cases,  all  prepositions  would  be 
superfluous,  as  all  conjunctions  would  be  if  there  were  a  similar 
variety  of  moods.  This  would  make  no  change  in  the  logical  needs 
of  thought ;  in  one  way  or  another,  the  meanings  of  substantives, 
adjectives,  and  verbs  would  have  to  be  supplemented  by  a  number  of 
Ideas,  indicating,  either,  like  prepositions,  the  position  of  two  sup- 
posedly simple  objects  in  a  simple  relation,  or,  like  conjunctions,  the 
comparative  position  and  value  of  two  relations  or  judgments. 

8.  If  we  glance  at  the  developed  structure  of  the  world  of  our 
thoughts  and  ask  what  the  conditions  are  upon  wh\ch  its  construction 
depends,  the  objectification  of  impressions  and  their  concomitant 
formation  in  the  sense  of  the  parts  of  speech  must  always  appear  as 
the  most  indispensable,  and  in  that  sense  the  first,  of  all  operations  of 
thought.  It  is  certain  that  without  it  the  framing  of  sentences,  simple 
or  complex,  through  which  we  express  the  work  and  results  of  our 
thinking,  would  have  been  quite  impossible.  But  we  must  not  be 
taken  to  mean  that  the  logical  spirit,  at  the  beginning  of  its  intel- 
lectual work,  before  it  ventured  a  step  further,  performed  this,  the 
first  of  its  necessary  operations,  on  the  entire  matter  of  its  ideas  once 
for  all.  The  infinitude  of  possible  impressions,  of  which  every  mo- 
ment may  bring  a  new  one,  would  be  enough  to  make  such  a  task 
impracticable  :  it  is  made  still  more  impracticable  by  the  fact  that  in 
working  up  the  matter  that  is  given  to  it  thought  is  constantly  pro- 
ducing new  matter,  and  has  to  bring  this  again  into  the  same  logical 
forms  of  which,  as  applied  to  a  simpler  matter,  it  is  the  result  Thus 
it  is  that  every  developed  language  possesses,  in  the  form,  of  simple 
substantives,  adjectives,  or  verbs,  numerous  ideas  which  could  not  have 
been  framed,  and  cannot  be  fully  understood,  without  manifold  intellec- 
tual operations  of  a  higher  kind,  without  employing  judgments  and  syllo-* 
gisms,  and  even  without  presupposing  systematic  scientific  investigation 

This  obvious  reflexion  has  given  rise  to  the  assertion,  that  in  logic 
the  theory  of  judgment  at  least  must  precede  the  treatment  of  con- 
cepts, with  which  it  is  only  an  old  tradition  to  begin  the  subject, 
I  consider  this  to  be  an  over-hasty  assertion,  due  partly  to  a  confusion 
of  the  end  of  pure  with  that  of  applied  logic,  partly  to  a  general  mis- 
conception of  the  difference  between  thought  and  the  mere  current  of 
ideas.  For  if  those  judgments,  out  of  which  the  concept  is  said  to 
result,  are  to  be  really  judgments,  they  themselves  can  consist  of 
nothing  but  combinations  of  ideas  which  are  no  longer  mere  im- 
pressions; every  such  idea  must  have  undergone  at  least  the  simple 

c 


1 8  The  Theory  of  the  Concept.  i  BOOK  i. 

formation. mentioned  above  ;  the  greater  part  of  them,  as  experiment 
would  show,  will  already  practically  possess  that  higher  logical  form. 
to  which  the  very  theory  in  question  gives  the  name  of  concept.  The 
element  of  truth  in  this  proposed  innovation  reduces  itself  to  the  very 
simple  thought,  that  in  order  to  frame  complex  and  manifold  con- 
cepts, more  especially  in  order  to  fix  the  limits  within  which  it  is 
worth  while  and  justifiable  to  treat  them  as  wholes  and  distinguish 
them  from  others,  a  great  deal  of  preparatory  intellectual  work  is 
necessary ;  but  that  this  preparatory  work  itself  may  be  possible,  it 
must  have  been  preceded  by  the  conformation  of  simpler  concepts 
out  of  which  its  own  subsidiary  judgments  are  framed.  Without 
doubt,  then,  pure  logic  must  place  the  form  of  the  concept  before 
that  of  the  judgment :  it  remains  for  applied  logic  to  tell  us  how,  in 
framing  determinate  concepts,  judgments  consisting  of  simpler  con- 
cepts may  be  turned  to  account.  A  proposal  to  reverse  this  order 
can  only  commend  itself  to  those  who  regard  thinking  in  general  as 
merely  the  interaction  of  impressions  excited  in  us  from  without,  and 
overlook  the  reacting  energy  which  makes  itself  felt  at  every  point  in 
the  current  of  ideas,  separating  the  merely  coincident,  combining  the 
coherent,  and  thus  already  giving  form  to  the  individual  elements  of 
future  thoughts. 

B.  Position  \  Distinction,  and  Comparison  of  the  Matter  of  Simple  Ideas. 

0.  If  we  recognise  in  these  first  formative  acts  the  specific  con- 
tribution which  the  operative  energy  of  thought 'makes  to  the  whole 
of  our  intellectual  world,  we  are  easily  led  to  the  view  that  the  logical 
spirit  has  certain  ready-made  modes  of  apprehension  with  which  it 
meets   the  impressions  as   they  come ;    and   this   again  raises   the 
question,  how  it  contrives  to  bring  the  matter  of  each  impression 
under  that  particular  form  which  is  appropriate  to  it.     But  such  a 
view  is  inadmissible,  and  such  a  question  therefore  has  no  point,  or 
at  any  rate  leads  to  an  answer  different  from  that  which  it  expects. 
Thought  does  not  stand  fronting  the  impressions  as  they  arrive  with 
a  bundle  of  logical  forms  in  its  hand,  uncertain  which  form  can  be 
fitted  to  which  impression,  and  therefore  needing  some  special  ex- 
<  pedient  to  discover  how  to  pair  them  properly.     It  is  the  relations 
\  themselves,  already  subsisting  between  impressions  when  we  become 
j  conscious  of  them,  by  which  the  action  of  thought,  which  is  never 
/  anything  but  reaction,  is  attracted ;  and  this  action  consists  merely  in 

1  ['  Positicn/  as  the  equivalent  of  Setsung,  is  here  used  in  the  active  sense  in 
which  it  occurs,  e.g.  in  'composition,'] 


CHAPTER  L]  Position  and  Distinction.  1 9 

interpreting  relations,  which  we  find  existing-  between  our  passive 
impressions,  into  aspects  of  the  matter  of  the  impressions.  It  is 
not  therefore  the  assignment  of  the  proper  form  to  each  matter, 
which  requires  any  special  device  of  thought :  in  another  point  of 
view,  however,  this  arrangement  of  a  manifold  matter  in  logical  forms 
does  involve  a  second  intellectual  operation ;  for  no  matter  can  have 
a  name  made  for  it  unless  it  has  been  thought  of  as  identical  with 
itself,  as  different  from  others,  and  as  comparable  with  others. 

10.  This  second  operation  of -thought,  like  the  first,  is  one  which 
inherited  language  has  already  carried  out  for  all  those -who  speak  it; 
like  the  first  therefore  it  is  easily  overlooked,  and  not  reckoned  as 
part  of  the  work  of  the  mind.     But  logical  science,  expressly  devoted 
to  the  self-evidentj  must  not  treat  a  part  of  its  subject  as  a  still  more 
self-evident  presupposition  which  may  be  excluded  from  the  proper 
objects  of  its  consideration.     Still,  the  first  at  any  rate  of  the  three 
heads  under  which  we  expressed  this  new  operation  of  thought  does 
not  need  a  detailed  explanation.   It  is  at  once  obvious  how  every  name, 
4 sweet'  or  'warm/  'air'  or  '  light/  ( tremble'  or  c shine/  gathers  up  the 
matter  which  it  indicates  in  some  sort  of  coherent  unity  with  a  mean- 
ing of  its  own;  it  is  not  only  (though  it  is  most  emphatically)  matter 
in  the  substantival  form  that  is  thus  lifted  into  unity  with  itself  by  the 
prefixed  article ;  the  same  indicative  force  resides,  under  a  different 
form,  in  the  infinitive  of  the  verb,  and  even  when  language  has  no 
distinctive  expression  for  it,  this  accessory  notion  of  singling  out  and 
giving  position  to  the  matter  indicated  accompanies  every  form  of 
word.     It  may  be   doubted  whether  the  process  which  we  would 
understand  by  giving  position  is  not  already  contained  in  the  objecti- 
fication  which  we  represented  as  converting  the  passive  impression 
into  an  idea ;  and  it  is  true  that  we  can  neither  have  an  idea  without 
thus  giving  position  to  its  content,  nor  give  it  position  in  any  in- 
telligible sense  without  objectifying  it.     Practically  therefore  it  is  a 
really  inseparable  operation  which  we  are  considering  from  different 
sides ;  before,  we  contrasted  the  presented  idea  to  which  we  are  re- 
lated as  presenting3  with  the  impression  by  which  we  are  simply 
affected ;  now,  when  the  multiplicity  of  the  matter  presented  begins 
to  excite  our  attention,  we  lay  stress  upon  the  unity  and  independence 
in  virtue  of  which  the  matter  thus  singled  out  by  attention  is  what  it 
is  and  differs  from  everything  else, 

11.  By  the  last  words  I  wished  to  convey  clearly  the  close  con- 
nexion in  which  the  affirmative  position  given  to  a  content  stands  with 
the  negative  exclusion  of  all  others.     The  connexion  is  so  close,  that 

c  2 


2O  The  Theory  of  the  Concept. 

the  terms  which  we  are  obliged  to  employ  to  express  the  simple  sense 
of  the  first  are  only  made  perfectly  clear  by  adding  the  accessory 
notion  of  the  second.  We  can  only  explain  what  we  mean  by  the 
unity  of  position  given  to  a  content  by  emphasising  its  difference 
from  others,  and  saying,  not  only,  it  is  what  it  is,  but  also,  it  is  not 
what  others  are.  The  affirmation  and  the  negation  are  one  in- 
separable thought,  and  accompany  in  inseparable  union  every  one 
of  our  ideas,  even  when  we  do  not  expressly  attend  to  the  others 
which  are  tacitly  negated.  But  the  accessory  notion  thus  amalga- 
mated with  our  ideas  only  determines  the  logical  setting  which  we 
give  to  their  content ;  it  does  not  produce  that  content  in  the  first 
instance.  It  cannot  be  said  that  we  have  the  idea  of  red  as  red  only 
when  we  distinguish  it  from  blue  or  sweet,  and  only  by  so  distinguish- 
ing it,  and  again  the  idea  of  blue  as  blue  only  by  a  similar  opposition 
to  red.  There  could  be  no  conceivable  occasion  for  attempting  such 
a  distinction,  nor  any  possibility  of  succeeding  in  the  attempt,  unless 
there  were  first  a  clear  consciousness  of  what  each  of  the  two  oppo- 
sites  is  in  itself.  Without  doubt  the  peculiar  impression  which  we 
experience  under  the  influence  of  red  light  will  be  entirely  the  same 
before  we  have  had  our  first  experience  of  blue  light  as  it  will  be 
afterwards;  the  possibility  of  comparison  and  distinction  which  the 
latter  experience  gives  may  indeed,  at  any  rate  in  a  matter  more 
complex  than  these  simple  colours,  draw  the  attention  to  parts  of  the 
impressions  which  had  been  previously  overlooked,  and  so  make  both 
of  them  more  complete ;  but  even  in  this  case,  which  is  quite  outside 
our  present  consideration,  the  new  element  is  not  discovered  by  the 
distinction,  but  by  the  immediate  sensation  of  which  the  comparison 
was  merely  the  occasion.  It  is  always  affirmative  position  therefore 
which  makes  negative  distinction  possible,  while  it  is  never  the  case 
that  the  act  of  distinction  gives  rise  to  the  matter  distinguished.  Only 
our  accessory  notions  about  the  matter  of  our  ideas,  only  its  logical 
setting,  gains  in  defmitencss  by  adding  to  the  affirmation  of  itself  the 
negation  of  others ;  and  even  this  gain  would  seem  to  me  small  if  it 
went  no  further,  and  were  not  supplemented  by  that  third  operation 
of  positive  comparison,  which,  in  the  above  account  of  this  second  act 
of  thought,  was 'mentioned  last. 

•  12.  I  will  introduce  the  consideration  of  this  third  operation,  which 
I  regard  as  the  most  essential  part  of  the  logical  work  to  be  here 
explained,  by  recalling  a  familiar  fact  which  is  commonly  used  to 
support  other  conclusions.  Words  never  denote  impressions  as  they 
can  be  experienced ;  we  can  only  experience  or  actually  perceive  a 


CHAPTER  LI  Comparison.  .  21 

particular  shade  of  red,  a  specific  kind  of  sweetness,  a  definite  degree 
of  warmth,  not  the  universal  red,  sweet,  and  warm,  of  "language. 
The  universalisation  which  in  these  and  all  similar  cases  the  matter 
of  sensation  has  undergone,  is  commonly  regarded  as  an  unavoidable 
inexactness  of  language,  perhaps  even  of  the  thought  which  language 
serves  to  express.  Unable  or  not  accustomed  to  make  a  definite 
name  for  every  single  impression,  language  (it  is  supposed)  blurs  the 
slight  differences  between  them,  and  retains  only  what  is  immediately 
experienced  in  sensation  as  common  to  them  all :  by  this  reduction 
of  its  means  of  expression  to  a  moderate  number  it  certainly  makes 
the  communication  of  ideas  possible,  but  diminishes  proportionately 
the  exactness  of  that  which  has  to  be  communicated.  I  do  not  think 
that  this  view  does  full  justice  to  the  significance  of  the  fact. 

13.  First  of  all,  to  regard  the  universalisation  in  question  as  a  sort 
of  falsification  of  the  impressions  is  to  pass  too  lightly  over  the  very 
remarkable  circumstance,  that  in  a  number  of  different  impressions 
there  is  something  common  which  -can  be  thought  apart  from  their 
differences.  This  is  by  no  means  such  a  matter  of  course  that  the 
opposite  is  out  of  the  question ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  quite  conceiv- 
able that  every  one  of  our  impressions  should  be  as  incomparably 
different  from  every  other  as  sweet  actually  is  from  warm,  yellow 
from  soft.  The  fact  that  the  thinkable  world  itself  is  so  constituted 
that  this  is  not  the  case,  is  one  which  it  is  worth  while  to  take  into 
consideration.  Nor  again  can  I  regard  the  want  of  exactness,  which 
the  application  of  the  universal  terms  of  language  undoubtedly  gives 
to  the  communication  of  ideas,  as  sheer  loss.  Moreover,  when  perfect 
exactitude  is  felt  to  be  important,  the  shortcomings  of  these  simplest 
products  of  rudimentary  thought  can  always  be  supplemented  by  its 
more  advanced  activity  :  science  has  long  taught  us  to  measure  every 
degree  of  heat,  and  in  case  of  necessity  would  find  out  how  to  measure 
every  gradation  of  redness  or  sweetness. 

But  the  way  in  which  language  and  natural  thought  operative  in 
language  solve  the  same  problem,  seems  to  me  to  be  logically  very 
significant.  For  when,  instead  of  attaching  a  particular  name  to  every 
single  colour  of  which  we  have  actual  sensation,  we  give  the  privilege 
of  names  of  their  own  to  blue,  red,  yellow,  and  a  few  others,  and  then 
intercalate  the  other  individual  sensations  between  them  as  bluish  red 
'  or  reddish  yellow,  this  is  not  merely  a  shift  for  approximating  to  an 
unattainable  exactitude;  .rather,  as  it  seems  to  me,  it  expresses  the 
conviction  that  only  these  few  colours  are  really  fixed  points  deserving 
names  of  their  own,  while  the  rest  must  be  characterised  by  approxL* 


22  The  Theory  of  the  Concept.  CBOOKI. 

mate  expressions  because  they  are  themselves  only  approximations  to 
these  fixed  points,  or  connecting  links  between  them.     If  we  really 
had  particular  and  mutually  independent  names  for  every  single  shade 
of  blue,  and  our  ideas  answered  to  this  form  of  expression,  we  should 
have  achieved  in  a  onesided  way  the  separation  of  each  from  every 
other,  but  we  should  have  overlooked  completely  the  positive  relations 
which  subsist  between  them  all.     If  on  the  contrary  we  speak  of 
bright  blue,  dark  blue,  black  blue,  we  arrange  this  manifold  in  a  series 
or  a  network  of  series,  and  in -each  series  a  third  member  results  from 
a  second  by  intensification  of  the  same  sensible  change  in  a  common 
element  as  that  which  gave  rise  to  the  second  out  of  the  first.     It 
must  be  already  perfectly  clear  that  a  presentative  activity  which  did 
not  involve  this  comparison  of  the  diverse,  but  was  confined  to  the 
bare  separation  of  each  from  each,  would  not  offer  to  the  later  opera- 
tions of  thought  adequate  grounds  for  contrasting  two  ideas,  as  in 
some  way  or  other  cohering,  with  two  others  as  not  cohering.     We 
therefore  apprehend  this  second  act  of  thought,  of  which  we  are  here 
speaking,  not  merely  as  that  of  giving  simple  position  to  a  or  b,  not 
merely  as  that  of  simply  distinguishing  every  a.'  from  every  $,  but  also 
as  that  of  determining-  the  extent  and  peculiarity  of  the  distinction, 
which  is  not  everywhere  the  same  in  degree  and  kind,  but  is  different 
between  b  and  c  and  between  a  and  b.-    I  do  not  mean  to  say  that 
every  single  idea,  at  must  be  accompanied  by  the  developed  idea  of 
all  its  relations  to  the  infinite  number  of  all  other  ideas ;  the  general 
accessory  notion,  that  every  idea  is  enclosed  on  all  sides  in  such  a 
network  of  relations,  does  indeed  in  our  logical  consciousness  envelop 
every  idea;  but  these  relations  are  only  followed  out  in  each  particular 
case  so  far  as  a  special  requirement  suggests. 

14.  This  comparison  of  the  diverse  clearly  presupposes  a  common 
element  to  which  in  the  several  members  of  the  series  specific  differ- 
ences attach.  Such  a  common  element  is  usually  considered  by  logic 
only  in  the  form  of  a  universal  concept,  and  in  this  shape  it  is  a 
product  of  more  or  less  numerous  acts  of  thought.  It  is  therefore 
important  to  point  out  that  this  first  universal^  which  we  find  here 
involved  in  the  comparison  of  simple  ideas,  is  of  an  essentially  differ- 
ent kind;  that  it  is  the  expression  of  an  inward  experience  which 
thought  has  merely  to  recognise,  and  that  just  for  this  reason  it  is, 
as  will  be  seen  later,  an  indispensable  presupposition  of  that  other 
kind  of  universal  which  we  shall  meet  with,  in  the  formation  of  con- 
cepts. We  impart  the  universal  concept  of  an  animal  or  a  geometrical 
figure  to  another  person  by  directing  him  to  execute  a  precisely  de- 


CHAPTER  LI  The  ' Fir st  Universal!  23 

finable  series  of  intellectual  operations)  connecting,  separating,  or 
relating  a  number  of  simple  ideas  assumed  to  be  known ;  when  this ; 
logical  work  is  completed,  we  suppose  him  to  have  before  his  mind 
the  same  object-matter  which  we  wished  to  impart  to  him.  But  we 
cannot  explain  by  the  same  means  wherein  the  universal  blue  or  the 
universal  colour  consists,  which  accompany  our  ideas •  of  bright  and 
dark  blue  or  of  red  and  yellow.  We  can  indeed  direct  another  person 
to  think  of  all  single  colours  or  all  shades  of  blue,  and  by  eliminating 
their  differences  bring  out  what  is  common  to  his  ideas  in  the  two 
cases ;  but  it  is  only  in  appearance  a  logical  work  which  we  are  here 
prescribing ;  all  that  we  really  call  upon  him  to  do  is  to  see  for  him- 
self how  he  executes  the  task.  How  he  is  to  set  to  work  to  discover 
whether  there  really  is  any  common  element  in  red  and  yellow,  and 
how  he  is  to  contrive  to  separate  it  from  the  differences,  this  we 
cannot  tell  him;  we  must  simply  trust  to  his  having  an . immediate 
sensation,  feelings  or  experience  of  the  connexion  which  exists  be- 
tween red  and  yellow,  of  the  fact  that  they  contain  a  common  element; 
his  logical  work  can  consist  only  in  the  recognition  and  expression  of 
this  inward  experience.  This  first  universal,  therefore,  is  no  product 
of  thought,  but  something  which  thought  finds  already  in  existence. 

15.  I  will  insert  an  observation  here  which  with  slight  modification 
may  be  extended  to  all  universals,  but  is  most  easily  illustrated  in  this 
simplest  instance,  the  first  universal.  That  in  which  red  and  yellow 
agree  and  which  makes  them  both  colours  cannot  be  separated  from 
that  which  makes  red  red  and  yellow  yellow,. not  separated,  that  is  to 
say,  so  as  to  form  the  content  of,  a  third  idea  similar  in  kind  and 
order  to  the  two  compared.  It  is •  always,  as. we  know,  only  a  single 
definite  shade  of  colour,  only  a  tone  of  definite  height,  strength,  and 
quality,  which  is  the  object  of  sensation ;  and  it  is  only  these  definite 
impressions  which  are  "so  repeated  in  memory  as  to  present  sub- 
stantial and  perceptible  images  to  consciousness.  Universal  ideas 
never  have  this  perceptibility.  If  we  try  to  apprehend  the  universal 
element  of  colour  or  tone,  we  shall  always  find  that  either  we  have 
before  our  perception  a  definite  colour  and  a  definite  tone,  only  with 
the  accessory  notion  that  every  other  tone  and  colour  has  an  equal 
right  to  serve  as  a  perceptible  instance  of  the  ever  imperceptible 
universal ;  or  else  our  memory  will  produce  a  number  of  colours  and 
tones  in  succession,  with  the  same  accessory  notion  that  it  is  not 
these  individuals  that  are  really  meant,  but  the  common  element  in 
them  which  cannot  as  such  be  apprehended  in  perception.  If  there- 
fore we  understand  by  idea1  (as  ordinary  usage  certainly  inclines  us)  , 

J  [Vorstellung.] 


24  The  Theory  of  the  Concept.      . 

the  consciousness  of  something  standing  at  rest  before  the  mind, 
or  a  perception  of  something  capable  of  being  presented  to  it, 
the  universal  cannot  claim  to  be  called  an  idea.  Words  like 
c  colour '  and  c  tone '  are  in  truth  only  short  expressions  of  logical 
problems,  whose  solution  cannot  be  compressed  into  the  form  of  an 
idea.  They  are  injunctions  to  our  consciousness  to  present  to  itself 
and  compare  the  ideas  of  individual  tones  and  colours,  but  in  the 
act  of  so  comparing  them  to  grasp  the  common  element  which  our 
sensation  testifies  them  to  contain,  but  which  cannot  by  any  effort  of 
thought  be  really  detached  from  their  differences  and  made  the  material 
of  a  new  and  equally  perceptible  idea, 

16.  Let  us  now  direct  our  attention  to  the  differences,  which,  within 
the  first  universal,  separate  the  various  instances  of  it.  It  is  clear  that 
what  distinguishes  one  sensation  of  warmth  from  another,  a  gentler 
from  a  louder  sound,  bright  from  dark  blue,  is  a  more  or  a  less  of  a 
common  sensible  element,  which  in  itself,  undetermined  by  any  degree, 
is  no  object  of  perception.  We  shall  -find  ourselves  brought  back  to 
the  same  ground  of  distinction  in  all  other  ideas;  it  is  only  in  giving 
an  account  of  the  universal,  to  which  this  quantitative  comparison 
applies,  that  we  meet  with  a  difficulty,  which  after  the  above  remarks 
is  intelligible.  The  louder  tone  is  no  doubt  distinguished  from  the 
gentler  by  a  certain  intensification,  but  so  also  is  the  higher  from  the 
lower;  yet  it  is  only  in  the  former  case  that  we  fed  able  to  express 
directly,  by  the  term  '  strength/  the  common  element  which  under- 
goes this  change;  in  the  latter  we  express  it  by  the  metaphor  of 
height.  Red  and  yellow  seem  to  be  still  more  essentially  different 
and  undcrivablc  one  from  the  other  by  increase  or  decrease  of  a 
common  element ;  only  the  intermediate  colours,  reddish  yellow  or 
yellowish  red,  are  intelligible  to  us  as  mixtures  containing  more  or 
less  of  one  or  the  other.  Nevertheless  no  on'e  denies  that  one  of  the 
fundamental  colours  is  more  nearly  related  to  a  second  than  to  a 
third,  red  to  yellow  than  to  green ;  and  these  grades  of  resemblance 
cannot  be  conceived  without  a  more  or  a  less  of  some  common  ele- 
ment, which  we  are  conscious  of  in  passing  from  one  member  of  the 
series  to  the  next  and  from  this  to  the  third.  To  determine  in  each 
particular  case  what  this  common  element  consists  in,  to  decide 
whether  a  number  of  ideas  are  separated  merely  by  differences  in 
degree  of  one  simple  universal,  or  by  differences  in  value  of  several 
mutually  determined  ones,  and  whether  accordingly  the  ideas  are  to 
be  grouped  in  a  linear  series  or  plane-wise  or  in  still  higher  forms, 
these  are  all  attractive  objects  of  enquiry,  but  they  are  not  objects  of 


CHAPTER  i.]  Quantitative  Determinations.  2  5 

logic.  For  logic  it  is  enough  to  know  that  some  generally  applicable 
and  primarily  quantitative  determination  is  the  indispensable  means 
for  distinguishing  between  the  particular  instances  of  a  universal. 
And  even  this  determination  is  something  which  it  is  not  the  work 
of  logic  to  produce,  but  only  to  find,  recognise,  and  develop.  A 
judgment,  c  a  is  stronger  than  b,'  is  indeed,  as  a  judgment,  a  logical 
piece  of  work ;  but  that  which  it  expresses,  the  general  fact  that 
differences  of  degree  do  exist  in  the  same  matter,  as  well  as  the 
particular  fact  that  the  degree  of  a  exceeds  that  of  b,  can  only  be 
experienced,  felt,  or  recognised  as  part  of  our  inward  consciousness. 
By  whatever  artificial  contrivances  we  may  seek  to  increase  scientifi-' 
cally  the  exactness  of  a  measurement,  everything  must  depend  ulti- 
mately on  the  capacity  to  recognise  two  sensuous  perceptions  as  like  or 
as  unlike,  and  not  to  be  deceived  as  to  which  has  the  more  and  which 
the  less. 

17.  If  inward  experience  were  confined  to  bringing  out  resem- 
blances and  differences  in  the  various  object-matters,  thought  would 
merely  be  called  upon  to  arrange  ideas  in  an  unalterable  system,  like 
the  musical  scale,  in  which  all  tones  have  once  for  all  their  fixed  and 
immoveable  places.  But  logic  has  to  do  with  thought,  not  as  it 
would  be  under  hypothetical  conditions,  but  as  it  is.  Now  owing  to 
the  mechanism  which  controls  the  interaction  of  its  inward  states,  all 
actual  thought  has  necessarily  more  opportunities  of  stimulation  than 
the  above  hypothesis  would  imply ;  the  manifold  matter  of  ideas  is 
brought  before  us,  not  only  in  the  systematic  order  of  its  qualitative 
relationships,  but  in  the  rich  variety  of  local  and  temporal  combina- 
tions j  and  this  fact,  like  the  other,  belongs  to  the  material  which 
serves  thought  in  its  further  operations  and  must  be  given  it  to  start 
with.  The  combinations  of  heterogeneous  ideas  produced  in  this 
way  form  the  problems,  in  connexion  with  which  the  efforts  of 
thought  to  reduce  coexistence  to  coherence  will  subsequently  have  to 
be  made.  The  homogeneous  or  similar  ideas  on  the  other  hand  give 
occasion  to  separate,  to  connect,  and  to  count  their  repetitions ;  and 
to  these  ideas  of  unity  and  multiplicity  those  of  greatness  and  smallness 
are  added  where  the  matter  presented  is  continuously  extended  in 
space  or  in  time.  These  three  pairs  of  quantitative  ideas  (for  we 
have  already  got  those  of  more  and  less)  comprise  all  the  standards 
by  which  the  individual  instances  of  any  universal  are  distinguished. 

18.  There  are  two  things  which  1  intentionally  exclude  from  my 
consideration.  Firstly,  all  enquiry  into  the  psychological  character 
of  the  growth  and  development  of  these  quantitative  ideas  in  our 


26  The  Theory  of  the  Concept.  CBOOKI. 

consciousness,  into  the  order  in  which  one  of  them  may  condition  the 
origin  of  another,  and  into  the  different  importance  of  perceptions  of 
time  and  space  in  .their  formation.  However  attractive  these  ques- 
tions may  be,  it  would  lengthen  our  way  unnecessarily  to  answer 
them  ;  logic  is  not  concerned  with  the  manner  in  which  the  elements 
utilised  by  thought  come  into  existence,  but  with  their  value,  when 
they  have  somehow  or  other  come  into  existence,  for  the  carrying 
out  of  intellectual  operations.  Now  this  point,  which  I  conceive  to 
have  been  unduly  neglected,  I  wish  to  emphasize  here,  and  shall  sub- 
sequently keep  in  view,  viz,,  that  all  ideas  which  are  to  be  connected 
by  thought  must  necessarily  be  accessible  to  one  of  the  three  quantita- 
tive determinations  which  have  just  been  mentioned.  The  other 
thing  which  I  exclude  is  the  investigation  of  the  consequences  which 
may  be  drawn  from  these  quantitative  determinations  as  such :  they 
have  long  ago  developed  into  the  vast  structure  of  mathematics,  the 
complexity  of  which  forbids  any  attempt  to  re-insert  it  in  universal 
logic.  It  is  necessary,  however,  to  point  out  expressly  that  all 
calculation  is  a  kind  of  thought,  thai  the  fundamental  concepts  and 
principles  of  mathematics  have  their  systematic  place  in  logic,  and 
that  we  .must  retain  the  right  at  a  later  period,  when  occasion  requires, 
to  return  without  scruple  upon  the  results  which  mathematics  have 
been  achieving,  as  an  independently  progressive  branch  of  universal 
logic. 

10.  If  we  take  a  general  survey  of  this-  second  act  of  thought,  in 
which  I  now  include  that  of  giving  affirmative  position  to  the  object- 
matter,  that  of  distinguishing  it  negatively  from  all  others,  and  that  of 
estimating  by  quantitative  comparison  its  differences  and  resem- 
blances, we  may  observe  that  the  significance  of  this  new  logical 
operation  is  somewhat  different  from  that  of  the  first,  by  which 
impressions  were  shaped  into  ideas.  In  the  former  case;  there  was  a 
temptation,  (which,  it  is  true,  we  resisted)  to  regard  the  forms  of 
substantivity,  ruljcotivily,  and  verbal! ty  as  modes  of  apprehension 
which  thought  is  ready  to  put  in  practice  upon  its  object-matter  before 
receiving  any  solicitation  from  it;  but  though  we  set  aside  this  claim 
at  once,  it  remains  true  that  in  those  forms  thought  does  not  merely 
respond  to  and  reproduce  the  actual  current  of  ideas,  but  gives  them 
the  shape  without  which  the  logical  spirit  could  not  accept  them. 
The  independence  which  the  substantival  form  gives  to  its  matter,  most 
obviously  by  means  of  the  afticle,  did  not  itself  lie  in  the  fact  that  _ 
this  matter  was  a  permanent  link  between  changing  groups  of  ideas ; 
nor  was  the  accessory  notion  of  dependence  expressed  by  the 


CHAPTER  I.]  Receptivity  of  TJlOUght.  2J 

adjectival  form  present,  as  such,  in  the  fact  which  stimulated  the 
mind  to  characterise  it  by  that  form ;  so  that  we  may  continue  to 
assert,  in  a  certain  sense,  that  in  this  first  act  thought  dictates  its  own 
laws  to  its  object-matter. 

If,  using  an  expression  which  we  shall  otherwise  avoid,  we  repre- 
sent this  procedure  as  a  proof  of  spontaneity,  the  second  act  of 
thought  has  the  character  of  receptivity ;  it  is  a  recognition  of  facts, 
and  adds  no  other  form  to  them  except  this  recognition  of  their 
existence.  Thought  can  make  no  difference  where  it  finds  none 
already  in  the  matter  of  the  impressions ;  the  first  universal,  as 
we  saw,  can  only  be  experienced  in  immediate  sensation ;  as  so  ex- 
perienced it  can  be  named,  but  this  is  the  only  contribution 
which  logic  can  make  to  the  further  fixing  of  its  character ;  all 
quantitative  determinations,  to  whatever  extent  thought  may  develop 
them  by  subsequent  comparison,  always  come  back  to  an  immediate 
consciousness  of  certain  characteristics  given  in  the  object-matter. 
I  should  wish  this  fact  to  be  considered  from  two  points  of  view.  In 
the  first  place,  logic  is  guilty  of  a  certain  carelessness  in  assuming  at 
almost  every  moment  in  its  later  stages  the  comparability  of  ideas  and 
the  possibility  of  their  subordination  to  a  universal,  without  observing 
that  that  possibility,  and  the  success  of  its  own  procedure  in  general, 
depends  upon  this  original  constitution  and  organisation  of  the  whole 
world  of  ideas,  a  constitution  which,  though  not  necessary  in  thought, 
is  all  the  more  necessary  to  make  thinking  possible.  For  I  must 
repeat  that  there  is  no  inherent  contradiction  in  supposing  that  every 
idea  was  incomparably  different  from  every  other;  that  in  the  absence 
of  all  qualitative  comparability  there  was  no  standard  of  more  or  less ; 
that  the  same  idea  never  presented  itself  twice  to  perception;  and  that, 
as  there  was  no  repetition  of  the  homogeneous,  the  ideas  of  larger 
and  smaller  also  vanished.  The  fact  -that  this  is  not  the  case,  but 
that  the  world  of  ideas  is  organised  as  we  have  found  it  to  be, 
must  be  emphasized  as  of  the  highest  importance ;  but  logic 
ought  not  in  case  of  need  to  appeal  to  it  incidentally  as  a  self- 
evident  truth  derived  no  one  knows  whence.  And  this  brings  me 
to  the  other  observation  which  I  had  to  make.  If  thought  is  a 
reaction  upon  a  stimulus  found  in  the  current  of  ideas,  a  systematic 
survey  of  its  functions  will  show  clearly  at  certain  points  the  influence 
exercised  upon  them  by  the  thinkable  world ;  as  it  is  here  the  second 
member  in  the  first  triple  series  of  operations,  so  at  a  later  stage  also 
it  will  be  the  second  member  of  the  following  more  highly  developed 
group  in  which  we  shall  see  the  peculiar  dependence  of  thought  upon 


28  The  Theory  of  the  Concept* 

the  material  to  which  it  is  directed.  I  do  not  however  claim  to  do 
more  by  this  preliminary  indication  than  to  throw  a  preliminary  light 
over  the  system  which  I  have  followed  in  my  exposition ;  the  system 
itself  can  only  find  its  justification  in,  the  advantages  which  in  its 
successive  stages  it  will  be  found  to  secure. 


C.     The  Formation  of  the  Concept. 

20.  To  separate  the  merely  coincident  amongst  the  various  ideas 
which  are  given  to  us,  and  to  combine  the  coherent  afresh  by  the 
accessory  notion  of  a  ground  for  their  coherence,  is  the  further  task 
of  thought.  It  will  be  useful,  with  a  view  to  making  its  meaning 
clear,  to  review  the  different  senses  in  winch  any  combination  of 
manifold  elements  occurs  in  our  mental  world.  In  the  first  place, 
no  later  intellectual  activity  is  possible,  unless  the  various  ideas  upon 
which  it  is  to  be  exercised  meet  together  in  one  and  the  same  con- 
sciousness. The  fulfilment  of  this  condition  is  secured  by  the  unity 
of  the  soul  and  the  mechanism  of  memory,  which,  by  bringing 
together  impressions  separated  in  time,  makes  their  interaction 
possible.  Tins  union  of  the  manifold  may  be  called  the  synthesis 
of  apprehension ;  it  is  not  a  logical  act;  it  merely  lumps  the  manifold 
together  into  a  simultaneous  possession  of  consciousness,  without  com- 
bining any  two  of  its  elements  in  a  different  order  from  any  other  two, 
Such  an  order  comes  in  with  the  second  form  of  connexion,  the 
synthesis  of  perception,  that  is,  with  figures  in  space  and  succes- 
sion in  time,  in  which  the  individual  impressions  take  up  definite 
and  non-equivalent  positions.  This  connexion  also  is  supplied 
by  the  inward  mechanism  of  consciousness  without  any  action  of 
thought,  and  however  firmly  defined  and  finely  articulated  it  may  be,  it 
exhibits  nothing  but  the  fact  of  an  external  order,  and  reveals  no  ground 
of  coherence  justifying  coexistence  in  that  order.  From  the  second 
stage  I  p;iss  at  once  to  the  fourth,  to  a  synthesis  in  which  the  last- 
mentioned  requirement  would  be  completely  satisfied  in  regard  to  any 
given  object- matter,  In  such  a  synthesis  we  should  have  before  our 
mind,  not  the  mere  fact  of  manifold  elements  in  order,  but  also  the 
value  which  each  element  possessed  in  determining  the  coalescence 
of  the  whole.  If  what  we  thus  apprehended  were  an  object  in  real 
existence,  we  should  see  which  were  the  prior,  determining,  and  effective 
elements  in  it,  in  what  order  of  dependence  and  development  the 
others  followed  from  them,  or  what  end  was  to  be  regarded  as  their 
authoritative  centre,  involving  in  itself  the  simultaneous  union  or 


CHAPTER  I.]  Imperfect    C-OHCeptS,  2<) 

successive  growth  of  them  all :  if,  like  the  figures  of  geometry,  it  was 
something  which  had  no  reality  out  of  our  consciousness  and  no 
growth  or  development  in  time,  we  should  here  too  attempt  at  any  rate 
(though,  as  we  shall  see  later,  with  limited  success)  to  arrange  the 
elements  of  the  whole  in  a  hierarchy  in  which  those  that  conditioned 
others  should  take  precedence  of  those  that  were  conditioned,  accord- 
ing to  their  stages  of  dependence.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  a  synthesis  of 
this  sort  would  be  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  knowledge  of  the 
thing;  as  the  goal  of  all  intellectual  effort,  it  lies  as  far  above  the 
province  of  logic  as  the  first  and  second  modes  of  connexion  lay 
beneath  it ;  it  is  in  the  space  between  that  we  must  place  the  third 
and  logical  form  of  synthesis,  the  character  of  which  has  now  to  be 
examined. 

21.  When  a  person  who  has  no  special  knowledge  speaks  of  'credit' 
or  of  ' -banking,1  we  trace  in  these  expressions  his  conviction  that  a 
number  of  businesses  and  institutions  form  a  connected  whole ;  but  he 
would  not  be  able  to  say  where  the  nerve  of  the  connexion  lies,  or 
what  limits  separate  the  whole  from  that  which  does  not  belong  to  it. 
In  this  accessory  notion,  that  the  various  elements  are  not  merely 
there  in  -a  sort  of  heap,  but  form  a  whole  of  parts  with  self-imposed 
limits  and  a  unity  included  by  those  limits,  the  general  impulse"  of 
thought  leaves  its  mark  upon  the  given  object  in  a  formal  way, 
without  as  yet  attaining  material  fulfilment.  If  we  pass  our  mental 
world  in  review,  we  are  in  this  position  as  regards  a  very  large  part 
of  its  contents ;  indeed  we  shall  be  surprised  to  find  that  words  of 
great  significance  betray  this  imperfect  apprehension  of  their  objects ; 
for  the  more  complex,  important,  and  various  any  matter  is,  the  more 
easily  will  persuasive  impressions  derived  from  repeated  observations 
awaken  the  feeling  of  its  individuality,  completeness,  and  self- 
inclusiveness,  without  necessarily  giving  any  real  insight  into  its 
structure.  Such  words  as  f  nature/  e  life/  '  art/  *  knowledge/  '  animal/ 
and  many  others  have  no  more  significance  than  this  in  ordinary 
usage;  they  merely  express  the  opinion  that  a  certain  quantity, 
usually  not  exactly  definable,  of  individual  objects,  attributes,  or 
events,  which  attach  to  one  another,  form  somehow  an  inwardly 
connected  whole,  which  can  neither  have  any  part  taken  away  without 
being  destroyed,  nor  admit  any  casual  additions  within  the  bounds  of 
its  unity.  But  how  little  the  nature  of  this  connexion  is  really  known, 
appears  from  the  failure  of  the  attempt  to  describe  the  limits  which 
include  what  belongs  to  the  unity  and  exclude  what  does  not.  So  long 
as  the  logical  work  of  holding  the  manifold  together  has  not  gone 


30  The  Theory  of  the  Concept.  LBOOKJ. 

further  than  this,  I  should  hesitate  to  speak  of tf  concepts/  though  I  do 
not  attach  any  value  to  the  invention  of  a  special  technical  term  for 
such  imperfect  apprehension.  Suppose  we  call  it  an  imperfect  or 
growing  concept ;  then  we  shall  not  feel  that  we  have  got  a  perfect  or 
fully  developed  concept,  until  the  vague  suggestion  of  some  sort  of 
whole  has  grown  into  the  pervading  thought  that  there  is  a  definite 
ground  for  the  co-existence  of  these  particular  attributes,  in  this 
particular  combination  and  to  the  exclusion  of  certain  others,  and 
that  this  ground  is  an  adequate  one. 

22.  The  question  now  arises,  how  we  get  at  this  ground  and  con- 
dition. If  we  merely  continued  to  observe  a  composite  form  a  be  dm 
its  isolation,  we  should  never  discover,  however  long  we  looked,  which 
of  its  parts  only  coexist,  which  really  cohere,  and  in  what  degree  the 
existence  of  one  depends  upon  that  of  another.  But  if  we  compare 
ale d with  other  forms  like  it,  that  is,  with  such  as  we  are  led  from 
it  to  observe,  not  by  any  special  logical  effort,  but  by  the  natural 
current  of  our  ideas,  and  if  we  find  that  in  abed,  abcf>  a  beg,  etc., 
a  similar  group  a  be  occurs  with  various  dissimilar  additions,  we 
regard  the  latter  as  loose  and  separable  appendages  of  the  permanent 
stemrt^er.  Nor  does  the  common  group  abc  contrast  with  the  rest 
merely  as  the  centre  to  which  as  a  matter  of  fact  they  attach  ;  on  the 
general  assumption  that  we  have  before  us  a  whole  of  interdependent 
parts,  this  solid  kernel  becomes  the  expression  of  the  constant  rule 
which  allows  the  accretion  of  the  several  accessory  elements,  and 
determines  the  manner  in  which  it  takes  place.  If  we  wish  for 
practical  purposes  to  ascertain  in  any  creature,  object,  or  arrange- 
ment, what  is  the  line  which  divides  what  is  inwardly  coherent  from 
casual  accessions,  \ve  put  the  whole  in  motion,  in  the  belief  that  the 
influence  of  change  will  show  which  parts  hold  firmly  together  while 
foreign  admixtures  fall  away,  and  in  what  general  and  constant  modes 
those  parts  combine  while  changing  their  relative  positions  in  par- 
ticular cases :  in  this  sum  of  constant  elements  we  find  the  inner  and 
essential  cohesion  of  the  whole,  and  we  expect  it  to  determine  the 
possibility  and  the  manner  of  variable  accretions.  The  first  of  these 
methods,  that  of-  bringing  out  the  common  element  in  different 
instances  when  at  rest,  is  the  one  which  has  been  usually  followed  by 
logic,  and  has  led  to  the  formation  of  the  logical  universal ;  I  should 
give  the  preference  to  the  other,  that  of  determining  the  element 
which  maintains  itself  in  the  same  instance  under  changed  con- 
ditions; for  it  is  only  the  assumption  that  the  group  abc,  the 
common  element  in  several  groups  of  ideas,  will  also  be  found  thus  to 


CHAPTER  LI  Abstraction  is  not  Omission,  31 

maintain  itself,  which  strictly  justifies  us  ai  regarding  these  coexisting 
elements  as  coherent,  and  as  the  ground  for  the  admissibilitj  or 
Inadmissibility  of  fresh  elements. 

23.  Abstraction  is  the  name  given  to  the  method  by  which  the 
universal  is  found,  that  method  being,  we  are  told,  to  leave  out 
what  is  different  in  the  particular  instances  compared  and  to  add 
together  that  which  they  possess  in  common.  If  we  look  at  the 
actual  procedure  of  thought,  we  do  not  find  this  account  confirmed. 
Gold,  silver,  copper,  and  lead  differ  in  colour,  brilliancy,  weight,  and 
density ;  but  their  universal,  which  we  call  metal,  is  not  found  upon 
comparison  by  simply  leaving  out  these  differences  without  compen- 
sation. Clearly  it  is  no  sufficient  definition  of  metal  to  say  negatively, 
it  is  neither  red  nor  yellow  nor  white  nor  grey ;  the  affirmation,  that 
it  has  at  any  rate  some  colour,  is  equally  indispensable ;  it  has  not 
indeed  this  or  that  specific  weight,  this  or  that  degree  of  brilliancy, 
but  the  idea  of  it  would  either  cease  to  have  any  meaning-  at  all, 
or  would  certainly  not  be  the  idea  of  metal,  if  it  contained  no  thought 
whatever  of  weight,  brilliancy,  and  hardness.  Assuredly  we  do  not 
get  the  universal  image  of  animal  by  comparison,  if  we  leave  out  of 
our  minds  entirely  the  facts  of  reproduction,  self-movement,  and 
respiration,  on  the  ground  that  some  animals  produce  their  young 
aKve,  others  lay  eggs,  others  multiply  by  division,  that  some  again 
breathe  through  lungs,  others  through  gills,  others  through  the  skin, 
and  that  lastly  many  move  on  legs,  others  fly,  while  some  are  in- 
capable of  any  locomotion.  On  the  contrary,  the  most  essential 
thing  of  all,  that  which  makes  every  animal  an  animal,  is  that  it  has 
some  mode  or  other  of  reproduction,  of  motion,  and  of  respiration. 
In  all  these  cases,  then,  the  universal  is  produced,  not  by  simply 
leaving  out  the  different  marks  pl  and  />2,  ql  and  $\  which  occur  in  the 
individuals  compared,  but  by  substituting  for  those  left  out  the 
universal  marks  P  and  (2,  of  which  pl  p*  and  ql  g*  are  particular  kinds. 
The  simple  process  of  leaving  out  only  takes  place  when  one  of 
two  individuals  compared  actually  possesses  no  species  of  a  mark  P, 
of  which  some  species  is  a  necessary  mark  of  the  other.  Thus 
we  suppose,  whether  rightly  or  wrongly  does  not  matter,  that  we 
cannot  find  in  plants  any  trace  of  sensation  and  self-movement,  both 
of  which  are  essential  to  all  animals;  we  do  therefore  form  the 
universal  idea  of  organic  being  from  a  comparison  of  plant  and 
animal  by  leaving  out  these  marks  without  compensation.  If  we 
went  thoroughly  into  the  facts,  we  should  perhaps  find  occasion,  not 
indeed  in  this  instance  but  in  many  similar  ones,,  to  continue  to 


32  The  Theory  of  the  Concept, 

ascribe  two  marks  jointly  to  Sbth  the  objects  compared,  but  to  assume 
them  to  be  at  zero  in  the  plant,  while  in  the  animal  they  always 
occur  in  an  appreciable  quantity.  To  express  the  matter  somewhat 
differently,  it  may  be  asserted  from  the  point  of  view  of  logic  that 
compensation  by  the  corresponding  universal  for  omission  of  in- 
dividual marks  is  the  regular  rule  of  abstraction,  while  the  uncom- 
pensated  omission  applies  to  exceptional  cases,  where  we  can  find 
no  logically  common  mark,  of  which  the  presence  and  absence  of 
some  individual  mark  might  be  held  to  constitute  different  species. 
So  formulated,  our  rule  of  abstraction  covers  these  cases  of 
mere  omission ;  on  the  other  hand,  a  rule  which  made  omission  its 
sole  starting-point  could  find  no  way  to  bring  in  compensation 
afterwards;  and  the  importance  of  compensation  in  forming  the 
universal  will  be  confirmed  at  every  step  in  the  later  stages  of 
logic. 

24.  After  the  considerations  urged  in  the  preceding  section,  the 
necessity  of  which  to  what  was  to  follow  will  now  be  clear,  the  appa- 
rent circle  involved  in  the  injunction  to  form  univcrsals  by  putting 
together  univcrsals,  will  not  give  serious  offence.  We  have  seen  that 
the  universal  marks  P  and  Q  which  we  require  here,  the  e  first  uni- 
versal '  of  the  section  referred  to,  come  to  us  without  logical  effort  as 
simple  facts  of  observation  in  our  mental  life ;  and  just  for  this  reason 
they  can  be  applied  in  building  up  this  second  universal,  which  we 
do  produce  by  logical  effort.  That  the  yellow  of  gold,  the  red  of 
copper,  and  the  white  of  silver  are  only  variations  of  a  common 
element  which  we  proceed  to  call  colour,  this  is  a  matter  of  immediate 
sensation  ;  but  to  a  person  who  could  not  be  made  sensible  of  it,  it 
could  never  be  explained  by  logic  either  that  these  particular  impres- 
sions are  species  of  this  universal,  or  what  is  meant  by  a  universal  as 
such  and  the  relation,  of  its  particular  to  it.  It  is  just  this  point  to 
which  1  would  again  draw  attention  here,  that  the  immediate  percep- 
tion of  a  first  universal  and  the  application  of  some  kind  of  quantita- 
tive ideas  is  the  condition  of  the  formation  of  the  second  universal  in 
all  cases,  not  only  in  those  like  metal  where  there  is  no  difficulty  in 
regarding  the  marks  of  colour,  brilliancy,  and  hardness  as  stable  pro- 
perties of  that  which  they  describe,  but  also  where,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  animal  powers  of  reproduction  and  motion,  they  are  merely  short 
adjectival  descriptions  of  conditions  which  we  cannot  think  completely 
but  by  means  of  manifold  relations  between  various  related  points* 
It  is  easy  to  convince  oneself  by  an  analysis  (which  I  only  leave  the 
observant  reader  to  make  for  himself  because  it  threatens  to  be  a  long 


CHAPTER  i.]  Extent  and  Content.  33 

one)  that  all  differences  between  animals,  even  in  these  respects,  issue 
ultimately  in  quantitative  determinations,  whether  of  the  force  with 
which  some  identical  or  similar  process  takes  place  in  them,  or  of  the 
number  of  related  points  between  which  it  takes  place,  or  of  the 
variations  in  form  to  which  it  is  liable  owing  to  variations  in  the 
number  of  these  related  points,  the  intimacy  of  their  relations,  and 
their  relative  positions  in  space  and  time,  these  last,  like  the  rest,  being 
measurable  variations.  If  we  take  away  this  quantitative  gradation 
and  comparability,  which  extends,  thougLof  course  in  different  ways, 
to  everything,  whether  simple  properties,  or  their  relations,  or  com- 
binations of  events  simultaneous  or  successive,  the  formation  of  a 
universal  by  comparison  of  different  groups  of  ideas,  would,  at  least 
in  the  sense  in- which  it  has  any  .value  for  thought,  be  impossible. 

25.  I  will  now  mention  some  traditional  technical  expressions.  If 
we  provisionally  give  the  general  name  of  concept  (fwtio,  conceptus)  to 
the  composite  idea  which  we  think  as  a  connected  whole,  the  sum  of 
individual  ideas  or  marks  (notae]  a,  b9  c,  d,  etc.,  through  which  a  concept 
£  is  fully  thought  and  distinguished  from  all  other  concepts  S,  is  called 
its  '  content1  (materia);  while  its  'extent'  (ambitus,  sphaera)  is  the 
number  of  individual  concepts  sl,  sz,  s3,  etc.,  in  each  of  which  the  con- 
tent of  S,  that  is,  the  group  of  marks  a,  69  c,  d9  in  some  one  or  other 
of  their  possible  modifications,  is  contained.  Thus  colour,  a,  weight, 
b9  elasticity,  d,  .and  the  like,  would  together  form  the  content  of  metal, 
S,  while  copper,  sl9  silver, -a2,  gold,  j*,  and  the  like,  taken  together, 
form  its  extent.  It  is  usual  also  to  speak  of  the  individual  marks  a,  b}  c, 
as  '  coordinated '  in  •  the  content  of  S,  and,of.the  individual  -species, 
•y1,  J2,  ^3,  as  'coordinated'  in  the  extent  of  S:  the  relation  of  the  species 
s\  s2,  s*,  to  the  universal  itself  which  forms  their  genus,  is  called  { sub- 
ordination/ while  both  the  species  and  the  genus  are  said  to  be  '  sub- 
sumed '  under  each  of  the  universally  expressed  marks,  which  make 
up  the  content  of  S,  and  consequently  also  of  j1,  s*,  s*.  .Lastly,  it  is 
asserted  that  the  extent  and  •  content  of  every  concept  vary  inversely ; 
the  greater  the  content,  that  is,  the  number  of  marks  which  the  con- 
cept imposes  upon  all  its  subordinate  species,  the  smaller  is  the  number 
of  species  which  fulfil  this  requirement ;  the  smaller  the  content  cf  S, 
the  greater  is  the  quantity  of  individuals  possessing  the  few  marks 
necessary  to  make  them  species  of  S  or  bring  them  within  its  extent. 
If  therefore  we  compare  the  universal  concept  S  with  a  similar  universal 
T,  and  look  for  a  third  universal  U  to  which  both  of  them  belong  as 
species,  and  if  we  continue  this  process,  the  higher  each  universal  con- 
cept W  stands  in  the  scale,  that  is,  the  farther  it  is  removed  from  the 

D 


34  The  Theory  of  the  Concept.  [BOOKI. 

concepts  S  and  T7 originally  compared,  the  poorer  will  it  be  in  content 
and  the  larger  in  extent;  and  conversely,  if  we  descend  from  the 
highest  universals  W  through  V  and  U>  S  and  T,  to  the  species  of  S 
and  lower,  the  content  will  increase  with  the  decreasing  extent  and 
become  greatest  in  those  completely  individual  ideas  to  which  logic 
hesitates  to  give  the  name  of  concept  at  all. 

26.  The  value  of  these  distinctions  is  unequal,  but  on  the  whole 
slight.     I  will  begin  what  I  have  to  say  about  them  by  fixing  the  ter- 
minology which  I  shall  myself  use  in  future.     I  speak  of  any  compo- 
site matter  s  as  conceived  or  as  a  concept,  when  it  is  accompanied  by 
the  thought  of  a  universal  *$',  which  contains  the  condition  and  ground 
of  the  coexistence  of  all  its  marks  and  of  the  form  of  their  connexion. 
After  this  explanation  we  shall  not  hesitate  to  speak  of  concepts  of 
perfectly  individual  things  (singular  concepts,  in  the  old  logical  ter- 
minology), and  we  believe  this  to  be  quite  consistent  with  the  usage  of 
language.    For  when  we  observe  a  new  object  A-  for  the  first  time,  and, 
not  content  with  the  perfectly  clear  sensible  perception  of  it,  go  on  to 
ask  what  it  really  is,  we  clearly  want  to  know  the  rule  which  connects 
the  perceived  marks  in  the  observed  fact  and  converts  them  into  a 
coherent  whole  of  a  definite  and  predictable  character.  If  we  then  find 
that  this  s  is  S,  an  animal  or  a  plant,  we  suppose  ourselves  to  have  a 
conception  of  j;  it  is  the  idea  of  it  which  is  raised  into  a  concept  by 
the  accompanying  thought  of  the  universal  S.     Every  proper  name  is 
an  illustration  of  this.     '  Alcibiades/  for  human  thought,  never  means 
merely  a  multiplicity  of  differently  coloured  points,  which  are  combined 
in  space  in  a  definite  though  not  quite  invariable  outline,  and  resist 
the  attempt  to  separate  them ;  nor  does  the  name  express  merely  the 
accessory  notion  that  this  multiplicity  in  some  unexplained  way  forms 
a  whole ;  it  suggests  to  the  mind  a  definite  general  image  of  a  man  or 
a  human  being,  which  lays  down  the  lines  for  our  view  of  the  con- 
nexion of  the  observed  marks  with  one  another  and  with  the  future 
behaviour  to  be  expected  from  them.     A  view  so  determined  cannot 
be  appropriately  called  either  a  perception,  or  an  idea  merely,  but 
only  a  singular  concept. 

27.  On  the  other  hand,  it  seems  t6  me  quite  out  of  place  to  call 
the  universal  5  itself,  the  accompanying  thought  of  which  makes  the 
individual,  into  a  concept,  without  any  reservation  a  universal  concept. 
S  may  have  the  form  of  a  concept,  but  by  no  means  always  has  it ; 
often  it  remains  a  mere  general  image,  the  thought  of  which  is  indeed 
accompanied  by  the  thought  of  its  connected  wholeness,  but  does  not 
exhibit  the  organic  rule  of  the  connexion.    The  name 


CHAPTER  I.]  .       The  Logical   CoHCCpt.  35 

ordinarily  used  expresses  no  more  than  an  image  of  this  kind ;  reflex- 
ion, by  subordinating  it  to  the  universal  (  animal/  easily  makes  it  "into 
a  concept ;  but  then  *  animal'  remains  a  general  image,  which  only  the 
naturalist,  for  the  uses  of  his  science,  converts  into  a  concept  by 
thinking  '  organic  being '  along  with  it.  It  is  upon  such  incomplete 
logical  activity,  which  brings  into  relief  only  a  single  link  in  the  chain, 
the  connexion  of  the  individual  with  its  nearest  universal,  but  leaves 
all  beyond  it  in  darkness,  that  the  concepts  which  occur  in  ordinary 
thinking  are  based ;  as  however  scientific  investigations,  to  which  logic 
is  primarily  intended  as  an  introduction,  do  really  aim  at  extending 
the  conceptual  form  from  the  concept  itself  to  the  higher  universals 
under  which  it  successively  falls,  it  is  enough  to  have  made  the  above 
remark  without  rigidly  enforcing  it,  and  I  shall  follow  ordinary  usage 
in  conceding  the  name  of  concept  to  those  general  images  as  well. 
I  can  do  this  the  more  easily  because  the  name  '  concept '  does  not 
seem  to  deserve  in  logic  that  exalted  significance  which  the  school  of 
Hegel  has  given  it,  and  in  which  it  claims  to  express  the  knowledge 
of  the  essential  nature  of  the  object.  The  difference  between  logical 
forms  and  metaphysical  ideas  must  be  taken  into  account  here  as 
elsewhere.  There  may  be  a  privileged  concept,  which  follows  the 
thing  itself  in  its  being  and  development,  or  takes  up  a  point  of  view 
at  the  very  centre  of  the  thing,  the  fountain-head  of  its  self-determina- 
tion and  self-organisation ;  but  it  is  not  the  function  of  logic  to  reserve 
its  concept^r/^  for  so  very  select  a  filling.  By  the  logical  concept 
we  understand  such  a  form  of  apprehending  any  matter  of  thought, 
from  whatever  point  of  view,  that  consequences  admit  of  being  drawn 
from  it  which  coincide  again  at  certain  points  with  results  flowing 
from  that  matter,  that  is,  from  the  thing  itself;  and  as  the  thing  pro- 
jects itself  differently  at  every  different  point  of  view,  there  may  be 
various  equally  right  and  equally  fruitful  logical  concepts  of  the  same 
object.  We  may  therefore  continue  to  call £  concept '  any  apprehen- 
sion which,  though  only  with  the  help  of  a  general  image  which  is  not 
further  analysed,  has  the  effect  of  bringing  the  given  object  under  a  rule 
of  behaviour  which  agrees,  when  applied,  with  its  actual  behaviour. 

28.  The  asserted  coordination  of  marks  in  the  content  of  the 
concept  raises  serious  difficulties.  To  begin  with,  it  is  a  misfortune 
that  we  have  no  appropriate  name  for  the  elements  of  which  we  com- 
pose the  concept ;  for  c  mark '  and  '  part '  only  apply  in  certain  cases. 
They  give  rise  to  the  current  delusion  that  the  elements  of  a  concept 
are  universally  of  equal  value,  connected  in  the  same  way  each  with 
the  whole  and  each  with  each.  The  ordinary  instances  of  logic,  taken 


36  The  Theory  of  the  Concept. 

from  simple  natural  objects,  are  specially  calculated  to  lead  us  into 
this  error.  It  is  true  that  gold  is  yellow  only  in  the  light,  ductile  only 
under  a  certain  power  of  traction^  heavy  only  for  the  body  upon  which 
it  presses;  but  these  various  conditions  easily  present  themselves 
to  our  imagination  as  stable  properties,  collected  in  a  definite  point  of 
space,  and  inhering,  in  a  manner  identical  but  otherwise  unexplainable, 
in  the  reality  which  on  their  account  we  call  gold.  Here  the  name 
4  marks '  is  appropriate,  and  here  the  marks  are  certainly  coordinated 
in  the  content  as  has  been  asserted;  but  this  coordination  merely 
means  that  they  are  all  equally  indispensable  to  the  whole,  but  have 
not  any  other  sort  of  order.  If  we  leave  such  simple  instances,  and 
consider  concepts  like  c  triangle/  e  animal/  or  s  motion/  we  require',  in 
order  to  think  them  properly,  a  quantity  of  part-ideas  which  are  no 
longer  mutually  equivalent,  but  have  to  be  placed  in  the  most  various 
relations  to  one  another.  The  three  sides  of  a  triangle  are  not  merely 
there  as  well  as  the  three  angles ;  they  must  form  the  angles  by  their 
intersections :  the  concept  of  motion  does  not  merely  contain  the 
part-ideas  of  place,  change,  direction,  and  speed ;  direction  and  speed 
are,  each  in  a  different  sense,  determinations  of  change ;  place,  being 
that  which  is  left  behind,  can  least  of  all  be  called  a  mark  of  the  con- 
cept ;  it  is  a  point  of  reference  for  the  idea  of  change,  to  which  its 
relation  is  expressed  by  that  of  the  genitive  to  the  nominative  which 
governs  it.  To  follow  out  these  points  in  detail  would  take  too  long, 
but  it  would  evidently  lead  us  to  the  conviction  that,  as  a  rule,  the 
(  marks  of  a  concept  are  not  coordinated  as  all  of  equal  value,  but  that 
they  stand  to  each  other  in  the  most  various  relative  positions,  offer  to 
each  other  different  points  of  attachment,  and  so  mutually  ddtrmme  each 
other ;  and  that  an  appropriate  symbol  for  the  structure  of  a  concept 
is  not  the  equation  S^=  a  •\-l-\-  <r~f  </,  etc.,  but  such  an  expression  as 
S=F(a,  I,  C)  etc.),  indicating  merely  that,  in  order  to  give  the  value 
of  $,  #,  &,  <r,  etc.,  must  be  combined  in  a  manner  precisely  definable 
in  each  particular  case,  but  extremely  variable  when  taken  generally. 

If  in  any  particular  instance  S  *=•  a\fr  sin  d]  -f  (e~£}</~k,  this  for- 

o 

mula,  however  foolish  it  would  be  if  it  professed  to  mean  anything 
more,  would  give  a  better  picture  than  the  above  inadequate  formula 
of  addition  of  the  different  ways  in  which  the  several  marks  at  6>  c9  etc, 
contribute  to  the  construction  of  S  as  a  whole. 

29.  No  objection  need  be  made  to  the  coordination  of  s\  s*,  $\ 
copper,  gold,  silver,  within  the  sphere  of  S,  metal ;  on  the  other  hand, 
attention  should  be  drawn  to  the  great  difference  of  value  between 


CHAPTER  i.  j       Subordination  and  Subsumption.  3  7 

the  subordination  of  the  species  to  the  genus,  and  that  of  the 
universal  S  along  with  its  species  to  the  universal  marks  a,  &, 
(ductile,  coloured,  etc.).  The  nature  of  the  universal,  metal,  com- 
pletely dominates  the  nature  of  its  speciesy  gold  and  copper,  and 
no  property  of  the  latter  escapes  its  influence;  many  things  are 
yellow  or  red,  but  the  glistening  red  and  yellow,  of  copper  and  gold 
belong  to  metal  alone;  many  things  are  ductile,.. but -.the/ amount  and 
other  peculiarities  of  the  ductility  exhibited  by  gold  and:-  copper  are 
heard  of  only  in  metals ;  and  only  metallity  explains  their,  degree  of 
specific  gravity.  Similarly  the  universal  -animal  determines'  every  pro- 
perty and  every  movement  of  its  species ;  animals-  move,  grow,  and 
rest  differently  from  plants  and  lifeless  things, .  If  we  symbolise  the 
universal  metal  by  a  circle  S,  the  smaller  circle  of  gold,  sl}  lies  entirely 
within  it,  and  by  the  side  of  this,  separate  from  it  but  also  completely 
inside  *$",  the  circles  S2,  ^8,  copper  and  silver.  Applying  differently  two 
names  which  are  generally  used  as  equivalents,  I,  describe  tbe  true 
subordination  to  a  dominant  universal  as  subordination  to  the  genus, 
while  I  call  the  subordination  of  gold  to  yellow  or  ductile  subsump- 
iion  under  the  mark.  These  universal  marks  obviously  da -not  rule 
and  penetrate  the  whole  nature  of  gold ;  each  of  them  expresses  only 
one  side  of  it,  which  it  shares  with  other  objects  of  an  entirely  different 
kind,  from  which,  so  far  as  logic  can  see,  no  sort  of  inferences  caa 
be  drawn  as  to  the  other  properties  of  gold.  Thus  the  lesser  circle  s, 
gold,  occurs  only  in  a  particular  place  in  the  larger  G3  yellow,  and  in- 
tersects it  without  lying  wholly  within  it ; .  G  is  similarly  intersected  in 
other  places  by  the  circles  of  other  yellow  objects,  and  they  all  remain 
partially  outside  it. 

30.  Starting  from  the  universal  Sy  which  was  the  rule  for  s\  s*,  /> 
the  original  objects  of  comparison,  we  were  able  to  mount  to  higher 
and  higher  universals  X>  U,  V,  W,  In  natural  history,  where  such  a  series 
is  of  value,  its  several  members  in  an  ascending  scale  have  been  named 
species,  genus,  family,  order,  class :  there  is  however  a  difference  of 
opinion  as  to  what  functions  a  universal  concept  must  perform  in 
order  to  represent  even  a  species  or  a  genus,  and  the  other  names  are 
applied  still  more  divergently,  and  always  from  points  of  view  depend- 
ing for  their  justification  on  the  special  nature  of  the  subject-matter. 
If  we  dispense  with  this  plea,  the  plea  from  the  side  of  the  specialist 
for  the  significance  and  importance  of  these  distinctions,  the  only  way 
to  give  some  sort  of  fixed  logical  value  to  species  and  genus  is  as 
follows.  The  only  thing  which  suggests  to  the  natural  mind  to  look 
for  a  universal,  is  the  comparison  of  individual  instances  which  ar§ 


38  The  Theory  of  the  Concept. 

not  identical  but  similar.  To  seek  for  a  concept  which  included  under 
it  cucumbers  and  mathematical  principles,  could  only  be  an  ingenious 
joke  ;  but  all  varieties  of  human  beings,  big  and  little,  old  and  young, 
fat  and  thin,  black  and  white,  provoke  the  natural  mind  to  the  search. 
Their  sensible  appearances  produce  similar  images,  at  the  correspond- 
ing points  of  which  only  such  marks  occur  as  are  immediately  felt  to 
be  species  of  the  same  universal  mark,  such  as  hardness  or  colour ; 
and  the  relations  between  any  two  of  these  points  are  in  all  cases 
merely  modifications,  differing  in  degree  and  amount,  of  one  and  the 
same  universal  relation.  The  comparison  -of  individual  men,  there- 
fore, produces  a  universal  image ;  not  indeed  in  the  sense  that  the 
universal  man  can  really  be  painted,  but  in  the  sense  of  the  illustra- 
tions in  a  natural  history,  which  purport  by  one  camel  or  horse  to 
exhibit  all  camels  or  horses  clearly  to  perception,  in  a  form  which  is 
more  than  a  mere  scheme  or  symbol;  or  again  in  the  sense  of 
geometry,  in  which  a  drawn  triangle,  though  necessarily  individual 
with  others  existing  beside  it,  yet  represents  all  these  others,  and  in  a 
similarly  perceptible  form.  But  this  possibility  vanishes  when  we 
ascend  to  higher  imiversals,  in  which  these  universal  images  are 
themselves  included  in  their  turn  as  species ;  the  universal  mammal, 
which  is  neither  horse  nor  camel  nor  is  otherwise  named,  cannot  even 
be  drawn  in  a  schematic  form,  any  more  than  the  polygon  can  which 
has  neither  three,  four,  or  any  other  definite  number  of  sides.  Thus 
these  higher  universals  are  no  longer  apprehended  in  perception,  but 
only  in  thought,  by  means  of  a  formula  or  equation,  which  prescribes 
essentially  the  same  relation  between  various  related  points,  but  leads 
to  quite  different  perceptible  configurations,  accordingly  as  the  pre- 
viously undetermined  values  of  these  points  and  their  various  con- 
nexions are  differently  determined  in  thought.  I  would  then  call  a 
universal  which  still  admits  of  an  image,  a  species,  and  the  first  of 
those  which  can  only  be  expressed  by  a  formula,  a  genus,  in  agree- 
ment, as  I  believe,  with  the  instinct  of  language,  and  incidentally 
also  with  the  old  terminology  of  Aristotle ;  for  in  his  choice  of  the 
words  et$os  and  yeW  he  was  no  doubt  determined  by  their  original 
meanings;  ctfios,  the  species,  which  includes  only  individuals  under 
it,  is  the  common  element  in  the  look  or  appearance  of  things, 
while  yfvos  comprehends  things  which  differ  in  form,  but  in  their  pro- 
cess of  growth,  or,  if  they  have  no  growth  in  time,  in  the  regulative 
connexion  of  their  parts,  obey  the  same  law  and  formula. 

31.  It  remains  to  consider  the  last  of  the  assertions  mentioned 
above,  that  of  the  inverse  ratio  between  the  content  and  extent  of  con- 


CHAPTER  i.]     Inverse  Ratio  of  Content  and  Extent.  39 

cepts ;  this  seems  to  me  to  be  untrue  where  its  truth  would  be  im- 
portant, and  to  be  comparatively  unimportant  where  it  is  true.  The 
number  of  marks,  of  which  we  compose  our  concepts,  is  not  infinite ; 
the  words  of  language,  numerous  but  not  innumerable,  suffice  to 
denote  them.  It  may  therefore  easily  happen  that  a  group  of  them, 
say  i  k  /,  occurs  in  several  universal  concepts,  S  T  and  F,  at  once, 
without  its  therefore  representing  a  higher  universal  containing  all 
species  of  S  77and  F.  We  may  class  cherries  and  flesh  under  the  group 
ikl  of  red,  juicy,  edible  bodies,  but  we  shall  not  suppose  ourselves 
thereby  to  have  arrived  at  a  generic  concept  of  which  they  deserve  to 
be  called  species.  I  do  not  say  that  in  giving  exclusive  prominence 
to  such  groups  there  is  always  as  little  sense  as  in  this  absurd  instance; 
we  shall  see  later  how  valuable  the  process  may  be  ;  it  helps  to  show, 
what  is  often  useful  and  necessary,  that  different  subjects,  though 
otherwise  quite  foreign  to  one  another  and  not  subsumable  under  any 
common  generic  concept,  are  nevertheless,  in  consequence  of  a  single 
or  a  few  common  marks,  jointly  liable  to  certain  inevitable  con- 
sequences. If  then  anyone  chooses  to  go  on  to  call  these  groups 
of  marks  universal  concepts,  he  is  certainly  right  about  the  inverse 
ratio  of  their  content  and  extent :  the  fewer  members  there  are  in,  the 
group,  the  more  sure  will  it  be  to  occur  in  all  sorts  of  concepts,  and 
again,  the  greater  the  number  of  different  ideas  compared,  the  smaller 
will  be  the  group  of  marks  in  which  they  all  agree.  Of  the  true 
universal,  on  the  other  hand,  which  contains  the  rule  for  the  entire 
formation  of  its  species,  it  may  rather  be  said  that  its  content  is  always 
precisely  as  rich,  the  sum  of  its  marks  precisely  as  great,  as  that  of  its 
species  themselves ;  only  that  the  universal  concept,  the  genus,  con- 
tains a  number  of  marks  in  a  merely  indefinite  and  even  universal 
form';  these  are  represented  in  the  species  by  definite  values  or  parti- 
cular characterisations,  and  finally  in  the  singular  concept  all  indefinite- 
ness  vanishes,  and  each  universal  mark  of  the  genus  is  replaced  by 
one  fully  determined  in  quantity,  individuality,  and  relation  to  others. 
It  is  true  that  instances  may  be  alleged  against  the  universal  validity 
of  this  assertion,  like  that  mentioned  above  of  organic  being,  to  the 
concept  of  which  we  subordinate  plants  and  animals;  it  may  be  called 
a  logical  caprice  to  retain  the  marks  of  sensibility  and  motivity  in  this 
concept,  with  the  tacit  reservation  that  they  are  both  at  zero  in  plants* 
But  what  this  instance  properly  shows  is  rather,  that  the  higher 
universals,  from  the  genus  upwards,  really  cease  to  be  true  universal 
concepts^  and  pass  over  into  groups  of  conditions,  imposing  uniform 
consequences  upon  various  genera,  more  properly  so  called,  The 


4O  The  Theory  of  the  Concept. 

concept  of  organic  being  Is  such  a  group  of  marks,  ikl,  which  does 
not  occur  in  any  independent  form  of  its  own,  but  in  the  genera  in 
which  it  does  occur,  plants-  and  animals,  gives  rise  necessarily  to  the 
same  results. 

32.  By  the  preceding  remarks  I  neither  hope  nor  aspire  to  bring 
about  a  permanent  change  in  the  traditional  terminology  ;  they  were 
intended  merely  as  helps  to  a  clearer  insight  into  the  structure  of  con- 
cepts in  general.  With  the  same  object  I  add  the  following.  I 
express  the  genus  (?,  so  far  as  its  concept  gives  the  rule  of  combina- 
tion for  a  number  of  individual  marks  AB  C,  etc.,  by  F  [A  B  C],  and 
J  assume  that  each  of  the  marks  admits  of  particular  forms,  which  we 
may  call  a1  cr  a'  .  ,  &  Ir  ^  .  .  cl  r  r*  ;  also  that  the  principle  of  com- 
bination F  has  freedom  to  assume  various  forms,  of  which  we  may  in- 
dicate three  by/?  </>,  and  f.  Now  as  the  marks  ABC  may  be  of  very 
different  value  for  the  whole  G9  it  is  possible  that  the  different  values 
assumed  e.  g.  by  A  may  be  of  decisive  importance  for  the  configura- 
tion of  the  whole,  and  may  also  exercise  a  transforming  influence 
upon  the  combination  of  the  other  marks*  The  consequence  of  this 
may  be  that,  as  A  assumes  one  or  other  of  its  values,  the  organisation 
of  the  whole,  Ft  changes  from  one  of  its  particular  modes  to  another; 
the  sum  total  of  the  species  of  G  would  then  be, 


omitting  for  shortness'  sake  to  express  the  corresponding  changes  in 
li  and  C.  These  decisive  marks,  alal(f\  are  in  this  case  the  specific 
differences,  differentiae  spccificae.  Thus  Aristotle,  who  gives  them  the 
name  of  &«</>«/>«,  when  he  subordinates  man  to  the  genus  animal, 
usually  describes  the  faculty  of  rational  thought  as  that  peculiar 
characteristic,  a\  of  the  universal  psychical  life,  A,  by  which  man  is 
distinguished  from  all  other  animals  ;  to  this  we  may  now  add,  follow- 
ing out  what  I.  have  indicated  above,  that  this  a1  not  only  separates 
man  from  brutes,  but  also  determines  the  values  of  7?  and  C  peculiar 
to  him,  as  also  the  mode  of  their  combination,  i,  e.  the  general  cha- 
racter by  which  man  is  distinguished  from  the  brutes  with  their  peculiar 
organisation  c/>  or  f.  It  may  further  happen  that  the  particular  values 
which  one  or  more  of  the  generic  marks  have  assumed  in  a  single 
species,  are  possible  in  this  and  no  other  species,  and  that  yet  they 
have  no  important  influence  upon  the  shaping  of  its  other  marks,  and 
do  not  therefore  represent  the  nature  of  it  in  all  its  aspects,  Such 
a  mark  is  called  by  Aristotle  property,  i<W;  it  is  what  we  call  "a 
characteristic  ;  Aristotle  gives  risibility  as  a  property  of  man,  Hegel, 
in  a  similar  sense,  the  ear-lap  ;  both  distinguish  man  from  the  brutes, 


CHAPTER!.]  The  highest  Concepts.  41 

but  without  exhausting  his  nature.  There  are  also,  according  to 
Aristotle,  marks  which  do  not  belong  to  the  rigid  constitution  of  a 
concept,  but  indicate  something  which  comes  in  contact  with  or 
happens  to  it ;  every  verb  which  says,  e.  g.,  Socrates  '  is  sitting '  or 
4  standing/  is  an  example.  Translators  torment  themselves  in  vain  to 
find  an  equivalent  for  both  the  real  and  the  etymological  sense  of 
Aristotle's  expression  O-V^^KOS ;  what  is  important  and  true  in 
it  answers  completely  to  what  we  call  state  \  that  this  word  does 
not  nevertheless  cover  the  usage  of  Aristotle  seems  to  me  to  be  the 
fault  of  an  inexactitude  of  his  own,  which  it  is  scarcely  worth  while 
to  enter  into.  As  to  the  relation  in  fact  between  the  concept  as  a 
whole  and  this  species  of  mark,  its  consideration  belongs  to  the 
theory  of  the  judgment.  In  the  introduction  of  Porphyrius  to 
the  Aristotelian  logic  there  is  material  enough  for  further  reflexion, 
though  indeed  of  a  mostly  unprofitable  sort,  about  the  likenesses 
and  differences  of  the  logical  determinations  here  touched  upon ;  we 
have  used  them  primarily  to  illustrate  the  complex  organisation  of 
concepts,  and  with  this  view  have  not  always  agreed  with  Aristotle  in 
the  form  of  our  exposition. 

33.  And  now,  where  do  we  get  to  at  last  if  we  go  on  looking  for 
higher  and  higher  concepts  above  those  which  we  have  already  found  ? 
What  form  does  the  entire  system  of  our  concepts  assume  if  we  sup- 
pose this  task  completed  ?  It  must  be  a  structure  resting  on  a  broad 
base,  formed  by  all  singular  concepts  or  ideas,  and  growing  gradually 
narrower  as  it  rises.  The  ordinary  view,  in  fact,  gives  it  the  form  of 
a  pyramid,  ending  in  a  single  apex,  the  all-embracing  concept  of  the 
•  thinkable.  I  cannot  see  much  point  in  this  notion ;  it  rests  entirely 
upon  that  unmeaning  subsumption  under  a  mark,  the  logical  value  of 
which  we  have  already  depreciated.  A  single  step  suffices  to  bring 
everything  at  once  under  the  head  of  the  thinkable  ;  we  may  spare  our- 
selves the  trouble  of  climbing  up  to  this  result  by  a  pyramidal  ladder ; 
and  moreover  the  result  itself  ignores  in  the  most  absolute  and  un- 
meaning way  everything  which  gives  substance  and  character  to  thought, 
If  on  the  other  hand  we  follow  the  method  of  subordination  to  the 
genus,  and  arrange  the  manifold  only  under  such  universals  as  still 
imply  the  notion  of  universally  regulating  its  specific  conformations, 
we  arrive  not  at  one  but  at  several  ultimate  concepts  not  reducible  to 
one  another,  in  which  we  are  not  surprised  to  recognise  those  very 
meanings  of  the  parts  of  speech  which  at  the  outset  we  found  to  be 
the  primary  logical  elements.  All  substantives  go  back  to  the  radical 
concept  of  something,  all  adjectives  '^.  that  of  quality,  verbs  to  that  of 


42  77ie  Theory  of  the  Concept.  EBOOKI. 

becoming,  and  the  rest  to  that  of  relation.  It  is  true  that  all  these 
radical  concepts  have  the  common  mark  of  being  thinkable ;  but  there 
is  no  common  genus  over  them  of  which  their  several  essences  form 
species,  nor  does  any  one  of  them  occupy  this  position  in  regard  to 
the  rest;  it  is  not  possible  to  apprehend  something  as  a  species  of 
becoming,  or  becoming  as  a  species  of  something.  From  this  point 
of  view  the  entire  structure  of  our  concepts  rises  like  a  mountain- 
chain,  beginning  in  a  broad  base  and  ending  in  several  sharply 
defined  peaks. 

Transition  to  the  form  of  the  Judgment. 

34.  It  was  this  image  of  a  conceptual  world  building  itself  up 
•without  a  break,  upon  which  the  vision  of  Plato  dwelt.  The  first  to 
recognise  the  eternal  self-identity  of  every  concept  and  its  significance 
as  against  the  variableness  of  the  real  world,  he  might  well  feel  the 
charm  of  tracing  out  all  the  simple  elements  of  thought,  of  combining 
all  that  could  be  combined,  and  of  setting  up  in  the  organic  whole  of 
a  world  of  ideas  the  eternal  pattern  of  which  the  created  world  is  an 
imperfect  imitation.  But  neither  he  nor  his  successors  have  attempted 
actually  to  execute  this  essentially  impossible  task  :  still  less  should 
we  now  be  inclined  to  regard  its  execution  as  desirable.  And  this 
not  only  because  reality,  things  as  they  are,  suggests  riddles  too  many 
and  too  hard  to  leave  us  any  time  for  drawing  up  an  inventory  of 
what  might  be  but  is  not ;  for  even  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  ideal 
world  would  give  us  little  support  in  understanding  the  real.  The 
utmost  that  we  could  attain  by  such  means  would  be  merely  the  image 
of  a  fixed  order,  in  which  simple  and  composite  concepts  stood  side 
by  side,  each  unchangeably  self-identical  and  each  bound  to  its  place 
in  the  system  by  invariable  relations  to  all  the  rest ;  whereas  what 
reality  shows  us  is  a  changing  medley  of  the  most  manifold  relations 
and  connexions  between  the  matter  of  ideas,  taking  first  one  form  and 
then  another  without  regard  to  their  place  in  the  system.  This  great 
fact  of  change  does  not  cease  to  be  a  fact  because,  in  the  spirit  of 
antiquity,  we  find  fault  with  it  as  an  imperfection  compared  with  the 
solemn  rest  of  the  work!  of  ideas :  the  current  of  our  thoughts  is  per- 
petually bringing  it  before  us  again,  and  the  mind,  receiving  as  it 
does  from  that  current  the  stimulus  to  activity,  has  to  exert  itself  to 
reduce  even  these  changeable  coincidences  to  principles  of  coherence* 
The  next  advance  of  logic  is  determined  by  this  fact, 

35.  There  are  different  considerations  which  lead  us  to  take  the 


CHAPTER  i.]  Suggestions  of  the  Judgment.  43 

same  step  next  When  new  marks,  of  which  we  were  not  before 
conscious  in  a  concept,  attach  themselves  to  it  without  its  apparently 
being  changed,  we  are  directly  stimulated  to  ask  what  ground  can  be 
conceived  for  such  a  variable  connexion  of  the  two.  But  also  when 
we  compare  different  instances  of  a  universal,  in  the  universal  marks 
of  which  we  have  already  included  the  possibility  of  many  particular 
ones,  it  may  still  be  asked  on  what  ground  a  particular  mark  in  each 
instance  coheres  with  the  rest  of  the  content,  and  why  this  particular 
mark  is  privileged  above  all  the  others  which  remain  absent,  though, 
as  species  of  the  same  universal,  they  might  equally  well  be  present. 
Lastly,  as  we  think  of  every  concept  as  uniting  a  number  of  marks, 
and  these  marks,  though  not  essentially  related  as  members  of  one 
and  the  same  systematic  series,  but  rather  heterogeneous  and  foreign 
to  one  another,  nevertheless  determine  each  other  and  in  their  com- 
bination influence  the  accession  of  others,  the  question  again  recurs, 
what  is  the  ground  of  the  apparent  coherence  in  this  coexistence  of 
heterogeneous  elements.  We  are  conscious  that  when,  in  considering 
the  concept,  we  attributed  to  a  certain  combination  of  marks  this 
position  of  a  dominant  logical  substance,  operating  in  a  number  of 
different  or  changing  forms,  we  required  and  presupposed  a  view 
which  we  have  yet  to  show  to  be  logically  practicable.  This  then  is 
our  present  problem,  either  to  break  up  these  presupposed  combina- 
tions again,  or,  if  they  can  be  justified,  to  reconstitute  them,  but  in  a 
form  which  at  the  same  time  expresses  the  ground  of  coherence  in 
the  matter  combined.  In  seeking  to  solve  this  problem,  the  form  in 
which  thought  will  move  will  obviously  be  that  of  the  judgment.  In 
this  a  permanent  conditioning  member,  the  whole  content  of  a  con- 
cept, appears  as  subject  over  against  the  variable  or  conditioned  mem- 
bers or  the  sum  of  them,  as  predicates ;  the  relation  of  the  two, 
explaining  and  justifying  their  connexion,  lies  in  the  copula^  that  is,  in 
the  accessory  notion  which,  more  or  less  fully  expressed  in  language, 
holds  together  the  two  members  of  the  sentence. 


CHAPTER    II. 
The  Theory  of  the  Judgment, 

Preliminary  observations  on  the  meaning  and  customary  division 
of  Judgments. 

IN  accordance  with  the  general  plan  of  my  exposition,  I  should 
now  have  to  develop  the  various  forms  of  judgment  systematically  as 
members  of  a  series  of  intellectual  operations,  each  one  of  which 

leaves  a  part  of  its  problem  unmaslered  and  thereby  gives  rise  to  the 
next.  Before  beginning  this  attempt,  I  must  say  a  few  words  about 
other  usual  modes  of  treatment,  and  my  reasons  for  deviating  from 
them, 

38.  Every  judgment  formed" in  the  natural  exercise  of  thought  is 
intended  to  express  a  relation  between  the  matters  of  two  ideas,  not  a 
relation  of  the  two  ideas  themselves.  Of  course  some  sort  of  relation 
between  the  ideas  follows  inevitably  from  the  objective  relation  in  the 
matter  which  they  represent ;  but  it  is  not  this  indispensable  relation 
in  the  mental  media  through  which  we  endeavour  to  grasp  the  matter 
of  fact,  but  this  matter  of  fact  itself,  which  is  the  essential  meaning  of 
the  act  of  judgment.  When  we  say,  'gold  is  yellow/  it,  is  indisputable 
that  in  this  judgment  our  idea  of  gold  lies  within  the  sphere  of  the 
idea  of  yellow,  and  that  accordingly  the  predicate  is  of  wider  extent 
than  the  subject;  but  it  was  certainly  not  this  that  we  intended  to 
express  by  the  judgment,  We  wanted  to  say  that  yellow  itself 
belongs  as  a  property  to  gold  itself,  and  only  because  this  relation  of 
fact  is  already  presupposed  to  exist  (whatever  difficulties  this  may 
involve),  can  it  be  reproduced  in  a  sentence  in  which  the  idea  of  gold 
5s  contained  by  that  of  yellow.  Logic  indeed  has  already  drawn  atten- 
tion to  the  fact  that  we  are  not  quite  right  even  in  making  this  sentence ; 
appealing  from  what  we  express  to  what  we  mean,  it  leaches  that  the 
subject  also  from  its  side  limits  the  too  extensive  predicate ;  gold  is  not 
yellow  simply,  but  golden  yellow,  the  rose  rosy  red,  and  this  particular 
rose  only  this  particular  rosy  red.  But  even  with  this  correction  the 


Logical  Subject  not  an  Idea,  45 

imperfection  of  this  whole  view  of  the  judgment  is  not  mended ;  for 
it  does  not  tell  us  what  is  after  all  the  relation  between  the  two  mem- 
bers so  corrected,  and  it  loses  sight  entirely  of  the  great  possible 
variety  in  the  modes  of  their  connexion.  Thus  gold  is  not  yellow  in 
the  dark ;  its  colour  therefore  only  attaches  to  it  under  a  condition, 
that  of  the  presence  of  light; 'and  if  we  wished  to  connect  this  new 
experience  with  the  previous  one  in  the  phraseology  of  the  view  which 
we  are  now  considering,  we  should  have  to  say,  the  idea  of  gold  lies 
simultaneously  within  the  spheres  of  that  which  is  yellow  in  the  light 
and  of  that  which  is  not  yellow  in  the  dark ;  but  this  form  of  ex- 
pression seems  to  me  only  to  betray  a  disposition  to  leave  the  really 
important  point,  the  mention  of  the  conditional  relation,  and  to  go  off 
upon  results  which  are  true  but  quite  without  significance.  Doubtless 
these  relations  of  extension  between  the  ideas  combined  in  the  judg- 
ment have  their  logical  value;  but  where  the  want  of  them  is  felt, 
they  are  not  so  difficult  but  that  they  can  be  mastered  at  the  moment 
without  special  effort :  to  give  them  a  chief  place  in  the  consideration 
of  the  judgment  seems  to  me  to  be  as  erroneous  as  it  is  wearisome. 

37.  The  technical  expressions  of  logic  point  to  the  view  which 
I  have  taken  here.  In  the  judgment  above  the  subject  in  the  sentence, 
that  is,  the  grammatical  subject,  is  the  word  gold,  the  subject  in  the 
judgment,  the  logical  subject,  is,  not  the  idea  of  gold,  but  gold  ;  for  it 
is  to  this  only  that  yellow  belongs  as  that  which  is  predicated  of  it, 
and  predicated  in  a  definite  sense  indicated  by  the  copula.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  idea  of  yellow  is  not  a  property  of  the  idea  of  gold  in 
the  same  sense  in  which  yellow  is  of  gold;  the  one  idea  is  not 
affirmed  or  predicated  of  the  other ;  the  relation  which  exists  between 
them  is  primarily  no  more  than  this,  that  whenever,  or  whenever 
under  certain  conditions,  the  one  idea,  gold,  is  found,  there  the  other 
idea,  yellow,  is  also  found,  but  that  the  former  is  not  always  present 
when  the  latter  is.  But  to  explain  and  express  what  it  is  which  makes 
this  relation  possible,  justifiable,  or  necessary,  is  the  problem  of 
the  logical  judgment  alone,  and  it  solves  the  problem  by  exhibiting 
through  its  copula  the  relation  between  the  object-matters  of  the  two 
ideas,  a  relation  due  to  that  which  the  ideas  represent  and  differing  in 
different  cases.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  only  between  these  object-* 
matters  that  a  logical  copula  is  conceivable ;  between  the  ideas  there 
is  ,no  relation  but  that  of  the  psychological  connexion  mentioned 
above,  and  that  of  the  monotonous^  unmeaning  inclusion  of  the  one 
within  the  other, 

88.  It  is  now  clear  that  for  us  there  can  be  only  so  many  essentially 


46  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment* 

different  forms  of  judgment  as  there  are  essentially  different  meanings 
of  the  aipula^  that  Is,  different  accessory  notions  which  we  form  of  the 
connexion  of  the  subject  with  its  predicate,  and  to  which  we  give 
more  or  less  complete  expression  in  the  syntactical  form  of  the 
sentence.  Thus  many  other  distinctions  which  meet  us  in  logic  have 
no  use  or  place  in  our  systematic  surtey,  though  they  may  still  have 
a  logical  value  of  some  other  kind.  To  secure  clearness  In  what  is  to 
follow,  therefore,  it  is  desirable  to  give  a  preliminary  explanation  of 
traditional  views;  but  1  think  I  may  confine  it  to  that  division  of 
judgments  to  which  Kant  has  given  currency  in  Germany,  though  it 
is  Itself  of  much  older  date.  According  to  Kant,  as  we  know,  the 
character  of  every  judgment  is  determined  in  four  respects,  quantity, 
quality,  relation,  and  modality,  and  in  each  respect  every  judgment 
lias  necessarily  one  of  three  mutually  exclusive  forms,  1  may  exclude 
the  third  member  of  this  division  from  these  preliminary  considerations, 
for  rdaiim  (between  subject  and  predicate),  in  respect  of  which  Kant 
distinguishes  categorical,  hypothetical,  and  disjunctive  judgments, 
clearly  c»>nrcrns  just  those  essential  characteristics  of  the  judgment 
whii'h  we  are  looking1  for,  arid  which  1  shall  have  subsequently  to 
expound  myself.  If  the  categorical  judgment  connects  its  subject  S 
and  its  predicate  P  afatrftttt'/y,  as  the  phrase  is,  or  on  the  simple 
model  of  the  relation  of  a  thing  to  its  property,  while  the  hypothetical 
assigns  P  to  *S'?  not  immediately,  but  only  on  the  assumption  that  a 
certain  condition  is  fulfilled,  and  the  disjunctive  gives  *S*  no  definite 
predicate,  but  imposes  on  It  the  necessity  of  choosing  between  several 
mutually  exclusive  ones,  there  is  no  doubt  that  in  each  of  these  three 
forms  the  sense  of  the  copula.,  the  mode  of  connexion  between  S  and 
/*,  is  different  and  peculiar;  these  three  will  form  the  series  of  judg- 
ments which  we  shall  have  subsequently  to  construct ;  only  the  nine 
remaining1  ones  call  for  the  following  preliminary  remarks. 

80,  In  respect  of  their  quantity  judgments  must  be  either  universal 
or  particular  or  singular  *  If  we  express  these  distinctions  by  the 
usual  formula,  *  all  .V  are  /Y  *  some  S  arc  /V  *  this  S  is  TV  it  is  clear 
that  they  indicate  merely  the  different  extents  to  which  a  connexion 
between  *S*  and  P  is  supposed  to  hold  good ;  the  nature  of  the  con- 
nexion iii  all  the  cases  is  the  same,  and  must  be  the  same,  because 
the  universal  judgment,  according  to  thin  view  of  its  meaning,  admits 
of  being  formed  by  summing  the  singular  and  particular  ones,  and 
must  therefore  be  perfectly  homogeneous  with  them.  Thus  the 
quantitative  description  applies  to  the  subject  only,  and  has  no  re- 
ference to  .the  logical  relation  between  it  and  its  predicate;  it  is 


CHAPTER  iL]     Kant  on  the  Quality  of  Judgments.  47 

therefore  of  importance  where  the  connexion  of  ideas  requires  the 
application  of  a  judgment,  the  import  of  which  depends  upon  the 
circuit  over  which  it  holds  good ;  but  no  special  advance  in  logical 
activity  is  indicated  by  these  distinctions  as  they  are  here  formulated. 
I  say  c  as  they  are  here  formulated/  because  certainly  the  quantitative 
differences  of  judgments  are  really  connected  with  important  logical 
differences  in  the  mode  of  connexion  between  S  and  P ;  for  doubt- 
less that  which  belongs  to  all  S  has  also  a  different  hold  upon  the 
nature  of  its  subject  from  that  which  belongs  only  to  some ;  but  the 
quantitative  formulation  of  the  judgment,  which  merely  counts  the 
subjects,  just"  fails  to  seize  this  important  accessory  notion,  and  makes 
the  relation  of  the  predicate  to  its  subject,  often  in  violation  of  the 
fact,  appear  the  same  in  all  cases. 

40.  In  respect  of  qtialily  Kant  distinguished  affirmative,  negative, 
and  limitative  judgments.  Nothing  is  clearer  than  that  the  two 
sentences  '  S  is  P99  '  *S  is  not  P?  so  long  as  they  are  supposed  to  be 
logically  opposed  to  one  another,  must  express  precisely  the  'same 
connexion  between  S  and  P,  only  that  the  truth  of  that  connexion  is 
affirmed  by  the  one  and  denied  by  the  other.  It  is  useful,  though 
certainly  not  necessary,  to  make  this  clear  to  ourselves  by  splitting 
each  of  these  judgments  into  two.  We  think  of  a  certain  relation, 
whatever  it  may  be,  between  S  and  P  expressed  in  the  judgment 
*S  is  P'  as  an  idea  still  open  to  question;  this  relation  forms  the 
object-matter  upon  which  two  opposite  judgments  are  passed;  the 
affirmative  gives  it  the  predicate  of  validity  or  reality,  the  negative  re- 
fuses it.  In  the  connexion  of  our  thoughts  it  is  of  course  of  the 
greatest  importance  which  of  these  judgments  is  subsequently  passed 
upon  a  given  connexion  between  3*  and  P ;  but  this  difference  does 
not  give  rise  to  two  essentially  different  kinds  of  judgment  as  such ; 
validity  or  invalidity  are  rather  to  be  considered,  in  regard  to  the 
question  before  us,  as  predicates  of  fact  to  which  the  whole  content  of 
the  judgment  forms  the  subject.  This  cosls!^i!^£jf^aixJbit^sp?es?^ 
in  a  form  as  yet  neither  affirmative  nor  negative  in  the  interrogative 
sentence,  and  this  indeed  would  take  the  third  place  amongst  the 
three  qualities  of  judgment  more  appropriately  than  the  limitative  or 
infinite  judgment,  which  is  supposed  to  attribute  a  negative  predicate 
to  the  subject  by  a  positive  copula,  and  is  usually  expressed  In  the 
formula  'S  is  not-P/  Much  acumen  has  been  expended  even  in 
recent  times  in  vindicating  this  form  of  judgment,  but  I  can  only  see 
in  it  an  unmeaning  product  of  pedantic  ingenuity.  Aristotle  himself 
.saw  clearly  enough  that  such  expressions  as  *not-man'  are  no 


48  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment.  i  BOOK  i, 

concepts ;  they  are  not  even  apprehensible  ideas.  The  truth  is  that, 
if  ( not-man '  means  all  that  it  ought  logically  to  mean,  that  is,  every- 
thing that  is  not  man,  triangle,  melancholy,  sulphuric  acid,  as  well  as 
brute  and  angel,  it  is  an  utterly  impossible  feat  to  hold  together  tins 
chaotic  mass  of  the  most  different  things  in  any  one  idea,  such  as  could 
be  applied  as  a  predicate  to  a  subject.  Every  attempt  to  affirm  this 
unthinkable  not-P  of  S  will  be  found  by  an  unsophisticated  mind  to 
end  in  denying  the  thinkable  P  of  the  same  S ;  instead  of  saying, 
*  spirit  is  not-matter/  we  all  say,,  £  spirit  is  not  matter/  Even  in  cases 
where  in  natural  thinking  we  seem  really  to  make  a  limitative  judg- 
ment, as  e.g.  when  we  say  'doctors  are  non-combatants/  we  are  in 
truth  making  only  a  negative  one.  For  this  not-/*  has  not  here  the 
meaning  which  the  limitative  sentence  would  give  it ;  according  to 
that,  horses,  wagons,  triangles,  and  letters  would  be  non-combatants ; 
what  is  meant  is  only  human  beings  who  belong  to  the  army  but  are 
declared  to  take  no  part  in  fighting.  Thus  there  is  never  any  neces- 
sity to  the  natural  mind  for  forming  limitative  judgments ;  every 
inference  which  could  be  drawn  from  '  *9  is  not-P ?  can  also  be  drawn 
from  ( S  is  not  P/  It  is  not  worth  while  to  spend  more  words  on 
this  point ;  obvious  vagaries  in  science  must  not  be  propagated  even 
by  a  too  elaborate  polemic, 

41ff  Through  the  forms  of  modality  different  values  are  supposed 
to  be  given  to  the  relation  which  is  conceived  to  hold  between  S  and 
P;  the  problematic  judgment  expresses  it  as  merely  possible,  the 
asserlorial  as  real,  the  apoddciic  as  necessary.  But  these  new  proper- 
ties are  treated  quite  independently  of  the  way  in  which  judgments 
have  been  already  determined  from  the  other  three  points  of  view* 
After  it  has  been  fixed  whether  a  given  judgment  J  connects  its 
elements  in  categorical,  hypothetical,  or  disjunctive  form,  after  It  has 
been  decided  whether  it  affirms  or  denies  the  relation  conceived  in 
one  of  those  forms,  and  after  the  extent  of  the  subject  to  Vaich  the 
£redicnj-e  .aunfe  has  b/vn.  limited  by  fee  expression  of  quantity,  it  is 
still  held  to  be  an  open  question  whether  the  judgment  so  composed 
will  be  problematic,  assertorial,  or  apodeictic.  To  treat  the  matter 
thus  is  to  confess  openly  that  the  possibility,  reality,  or  necessity, 
spoken  of  here,  stand  in  no  connexion  with  the  logical  construction  of 
the  judgment.  All  these  judgments,  which  are  usually  expressed  in 
the  formuto  *  S  may  be  P/ '  S  is  /Y  '  S  must  be  P,'  are  entirely  the 
same  as  regards  the  validity  which  they  give  to  their  contents  by 
logical  means;  they  are  all  merely  assertions  of  the  person  who 
makes  them*  and  are  distinguished  only  by  their  object-matter. 


CHAPTER  iL]          .  Trw  Modality,  '  49 

This,  the  possibility,  reality,  or  necessity  of  a  relation  between  S  and 
P,  they  express  either  without  any  grounds  at  all,  or  upon  grounds 
derived  from  right  reflexion  upon  the  facts,  which  they  do  not  then 
allow  to  appear  in  any  way  in  their  logical  structure  ;  just  for  this 
reason  they  need  additional  auxiliary  verbs,  in  order  to  express  inde- 
pendently what  does  not  lie  in  the  form  of  the  judgment  itself.  In 
more  developed  connexions  of  thought  such  judgments  of  course 
have  their  value ;  for  what  is  wanted  is  often  to  compress  results  of 
previous  reflexion  into  the  shape  of  simple  assertions,  without  per- 
petually repeating  the  grounds  upon  which  they  rest;  here  these 
auxiliary  verbs  are  in  place,  expressing  in  the  form  of  a  now  familiar 
fact  the  possibilitjr,  reality,  and  necessity  which  once  had  a  logical 
justification.  But  for  the  separation  of  essential  forms  of  judgment 
and  their  systematic  arrangement,  the  only  modality  that  could  be  of 
value  would  be  one  which,  instead  of  going  its  own  way  independently 
of  the  logical  nexus  of  the  other  judgments,  grew  out  of  that  nexus 
itself,  and  expressed  the  claim  to  possible,  real,  or  necessary  validity, 
which  the  content  of  the  judgment  derives  from  the  mode  In  which 
its  elements  are  combined. 

42.  It  would  be  useless  to  ask  for  such  a  modality,  if  we  could  not 
show  the  possibility  of  it.  I  will  therefore  anticipate  somewhat  what  I 
have  to  say  later.  The  proposition, '  all  men  must  die/  is  usually  held 
to  be  apodeictic;  I  consider  it  merely  assertorial ;  for  it  states  only, 
and  does  not  give  grounds  for,  the  necessity  of  which  it  speaks ;  so 
far  as  its  form  goes  it  does  not  even  decide  whether  all  men  die  for 
the  same  reason,  or  everyone  for  a  special  reason,  so  that  the  various 
conditions  agree  merely  in  the  fact  that  they  leave  no  one  alive.  And 
yet  what  we  had  meant  by  the  sentence  was,  not  only  that  all  men  as 
a  matter  of  fact  die,  but  that  the  extension  of  mortality  to  all  has  its 
ground  in  the  universal  concept  of  man,  in  the  nature  of  humanity ; 
and  this  thought  we  do  in  fact  express  by  the  genera]  form  of  the 
judgment t man  dies';  for  the  sense  of  this  judgment,  the  difference 
of  which  from  the  ordinary  universal  I  shall  come  back  to,  is  not  of 
course  that  the  universal  concept  man  dies,  but  that  everything  dies 
which  is  included  under  it,  and  for  the  reason  that  it  is  so  included. 
Every  hypothetical  judgment,  again,  gives  in  its  protasis  the  ground 
for  what  is  stated  in  its  apodosis,  and  is  therefore  in  my  sense  an 
apodeictic  form  of  judgment;  the  apodosis  here  is  not  simply  as- 
serted, but  asserted  conditionally  upon  the  validity  of  the  protasis; 
but,  presupposing  that  validity,  the  content  of  the  apodosis  is-  no 
longer  a  mere  fact,  but  a  necessity?  with  the  same  right  with  which 

£ 


50  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment. 

every  consequence  necessarily  follows  from  its  conditions.  Similar 
remarks  might  be  made,  if  they  would  not  be  too  long  for  this  pre- 
liminary section,  about  the  disjunctive  judgment ;  and  thus  we  should 
have  found  in  the  three  forms  of  relation  three  forms  also  of  apodeictic 
modality. 

43.  I  will  guard  myself  against  a  misunderstanding,  though  it  would 
be  so  gross  that  I  am  almost  ashamed  to  do  so.  The  form  which  we 
give  to  the  content  of  a  judgment  can  never  guarantee  its  truth  to 
fact;  this  always  depends  upon  whether  the  relations  between  the 
elements  of  the  content  itself  are  truly  such  as  the  form  of  the  judg- 
ment, in  order  to  ascribe  to  them  a  certain  sort  of  validity,  has  to 
presuppose.  This  holds  good  of  the  ordinary  modality  no  less  than 
of  that  which  we  would  put  in  its  place.  In  the  ordinary  form  of  the 
apodeictic  judgment,  '  S  must  be  /Y  any  nonsense  may  be  expressed 
without  thereby  becoming  sense ;  and  it  is  equally  open  to  us  to  mis- 
use the  judgments  which  1  call  formally  apodeictic,  and  say  4  man  is 
omnipotent/  'if  it  rains  everything  is  dry/  'every  triangle  is  either 
curved  or  sweet  or  hasty-tempered/  These  latter  forms  of  judgment, 
then,  do  not,  any  more  than  the  former,  make  every  connexion  of 
concepts  which  is  put  into  them  true  or  necessary;  the  significance  of 
them  lies  merely  in  showing  the  formal  conditions  under  which  we 
may  ascribe  demonstrative  certainty  to  a  given  content,  if  that  con- 
tent is  in  itself  such  as  to  satisfy  them.  And  he: re  our  view  of 
modality  differs  to  its  advantage  from  the  ordinary  one.  The  latter 
merely  tells  us  that  there  is  demonstrative  knowledge,  and  that,  if  we 
have  got  it,  we  can  express  it  in  the  form  '  8  must  be  P  * ;  but  it  does 
not  tell  us  how  knowledge  must  look,  and  what  its  internal  structure 
must  be,  in  order  to  be  demonstrative  and  to  justify  this  expression. 
Our  plan  on  the  other  hand  does  show  us  this ;  we  find  that  there 
are  three  forms  of  relation  between  S  arid  1\  which,  when  they  exist, 
lead  to  necessary  knowledge ;  endeavour  to  bring  your  ideas  into  one 
of  these  forms ;  cither  frame  general  judgments  and  look  for  the  P 
which  is  already  implied  in  the  conception  of  a  genus  S ;  this  P  then 
belongs  necessarily  to  every  species  of  Si  or  form  hypothetical  judg- 
ments, and  show  that  the  addition  to  *S*  of  a  condition  A*  gives  rise  to 
a  P  which  would  not  otherwise  be  present ;  then  this  P  holds  neces- 
sarily of  every  S  which  comes  under  the  same  operation  of  the  same 
conditions :  or  lastly  form  disjunctive  judgments ;  as  soon  as  you 
have  brought  a  question  to  a  definite  *  either  .  .  or/  the  thing  is 
settled,  and  all  that  is  now  wanted  is  experience  to  determine,  in  each 
particular  instance,  which  of  two  predicates,  P  or  Q9  will  be  true  and 


CHAPTER  IT.]    Are  there  Problematic  Judgments  ?  51 

necessarily  true.  There  are  no  other  ways  of  arriving  at  necessary 
knowledge,  and  every  judgment  which  we  express  in  the  form,  'S 
must  be  P'  remains  merely  an  assertion,  the  matter  of  which,  if  it  is 
convincing,  has  always  been  originally  apprehended  in  one  of  those 
three  ways. 

44.  Thus  far  I  have  spoken  only  of  apodeictic  judgments:  the 
ambiguity  of  the  ordinary  theory  of  modality  is  still  more  striking  in 
the  case  of  problematic  judgments.  The  proposition,  '  all  bodies  can 
be  set  in  motion  by  adequate  forces/  may  have  any  one  of  the  three 
modalities  ascribed  to  it  with  about  equal  right.  Firstly,  as  a  state- 
ment which  does  not  add  the  grounds  upon  which  it  is  made,  it  is 
assertorial :  but  what  it  states  is  not  a  real  occurrence,  but  the  possi- 
bility of  an  unreal  or  only  conceived  one,  and  this  is  enough  accord- 
ing to  traditional  usage  to  give  it  the  name  of  problematic :  lastly, 
it  may  be  called  apodeictic,  because  it  ascribes  a  property  to  all 
bodies,  a  property  therefore  which  can  be  wanting  in  none  and  is 
accordingly  necessary  to  each :  in  fact,  this  judgment  contains  the 
reality  of  the  necessity  of  a  possibility.  From  which  point  of  view  are 
we  to  choose  its  name  ?  I  should  be  in  favour  of  regarding  it  as  an 
assertorial  judgment,  reckoning  the  necessary  possibility  as  part  of 
the  matter  asserted;  As  however  the  same  view  may  be  extended  to 
all  problematic  judgments  of  the  ordinary  form,  the  question  arises 
whether  there  is  any  form  of  judgment  at  all  which,  as  such,  deserves 
to  be  called  problematic.  Interrogations  and  prayers  have  been 
alleged  as  instances,  for  neither  of  them  really  asserts  anything ;  the 
connexion  of  S  and  P  which  forms  their  content  seems  to  be  pre- 
sented to  the  mind  as  no  more  than  a  floating  possibility,  I  doubt 
however  whether  they  can  be  considered  as  specific  logical  forms  at 
all.  For  ultimately  interrogation  must  be  distinguished  "from  prayer, 
and  the  distinction  can  only  lie  in  the  fact  that  the  conscious  attitude 
of  the  questioner  to  his  question  is  different  from  that  of  the  petitioner 
to  his  petition.  Suppose  the  import  of  the  question  to  be,  ( 1  do  not 
know  whether  S  is  P]  and  that  of  the  petition, «  I  wish  that  6"  were  P' ; 
it  would  of  course  be  very  pedantic  to  say  that  the  speaker  himself 
must  always  analyse  what  he  says  into  this  bipartite  form,  but  still, 
if  we  take  his  consciousness  as  a  whole,  it  must  contain  in  both 
cases  two  different  states,  tempers,  dispositions,  or  whatever  we  call 
them,  which,  z/*we  wished  to  express  them,  could  only  be  expressed 
In  those  ways.  If  this  is  so,  it  is  clear  that  both  judgments  contain  a 
principal  sentence  of  an  assertorial  form,  which  says  nothing  about 
the  content  of  the  judgment,  but  merely  indicates  the  attitude  of  the 

£  3 


52  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment. 

speaker  to  it ;  the  other  and  dependent  sentence,  Introduced  by  the 
conjunctions  *  whether*  or  'that/  comprises  the  whole  content,  with- 
out saying  anything  about  the  nature  and  degree  of  its  validity.  It 
is  for  this  reason  that  I  do  not  consider  the  dependent  sentence 
either  to  be  a  problematic  judgment;  for  it  is  not  enough  that  the 
account  of  the  nature  of  the  Import  should  be  merely  absent}  the 
Import  ought  to  be  explicitly  confined  tto  mere  possibility.  As  to  the 
prayer,  it  might  further  be  said  that  It  contains  the  possibility  of  what 
is  prayed  for  and  nothing  else,  whereas  the  question,  as  it  may  be  a 
question  about  possibility  itself,  does  not  always  do  even  that:  in  both 
moreover  the  assumption  of  the  possibility  of  a  conceived  connexion 
between  S  and  P  could  only  be  reckoned  as  a  state  of  the  speaker's 
mind,  and  would  not  lie  in  the  logical  form  of  the  judgment.  I  should 
rather  consider  this  dependent  sentence  to  express  without  any 
modality  the  mere  content  of  a  judgment ;  and  it  is  just  because  no 
complete  judgment  can  be  expressed  without  claiming  possibility, 
reality,  or  necessity  for  its  import,  that  these  sentences  void  of 
modality  never  occur  independently,  but  arc  always  governed  by 
some  other  independent  sentence  which  asserts  one  of  those  modalities 
of  its  content, 

46.  According  to  our  view  those  judgments  only  could  be  called 
problematic  which  by  their  logical  form  characterise  a  conceived  rela- 
tion between  *V  and  P  as  possible  and  only  as  possible.  This  is  done 
by  all  quantitatively  particular  and  singular  judgments.  All  that  is 
directly  expressed  by  sentences  of  the  form,  *  Some  *9  arc  Pf  *  Some 
S  may  or  must  be  /V  'This  S  is  P*  or  "may  or  must  be  P,'  is  the 
actual  possible,  or  necessary  occurrence  of  P  in  certain  cases  of  S; 
they  leave  it  doubtful  how  the  matter  stands  with  the  other  cases  of  S 
which  arc  not  mentioned;  for  -$'  as  such,  therefore,  It  is  only  the 
possibility  of  each  of  these  three  relations  to  P  which  is  expressed, 
and  these  particular  sentences  are  equivalent  to  the  assertions,  £5 
may  be  P  possibly,'  *  5'  may  be  P}  £  S  may  be  P  necessarily/  I  there- 
fore call  particular  sentences  problematic  in  respect  of  the  universal  *$*; 
the  fact  that  they  are  clearly  also  assertorial  In  respect  of  the  some  S 
of  which  each  speaks,  does  not  at  all  militate  against  my  view  ;  it  only 
shows  us  that  in  fact  the  only  way  of  recognising  a  certain  relation 
between  S  and  P  to  be  merely  possible  is  by  observing  that  the  rela- 
tion does,  may,  or  must  hold  good  of  some  S  and  not  of  others. 
There  are  therefore  certainly  no  independent  problematic  judgments, 
which  are  not  assertorial  In  respect  of  a  part  of  their  universal  subject 
In  so  far  as  they  affirm  of  it  a  possible,  actual,  or  necessary  predicate. 


CHAPTER  iL]  Unclassified  Modalities.  5  3 

46.  Lastly,  It  is  easy  to  see  that,  on  the  one  hand,  the  '  may '  and 
'must'  of  the  ordinary  problematic  and  apo deictic  judgments  and  the 
'is'  of  the  assertorial  by  no  means  suffice  to  express  all  material 
differences  of  importance  in  the  truth  of  their  several  contents,-'  and 
that  on  the  other  hand,  just  for  this  reason3  they  lump  together  very 
different  relations  under  the  same  expression.  Firstly,  what  modality 
have  such  sentences  as  these,  c  *9  will  be  P,}  '  5  ought  to  be  P*  £  S 
may  be  P,9  ( S  has  been  P'i  No  one  of  them  affirms  reality,  but  the 
unreal  which  is  past  in  the  last  is  something  quite  different  from  that 
which  is  permitted,  enjoined,  or  future,  in  the  others  :  in  the  third  it 
is  possible,  in  the  second  its  possibility  is  doubtful,  in  the  first  its 
reality  is  inevitable,  while  in  the  last  it  is  at  once  irretrievable  and 
unreal.  If  all  these  shades  of  meaning  had  been  taken  into  account, 
the  forms  of  modality  might  have  been  correspondingly  increased  in 
number.  On  the  other  hand,  how  entirely  different  in  meaning  are 
the  similarly  formed  sentences,  ( It  can  rain  to-day  V  <  The  parrot  can 
talk,'  c  Every  quadrangle  can  be  divided  into  two  triangles.'  In  the 
first  case  we  have  a  supposition  which  is  possible  because  we  know 
no  reason  to  the  contrary ;  next  a  capacity  which  exists  upon  con- 
ditions which  need  not  have  existed ;  lastly  a  necessary  result  of  an 
operation  which  we  may  carry  out  or  not  as  we  please.  I  will  not 
multiply  these  instances,  as  might  be  done  indefinitely ;  to  attempt  to 
analyse  them  all  would  be  as  foolish  as  to  undertake  to  work  out 
beforehand  all  possible  examples  in  a  mathematical  text-book.  In 
practice,  indeed,  it  is  just  from  these  material  varieties  of  meaning  in 
the  expressions  in  question  that  our  inferences  are  drawn;  but  we 
have  no  resource  except  to  observe  in  each  particular  instance  what 
we  have  before  us ;  whether  it  is  a  possibility  which  may  be  tenta- 
tively assumed  in  the  absence  of  proof  to  the  contrary,  or  a  well- 
grounded  capacity  resting  securely  upon  its  conditions ;  whether  it  is 
a  necessity  due  to  the  presence  of  imperative  reasons,  or  one  arising 
from  a  command,  a  purpose,  a  duty,  or  lastly  one  of  those  com- 
binations of  possibility,  reality,  and  necessity  which  we  touched  upon 
above. 

1  ['  Es  karm  heute  regnen ;  der  Papagei  kann  reden ; '  in  English  we  say,  '  It 
may  rain  to-day,'  so  that  the  difference  of  meaning  is  represented  by  some  difference 
of  form.] 


54  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment. 


The  scries  of  the  forms  of  Judgment 

A,  2726'  Impersonal  Judgment.     The  Categorical  Judgment.     The 
Principle  of  Identity. 

47.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  the  series  of  the  forms  of 
judgment  the  categorical  comes  before  the  hypothetical  and  the  dis- 
junctive. We  could  have  no  occasion  for  making  the  occurrence  of 
a  predicate  P  in  a  subject  *S'  dependent  on  a  previously  fulfilled  con- 
dition^ unless  we  had  already  had  experiences  of  the  presence  of  P  in 
some  S  and  its  absence  in  others.  Equally  little  can  we  think  of 
prescribing  to  S  the  necessary  choice  between  different  predicates, 
until  previous  experiences  have  established  the  constant  relation  of  S 
to  a  more  universal  predicate,  of  which  the  proposed  alternatives  are 
specific  forms ;  and  these  experiences  too  would  find  their  natural 
expression  in  a  judgment  of  the  form  C*V  is  P!  The  structure,  moreover, 
of  the  hypothetical  and  disjunctive  judgments  exhibits  permanent  traces 
of  this  dependence  :  however  complex  they  may  be  in  particular  cases, 
the  general  scheme  to  which  they  are  reducible  is  always  that  of  two 
judgments  of  the  form  **S*  is  /Y  combined,  either  as  protasis  and  apo- 
closis  or  as  mutually  exclusive  members,  so  as  to  form  a  single  com- 
plete assertion.  But  the  question  may  be  raised  whether  a  still 
simpler  form  must  not  precede  the  categorical  judgment  itself  in  the 
systematic  series.  The  sentence  '$  is  P'  cannot  lie  uttered  until  the 
current  of  ideas  has  informed  us  of  an  *S*  with  a  fixed  position  and 
recognisable  character  of  its  own,  to  which  a  P  can  be  added  in 
thought  as  a  predicate.  Now  this  will  not  always  be  the  case ;  indeed 
it  may  be  questioned  whether  the  discovery  of  the  definite  »$',  which  is 
to  serve  as  subject  to  a  categorical  judgment,  does  not  always  pre- 
suppose experiences  of  *V  in  a  less  developed  form,  and  their  trans- 
lation into  logical  equivalents.  This  question,  which  relates  to  the 
psychological  growth  of  thought,  I  leave  unanswered  here ;  for  our 
present  purpose  the  fact  is  enough  that  even  our  fully  developed 
thought  has  preserved  a  form  of  judgment  which  performs  this  simplest 
of  functions,  that  of  giving  logical  setting  to  a  matter  of  perception 
"without  regarding  It  as  a  modification  or  determination  of  an  already 
fixed  subject.  This  is  the  impersonal  judgment,  which,  as  the  first  act 
of  judging,  I,  here  treat  as  a  preliminary  stage  to  the  categorical. 

48.  I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  defend  at  length  the  logical 
import  of  the  impersonal  judgment  against  the  opinion  which  would 


ii.]          Perception  and  Predication,  55 

make  it  merely  the  linguistic  expression  of  perception  itself,  'without 
involving1  any  logical  activity.  The  natural  sound  which  a  man  who 
Is  shivering  with  cold  makes  when  he  cowers  against  another,  is  a 
mere  sign  of  this  sort,  which  only  serves  to  give  tongue  to  his  feeling; 
but  as  soon  as  he  expresses  his  discomfort  in  the  sentence  c  it  is  cold/ 
he  has  undoubtedly  performed  an  act  of  thought  By  giving  to  the 
content  of  his  perception,  which  in  itself  is  undivided,  this  bipartite 
form  of  a  predicate  related  to  a  subject  by  a  copula,  he  expresses  that 
he  can  think  of  it  as  a  perceived  reality  in  no  other  form  than  this.  It 
is  true  that  he  is  not  in  a  position  to  give  the  subject  an  independent 
content ;  he  only  indicates  its  empty  place  and  the  fact  that  it  requires 
filling,  either  by  the  indefinite  pronoun,  or  in  other  languages  by  the 
third  person  of  the  verb,  which  he  uses  instead  of  the  infinitive :  it  is 
true  also  that  the  whole  content  of  the  perception  which  he  expresses 
falls  into  the  predicate  alone  :  and  it  is  true,  lastly,  that  the  copula 
which  he  puts  between  them  has  not  as  yet  the  sense  of  a  definitely 
expressible  relation ;  it  only  keeps  formally  apart  what  is  substantially 
inseparable  and  interfused.  But  it  is  just  by  this  attempt  to  bring 
about  an  articulation  to  which  the  matter  of  perception  will  not  yet 
lend  itself,  that  the  impersonal  judgment  expresses  all  the  more  clearly 
the  instinct  of  thought,  that  everything  which  is  to  be  matter  of 
perception  must  be  conceived  as  a  predicate  of  a  known  or  unknown 
subject. 

49.  I  will  now  explain  why  I  have  here  spoken  repeatedly  of  per- 
ception1. The  indefiniteness  of  the  subject  in  the  impersonal  judgment 
has  been  interpreted  to  mean  that  it  merely  expresses  in  substantival 
form  what  is  expressed  in  verbal  form  by  the  predicate.  I  do  not 
doubt  that  anyone  who  is  asked  what  he  means  by  { it,'  when  he  says 
'  it  rains/  or  '  it  thunders/  can  easily  be  driven  to  say,  '  the  rain  rains/ 
or  '  the  thunder  thunders/  But  I  believe  that  in  that  case  his  em- 
barrassment makes  him  say  something  different  from  what  he  really 
intended  by  his  impersonal  judgment.  It  seems  to  me  to  lie  in  the 
essence  of  such  a  judgment  that  he  really  looks  upon  the  determinate 
matter  in  question  as  attaching  to  an  indeterminate  subject,  the  extent 
of  which  is  much  wider  than  that  of  the  predicate ;  and  if  he  uses 
several  such  expressions  one  after  another,  f  it  lightens/  '  it  rains/  '  it 
is  cold/  though  he  does  not  expressly  intend  to  say  that  the  indefinite 
pronoun  means  the  same  in  all  those  cases,  he  would  certainly,  if  he 
understood  himself  correctly,  give  this  answer  rather  than  the  former 
one,  This  '  it '  is  in  fact  thought  of  as  the  common  subject,  to  which 
1  [« Wahrnehmung.'] 


56  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment. 

the  various  phenomena  attach  as  predicates  or  from  which  they  pro- 
ceed ;  It  indicates  the  all-embracing  thought  of  reality,  which  takes 
now  one  shape3  now  another*  This  has  been  rightly  felt  by  those 
who  found  in  the  impersonal  judgment  a  judgment  of  existence^  and 
transformed  the  sentence  '  it  lightens '  Into  '  the  lightning  is.?  It  is 
only  the  transformation  itself  which  seems  to  me  unnatural ;  we  never 
express  ourselves  in  this  way;  the  unsophisticated  mind  does  not 
think  of  the  phenomenon  as  if  it  were  already  something  before  it  ex- 
isted, of  which  we  could  speak,  and  of  which  among  other  things  we 
could  assert  reality ;  on  the  contrary,  it  regards  the  particular  reality 
In  question  as  a  phenomenon,  a  predicate,  a  consequence,  proceeding 
along  with  others  from  an  antecedent  and  permanent,  though  quite 
inexpressible,  subject  Though  however  we  cannot  accept  this  ex- 
planation, it  is  so  far  right  as  that  every  genuine  impersonal  judgment 
expresses  an  actually  present  perception,  and  is  therefore  as  regards 
its  form  an  asscrt&rial  judgment.  Such  genuine  judgments  are  to  be 
distinguished  from  other  modes  of  expression  which  begin  with  the 
indefinite  *  it  *  as  subject,  but  immediately  fix  its  content  by  an  ex- 
planatory sentence,  as,  e.  g.,  *  it  is  well  that  this  or  that  should  be 
done/ 

50,  The  more  definitely  the  mind  emphasizes  the  necessity  of  the 
subject  to  which  the  predicate  is  to  attach,  the  less  can  it  rest  content 
with  an  expression  in  which  this  demand  is  unsatisfied.     It  is  not  part 
of  my  logical  task,  as  I.  have  already  said,  to  describe  the  processes  of 
comparison  and  observation  by  which  our  ideas  of  those  subjects  are 
gradually  formed,  which  we  require  to  take  the  places  of  the  indefinite 
'it 'in  the  various  impersonal  judgments;  I  have  only  to  point  out 
the  logical  form  in  which  this  requirement  is  satisfied.     Most  of  the 
simple  instances  with  which  logic  usually  begins  its  illustration  of  the 
judgment  in  general,  are  in  the  familiar  form  of  the  categorical  judg- 
ment *S  is  /V  e.g.  'gold  is  heavy/  Uhe  tree  is  green/  'the  day  is 
windy,*    No  explanation  is  needed  as  regards  this  form ;  its  structure 
is  perfectly  transparent  and  simple  ;  all  that  we  have  to  show  is,  that 
this   apparent  clearness  conceals  a  complete  enigma,  and  that  the 
obscurity  in  which  the  sense  of  the  copula  in  the  categorical  judgment 
is  involved  will  form  a  motive  that  will  carry  us  a  long  way  in  our 
successive  modifications  of  logical  activity. 

51.  A  certain  embarrassment  is  at  once  observable  as  soon  as  we 
ask  in  what  sense  S  and  P  are  connected  in  the  categorical  as  distinct 
from  the  hypothetical  and  disjunctive  judgments.    A  common  answer 
is,  that  the  categorical  judgment  asserts  S  of  -P  absolutely ;  but  this 


CHAPTER iL]  What  is  Predication  ?  57 

answer  is  only  negatively  satisfactory,  i.  e.  so  far  as  it  denies  of  the 
categorical  sentence  the  idea  of  a  condition  and  the  idea  of  an  oppo- 
sition between  mutually  exclusive  predicates;  but  when  we  know 
what  this  form  of  judgment  does  not  do,  the  statement  that  it  joins 
P  to  S  absolutely  gives  us  no  positive  information  as  to  what  it  does 
do.  Such  a  statement  in  fact  merely  expresses  the  greater  simplicity 
of  the  categorical  copula  as  compared  with  that  of  the  hypothetical 
and  disjunctive  judgments ;  but  this  simpler  connexion  must  still  have 
a  determinate  and  expressible  sense  of  its  own,  distinguishing  it  from 
other  conceivable  forms  of  connexion  equally  simple  or  more  com- 
plicated. The  necessity  of  explaining  this  sense  appears  most  simply 
from  the  fact,  that,  of  all  connexions  of  £  and  P,  the  complete 
identity  of  the  two  would  be  that  which  most  obviously  deserved  the 
name  of  absolute.  Yet  it  is  just  this  which  as  a  rule  is  not  intended 
in  the  categorical  judgment :  <  gold  is  heavy '  does  not  mean  that  gold 
and  weight  are  identical ;  equally  little  do  such  sentences  as  '  the  tree 
is  green/  *  the  sky  is  blue,7  identify  the  tree  with  green  and  the  sky 
with  blue.  On  the  contrary,  we  are  at  pains  to  express  our  real 
meaning  in  such  judgments  by  saying,  '  P  is  not  S  itself,  but  only  a 
predicate  of  £/  or  '  S  «•  not  P,  it  only  has  P!  We  thus  admit  that 
we  are  thinking  of  a  definite  and  distinguishable  relationship  between 
S  and  P>  and  it  only  remains  to  make  really  clear  what  constitutes 
this  '  having '  which  we  oppose  to  '  being/  or,  in  more  logical  lan- 
guage, wherein  we  have  to  look  for  that  relation  of  a  subject  to 
its  predicate  which  we  wish  to  distinguish  from  the  relation  of 
identity. 

52.  Plato  was  the  first  to  touch  this  problem;  his  doctrine,  that 
things  owe  their  properties  to  participation  in  the  eternal  universal 
concepts  of  those  properties,  was  rather  an  inadequate  answer  to  a 
metaphysical  question  about  the  structure  of  reality,  than  an  explana- 
tion of  what  we  have  in  our  mind  when  we  establish  a  logical  relation 
between  subject  and  predicate.  Aristotle  made  the  right  treatment  of 
the  question  possible  by  observing  that  the  attributes  are  primarily 
enunciated  of  their  subjects ;  this  at  any  rate  established  the  fact  that 
it  is  a  logical  operation  of  the  mind  which  refers  the  matter  of  the 
one  concept  to  that  of  the  other;  but  more  than  this  name  of  enun- 
qiation,  Karrryopfiv,  from  which  that  of  the  *  categorical '  judgment  and 
that  of  the  Latin  equivalent c  predicate '  are  derived,  even  Aristotle  did 
not  discover.  He  escaped  indeed  a  confusion  of  later  logic ;  he  did 
not  reduce  the  connexion  which  he  supposed  between  *$*  and  P  from 
a  logical  operation  to  a  mere  psychical  occurrence,  thus  making  the 


5 8  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment.  CBOOKI. 

relation  between  the  two  consist  only  in  the  fact  that  the  idea  of  P  Is 
associated  in  our  consciousness  with  that  of  S :  for  him  the  sense  of 
the  judgment  and  the  ground  for  making  it  was  a  real  relation 
between  the  matters  of  the  two  ideas.  But  he  did  not  tell  us  how 
precisely  S  is  affected  by  the  fact  that  we  enunciate  P  of  it ;  lie  made 
the  enunciation  itself,  which  can  really  do  nothing  but  recognise  and 
express  this  real  relation,  stand  for  the  very  relation  which  it  had  to 
recognise.  Now  it  is  easy  to  see  that  this  fusion  is  quite  inadmissible ; 
it  is  impossible  merely  to  enunciate  the  concept  l  slave '  of  Socrates  in 
such  a  way  that  the  enunciation  itself  should  settle  the  relationship  in 
which  the  two  concepts  stand  to  one  another :  what  we  really  mean 
by  a  judgment  is  always,  that  Socrates  is  or  is  not  a  slave,  has  or  has 
not  slaves,  liberates  or  does  not  liberate  slaves.  It  is  one  or  other  of 
these  possible  relations  which  constitutes  what  is  enunciated  in  each 
case,  and  it  is  only  a  matter  of  linguistic  usage  that,  when  we  speak 
of  enunciating1  the  latter  concept  of  the  former,  we  choose  tacitly  to 
understand  only  the  first  relation,  viz.  that  Socrates  is  a  slave.  The 
relation,  therefore,  of  S  to  P  in  a  categorical  judgment  is  not;  dis- 
tinguished from  other  relations  by  saying  that  P  is  enunciated  of  »S*; 
the  truth  rather  is  that  the  meaning  of  this  enunciation,  in  itself  mani- 
fold, is  determined  by  the  tacit  supposition  that  P  is  enunciated  of 
S  as  (i  predicate  of  a  subject.  It  still  remains  a  further  question,  what 
constitutes  this  peculiar  relation. 

53.  We  moderns  are  accustomed  on  this  point  to  hole!  to  the 
doctrine  of  Kant,  who  represented  the  relation  of  a  thing  to  its 
property^  or  of  substance  to  its  accident,  as  the  model  upon  which  the 
mind  connects  S  and  P  in  the  categorical  judgment.  This  statement 
may  have  a  good  meaning  in  the  connexion  in  which  Kant  made  it, 
but  it  does  not  seem  to  be  available  for  the  logical  question  before  us. 
I  will  not  here  raise  the  point  whether  the  idea  of  the  relation  between 
substance  and  attribute  is  itndf  so  clear  and  intelligible  as  to  dissipate 
all  obscurity  from  the  categorical  judgment ;  it  is  enough  to  remind 
ourselves  that  logical  judgments  do  not  speak  only  of  what  is  real,  of 
things  ;  many  of  them  have  for  their  subject  a  mere  matter  of  thought, 
something  unreal,  or  even  impossible.  The  relation  existing  between 
the  real  tiling  as  such  and  its  properties  obviously  cannot  be  transferred 
in  its  full  sense  to  the  relation  of  subjects  to  their  predicates,  but  only 
In  the  metaphorical  or,  as  we  may  say,  symbolical  sense*  To  speak 
more  exactly,  the  only  common  element  in  these  two  kinds  of  relation 
is  the  formal  one,  that  in  both  the  one  of  the  related  members,  tiling, 
or  subject,  is  apprehended  as  independent,  the  other,  property  or 


CHAPTER  ii.]  Identity  in  the  Judgment*  59 

predicate,  as  dependent  upon  the  former  in  the  way  of  attachment  or 
inherence.  But  in  regard  to  the  thing,  metaphysic  has  at  any  rate 
exerted  itself  to  show  how  there  can  be  properties  which  are  not  the 
thing  and  yet  attach  to  it,  and  what  we  are  to  suppose  this  attachment 
to  consist  in ;  whereas  in  regard  to  the  relation  between  subject  and 
predicate  we  find  no  corresponding  account  of  the  sense  in  which  the 
one  inheres  in  the  other.  The  appeal  to  the  relation  between  thing 
and  property,  therefore,  does  not  help  logic  at  all;  the.  question 
repeats  itself,  How  much  of  this  metaphysical  relation  survives  as  a 
logical  relation  expressible  in  the  categorical  judgment,  if  the  thing  be 
replaced  by  something  which  is  not  a  thing,  and  the  property  by 
something  which  is  not  a  property  ? 

54.  Without  adding  any  more  to  these  customary  but  unsuccessful 
attempts  to  justify  the  categorical  judgment,  I  will  state  the  conclusion 
to  which  we  are  driven  :   this  absolute  connexion  of  two  concepts 
S  and  P,  in  which  the  one  is  unconditionally  the  other  and  yet  both 
stand  over  against  each  other  as  different^  is  a  relation  quite  imprac- 
ticable in  thought ;  by  means  of  this  copula,  the  simple  £  is '  of  the 
categorical  judgment,  two  different  contents  cannot  be  connected  at 
all;  they  must  either  fall  entirely  within  one  another,  or  they  must  remain 
entirely  separate,  and  the  impossible  judgment  1S  is  P'  resolves  itself 
into  the  three  others,  '6*  is  S,f  'P  is  P,9  'S  is  not  P.'  We  must  not  stumble 
too  much  at  the  startling  character  of  this  assertion.  Our  minds  are  so 
constantly  making  categorical  judgments  of  the  form  *  S  is  /Y  that  no 
doubt  what  we  mean  by  them  will  eventually  justify  itself,  and  we  shall 
soon  see  how  this  is  possible.     But  the  categorical  judgment  requires 
such  a  justification ;  taken  just  as  it  stands  it  is  a  contradictory  and 
self-destructive  form  of  expression,  in  which  the  mind  either  represents 
as  solved  a  hitherto  unsolved  problem,  the  determination  of  the  rela- 
tion between  -S*  and  Pt  or  so  abbreviates  the  discovered  solution  that 
their  connexion  is  no  longer  visible.     On  the  other  hand  we  are  met 
by  the  consciousness  that  all  our  thought  is  subject  to  a  limitation  or 
has  to  conform  to  a  law;  by  the  conviction  that  in  the  categorical 
judgment  each  constituent  can  only  be  conceived  as  self-same.     This 
primary  law  of  thought,  the  principle  of  id  entity  >  we  express  positively 
in  the  formula  A  =  A,  while  in  the  negative  formula,  A  does  not  = 
non-^j  it  appears  as  the  principle  of  contradiction  to  every  attempt  to 
make  A  =  B. 

55.  I  will  not  interrupt  my  exposition  here  by  remarks  which  would 
have  to  be  repeated  later  upon  the  various  interpretations  which  this 
first  law  of  thought  has  received;   I  will  confine  myself  to  stating 


60  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment. 

exactly  what  sense  I  shall  myself  attribute  to  it  in  opposition  to  many 
of  those  Interpretations.  In  the  case  of  an  ultimate  principle,  which 
limits  the  whole  of  our  thinking,  it  is  obvious  that  with  the  application 
of  thought  to  different  groups  of  objects  it  will  be  transformed  into 
a  number  of  special  principles,  which  exhibit  its  general  import  in  the 
particular  forms  in  which  it  applies  to  the  particular  characteristics  of 
those  groups  and  has  an  important  bearing  upon  them.  The  con- 
sequences thus  drawn  from  the  principle  of  identity,  some  of  which 
are  quite  unexceptionable  while  others  are  by  no  means  so,  must  be 
distinguished  from  the  original  sense  of  the  principle  itself,  and  do 
not  belong  to  this  part  of  logic.  Thus  it  is  quite  useless  to  expand 
the  expression  of  the  law  into  the  formula,  Everything  can  have  at 
the  same  moment  and  in  the  same  part  of  its  whole  self  only  one  pre- 
dicate A,  and  cannot  have  at  the  same  time  a  predicate  non--4  contrary 
or  contradictory  to  A.  This  statement  is  certainly  correct,  but  it  is 
no  more  than  a  particular  application  of  the  principle  to  subjects 
which  have  the  reality  of  things,  are  composed  of  parts,  and  are 
capable  of  change  in  time.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  incorrect  to 
distinguish,  as  is  often  done  tacitly  and  not  less  often  explicitly  in 
formulating  this  principle,  between  consistent  predicates,  which  can 
belong  at  the  same  time  to  the  same  subject,  and  others  which  cannot 
because  they  are  inconsistent  with  one  another  and  with  the  nature  of 
the  subject  In  the  applications  of  thought,  of  course,  this  distinction 
too  has  its  validity,  when  it  has  justified  itself  before  the  law  of 
Identity ;  but,  taken  as  it  stands,  that  law  knows  nothing  of  predicates 
which,  though  different  from  S,  are  still  so  far  consistent  with  it  that 
they  could  !>e  combined  with  it  in  a  categorical  judgment ;  on  the 
contrary,  every  predicate  P  which  differs  in  any  way  whatever  from  S, 
however  friendly  to  Sit  might  otherwise  be  conceived  to  be,  is  entirely 
irreconcileable  with  it;  every  judgment  of  the  form,  'S  is  /Y  is  impos- 
sible, and  in  the  strictest  sense  we  cannot  get  further  than  saying,  **$' is  S ' 
and  *P  is  /V  The  same  interpretation  of  the  principle  must  also  be 
maintained  against  other  metaphysical  inferences  which  are  drawn 
from  it.  It  may  be  that  in  the  course  of  metaphysical  enquiry  it 
becomes  necessary  to  make  such  assertions  as,  What  is  contradictory 
cannot  be  real,  What  is  must  be  unchangeable,  and  the  like :  but  the 
logical  law  of  identity  says  only,  What  is  contradictory  is  contradictory, 
What  is  is,  What  is  changeable  is  changeable :  all  such  judgments  as 
make  one  of  these'  concepts  the  predicate  of  another  require  a  further 
special  explanation. 


CHAPTER  IT.]   Particular  or  Quantitative  Judgment.         61 


B.  The  Particular  Judgment.      The  Hypothetical  Judgment.     The 
Principle  of  sufficient  Reason. 

58.  It  would  be  wearisome  to  stay  longer  at  a  point  of  view  in 
which  we  could  never  permanently  rest :  we  will  follow  thought  to 
the  new  forms  in  which  it  tries  to  bring  its  categorical  judgments 
into  harmony  with  the  law  of  identity.  Judgments  of  the  form  (S  is  P ' 
are  called  synthetical,  when  P  is  understood  to  be  a  mark  not  already 
contained  in  that  group  of  marks  which  enables  us  to  conceive  S  dis- 
tinctly ;  they  are  called  analytical  when  P,  though  not  identical  with 
the  whole  of  S,  yet  belongs  essentially  to  those  marks  the  union  of 
which  is  necessary  to  make  the  concept  of  6"  complete.  In  the 
analytical  judgment  people  have  found  no  difficulty ;  but  the  synthetical 
attracted  attention  at  an  early  period,  and  Kant's  treatment  of  it  in 
particular  has  recently  made  it  conspicuous.  He  too  however  was 
mainly  interested  in  accounting  for  the  possibility  of  synthetical  judg- 
ments a  priori,  i.  e.  such  as  assert  an  existing  and  necessary  con- 
nexion between  £  and  a  concept  P  not  indispensable  to  S,  without  the 
need  of  appealing  to  the  experience  of  its  actual  occurrence :  as  to 
synthetic  judgments  a  posteriori,  which  merely  state  that  such  a  con- 
nexion between  two  not  mutually  indispensable  concepts  is  found  or 
has  been  found  in  experience,  he  regarded  them  as  simple  expressions 
of  facts  and  therefore  free  from  difficulty.  These  distinctions  may  be 
fully  justified  within  the  circle  of  enquiry  in  which  Kant  moved ;  but 
our  logical  question  as  to  the  possibility  of  categorical  judgments  ex- 
tends to  all  three  forms  with  equal  urgency.  The  necessity  of  justifi- 
cation before  the  principle  of  identity  is  only  more  obvious  in  the 
case  of  the  a  priori  synthetical  judgment,  which  formally  contradicts 
that  principle ;  but  it  holds  good  of  the  a  posteriori  also.  For  a  judg- 
ment does  not  simply  reproduce  the  fact  like  a  mirror;  it  always 
introduces  into  the  observed  elements  of  the  fact  the  thought  of  an 
inner  relation,  which  is  not  included  in  the  observation.  Experience 
shows  us  only  that  *$*  and  P  are  together ;  but  that  they  are  inwardly 
connected,  as  we  imply  when  we  predicate  P  of  S  in  the  judgment,  is 
only  the  interpretation  which  our  mind  puts  upon  the  fact  How 
this  relation  can  subsist  between  subject  and  predicate  in  general,  and 
between  S  and  P  in  particular,  is  just  as  obscure  after  experience  has 
shown  the  coexistence  to  be  a  fact  as  when  we  assert  it  in  anticipation 
of  experience.  -  Lastly,  analytical  judgments  raise  the  same  difficulty. 
However  much  yellow  may  be  already  contained  in  the  concept  of 


62  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment.  [ROOKI. 

gold,  the  judgment  *  gold  Is  yellow '  does  not  assert  merely  that  the 
idea  of  yellow  lies  in  the  idea  of  gold,  but  ascribes  yellowness  to  gold 
as  its  property ;  gold  must  therefore  have  a  determinate  relation  to  it, 
which  is  not  the  relation  of  identity.  This  relation  has  to  be  ex- 
plained, and  the  question  still  remains,  What  right  have  we  to  assign 
to  S  a  P  which  is  not  S,  as  a  predicate  in  a  categorical  judg- 
ment ? 

57.  The  only  answer  can  be,  that  we  have  no  right :  the  number- 
less categorical  judgments  of  this  form  which  we  make  in  daily  life 
can  only  be  justified  by  showing  that  they  mean  something  quite  dif- 
ferent from  what  they  say,  and  that,  if  we  emphasize  what  they  mean, 
they  are  in  fact  Identical  judgments  in  the  full  sense  required  by  the 
principle  of  identity.  The  first  form  in  which  we  get  a  hint  of  this 
in  the  natural  course  of  thought  is  that  of  ynanttiatnw  judgments  in 
general,  which  I  shall  in  future  call  shortly  particular^  and  consider  as 
the  first  form  of  this  second  group  of  judgments.  Under  tins  title  I  in- 
clude not  only  the  traditional  forms,  such  as,  'all  S  are  ./V  *  sonic?  *S*ur<; 
,/V  this  (,S'  is  /V  which  have  for  their  subject  a  number  of  instances  of 
the  general  concept  *Sf,  but  those  also  which  in  various  other  ways  limit 
to  definite  cases,  and  therefore  particularise,  the  universal  application 
of  the  connexion  between  S  and  /*,  whether  by  particles  of  time 
(now,  often,  etc.),  or  by  those  of  space  (here,  there,  etc.),  or  again  by 
a  past  or  future  tense  of  the  verb,  or  lastly  by  any  kind  of  accessory 
idea,  imperfectly  expressed  or  not  expressed  at,  all*  In  the  genera! 
formula  of  the  categorical  judgment,  '£>  is  /V  it  looks  as  if  the  universal 
*$'  were  the  subject,  the  universal  P  its  predicate,  and  the  constant, 
unchangeable,  and  unlimited,  connexion  of  *S'  and  P  the  import  of  the 
whole  judgment,  If  on  the  other  hand  we  supply  explicitly  what  is 
suggested,  or  at  any  rate  is  meant,  by  these  particularising  accessory 
ideas,  we  find  that  the  true  subject  is  not  the  universal  »V,  but  i',  a  de- 
terminate instance  of  it ;  that  the  true  predicate  is  not  the  universal  /*, 
hut  II,  «i  particular  modification  of  it ;  and  lastly  that  the  relation 
asserted  is  not  between  .V  and  /',  but  between  S  and  II,  and  that  this 
relation,  if  the  supplementary  ideas  are  correct,  Is  no  longer  a  syn- 
thetical, nor  even  an  analytical  one,  but  simply  one  of  identity,  A  few 
instances  will  make  this  clear, 

68.  We  say,  *  some  men  are  black/ and  suppose  ourselves  to  be 
making  a  synthetical  judgment,  because  blackness  is  not  contained  in 
the  concept  of  man.  Hut  the  true  subject  of  this  sentence  is  not  the 
universal  concept  c  wan  *  (for  it  is  not  that  which  is  black),  but  cer- 
tain individual  men;  these  individuals,  however,  though  they  are 


CHAPTER  iL]    Subject  and  Predicate  of  Particular,  6$ 

expressed  as  merely  an  Indefinite  portion  of  the  whole  of  humanity., 
are  yet  by  no  means  understood  to  be  such  an  indefinite  portion  ;  for 
it  is  not  left  to  our  choice  what  individuals  we  will  take  out  of  the 
whole  mass  of  men ;  our  selection,  which  makes  them  £  some '  men, 
does  not  make  them  black  if  they  are  not  so  without  it ;  we  have? 
then,  to  choose  those  men,  and  we  mean  all  along  only  those  men3 
who  are  black,  in  short,  negroes ;  these  are  the  true  subject  of  the 
judgment.  That  the  predicate  is  not  meant  in  its  universality,  that 
on  the  contrary  only  the  particular  black  is  meant  which  is  found  on 
human  bodies,  is  at  once  clear,  and  I  shall  follow  out  this  remark 
later ;  here  I  will  only  observe  that  it  is  merely  want  of  inflexion  in 
the  German  expression  which  deceives  us  as  to  its  proper  sense;  the 
Latin  'nonnulli  homines  sunt  nigri'  shows  at  once  by  number  and 
gender  that  '  homines '  has  to  be  supplied  to. '  nigri.!  The  full  sense? 
then,  of  the  judgment  is.  '  some  men,  by  whom  however  we  are  only 
to  understand  black  men,  are  black  men ; 7  as  regards  its  matter  it  is 
perfectly  identical,  and  as  regards  its  form  It  is  only  synthetical 
because  one  and  the  same  subject  is  expressed  from  two  different 
points  of  view,  as  black  men  in  the  predicate,  as  a  fragment  of  all 
men  in  the  subject.  Again,  we  say,  'the  dog  drinks.5  But  the 
universal  dog  does  not  drink ;  only  a  single  definite  dog,  or  many, 
or  all  single  dogs,  are  the  subject  of  the  sentence.  In  the  predicate 
too  we  mean  something  different  from  what  we  express :  we  do  not 
think  of  the  dog  as  a  sort  of  ever-running  syphon ;  he  does  not  drink 
simply,  always,  and  unceasingly,  but  now  and  then.  And  this  c  now 
and  then'  also,  though  expressed  as  an  indefinite  number  of  moments, 
is  not  so  meant;  the  dog  drinks  only  at  definite  moments,  when  he 
is  thirsty  or  at  any  rate  inclined,  when  he  finds  something  to  drink, 
when  nobody  stops  him;  in  short,  the  dog  which  we  mean  in  this 
judgment  is  really  only  the  drinking  dog,  and  the  same  drinking  dog 
is  also  the  predicate.  Again,  £  Caesar  crossed  the  Rubicon  ;'  but  not 
the  Caesar  who  lay  in  the  cradle,  or  was  asleep,  or  was  undecided  what 
to  do,  but  the  Caesar  who  came  out  of  Gaul,  who  was  awake,  conscious 
of  the  situation,  and  had  made  up  his  mind ;  in  a  word,  the  Caesar 
whom  the  subject  of  this  judgment  means  is  that  Caesar  only 'whom  the 
predicate  characterises,  the  Caesar  who  is  crossing  the  Rubicon,  and 
in  no  previous  moment  of  his  life  was  he  the  subject  to  whom  this 
predicate  could  have  been  attached.  It  is  obvious  moreover  to  every 
capacity  that  when  he  had  crossed  the  river  he  could  not  go  on  crossing 
it,  but  was  across,  so  that  in  no  subsequent  moment  of  his  life  either 
can  he  be  the  subject  intended  in  this  judgment.  I  will  give  two  more 


64  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment,  c  BOOK  i. 

examples,  which  Kant  has  made  famous.  It  is  said  that  the  judgments 
s  a  straight  line  is  the  shortest  way  between  two  points/  is  synthetical, 
for  neither  in  the  concept  6  straight'  nor  in  that  of  Mine7  is  there  any 

suggestion  of  longitudinal  measure.  But  the  actual  geometrical 
judgment  does  not  say  of  a  straight  line  in  genera!  that  it  is  this 
shortest  way,  but  only  of  that  one  which  is  included  between  those 
two  points.  Now  this  fact,  the  fact  that  its  extension  is  bounded  by 
two  points,  (and  it  is  only  with  this  qualification  that  it  forms  the  true 
subject  of  the  sentence)  is  the  ground,  in  this  case  certainly  the 
satisfactory  ground,  for  assigning  the  predicate  to  it.  It  is  easy  to  see 
that  the  concept  of  a  straight  line  a  I  between  the  points  a  and  b 
is  perfectly  identical  with  the  concept  of  the  distance  of  the  two 
points  ;  for  we  cannot  give  any  other  idea  of  what  we  mean  by 
c  distance  in  space'  than  this,  that  it  is  the  length  of  the  straight  line 
between  a  and  b.  There  is  not  therefore  a  shorter  and  a  longer 
distance  between  a  and  <&,  but  only  the  one  distance  abt  which  is 
always  the  same.  On  the  other  hand,  we  can  speak  of  shorter  and 
longer  STWJV  between  a  and  l\  the  concept  of  way  implies  merely  any 
sort  of  progression  which  leads  from  a  to  l\  as  this  requires  the 
getting  over  of  the  difference  which  separates  b  from  #,  there  can  be 
no  way  leading  from  a  to  b  which  leaves  any  part  of  this  difference 
not  got  over;  accordingly,  that  the  shortest  of  all  possible  ways 
is  the  distance,  i.e.  the  straight  line  between  the  given  points,  is  a 
judgment  which,  as  regards  its  matter,  is  perfectly  identical,  and 
merely  regards  the  same  object  from  different  aspects.  Nor  again 
can  the  arithmetical  judgment,  7  +  5=12,  be  synthetical  because  12 
Is  not  contained  in  cither  7  or  5  ;  the  complete  subject  does  not 
consist  in  either  of  these  quantities  singly,  but  in  the  combination  of 
them  required  by  the  sign  of  addition ;  but  in  this  combination,  if  the 
equation  is  correct,  the  predicate  must  be  wholly  contained ;  the 
equation  would  be  false  if  some  unknown  quantity  had  to  be  added 
to  7 +  5  in  order  to  produce  12.  Here  too,  then,  we  have  a  perfectly 
identical  judgment  as  regards  its  matter,  and  it  is  only  synthetical 
formally  because  it  exhibits  the  same  number  1 2  first  as  the  sum  of 
two  other  quantities,  and  then  as  determined  by  its  order  in  the 
simple  scries  of  numbers.  I  must  now  add  that  it  is  impossible  to 
express  everything  satisfactorily  all  at  once :  what  it  really  means,  and 
how  it  is  possible,  that  thought  should  represent  the  same  matter 
under  different  forms,  we  shall  very  soon  have  occasion  to  consider; 
and  subsequently  it  will  appear  that  my  late  'remarks  were  not 
intended  to  charge  Kant  with  a  logical  oversight  so  easily  detected* 


CHAPTER  no       Identity  destroys  the  Judgment.  65 

59.  So  far  our  result  seems  to  be  this:  categorical  judgments  of 
the  form  1S  is  Py  are  admissible  in  practice  because  they  are  always 
conceived  in  the  sense  which  we  have  called  particular,  and  as  such 
are  ultimately  identical.  No  one  however  will  feel  satisfied  with  this 
conclusion:  it  will  be  rightly  objected  that  it  does  away  with  the 
essential  character  of  a  judgment,  which  is  that  it  expresses  a  co- 
herence between  the  contents  of  two  ideas.  In  fact,  if,  by  the 
supplementary  additions  which  we  spoke  of,  we  make  our  examples 
into  identical  judgments,  and  thus  compress  their  whole  content  into 
their  subjects,  so  that  A  means  the  black  man,  B  the  drinking  clog, 
C  Caesar  crossing  the  Rubicon,  all  that  they  say,  except  the  barren 
truth  that  A  =•  A,  B  =  B>  C  =  C,  is  reduced  to  this,  that  A  exists  as 
a  fact  continually,  B  sometimes,  and  C  has  occurred  once  in  history. 
In  other  words,  these  judgments  no  longer  assert  any  mutual  relation 
between  the  parts  of  their  content^  but  only  that  this  content  as  a 
composite  whole  is  a  more  or  less  widely  extended  fact,  and  this  is 
clearly  a  relapse  to  the  imperfect  stage  of  the  impersonal  judgment 
The  following  consideration  will  make  us  still  more  sensible  of  this 
defect.  I  just  now  described  B  as  the  concept  of  the  drinking  dog, 
but  properly  I  had  no  right  to  do  so ;  for  this  expression,  which  joins 
'drinking7  in  the  form  of  a  participle  to  the  subject  'dog,'  is  itself  only 
conceivable  and  admissible  on  the  assumption  that  the  mark  of 
drinking,  P,  which  is  not  contained  in  the  subject  *S',  can  really  be 
ascribed  to  that  subject  in  a  categorical  judgment,  and  ascribed  to  it 
in  the  sense  of  its  property  or  state.  Now  just  this  possibility  has 
been  done  away  with  by  our  previous  explanation ;  all  that  it  is  now 
competent  to  us  to  do  is  to  understand  B  as  the  coexistent  sum  of 
its  marks  alcd^  and  to  say,  this  alcd^  winch  according  to  the 
principle  of  identity  is  always  self-same,  has  a  certain  reality,  while 
another  aggregate  of  marks,  a  b  c  e,  has  a  similar  reality  on  another 
occasion.  But  we  have  no  right  whatever  to  regard  the  common 
group  <23  3,  C)  as  something  inwardly  connected,  and  more  connected 
in  itself  than  with  the  varying  elements  d  and  et  still  less  as  something 
which  offers  a  support  to  these  changing  elements  as  subject  to 
attributes.  In  language,  indeed,  we  should  continue  to  describe  this 
a  b  c  as  '  dog,'  a  b  c  d  as  c  eating,7  and  alee  as  '  drinking  dog  ' ; 
but  these  expressions  would  rest  upon  no  logical  ground  ;  none  of  our 
judgments  could  express  anything  but  simple  or  composite  perceptions, 
and  between  the  several  perceptions,  or  even  the  several  parts  of  each 
composite  perception,  there  could  be  no  expressible  connexion  such  as 
could  show  their  mere  coexistence  to  be  due  to  inner  coherence. 


66  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment.  [DOOKI. 

80.  Against  such  a  complete  failure  In  its  logical  purpose  the 
mind  guards  itself,  by  further  transforming  the  particular  judgment  in 
a  way  which  may  be  primarily  considered  as  a  simple  denial  that  the 
material  of  our  ideas  is  thus  disintegrated  into  merely  isolated  coexistent 
facts.  The  additions  by  which  we  supplemented  the  subject  »V  ex- 
pressed in  the  categorical  judgment,  were  the  means  by  which  we 
helped  that  judgment  to  justify  itself  before  the  principle  of  identity  ; 
they  are  now  recognised  as  being  also  the  valid  ground  of  fact  which 
qualifies  *$'  for  assuming  a  predicate  P,  which,  so  long  as  it  stood 
alone,  would  not  belong  to  it  The  accessory  circumstances,  through 
which  *$'  first  became  the  true  subject  2  of  a  then  identical  judgment, 
appear  now  as  the  conditwns,  by  the  operation  oj  presence  of  which 
»$'  is  so  influenced  that  a  P,  which  before  was  strange  to  it,  now  (its 
and  belongs  to  it  consistently  with  the  principle  of  identity.  It  is 
therefore  the  hypothetical  judgment  which  takes  its  place  as  the  second 
member  in  this  second  group  of  the  forms  of  judgment ;  it  is  coin- 
pounded  of  a  protasis  and  an  apodosis,  which  in  the  simplest  typical 
case  have  the  same  subject  *S'3  but  different  predicates,  in  the  protasis 
a  Q  which  expresses  the  condition  accruing  to  *S'7  in  the  apndosis 
u  P  which  expresses  the  mark  produced  in  *V  by  that  (..ondilion.  All 
hypothetical  judgments  with  different  subjects  in  their  two  members 
are  abbreviated  expressions,  and  can  be  reduced  by  easily  sup- 
plied links  to  this  original  form,  4  If  *V  is  $,  A*  is  P?  If  it  is  further 
wished  to  imply  that  the  protasis,  which  as  such  is  only  proble- 
matical, is  actually  true,  we  get  the  form,  ^  Because  S  is  Q,  $  is  />9: 
and  lastly,  the  assertion  that  Q  is  not  the  ground  for  ,S"s  being  P 
gives  rise  to  the  last  form  which  we  need  mention,  *  AlUwugh  S  is 
Q,  yet  «S*  is  not  7V  Logically  there  is  nothing  peculiar  in  tlie.se  two 
forms. 

61.  This  short  survey  is  quite  sufficient  to  characterise  the  external 
forms  of  the  hypothetical  judgment,  But  an  observant  reader  must 
ask  at  this  point,  what  right  had  we  to  translate  those  supplementary 
additions,  to  which  the  true?  subject  s  of  the  then  identical  judgment 
owed  its  origin,  into  cofitWwns^  which,  by  operating*  upon  an  already 
existing  subject  •$",  //«v  a  gnmntl  for  the  predication  of  /\  The 
principle  of  identity  merely  asserts  the  sameness  of  everything  with 
itself;  the  only  relation  in  which  it  places  two  different  tilings  is  that 
of  mutual  exclusion,  If  then  we  supposed  various  simple  elements 
a^€P(l  existing  together  in  some  real  form,  but  without  being  in  any 
way  inwardly  connected,  some  of  these  elements  might  equally  well 
occur  at  any  subsequent  moment  in  any  other  combination  with  any 


CHAPTER  no  The  idea  of  a  '  Condition!  67 

other  element,  and  the  fact  of  our  observing  a  I  c  q  a  second  time 
would  not  enable  us  to  conclude  that  /  must  be  there  too ;  any  r  or  s 
might  with  equal  right  take  Its  place.  On.the  other  hand,  if  we  make 
the  quite  general  presupposition  that  the  totality  of  things  thinkable 
and  real  is  not  merely  a  sum  which  coexists  but  a  whole  which 
•  coheres,  then  the  law  of  identity  has  wider  consequences.  The  same 
abcq>  with  which  p  has  once  been  found  in  combination,  can  then 
according  to  the  law  of  identity  never  be  found  in  combination  with 
a  non-/,  nor  can  this  abcq  ever  occur  without  Its  former  predicate/. 
How  such  a  cohesion  between  different  elements  is  conceivable,  we  will 
leave  for  a  moment  an  open  question ;  but  if  it  exists,  it  must  exist  in 
an  identical  form  in  every  recurrent  instance,  and  (confining  ourselves 
to  a  combination  of  three  elements)  given  a  b,  c  is  the  only  new 
element  which  can  necessarily  accrue,  given  a  c,  5,  and  given  l>  c,  a ; 
in  other  words,  whichever  of  these  elements  occurs  first  in  any  case  has 
in  the  second  the  sufficient  and  necessary  condition  for  the  possibility 
and  necessity  of  the  accession  of  the  third.  That  element  or  group  of 
elements  to  which  we  here  give  the  first  place,  appears  to  us  then 
logically  as  the  subject ;  that  which  we  place  second,  as  the  condition 
which  operates  upon  this  subject,  while  the  third  represents  the 
consequence  produced  in  the  subject  by  the  condition.  I  wish  further 
expressly  to  point  out  that  this  choice  of  places  is  quite  arbitrary,  and 
in  practice  is  decided  by  the  nature  of  the  object  and  our  interest  in 
it:  in  itself,  every  element  in  such  a  combination  is  a  function  of  the  rest, 
and  we  can  pass  inferential!/  from  any  one  to  any  other.  It  is  usual 
to  conceive  of  a  number  of  elements  which  frequently  recur  together 
as  a  subject  S,  which  generally  signifies  a  thing  or  permanent  reality : 
on  the  other  hand,  a  single  element  b,  which  is  absent  in  some  ob- 
servations of  S  and  present  in  others,  is  conceived  as  the  accessory 
condition  Q,  and  a  c,  which  always  accompanies  3,  as  the  consequence 
P  of  which  Q  is  the  condition.  But  it  is  obvious  that  we  may  pro- 
ceed in  a  different  way;  and  in  fact  mechanical  physics  are  able  to 
treat  the  single  and  uniform  force  of  gravity,  b  or  Q,  as  a  subject,  and 
to  investigate  the  various  consequences,  P,  which  accrue  to  it  if  the 
bodies  upon  which  it  acts  (a  m  n  =  S  or  a  m  r  =  S1)  be  regarded  as 
different  conditions  to  whose  influence  it  is  liable. 

62.  In  this  way  the  interpretation  by  which  we  arrived  at 
Hypothetical  judgments  may  be  said  to  be  so  far  justified,  as  that  it 
has  been  traced  back  to  the  most  general  assumption  of  a  coherence 
between  the  various  contents  of  thought.  To  prove  further  than  this 
the  admissibility  and  truth  of  that  assumption  itself,  cannot  be  part  of 

F  2 


68  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment.  [BOOK  i. 

our  undertaking ;  any  such  attempt  would  obviously  imply  what  had 
to  be  proved,  for  how  could  we  show  that  it  is  permissible  and 
necessary  to  conceive  the  matter  of  experience  as  a  web  of  reasons 
and  consequents ^  if  we  did  not  base  this  assertion  itself  upon  a  reason 
of  which  it  was  the  consequence  ?  This  idea  of  the  coherence  of  the 
world  of  thought  must  therefore  either  be  apprehended  with  immediate 
certitude,  as  the  soul  of  all  thinking,  or  we  must  give  it  up  and  along 
with  it  everything  that  depends  upon  it.  On  the  other  hand,  we  are 
justified  in  desiring  further  elucidation  of  the  possibility  and  the 
meaning  of  such  a  coherence  of  different  elements.  The  possibility 
of  mutual  relations  between  what  is  different  is  not  really  threatened 
by  the  principle  of  identity,  according  to  which  each  thing  is  related 
only  to  itself;  for  all  that  this  principle  can  affirm  is  the  content 
of  the  thing  itself;  it  cannot  exclude  other  contents  which  do 
not  conflict  with  it.  But  as  regards  the  meaning  of  the  coherence, 
we  must  distinguish  two  questions.  In  logic  as  here  conceived  we 
do  not  trouble  ourselves  at  all  as  to  what  the  real  process  may  be 
through  which  the  unknown  reality,  which  we  express  well  or  ill 
through  our  ideas,  reacts  upon  itself  and  produces  change's  in  its 
conditions ;  to  reflect  upon  the  bond  of  this  connexion  is  the  function 
of  metaphysic,  and  the  question  should  find  solution  in  a  theory  of  the 
efficient  cause.  Logic,  on  the  other  hand,  which  includes  in  its 
consideration  the  relations  of  the  merely  thinkable  which  has  no  real 
existence  in  fact,  is  confined  to  developing  the  other  principle,  that  of 
sufficient  reason ;  it  has  merely  to  show  how,  from  the  combination  of 
two  contents  of  thought,  *V  and  Q,  the  necessity  arises  of  thinking 
a  third,  P9  and  this  in  a  definite  relation  to  *$';  if  then  it  were  found 
in  actual  experience  that  such  a  union  of  S{  and  Ql  is  an  accom- 
plished fact,  the  particular  consequence  Pl,  which  according  to  the 
necessity  of  thought  must  follow  .such  a  combination  in  distinction 
from  P'1  which  could  not  so  follow,  could  be  inferred  according 
to  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason ;  but  how  it  comes  about 
that  the  very  P\  which  is  required  by  thought,  occurs  in  reality  as 
well,  is  a  question  which  would  be  left  to  the  metaphysical  enquiries 
referred  to, 

63.  The  law  of  sufficient  reason^  with  which  we  now  conclude 
as  the  third  member  and  the  net  result  of  this  second  group  of 
the  forms  of  judgment,  much  as  it  has  been  talked  about,  has 
had  the  curious  fortune  never  to  have  been,  properly  speaking, 
formulated,  even  by  those  who  most  frequently  appealed  to  it. 
For  the  ordinary  injunction,  that  for  every  statement  which  claims 


CHAPTER  iL]  *  Condition '  and £  Reason!  69 

validity  we  must  seek  a  ground  for  its  validity,  forgets  that  we 
cannot  seek  for  that  of  which  we  do  not  know  wherein  it  consists ; 
clearly  the  first  thing  that  has  to  be  explained  is,  in  what  relation 
reason  and  consequence  stand  to  each  other,  and  in  what  sort  of 
thing  consequently  we  may  hope  to  discover  the  reason  of  another 
thing.  I  shall  make  my  meaning  clear  in  the  shortest  way,  if,  on  the 
analogy  of  the  expression  of  the  principle  of  identity,  A  =  A,  I  at 
once  give  the  formula  A  +  JB  =  C  as  the  expression  of  the  principle 
of  sufficient  reason,  adding  the  following  explanation.  Taken  by 
themselves,  A  only  =  A,  £  =  B\  but  there  is  no  reason  why  a  par- 
ticular combination  A  +  JB,  the  very  different  sense  of  which  in 
different  cases  is  here  represented  by  the  sign  of  addition,  should  not 
be  equivalent  to,  or  -  identical  with,  the  simple  content  of  the  new 
concept  C.  If  we  thus  call  A  +  B  the  reason  and  C  the  conse- 
quence, reason  and  consequence  are  completely  identical,  and  the  one 
ts  the  other;  in  this  case  we  must  understand  by  A  +  B  any  given 
subject  along  with  the  condition  by  which  it  is  influenced,  and  by  C, 
not  a  new  predicate  which  is  the  consequence  of  this  subject,  but  the 
subject  itself  in  its  form  as  altered  by  the  predicate.  In  ordinary  usage 
this  is  expressed  differently.  Inasmuch  as,  in  speaking  of  real  facts,  the 
one  part  A  is  usually  already  given,  while  the  other  B  is  a  subsequent 
addition,  it  is  customary  to  describe  the  condition  B>  which  forms  only 
a  part  of  the  whole  reason  A  +  B,  as  the  reason  in  general  which 
acts  upon  the  passive  subject  A]  by  C  is  then  usually  understood 
nothing  but  the  new  property  conditioned  by  B,  and  this  is  called  the 
consequence;  at  the  same  time,  however,  the  property  is  never 
thought  of  as  existing  on  its  own  account,  as  if  in  empty  space,  but 
as  attaching  to  the  subject  A  upon  which  B  was  supposed  to  act. 
Ordinary  usage,  therefore,  though  it  employs  a  different  nomenclature, 
means  the  same  as  I  do.  If  with  the  idea  of  powder,  A,  we  connect 
the  idea  of  the  high  temperature  of  the  spark,  JB,  and  thus  substitute 
B  for  the  mark  of  ordinary  temperature  in  A}  then  A  -f  B  really 
is  the  idea  C  of  exploding  powder,  not  of  explosion  in  general ;  the 
ordinary  usage  makes  the  high  temperature  B  seem  to  supervene 
on  the  given  subject  A  as  a  reason  from  which  the  explosion  C 
follows ;  but  of  course  it  conceives  this  consequence,  not  as  a  process 
which  takes  place  anywhere,  but  as  an  expansion  of  the  particular 
powder  upon  which  the  spark  acted.  It  is  not  necessary  to  continue 
such  simple  explanations  any  further. 

64.  If  we  consider  the  whole  of  our  knowledge,  we  see  at-  once 
that  the  principle  of  identity  cannot  be  its  only  source.    Taken  alone 


70  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment.  i  BOOK  L 

It  would  isolate  every  judgment  and. even  every  concept,  and  would 
not  open  any  way  to  a  progress  from  the  barren  self-identity  of  single 
elements  of  thought  to  their  fruitful  combination  with  others.  It  is  a 
mistake,  as  is  sometimes  clone,  to  represent  this  single  principle  as 
the  basis  of  the  truths  of  mathematics;  the  fact  is  that  here  too  it  is 
only  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason  which  helps  to  real  discovery, 
From  a-self-identical  major  premiss  nothing  new  could  flow,  unless  it 
were  possible  in  a  number  of  minor  premisses  to  give  the  same 
quantity  C  innumerable  equivalent  forms,  at  one  lime  =  A  ~j~  J3t  at 
another  =  M  +  N,  at  another  =  N  —  JR  ;  or,  to  express  the 
same  thing  otherwise,  unless  the  nature  of  numbers  were  such  that 
we  can  divide  them  all  in  innumerable  ways  and  compound  them 
again  in  the  most  manifold  combinations ;  and  again,  unless  the 
nature  of  space  were  such  that  every  line  can  be  inserted  as  a  part 
or  otherwise  coherent  member  in  innumerable  figures  in  the  most 
various  positions,  and  that  each  one  of  the  expressions  for  it,  which 
flow  from  these  various  relations,  is  the  ground  for  new  and  manifold 
consequences.  I  need  hardly  mention  that  mechanics  and  physics 
also  make  the  most  extensive  use  of  this  analysis  and  composition  of 
given  facts,  and  that  the  process  of  thought  in  discovery  in  these 
branches  of  knowledge  rests  upon  operations  which  all  ultimately 
come  back  to  the  typical  formula,  A  +  J3  .=  C.  To  Ilerbart  belongs 
the  credit  of  having  brought  within  the  ken  of  formal  logic  the 
importance  of  a  mode  of  procedure  so  prominent  in  all  scientific 
practice. 

05.  Reserving  further  illustrations  for  applied  logic,  1  have  another 
remark  to  make  about  the  justification  of  the  principle  of  sufficient 
reason  itself.  We  were  only  able  to  show  that  an  extension  of  our 
knowledge  is  possible  //"there  is  a  principle  which  allows  us  to  make 
A  «f  -#  =  C.  We  might  accordingly  attempt  to  assert  the  validity  of 
this  principle  at  once,  as  tin  immediate  certitude,  like  the  principle  of 
identity.  This  is  what  we  have  done;  still  there  is  a  noticeable 
difference  between  the  two  principles.  The  principle  of  identity 
expresses  of  every  A  an  equality  with  itself  which  we  feel  immediately 
to  be  necessary,  and  the  opposite  of  which  also  we  feel  with  equal 
conviction  to  be  impossible  in  thought.  The  principle  of  sufficient 
reason  lacks  this  latter  support;  we  do  not  by  any  means  feel  it 
impossible  to  suppose  that,  while  every  content  of  thought  is  self- 
identical,  no  combination  of  two  contents  is  ever  equivalent  to  a  third, 
The  validity  of  the  latter  principle,  therefore,  is  of  a  different  kind 
from  that  of  the  former ;  if  we  call  the  one  necessary  to  thought 


CHAPTER  n.j  The  fact  of  coherent  Ideas.  7 1 

because  of  the  impossibility  of  Its  opposite,  the  other  must  be  con- 
sidered rather  as  an  assumption  which  serves  the  purposes  of  thought, 
an  assumption  of  mutual  relatedness  in  thinkable  matter  the  truth  of 
which  is  guaranteed  by  the  concentrated  impression  of  all  experience* 
I  wish  not  to  be  misunderstood  in  this  last  phrase.  In  the  first 
place,  I  do  not  mean  that  it  is  a  comparison  of  what  we  experience 
which  first  leads  the  mind  to  conjecture  the  validity  of  such  a  prin- 
ciple y  the  general  tendency  of  the  logical  spirit,  to  exhibit  the  co- 
existent as  coherent,  contains  in  itself  the  impulse,  which,  inde- 
pendently even  of  all  actual  experience,  would  lead  to  the  assumption 
of  a  connexion  of  reasons  and  consequences.  But  that  this  assump- 
tion is  confirmed,  that  thought  does  come  upon  such  identities  or 
equivalences  between  different  elements  in  the  thinkable  matter  which 
It  does  not  make,  but  receives  or  finds,  this  is  a  fortunate  fact, 
a  fortunate  trait  in  the  organisation  of  the  thinkable  world,  a  trait 
which  does  really  exist,  but  has  not  the  same  necessity  for  existing  as 
the  principle  of  identity.  It  is  not  impossible  to  conceive  a  world  in 
which  everything  should  be  as  incommensurable  with  every  other 
thing  as  sweet  is  with  triangular,  and  in  which  therefore  there  was  no 
possibility  of  so  holding  two  different  things  together  as  to  give 
ground  for  a  third :  it  is  true  that,  if  such  a  world  existed,  the  mind 
would  not  know  what  to  do  with  it,  but  it  would  be  obliged  to  recognise 
it  as  possible  according  to  its  own  judgment.  I  will  add  further  that, 
when  I  speak  of  a  kind  of  empirical  confirmation  of  the  principle  of 
sufficient  reason,  I  do  not  mean  such  a  confirmation  as  the  whole  of 
our  world  of  thought,  already  articulated  in  accordance  with  that 
principle,  might  find  in  the  fact  that  external  reality,  so  far  as  it  Is 
observable,  corresponds  with  this  articulation ;  I  am  speaking  here 
only  of  the  fact  that  the  thinkable  world,  the  contents  of  our  ideas 
which,  whatever  their  source,  we  find  in  our  inner  experience,  do 
really  conform  to  the  requirement  that  they  should  cohere  as  reasons 
and  consequences.  In  this  stage  of  logic  it  is  quite  indifferent  whether 
or  not  there  is  anything  which  can  be  called  external  world  or  reality 
besides  the  ideas  which  move  within  our  consciousness ;  like  that 
reality,  this  internal  world  itself,  with  all  that  it  contains,  is  not  made 
by  thought ;  it  is  a  material  which  thought  finds  in  us  to  work  upon, 
and  it  is  therefore  for  the  logical  spirit  and  its  tendency  an  object 
of  inner  experience-;  /fa's,  then,  is  the  empirical  object  which,  by 
responding  to  the  logical  tendency  and  making  its  realisation  possible, 
substantiates  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason,  not  as  a  necessity  of 
thought,  but  as  a  fact. 


72  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment. 

60.  As  to  the  nature  of  this  responsiveness  In  the  world  of 
thought  (if  that  question  is  to  be  raised  again  here),  the  shortest  way 
to  recall  it  is  to  observe  that  the  position  occupied  in  the  system  by 
the  principle  of  sufficient  reason,  as  the  second  law  of  thought,  is 
analogous  to  that  of  the  act  which 1  we  placed  second  in  treating  of 
conception.  The  possibility  of  forming  general  concepts  depended 
on  the  fact,  not  in  itself  a  necessity  of  thought,  that  every  idea  is  not 
incommensurable  with  every  other,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  colours, 
tones,  and  shapes  group  themselves  in  series  of  cognisable  grada- 
tions ;  that  further  there  are  oppositions  of  varying  degree,  as  well  as 
affinities,  in  the  world  of  thought,  and  that  opposites  cancel  one 
another ;  and  lastly,  and  most  important  of  all,  that  there  is  a  system 
of  quantitative  determinations  enabling1  us  to  compare  the  members 
of  different  series,  which  as  such  stand  in  no  mutual  relation.  With 
this  brief  indication,  we  leave  the  principle  of  sufficient  reason  as  the 
conclusion  and  net  result  of  the  second  group  of  the  forms  of 
judgment. 


C.  The  General  Judgment*     The  Disjunctive  Judgment.     The 

Dictum  cle  omni  ct  nullo  and  Ike  Principium  exclusi  rneclil 

07.  It  remains  to  determine  in  each  particular  case,  What  A, 
combined  in  what  form  with  what  ./?,  forms  the  adequate  reason  of 
what  C.  This  question  of  fact  logic  must  leave  to  experience  and 
the  special  sciences ;  but  a  new  question  is  developed  which  logic 
itself  must  deal  with.  There  would  be  little  result  from  all  the 
activity  of  our  mind  if  we  were  really  obliged  in  every  particular  case 
to  renew  the  question  to  experience.  What  A,  //,  and  C  in  this 
instance  cohere  as  reason  and  consequence?  There  must  be  at 
any  rate  a  principle  which  allows  us,  when  once  the  one  truth 
A  4-  -2?  •=  C  is  given,  to  apply  it  to  cases  of  which  experience  has 
not  yet  informed  us.  What  we  are  here  looking  for  is  easy  to  find, 
and  has  been  already  mentioned  incidentally.  Whenever  we  regard 
A  4-  B  as  the  reason  of  a  consequence  C,  we  necessarily  conceive 
the  connexion  of  the  three  as  a  universal  one ;  A  +  JJ  would  not  be 
a  condition  of  C\  if,  in  a  second  case  of  its  occurrence,  some  casual 
D  instead  of  C  might  possibly  be  found  combined  with  it.  The 
significance  of  this  in  its  present  application  is  as  follows ;  every- 
where., in  every  subject  *$"  in  which  A  -f  JB  is  contained  as  a  mark 

1  [See  above,  §  19.] 


CHAPTER  no    '  General'  or  '  Generic y  Judgments.  73 

along  with  other  marks,  N  0  P,  this  A  +  B  gives  ground  for  the 
same  consequence  C;  and  this  C  will  either  actually  occur  as  a 
mark  of  *S*,  or,  if  it  does  not  occor,  it  can  only  be  hindered  because 
the  other  marks,  N  -f  0  or  N  +  P  or  O  -f  Pt  formed  together  the 
ground  for  a  consequence  opposed  to  and  destructive  of  C ;  taken  by 
itself,  without  this  hindrance,  the  power  of  A  +  B  to  condition  C 
never  loses  its  effect.  If  now  we  conceive  A  +  J5  under  the  title  M 
as  a  universal  concept  to  which  S  is  subordinate,  we  may  give  the 
following  preliminary  expression  to  the  principle  just  discovered, 
viz.  that  by  right  of  pure  logic  and  without  appeal  to  experience  every 
subject  may  have  that  predicate  affirmed  of  it  which  is  required  by 
the  generic  concept  above  it.  And  it  is  clear  without  further  ex- 
planation that  this  very  idea  of  the  subordination  of  the  individual  to 
the  universal  is  the  comprehensive  logical  instrument,  of  which  we 
avail  ourselves  whenever  we  want  to  carry  further  the  work  of  thought 
upon  the  material  given  in  experience. 

88.  The  form  of  judgment,  the  first  of  this  third  group,  in  which 
the  mind  expresses  this  conviction,  is  that  of  the  quantitatively  un- 
determined proposition,  in  which  the  place  of  the  subject  is  filled 
simply  by  a  universal  or  generic  concept  M\  f  man  is  mortal/  c  sin  is 
punishable/  I  distinguish  these  as  general  judgments  from  the 
universal  ones,  c  all  men  are  mortal/  c  every  sin  Is  punishable/  Al- 
though the  fact  contained  in  both  forms  is  the  same,  the  logical 
setting  of  it  in  the  two  cases  is  quite  different.  The  universal  judg- 
ment is  only  a  collection  of  many  singular  judgments,  the  sum  of 
whose  subjects  does  as  a  matter  of  fact  fill  up  the  whole  extent  of  the 
universal  concept ;  thus  the  fact  that  the  predicate  P  holds  good  of 
all  M  follows  here  only  from  the  fact  that  it  holds  good  of  every  single 
M;  it  may  however  hold  good  of  each  M  for  a  special  reason  which 
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  universal  nature  of  M.  Thus  the 
universal  proposition,  *  all  inhabitants  of  this  town  are  poor/  leaves  it 
quite  uncertain  whether  each  inhabitant  is  made  poor  by  a  particular 
cause,  or  whether  the  poverty  arises  from  his  being  an  inhabitant  of 
this  town;  so  too  the  universal  proposition,  'all  men  are  mortal/ 
leaves  it  still  an  open  question  whether,  strictly  speaking,  they  might 
not  all  live  for  ever,  and  whether  it  is  not  merely  a  remarkable  con- 
catenation of  circumstances,  different  in  every  different  case,  which 
finally  results  in  the  fact  that  no  one  remains  alive.  The  general 
judgment  on  the  other  hand,  c  man  is  mortal/  asserts  by  its  form  that 
it  lies  in  the  character  of  mankind  that  mortality  is  inseparable  from 
every  one  who  partakes  in  it.  While  therefore  the  universal  judg- 


74  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment. 

ment  merely  slates  a  universal  fact,  and  is  therefore  only  assertorial, 
the  Amoral  judgment  lets  the  reason  of  its  necessary  truth  be  seen 
through  it,  and  may  thus,  in  the  sense  laid  down  above1,  be  called 
apodeiclic.  This  distinction  of  the  two  forms  of  judgment  will  not  • 
lead  to  any  unheard-of  discoveries  ;  but  in  comparison  with  the  many 
unprofitable  distinctions  \vhich  encumber  logic  it  deserved  an  in- 
cidental mention.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  remark  that .  in  the 
general  judgment  it  is  not  the  generic  concept  Jlf,  occupying  the 
place  of  subject  in  the  sentence,  which  is  the  true  logical  subject  of  the 
judgment;  it  is  no!  the  universal  man  who  is  mortal,  but  the  in- 
dividual A*  who  participates  in  this  type,  which  in  itself  is  immortal. 
From  (his  we  see  that  the  genera!  judgment  is  properly  an  abbre- 
viated hypothetical  judgment;  in  its  full  form  it  ought  to  stand, 
Mf  .V  is  yl/?  *V  is  /V  *  If  n.ny  A*  is  a  man,  this  $  is  mortal'  And 
tins  justifies  us  in  not  introducing  it  in  our  system  until  after  the 
hypoihi-tiral. 

00,  Bui   if  is  no  less  clear  lhat  \ve  must  make  another  step.     So 
lnn<t  as  a  universal  grneric  concept  ,/J/'«n  curs  as  formally  the  subject 
in  the  'M-Tteral  judgment,  the  predicate  />  which  is  joined  to  it  can 
only  be    understood   with    equal   universality.     If  we    say,  'man  is 
mortal,'  the  pre.diYah!  embraces   all  conceivable  kinds  of  mortality, 
and  does  not  clelenninr  cither  the  manner  or  the  moment  of  death ; 
or  if  we  say,  'bodies  occupy  space?/  it  remains  unexpressed  with 
what  degree  of  density  and  of  resistance*  each  single  body  realises  the 
universal  property  of  its  class.     Hut  we  saw  that  it  is  individual  men 
and   individual    bodies   which    are   the    real    subjects   of  the  general 
judgment  ;  it  is  tlierdon*  quite  iVtlse  to  say  that  71,  the  mark  of  their 
class,  is  u  predicate  of  the  individuals  in  the  same  universal  sense  in 
which  it  is  joined  in  thought  (and  that  not  as  a  predicate)  to  the 
concept  of  the  class;  the  truth  is  that  P  can  only  occur  in  each  one 
of  ibrse  individuals  in  one  of  the  definite  forms  or  modifications  into 
which  thr  univcr.snl  /'  can  IK*  analysed  or  particularised.     The  mind 
corrects  this  mistake  by  means  of  the  fresh  assertion,  *  If  any  S  is  an 
J/,  this  Sis  either /  or/'  or/V'/  and  here/1//'/  mean  the  different 
kinds  of  a  universal   mark  P  which  in  contained  In   the   generic 
concept  ,!/".     This  is  the  familiar  form  of  the  tUsjunctm  judgment^  the 
second  in  tins  third  group,  and  one  which,  as  such,  requires  no 
further  explanation.     It  in  usual  to  mention  along  with  it  the  copufo* 
//re  judgment  (4  .S'  is  both  />  and  q  and  r '),  and  the  remoiiw  judgment 
(' .V  is  neither/  nor  q  nor  r*);  but  in  spite  of  the  external  analogy  of 

J  [Above,  §  4 a.] 


CHAi-TERiL]          The  Principle  of  Disjunction*  75 

form,  neither  of  these  has  the  same  logical  value  as  the  disjunctive ; 
the  first  is  only  a  collection  of  positive,  the  second  of  negative^ 
judgments  with  the  same  subject  and  different  predicates,  which 
latter  are  not  placed  in  any  logically  important  relation  to  each 
other.  The  disjunctive  judgment  alone  expresses  a  special  relation 
between  its  members :  it  gives  its  subject  no  predicate  at  all,  but 
prescribes  to  it  the  alternative  between  a  definite  number  of  different 
predicates. 

70.  The  thought  expressed  by  the  form  of  the  disjunctive  judg- 
ment usually  finds  utterance  in  two  separate  laws  of  thought,  the 
Dictum  de  omni  ef  nullo  and  the  Prindpmm  exclusi  teriii  inter  duo  con- 
tradictoria\  but  the  amalgamation  of  them  in  a  single  third  law  is  not  only 
easy  but  necessary.    The  careless  formulations  often  given  of  the  first 
are  completely  false,  e.  g.  c  What  is  true  of  the  universal  is  true  also  of 
the  particular,'  '  What  is  true  of  the  whole  is  true  also  of  the  parts' ; 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  self-evident  that  what  holds  good  of  the  universal 
as  such  or  of  the  whole  as  such,  cannot  hold  good  of  the  individual 
as  such  or  of  the  parts  as  such.    The  only  correct  formula  is,  quidquid 
de  o?nmbus  vale/  valet  ctiam  de  qitilusdam  ei  de  sing  tills  ^  and  quid  quid  de 
nullo  valet  ncc  de  quifaisdam  valet  nee  de  dngulis.     But  this  form  of 
expression  (for  the  history  of  which  see  Rehnisch,  Fichte's  Zeitschrift, 
Ixxvi,  i)  is  as  barren  as  it  is  correct;    for  to  hold  good  of  all  is 
and  means  from  the  very  first  nothing  else  than  to  hold  good  of  each 
one ;  if  therefore  anything  worth  saying  is  to  take  the  place  of  this 
bare  tautology,  the  nature  of  the  universal  concept  must  certainly  be 
substituted  for  the  mere  sum  of  all.    But  in  that  case  the  principle 
cannot  really  be  accurately  expressed  except  in  a  form  which  means 
precisely  the  same  as  the  disjunctive  judgment ;    viz.  whenever  a 
universal  P  is  a  mark  in  a  universal  concept  J/,  one  of  its  modifica- 
tions,/1/2/3, to  the  exclusion  of  the  rest,  belongs  to  every  S  which  is 
a  species  of  -$/;  whenever  a  universal  P  is  excluded  from  a  concept 
M)  no  one  of  the  modifications  of  P  belongs  to  any  S  which  is  a 
species  of  M. 

71.  Of  this  complete  law  of  thought  the  ordinary  expression  of  the 
dictum  de  omni  ef  nullo  only  regards  the  one  and  positive  part,  which, 
as  we  saw,  cannot  by  itself  be  accurately  expressed,  the  general  idea, 
namely,  that  the  particular  is  determined  by  its  universal ;  the  other 
and  negative  part,  which  defines  the  manner  of  this  determination,  the 
idea  that  the  particular  admits  only  one  specific  form  of  its  generic 
predicate  to  the  exclusion  of  the  others,  has  found  only  a  partial  ex- 
pression in  the  principle  of  the  excluded  middle.    I  think  that  I  can 


7  6  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment.  [BOOK!. 

say  what  I  have  to  say  about  this  most  simply  as  follows.     Suppose  a 
subject  S  subordinate  to  M>  and  that  this  subordination  implies  that 
Smust  choose  its  own  predicate  from  amongst///*  the  specific 
forms  of  P,  a  universal  mark  belonging  to  M9  then,  if  there  are  more 
than  two  of  these  forms,  the  affirmation  of  one  of  them  as  predicate 
of  £  will  involve  the  negation  of  all  the  rest,  but  the  negation  of  one 
of  them  will  not  involve  the  affirmation  of  any  particular  one  of  the 
rest ;  what  is  not  /  has  still  an  open  choice  between  /  /  /A     To 
predicates  of  this  sort  it  is  usual  to  ascribe  the  opposition  of  conlra- 
riety*    If  however  there  are  only  two  specific  forms  of  P,  /  and  //, 
and  S  must  have  a  specific  form  of  P  for  its  predicate,  then  not  only 
does  the  affirmation  of  one  of  them  as  predicate  of  S  involve  the 
negation  of  the  other,  but  also  the  negation  of  the  one  involves  the 
definite  affirmation  of  the  other;  /  and/  arc  then  opposed  to  one 
another  contradictorily.     Thus  for  the  line  (5),  which  must  have  sonic 
direction  (P),  straight  (/)  and  crooked  (/)  are  contradictory  pre- 
dicates, and  so  for  man,  whose  nature  it  is  to  have  sex,  are  male  and 
female :  for  any  other  subjects,  of -which  it  was  not  yet  established 
whether  their  concepts  contained  the  universal  P  at  all,  these  pre- 
dicates would  be  only  contrary;  for  such  subjects  the  division  of  their 
possible  predicates  will  be  always  threefold,  they  are  either  male, 
female,  or  sexless,  either  straight,  crooked,  or  formless.     Now  the 
principle  of  the  excluded  middle  asserts  nothing  but  what  we  have 
just  remarked,  that  of  two  predicates  which  are  contradictory  for  a 
subject  £,  S  always  has  one  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other,  and  if  it 
has  not  the  one  it  necessarily  has  the  other  to  the  exclusion  of  any 
third.     So  regarded,  this  law  is  only  a  particular  case  of  the  more 
universal  law  of  which  the  disjunctive  judgment  is  the  expression,  viz, 
that  of  all  contrary  predicates  whose  universal  P  is  contained  in  the 
generic  concept  M  of  a  subject  S,  S  has  always  one  to  the  exclusion 
of  the  rest,  and  if  it  has  not  any  given  one,  it  has  only  left  it  the 
choice  between  the  others ;  this  choice  becomes  a  definite  affirmation 
when  it  can  only  fall  on  one  member,  i.  e.  in  the  extreme  ease  where 
the  number  of  contrary  predicates  is  only  two,     Such  a  case,  which 
is  all  that  is  covered  by  the  principle  of  the  excluded  middle,  is  no 
doubt  of  peculiar  importance  in  practice,  but  a  system  of  logic  cam 
only  treat  it  as  a  particular  instance  of  the  more  universal  principle, 
which  we  have  already  mentioned  several  times  and  which  we  will 
briefly  describe  as  the  disjunctive  law  of  thought. 

72.  It  is  usual  to  represent  this  differently.    From  motives  which 
are  likewise  only  intelligible  on  practical  grounds,  the  logical  desire 


CHAPTER  IT.]        Contradiction  is  of  Judgments.  77 

has  arisen  to  omit  the  presupposition  to  which  we  have  adhered 
throughout  (viz.  that  the  given  subject  S  be  already  understood  to 
stand  in  a  necessary  relation  to  the  universal  predicate  P),  and  to  be 
allowed  to  speak  of  two  predicates  which  hold  good  as  contradic- 
tories of  any  subject  whatever.     It  is  soon  found  that  this  is  only 
possible,  if  the  aggregate  of  all  conceivable  predicates  be  divided  into 
a  definite  Q  and  the  sum  of  all  those  which  are  not  Q  or  non-Q;  it  is 
then  certain  that  any  subject,  whatever  it  may  mean,  must  be  either  Q 
or  non-(?>  either  straight  or  not-straight,  for  not-straight  will  include 
not  only  crooked,  but  annoying,  sweet,  future,  everything  in  short 
which  lies  outside  of  straight.    On  this  point  I  may  repeat  what  I  said 1 
about  the  limitative  judgment,  viz.  that  non-(?  is  not  a  real  idea  at  all, 
such  as  can  be  treated  as  subject  of  a  predicate ;  it  is  only  a  formula 
expressing  a  mentally  impracticable  task,  the  collection  of  all  thinkable 
matter  that  lies  outside  a  given  concept  into  a  single  other  concept. 
Moreover  there  is  no   real  reason   for  propounding  this  insoluble 
problem ;  everything  which  it  is  wished  to  secure  by  the  affirmative 
predicate  non-<2  is  secured  by  the  intelligible  negation  of  Q.    I  there- 
fore consider  it  quite  improper  to  speak  of  contradictory  concepts,  i.  e. 
concepts  which  are  of  themselves  contradictorily  opposed  and  there- 
fore retain  that  opposition  when  treated  as  predicates  of  one  and  the 
same  subject,  whatever  that  subject  may  be:  if  we  want  a  contradic- 
tory relation  which  shall  hold  good  universally,  always,  and  in  regard 
to  every  subject,  it  can  only  exist  between  two  judgments,  '  S  is  Q,' 
(  S  is  not  Q.1     Accordingly  the  precise  expression  of  the  principle  of 
the  excluded  middle  would  be,  that  of  every  precisely  determined 
subject  S  either  the  affirmation  or  the  negation  of  an  equally  deter- 
minate predicate  Q  holds  good,  and  no  third  alternative  is  possible ; 
wherever  it  appears  to  be  possible,  S  or  Q  or  both  have  either  been 
taken  in  more  than  one  sense  or  in  an  indefinite  sense  in  the  first 
instance,  or  their  meaning  has  been  unconsciously  or  involuntarily 
changed  in  the  course  of  reflection. 

73.  I  have  one  more  observation  to  add.  No  one  doubts  that  the 
same  subject  can  be  at  the  same  time  red,  sweet,  and  heavy,  but  that 
it  is  red  only  when  it  is  neither  green,  nor  blue  nor  of  any  other  colour, 
and  that  it  cannot  be  straight  and  crooked  at  the  same  time.  Yet  it 
does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  immediately  evident  that,  as  is  sometimes 
asserted,  the  case  in  which  two  predicates  pl  and  />2  are  incompatible 
in  the  same  subject  is  just  that  in  which  they  are  contrary  species  of 
the  same  universal  P  and  therefore  admit  of  comparison,  whereas 
1  [See  above,  §  40.] 


78  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment.  i  BOOK  i. 

other  predicates  pqr  are  compatible  in  the  same  subject  when,  as 
species  of  quite  different  universals  PQR,  they  admit  of  no  com- 
parison. On  this  point  I  venture  the  following  reflections.  Every 
predicate/1  of  a  subject  S  must  be  regarded,  in  accordance  with  what 
we  said  above  and  the  formula  A+B—  C,  as  a  consequence  of  a 
group  of  marks  Al-\-Bl  in  St  which  group  tends  in  all  cases  (and 
therefore  in  the  case  of  S]  to  produce  the  same  result  Cl  (in  this  case 
p1).  If  now  the  same  S  is  to  have  at  the  same  time  the  predicate  /r, 
comparable  with  pl>  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  p"  must  depend  on  a 
group  of  marks  ^42  +  .Z?2,  similarly  comparable  with  Al  +  l?1,  existing 
side  by  side  with  the  latter  in  S,  and  in  all  cases  of  its  occurrence 
(and  therefore  in  the  case  of  S)  giving  ground  for  the  result  6"u  (in 
this  case  />2).  But  the  consequence  of  the  very  comparability  of 
Al-\-£l  and  A^  +  B*  must  be  that,  according  to  a  new  principle  of  the 
general  form  A  +  B—  C,  viz.  [A1  +  B }]  +  [A9  +  £«]  =  C\  their  meeting 
in  the  same  subject  5  will  furnish  the  sufficient  reason  for  a  new  conse- 
quence C?3,  in  which  the  two  specific  predicates  pl  and  //'  coalesce,  and 
which,  as  it  must  resemble  both  of  them,  we  will  call  //!.  The  only  reason, 
therefore,  why  two  contrary  and  comparable  predicates/1  and  //*  would 
be  irreconcileable,  is  that  they  would  always  give  rise  to  a  third  ami 
simple/;3;  on  the  other  hand,  two  disparate  and  incomparable  pre- 
dicates p  and  r>  such  as  sweet  and  warm,  could  coexist  permanently 
In  S  because  there  is  no  principle  such  as  (A  +  /?)  +  ( J/  i>  N)  =  6" 
enabling  the  two  disparate  grounds  A+JB  and  M+1V,  on  which 
the  predicates  respectively  depend,  to  produce  like  /  and  /'•  a  third 
and  simple  predicate.  I  will  not  quarrel  with  those  who  find  the 
whole  of  this  exposition  superfluous;  it  seems  to  me  to  have  sonic 
point,  when  I  turn  from  the  examples  which  logic  traditionally  em- 
ploys to  others  which  it  would  do  well  not  to  forget.  When  anyone 
says  of  gold  that  it  is  yellow,  he  has,  it  is  true,  no  occasion  to  think 
of  this  simple  property  as  a  product  of  two  other  imperceptible  ones, 
which  properly  speaking  must  have  been  produced  separately  by  two 
conditions  coexisting  in  gold,  but  could  not  remain  separate.  But 
when  two  motive  forces  contrary  or  even  contradictory  in  direction 
act  upon  a  material  point,  that  which  in  the  previous  case  would  have 
been  a  needless  assumption  is  now  an  actual  yfo-/ ;  we  have  to  con- 
ceive both  of  the  condition  which  tends  to  produce  the  motion  p{  and 
of  that  which  tends  to  produce  /  as  operating  at  the  point,  and  of  the 
two  motions  themselves  as  at  every  moment  predicates  of  that  point, 
but  predicates  which  cannot  maintain  themselves  separately  but  coalesce 
in  a  third/,  the  motion  in  the  diagonal 


CHAPTER  iL]  Disjunction  and  Inference.  79 

And  ultimately  this  is  seen  to  be  true  in  all  cases.  A  crooked  line 
may  appear  indifferently  red  or  green  :  but  if  the  conditions  of  both 
appearances  were  operating  at  the  same  time  and  with  the  same 
force,  it  would  help  us  but  little  to  assert,  on  the  principle  of  exclusion, 
that  the  image  of  the  line  cannot  have  these  two  contrary  properties ; 
it  must  present  some  appearance.  As  however  these  two  conditions 
are  comparable  and  capable  of  forming  a  resultant,  a  third  colour  will 
appear,  the  production  of  which  will  satisfy  the  claims  of  the  two  con- 
ditions, but  will  at  the  same  time  contain  the  reason  why  the  two 
contrary  colours,  which  singly  they  would  have  produced,  cannot 
exist  separately  side  by  side. 

74.  The  series  of  judgments  concludes  here  by  an  inherent  neces- 
sity.    The  more  definitely  the  disjunctive  judgment  prescribes  to  its 
subject  the  choice  between  different  predicates,  the  less   can   this 
uncertainty  be  final;  the  choice  must  be  made.     But  the  decision, 
whatp*  or  />2  belongs  to  S,  cannot  come  from  the  fact  (which  is  thus 
far  the  only  fact)  that  S  is  subordinate  to  M,  for  it  is  just  because  it 
is  a  species  of  J/ that  it  is  still  free  to  choose  :  that  decision  can  only 
corne  from  the  specific  difference  by  which  *S",  as  this  species  of  M,  is 
distinguished  from  other  species  of  it.     The  proposition  'M  (and 
every  S  which  is  M)  is  P,'  must  therefore  have  added  to  it  a  second 
proposition  which  brings  to  light  the  specific  character  of  S,  the  par- 
ticular subject  always  in  question,  and  shows  us  what  species  of  'Mil 
is ;  and  from  the  union  of  the  two  propositions  must  arise  a  third, 
informing  us  what  particular  modification  p  of  the  universal  P  belongs 
to  this  S  because  it  is,  not  only  a  species  of  M,  but  this  species.    The 
form  of  thought  which  combines  two  judgments  so  as  to  produce  a 
third  is,  speaking  generally,  inference,  and  it  is  therefore  to  the  expo- 
sition of  inference  that  we  have  now  to  pass. 


Appendix  on  immediate  inferences, 

In  conformity  with  tradition  I  insert  some  explanations  here  which 
would  more  correctly  come  under  the  head  of  applied  logic.  Of  the 
same  subject  S  and  the  same  predicate  P  the  universal  affirmative 
judgment*  A,  asserts  'All  S  are  P,'  the  particular  affirmative,  7, 
<  Some  S  are  P,'  the  universal  negative,  JE}  '  No  S  is  P,5  and  the  par- 
ticular negative,  0,  «  Some  S  are  not  P!  The  question  is,  what 
immediate  inferences  can  be  drawn  from  the  truth  or  untruth  of  one 
of  these  four  judgments  in  regard  to  the  truth  or  untruth  of  the  other 


So  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment.  EBOOKI. 

three.     From  the  Dictum  de  omni  et  nullo  and  the  principle  of  the 
excluded  middle  we  obtain  the  following  results. 

75.  Between  each  universal  judgment  and  the  particular  of  like 
name  there  is  the  relation  si sulalternation.    Going  from  the  universal 
to  the  particular  or  ad  ml  alter  natam^  we  infer  the  truth  of  the  latter 
from  that  of  the  former,  but  from  the  untruth  of  the  universal  we 
cannot  infer  either  the  truth  or  the  untruth  of  the  particular.     The 
correctness  of  the  first  inference  is  obvious  at  once,   and   it  only 
requires  the  removal  of  a  misunderstanding  to  make  the  impossibility 
of  the  second  equally  so.     A  person  who  denies  the  universal  pro- 
position, call  S  are  P,'  is  usually  led  to  do  so  by  having  already 
observed  some  S  which  are  not  P ;  but  he  will  not  have  included  all 
S  in  this  observation.     His  intention  therefore  generally  is  merely  to 
deny  the  universal  application  of  the  proposition  to  all  S,  while  leaving 
its  truth  in  single  cases  of  S  undisputed;   and  thus  it  is  thai  in 
ordinary  speech  expressions  such  as  '  It  is  not  true  that  all  S  are  also 
P,'  are  actually  understood  to  admit  incidentally  the  truth  of  the 
particular  proposition,  'some  S  are  P.'     Logic,  on  the  other  hand, 
knows  nothing  of  these  unexpressed  suggestions  in  the  denial  of  the 
universal  proposition  :  it  recognises  merely  what  lies  in  the  expressed 
negation  itself.     But  it  is  just  this  which  is  ambiguous.     For  the 
asserted  untruth  of  the  proposition,  c  all  S  are  P,'  is  equally  a  fact, 
whether  the  proposition  is  true  of  only  some  S  or  of  none.     So  long 
therefore  as  this  ambiguity  is  not  removed  by  accessory  statements, 
we  cannot  infer  from  the  negation  of  the  universal  proposition  either 
the  truth  or  the  untruth  of  the  particular. 

76.  Going  in  the  opposite  direction,  from  the  particular  to  the 
universal  or  ad  subalkrnantem,  we  infer  the  untruth  of  the  universal 
judgment  from  that  of  the  particular,  but  not  the  truth.     Here,  too, 
the  first  conclusion  is  obvious,  if  we  avoid  the  ambiguity  already 
alluded  to.    A  person  who  denies  the  proposition,  '  some  S  are  P,' 
may,  it  is  true,  intend  merely  to  deny  that  P  is  confined  to  some  S, 
and  the  effect  of  his  meaning  that  '  not  only  some  S  are  P '  would 
then  be  to  affirm  the  universal  proposition  £  all  S  are  P!     But  just 
because  this  consequence  would  directly  imply  that  the   particular 
judgment,  £  some  S  are  P,9  also  remained  true,  logic  cannot  possibly 
interpret  the  denial  of  that  judgment  in  this  way.    For  logic  this 
denial  means  nothing  but  that  <  there  is  no  such  thing  as  some  S 
which  are  P';  and  what  is  not  even  true  in  some  cases  is  still  less  true 
in  all.    Consequently  the  negation  of  the  particular  always  negates 
the  universal  too.    The  impossibility  of  the  second  inference  explains 


CHAPTER  II.]  Logical    Opposition.  8 1 

Itself;  the  truth  of  P  in  the  case  of  some  S  can  never  prove  its 
truth  in  all  S :  it  is  only  because  this  unjustifiable  generalisation  of 
single  observations  is  the  commonest  of  logical  mistakes,  to  which 
science  and  culture  owe  most  of  their  errors,  that  it  is  worth  while  to 
prohibit  with  especial  emphasis  this  false  inference  ad  mlcdternaniem. 

77.  Universal  judgments  are  contradictorily  opposed  to  particulars 
of  unlike  name,  A  to  O  and  E  to  /  and  vice  versa  ;  we  infer  ad 
contradictor iam  both  the  untruth  of  the   one  from  the  truth  of  the 
other  and  the  truth  of  the  one  from  the  untruth  of  the  other.     The 
first  inference  needs  no  explanation,  the  second  a  brief  one.     If  we 
deny  the  proposition  A,  f  all  S  are  P,'  the  denial  is  consistent  with 
both  the  assumptions  E  and  O}  f  no  S  is  P,'  and  '  some  £  are  not  Py ; 
but  the  second,  which  is  included  in  the  first,  is  true  in  any  case  ; 
consequently  the  truth  of  O  follows  certainly  from  the  untruth  of  A. 
If  we  further  deny  0,  '  some  S  are  not  P,'  this  means,  according  to 
what  we  said  above,  c  there  is  no  such  thing  as  some  *?  which  are  not 
P,f  and  this  is  equivalent  to  A,  'all  S  are  P!     If  we  deny  JZ9  'no 
S  is  P9r  either  ail  or  some  S,  in  any  case  the  latter,  are  P,  and  con- 
sequently /  is  true,   e  some  S  are  P':  if  we  deny  /,  this  means, 
'  there  is  no  such  thing  as  some  S  which  are  P,'  and  is  equivalent 
to  the  affirmation  of  E,  '  no  5*  is  P? 

78.  The  two  universal  judgments  of  unlike  names  are  only  con- 
trariwise opposed,  and  we  infer  the  untruth  of  the  one  from  the 
truth  of  the  other,  but  not  the  truth  of  the  one  from  the  untruth  of  the 
other,     The  first  case  is  obvious:    the  impossibility  of  the  second 
follows,  after  what  we  said  before,  from  the  consideration  that,  while 
the  negation  of  a  universal  judgment  allows  an  inference  ad  con- 
tradictoriam  to  the  truth  of  the  particular  of  unlike  name,  the  truth  of 
the  latter  does  not  allow  an  inference  ad  siib  alter  nantem  to  that  of 
the  universal  to  which  it  is   subordinate.     Lastly,  the  relation  be- 
tween the  two  particular  judgments  /  and  O  is  called  sulconirary 
opposition.     We  infer  ad  sulcontrariam  the  truth  of  the  one  from 
the  untruth  of  the  other,  but  not  the  untruth  of  the  one  from  the 
truth  of  the  other.     In  fact,  the  two  propositions,  '  some  S  are  not 
TV  and  c  some  S  are  P,*  may  both  be  true  together  ;  but  if  one  is 
denied,  the  truth  of  the  opposite  universal  follows  ad  contradictoriam, 
and  from  this  again  follows  ad  sulalternatam  the  affirmation  of  the 
particular  subordinate  to  it. 

79.  I  may  also  mention  another  logical  operation  which   has  a 
kindred  object.     All  observations,  which  always  admit  ultimately  of 
being  expressed  in  the  form  of  a  judgment  <  -S  is  P,'  present  us  only 


g2  The  Theory  of  the  Jiidgment.  i  BOOK  i. 

with  that  combination  of  S  and  P  which  actually  occurs  at  the4 
moment  of  observation :  they  tell  us  nothing  as  to  whether  S  and  P 
will  be  separable  or  not  in  other  cases,  whether,  in  fact,  there  are  S 
which  are  not  P  or  P  which  are  not  S.  Now  we  have  a  practical 
interest  in  this  question  which  is  very  intelligible  :  we  want  to  know 
whether  a  P  which  has  occurred  in  S  may  be  considered  as  a  mark, 
enabling  us  to  determine  the  nature  of  the  subject  in  which  it  occurs  ; 
in  short,  whether  everything  which  has  the  characteristics  of  a  P  is 
also  always  an  S.  The  answers  to  be  expected  to  this  question  will, 
accordingly  take  the  form,  c  P  is  *S° ;  and  they  are  therefore  called 
conversions  of  the  original  judgments  which  gave  rise  to  them.  It  is 
also  obvious  that  we  have  a  special  interest  in  knowing  whether  P 
points  to  a  subject  S  necessarily  and  always,  or  only  possibly  and 
sometimes ;  whether,  as  it  is  ordinarily  put,  all  P,  or  only  some,  are 
S.  Hence  it  is  the  quantity  of  the  original  and  the  converted  judg- 
ment to  which  particular  attention  ?s  paid,  and  the  conversion  is 
called  pure  (conversio  ftira)  when  the  quantity  of  the  second  is  that  of 
the  first  without  any  change,  and  impure  (convcrsio  itnpnnf)  when  it  is 
different,  especially  when  the  universal  truth  of  the  original  judgment ' 
has  to  be  reduced  to  particular,  in  order  to  make  it  true  when  con- 
verted. The  results  are  as  follows. 

80.  The  universal  affirmative  judgment,  call  S  are  /Y  understands 
by  P  either  a  higher  genus  in  which  S  is  contained  along  with  oilier 
species,  or  a  universal  mark  in  which  S  partakes  along  with  other 
subjects.  In  both  cases  there  is  a  part  of  P  left  which  has  nothing  to 
do  with  *9,  and  only  impure  conversion  can  take  place  into  the  par- 
ticular judgment '  some  P  are  *SV  This  rule  deserves  attention,  for 
it  is  one  of  the  commonest  mistakes  of  carelessness  and  one  of  the 
most  favorite  means  of  deception  to  substitute  the  universal  for  the 
particular  inference.,  and  to  assert,  *  If  P  belongs  to  all  *S',  then  & 
belongs  to  all  P.'  It  is  true  that  we  do  meet  with  universal  affirma- 
tive judgments  which  admit  of  this  pure  conversion,  those  viz,  in 
which  the  extents  of  S  and  P  exactly  cover  each,  other,  and  P  there- 
fore belongs  not  only  to  all  S,  but  only  to  all  S,  so  that  all  P  are  also 
S.  Such  so-called  reciprocal  judgments  are,  <  all  men  are  naturally 
capable  of  language/  '  all  equilateral  triangles  are  equiangular ' ; 
they  can  be  converted  into,  call  that  is  naturally  capable  of  language 
Is  man/  <  every  equiangular  triangle  is  an  equilateral  one/  But  it 
is  only  knowledge  of  the  matter  of  fact  contained  in  the  judgment  in 
question  which  can  assure  us  that  the  relation,  upon  which  this  possi- 
bility depends,  holds  good  between  S  and  P  in  any  particular  instance. 


CHAPTER  II.]  Logical  Conversion.  83 

Mathematics,  therefore,  where  the  pure  conversion  of  universal  affir- 
mative judgments  is  frequent,  are  right  in  demanding  special  proof  in 
every  case  of  the  truth  of  the  converted  judgment,  and  by  this  caution 
inculcate  the  rule  that  by  right  of  mere  logic  the  universal  affirmative 
judgment  admits  only  impure  conversion  into  a  particular  affirmative. 
It  is  otherwise  with  the  universal  negative  judgment,  'no  &  is  P.' 
This  complete  exclusion  of  the  two  concepts  from  each  other  clearly 
holds  good  reciprocally,  and  justifies  the  assertion  that  £  no  P  is  S* 
The  universal  negative  judgment  is  therefore  convertible  into  another 
universal  negative. 

81.  The  particular  affirmative  proposition,  csome  S  are  PI  ob- 
viously yields  pure  conversion  into  another  particular  affirmative, 
*  some  P  are  S?  And  this  inference  is  satisfactory  in  all  cases  in 
which  P  is  a  universal  predicate  in  which  -6"  partakes  along  with  other 
subjects ;  thus  the  assertion,  <  some  dogs  bite/  is  rightly  converted 
into  c  some  things  that  bite  are  dogs.7  But  when  S  is  the  genus  of 
which  P  is  a  species,  as  in  the  proposition,  '  some  dogs  are  pugs/ 
the  only  logically  admissible  conversion,  'some  pugs  are  dogs/  will 
contrast  unfavourably  with  the  actually  true  one,  '  all  pugs  are  dogs.' 
The  former  is  no  doubt  true  also,  but  it  expresses  only  a  part  of  the 
truth,  and  in  a  form  which  appears  rather  to  deny  than  to  affirm  the 
other  part,  that  all  other  pugs  also  are  dogs.  We  feel  this  still  more 
if  we  start  with  the  judgment,  c  all  pugs  are  dogs/  and  convert  it  twice 
over.  From  the  first  conversion,  £  some  dogs  are  pugs/  we  cannot 
get  back  again  by  the  second  to  the  original  proposition ;  and  thus 
the  logical  operations  have  here  resulted  in  eliminating  a  part  of  the 
truth.  This  inconvenience  could  easily  be  avoided  if  the  expressions 
of  quantity  were  regarded,  as  the  sense  requires  that  they  should  be, 
as  inseparable  from  their  substantives ;  we  should  then  formulate  the 
proposition,  in  the  first  instance  as  follows,  c  all  pugs  are  some 
dogs ';  then  by  conversion, '  some  dogs  are  alt  pugs/  and  by  a  second 
conversion,  c  all  pugs  are  some  dogs/  But  it  is  not  worth  the  trouble 
to  improve  what  are  after  all  barren  formulae. 

The  particular  negative  judgment,  '  some  S  are  not  P/  as  such 
asserts  merely  the  separability  of  S  from  P,  not  that  of  P  from  S 
also.  The  pure  conversion  therefore,  c  some  P  are  not  *SV  does  not 
hold  good  universally,  but  only  of  those  P  which  are  predicates  com- 
mon to  different  subjects,  and  are  not  therefore  exclusively  dependent 
upon  the  nature  of  S  for  their  occurrence.  For  this  reason  the  pro- 
position, '  some  men  are  not  black/  can  be  converted  into,  '  some- 
thing black  is  not  man';  but  the  judgments,  /some  mea  are  not 

G  a 


84  The  Theory  of  the  Judgment. 

pious/  'some  are  not  Christians/  would  yield  €  something-  pious  is 
not  man/  '  some  Christians  are  not  men/  both  inadmissible  because 
piety  and  Christianity,  though  not  belonging  to  all  men,  belong  only 
to  men.  These  disadvantages  are  in  general  only  avoided  by  joining 
the  negation  to  the  predicate,  and  then  converting  the  proposition, 
£*some  S  are  non-P/  like  a  particular  affirmative  into  '  some  non-P 
are  6";  e.g.  c  something  not-black,  something  not-pious,  some  non- 
Christians,  are  men/ 

82.  The  process  necessary  in  this  case  has  been  extended  to  all  judg- 
ments under  the  name  of  conversion  by  contraposition :  in  the  affirmative 
judgments  the  negation  of  non-P  takes  the  place  of  the  affirmation  of 
P,  in  the  negative  the  affirmation  of  non-P  takes  that  of  the  negation 
of  P;  the  judgments  thus  changed  are  then  converted  according  to 
the  ordinary  rules.  In  this  way  we  get  the  following  results  ;  first,  for 
A,  'all  S  are  P/  'no  S  is  non-P/  and  so  £no  non-P  is  *$";  for  /, 
on  the  other  hand,  (  some  6"  are  P/  the  transformation  into,  *  some 
*Sare  not  non-P/ would  not,  after  what  has  been  said  above,  allow  any 
conversion,  and  contraposition  would  therefore  be  impossible  ;  for  E, 
again,  £  no  S  is  P/  we  get c  all  *$"  are  non-73/  '  some  nori-P  are  *$7 
To  carry  out  these  operations  in  actual  instances  would  produce 
unshapely  and  unnatural  forms  of  expression ;  the  substantial  mean- 
ing of  the  four  forms  of  judgment  may  be  given  more  simply  by 
replacing  their  quantitative  determinations  by  the  equivalent  modal 
ones :  even  the  contraposition  of  /,  which  in  itself  is  impossible,  is 
thus  made  available.  The  conversion  of  A  would  then  mean,  '  If 
the  predicate  P  belongs  to  all  individuals  of  a  genus  &\  it  is  im- 
possible for  anything  in  which  this  mark  is  absent  to  be  an  S:1  that 
of  /would  mean,  'If  P  is  only  known  to  belong  to  some  species  of 
S,  it  is  not  necessary,  but  only  possible,  that  something  in  which  P  is 
absent  should  not  be  an  -6":'  that  of  E>  e  If  the  mark  P  is  universally 
absent  from,  or  contradictory  of,  the  genus  S,  it  is  not  necessary,  but 
only  possible,  that  something  which  similarly  lacks  or  is  contradicted 
by  P  should  be  a  species  of  S' ;  and  the  same  inference  applies  to  0 
also,  '  If  some  S  are  not  P,  something  which  also  is  not  P  may  be  an 
S  but  need  not  be  so.' 


CHAPTER    III. 
The  Theory  of  Inference  and  the  Systematic  Forms. 

Preliminary  remarks  upon  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  of  syllogism. 

I  HAVE  pointed  out  the  unsolved  problem  which  compels  us  to 
advance  beyond  the  disjunctive  judgment.  Before  I  follow  up  this 
thread  of  connexion  systematically,  I  think  it  will  be  advantageous  to 
state  the  theory  of  syllogism  in  the  form  which  it  received  from 
Aristotle,  I  shall  not  however  follow  the  original  exposition  of  the 
great  Greek  philosopher,  but  the  more  convenient  form  which  came 
into  vogue  later.  The  writings  of  Aristotle  are  preserved,  and  anyone 
who  takes  an  interest  in  the  origin  of  these  doctrines  may  easily  enjoy 
his  masterly  development  of  them :  but  when  we  are  concerned,  not 
with  the  history  of  the  thing,  but  with  the  thing  itself,  it  would  be  use- 
less affectation  to  prefer  the  inconvenient  phraseology  of  the  inventor 
to  those  improvements  in  detail  which  subsequent  ages  have  placed 
at  our  disposal. 

83.  Following  Aristotle,  we  give  the  name  of  inference  or  syllogism 
to  any  combination  of  two  judgments  for  the  production  of  a  third 
and  valid  judgment  which  is  not  merely  the  sum  of  the  two  first.  Such 
production  would  be  impossible  if  the  contents  of  the  antecedent 
judgments,,  the  two  premisses,  propositions  praemissae,  were  entirely 
different ;  it  is  only  possible  if  they  both  contain  a  common  element 
M,  the  middle  concept  or  terminus  medtus,  which  the  one  relates  to  S, 
the  other  to  P.  This  medium  brings  the  two  concepts  S  and  P  into 
connexion,  and  they  can  then  meet  in  the  conclusion  in  a  judgment 
of  the  form  {S  is  P,'  or,  more  shortly,  SP,  from  which  the  middle 
concept  which  served  to  produce  it  has  again  disappeared.  There  is 
no  reason  in  the  nature  of  the  case  for  making  a  difference  of  value 
between  the  two  premisses  SM  and  PM;  but  a  tradition,  which 
cannot  be  disregarded  without  subjecting  all  established  rules  to  a 
bewildering  change  of  meaning,  has  decided  that  the  premiss  which 


86    Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms.     [BOOK  i. 

contains  along  with  M  the  predicate  P  of  the  coming  conclusion  shall 
be  called  the  major  premiss,  and  that  which  contains  S,  the  subject, 
the  minor]  the  conclusion  itself  is  always  conceived  in  the  form  S  P, 
not  in  the  reverse  form  P  S.  This  being  presupposed,  the  further 
differences  in  the  position  which  the  three  concepts  may  assume 
give  rise  to  the  following  four  arrangements,  of  which  the  first  three 
represent  the  three  figures  of  Aristotle,  while  the  fourth  forms  that  of 
Galen. 


SM  SM  M>$  MS    * 

~SP  £P  SP  SP 

84.  If  we  now  ask  whether,  and  under  what  conditions,  these 
arrangements  of  premisses,  which  are  in  the  first  instance  merely 
based  upon  rules  of  combination,  give  ground  for  a  valid  inference, 
we  find  at  once  that  S  and  P  can  only  be  united  in  the  conclusion  if 
the  middle  concept  remains  precisely  the  same  ;  their  union  is  ob- 
viously unjustifiable  as  soon  as  the  M  connected  with  S  in  the  one 
premiss  is  different  from  the  M  connected  with  P  in  the  other.    Such 
a  division  of  M  would  give  four  concepts  in  the  premisses,  instead  of 
the  necessary  and  sufficient  three  ;    the  avoidance  of  this  quatermo 
fermmorum,  and  the  securing  of  complete  identity  in  the  middle  term, 
is  therefore  the  condition  of  conclusiveness  in  all  figures  alike.     To 
fulfil  this  condition  it  is  first  of  all  necessary  in  all  figures  to  exclude 
any  ambiguity  in  the  meaning  of  the  word  which  denotes  the  middle 
concept;  but  besides  this  there  are  special  precautions  for  the  same 
purpose,  which  the  peculiar  structure  of  the  several  figures  renders 
necessary,  and  which  we  have  now  to  mention. 

85,  In  the  first  figure  S  is  included  in  Mm  the  minor  premiss,  M 
in  P  in  the  major,  and  therefore  S  in  P  in  the  conclusion.    The  idea 
upon  which  this  inference  is  based  is  evidently  that  of  subsumption  ; 
that  which  is  a  predicate  of  the  genus  is  a  predicate  of  every  subject 
of  the  genus.    This  is  of  itself  sufficient  to  show  that  the  major  pre- 
miss in  the  first  figure  must  be  universal  ;  for  it  has  to  express  the 
rule  which  is  to  be  applied  to  the  subject  of  the  minor.  The  necessity 
that  the  middle  term  should  be  identical  leads  to  the  same  result.  For 
the  S  of  the  minor  premiss  is  always  a  definite  kind  or  a  definite  case 
of  M]  this  however  is  not  expressed  in  the  form  of  the  proposition  ; 
as  far  as  the  form  goes  S  might  be  merely  any  kind  of  M  in  general;  if 
this  indeterminate-ylf  is  to  be  the  same  as  that  which  the  major  premiss 
asserts  to  be  P,  this  can  only  be  secured  if  the  major  premiss  speaks 


CHAPTER  in.]          The  fir st  and  second  figures.  8  7 

universally  of  all  M}  thus  including  the  indeterminate  cases  along  with 
the  rest,  It  is  true  that  in  that  case  the  M  expressed  in  the  major 
premiss  is  not  identical  with  the  M  of  the  minor,  which,  as  predicate 
of  S,  necessarily  signifies  only  a  part  of  the  whole  extent  of  M\  but 
this  apparent  difficulty  disappears  when  we  consider  that  the  M  of  the 
major  premiss  which  is  actually  employed  in  producing  the  conclusion 
is  likewise  only  a  part  of  that  which  is  expressed,  that  part,  namely, 
which  is  intended  in  the  minor.  Further,  as  the  inference  in  the  con- 
clusion depends  upon  the  subordination  of  S  to  M,  this  subordination 
must  be  a  fact,  in  other  words,  the  minor  premiss  which  expresses  it 
must  be  affirmative ;  if  it  were  negative,  it  would  simply  deny  the 
existence  of  any  ground  for  the  validity  of  the  conclusion.  On  the 
other  hand  it  does  not  affect  the  logical  connexion  of  the  syllogism, 
but  depends  merely  upon  its  particular  content,  whether  the  major 
premiss  affirms  or  denies  P  of  Hf,  and  whether  the  application  fur- 
nished by  the  minor  of  the  general  rule  to  an  instance  embraces  all 
S  or  only  some.  The  quality  of  the  major  premiss  and  the  quantity 
of  the  minor  are  therefore  unlimited.  Lastly,  the  relation,  whether 
affirmative  or  negative,  in  which  the  major  premiss  places  M  to  P9 
must  be  transferred  unaltered  to  the  unaltered  subject,  whether  uni- 
versal or  particular,  of  the  minor;  the  conclusion  therefore  has  the 
quality  of  the  major  and  the  quantity  of  the  minor.  If  we  suppose  all 
the  possibilities  exhausted  for  which  these  rules  leave  room,  we  get 
four  valid  kinds  or  moods  of  the  first  figure.  Their  scholastic  names 
Barbara^  Celarent,  Darii,  and  Ferio,  which  by  the  three  vowels  in 
order  denote  (as  every  one  knows)  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the 
premisses  and  the  conclusions  show  at  a  glance  the  distinctive  feature 
of  the  first  figure,  namely,  its  capacity  to  produce  conclusions  of  every 
kind, 

80.  The  premisses  of  the  second  figure  show  us  two  subjects  S  and 
P  in  relation  to  the  predicate  M.  If  both  subjects  either  have  or 
have  not  this  predicate,  i.  e.  if  both  premisses  are  affirmative  or  both 
negative,  no  inference  can  be  drawn  from  them  as  to  a  mutual  rela- 
tion between  S  and  P.  For  innumerable  subjects  may  all  participate 
in,  or  all  be  excluded  from,  a  mark  M,  without  necessarily  having  any 
other  point  in  common,  and  in  particular  without  the  one,  6",  being 
necessarily  a  species  of  the  other,  P.  Only  if  the  one  subject  has  or 
has  not  the  mark  M  always  or  universally,  while  the  other  is  related 
to  M  in  the  opposite  way,  is  there  ground  for  concluding  that  the 
second  cannot  be  a  species  of  the  first.  The  premisses  in  the  second 
figure  must  therefore  be  of  opposite  qualities,  and  one  of  them  must 


88     Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Foi'ins.     \  \\,^  \. 

be  universal.  As  however  it  Is  the  tradition  that  this  second  subject 
should  be  supplied  by  the  minor  premiss,  the  premiss  in  which  the 
first  is  mentioned,  i.  e.  the  major,  must  be  the  universal  one.  Thus 
the  conditions  of  the  second  figure  may  be  summed  up  as  follows; 
the  major  premiss  is  universal,  but  is  not  limited  as  to  quality:  the 
minor  is  of  the  opposite  quality  to  the  major  and  is  not  limited  as  to 
quantity;  the 'conclusion  is  always  negative,  and  has  tin*  quantity  of 
the  minor.  The  possible  moods  are  Camcstres^  /?<fw.v»,  (\wf-.  /v,v ///*>. 

87.  The  third  figure  brings  the  same  subject  M  into  relation  t»> 
two  predicates,  P  and  S.     If  M  has  both  predicaies,  i.e.  if  both  pre- 
misses are  affirmative,  the  union  of  P  and  S  m list  be/«}.v.v//^\  ,md  the; 
conclusion  therefore,  according  to  the  usual  logical  expresMnn  of  nidi 
a  possibility,  is,  'some  S  are  P!     The  necessary  identity  of  J/  is  in 
this  case  sufficiently  secured  by  the  universality  of  one  premiss,  it  does 
not  matter  which;  for  it  clearly  makes  no  difference  whether  all  J/ 
have  the  mark  P  and  only  some  have  »V,  or  whether  all  31  lave  ,Y  an»l 
only  some  P",  in  either  case  there  are  always  some  Jlf  \vhiVJi  Ii.ivo 
both  and  thereby  justify  the  conclusion,  which  is  always  par! it  ulir, 
4  some  S  are  P.'     Moreover  this  case,  in  which  M  is  subjVit  in  Unh 
premisses,  is  just  one  in  which  its  identity  might  be  rusily  ^nnr,ihl»vd 
by  a  word  of  completely  individual  meaning,  the  proper  name  of  ;t 
person  for  instance.     We  often  meet  with  such  infcivnu's:  in  nrd«T 
to  prove  the  compatibility  of  two  actions  wliich  seem  to  be.  mutually 
exclusive,  we  bring  forward  an  instance,  e.g.  *  Socrates  was  /',  ;im! 
Socrates  was  also  S'  consequently  'what  is  »V  may  also  I>«*  /',*  <'»r 
f  some  £is  P!     Logic  justifies  such  inferences  l»y  atirilmfiiig  to  ilti: 
singular  judgment,  i.e.  one  whose  subject  is  not  an  imldmil»;  part  of 
a  universal  concept  but  a  perfectly  definite  and  unique  individual,  ihc 
syllogistic  value   of  a  universal  judgment.     Thus   this   casr  COHK-I 
under  the  above  rule,  which,  where  both  premisses  are  affirmative?, 
requires  one  to  be  universal,  prescribes  a  particular  affirmative  conclu- 
sion, and  admits  the  moods  Dampli^  Dallsl,  and  fiistimis. 

88.  Again,  if  the  same  subject  possesses  one  of  the  marks  bit!  tint 
the  other,  i.  e.  if  one  premiss  is  affirmative,  the  other  m-gaiivo,  S  ;m«l  P 
must  be  separable,  or,  according  to  the  ordinary  phraseology,  ib,  par- 
ticular negative  conclusion  follows,  <  some  ft  are  not  P!     In  'this  case 
also  it  is  sufficient  for  the  identity  of  if  that  one  premiss,  it  d«e»  not 
matter  which,  should  be  universal,  but  the  minor  premiss  must  be 
affiirnative.    For  though  one  of  two  marks  which  occurs  in  a  givt'ii 
subject  is  no  doubt  always  separable  torn  the  other  which  UOCH  «*/ 
occur  in  that  subject,  the  latter  is  not  necessarily  separable  from  the 


CHAPTER  in.]        The  third  and  fourth  figitres.  89 

former;  it  is  further  conceivable  that  if  it  exist  at  all  it  can  only  do 
so  in  conjunction  with  the  other.  Thus  life  without  intelligence  is  a 
possible  mark  of  an  animal,  but  not  intelligence  without  life.  It 
is  therefore  the  affirmed  mark  only  which  is  separable ;  only  of  it  as 
subject  can  the  conclusion  assert  that  it  is  not  always  combined 
with  the  other  as  predicate ;  and  as  this  subject  of  the  conclusion  is 
customarily  furnished  by  the  minor  premiss,  the  minor  premiss  must 
be  affirmative  and  only  the  major  can  be  negative.  Under  this  con- 
dition mixed  premisses  yield  the  moods  Felapton^  Ferison,  and  Bocardo^ 
these  like  the  preceding  ones  having  only  particular  conclusions. 

89.  Lastly,  it  is  asserted  by  logic  as  a  universal  principle  tjiat  in 
the  third  as  in  the  other  figures  two  negative  premisses  yield  no  valid 
inference.      This   is   incorrect;   a  conclusion  may  be   drawn   from 
them  similar  in  kind  and  equal  in  value  to  those  which  are  derived 
from  affirmative  or  mixed  premisses.     For  if  the  first  of  these  prove 
that  S  and  P  may  exist  together,  and  the  second  that  they  may  exist 
apart,  two  negative  premisses  prove  with  equal  ground  that  S  and  P 
are  not  contradictorily  opposed,  and  that  accordingly  what  is  not  S 
need  not  therefore  be  P;  in  ordinary  phraseology,  'some  not- S  are 
not  P.'     I  cannot  see  why  this  conclusion  should  stand  lower  in  value 
than  the  two  others;   the  first  only  says  to  us,  'when  you  find  S, 
be  prepared  for  the  possibility  of  finding  P/  the  second,  '  when  you 
meet  with  S  do  not  reckon  upon  the  existence  of  P,'  and  similarly 
the  third,  f  where  you  do  not  observe  S,  beware  of  inferring  for  that 
very  reason  the  presence  of  P!     In  life  we  often  meet  with  such 
inferences;  over  and  over  again,  when  the  necessary  presence  of  some 
quality  has  been  over-hastily  concluded  from  the  absence  of  some 
other,  we  appeal  to  instances  in  which  neither  the  one  nor  the  other 
is  found,  and  so  correct  an  erroneous  prejudice  by  an  inference  in  the 
third  figure  from  two  negative  premisses.  This  conclusion  therefore  is 
undoubtedly  valid,  but  it  would  be  an  anachronism  to  invent  supple- 
mentary names  for  its  various  moods. 

90.  The   premisses   of  the   fourth  figure,  ascribed   to    Claudius 
Galenus,  are  in  form  the  counterpart  of  the  first  figure  of  Aristotle, 
but  do  not  equal  it  in  value.  Its  moods  are  Bamalip,  Cakmes,  Dimatis, 
Fesapo,  Fresiso.     As  to  the  premisses  of  Bamalip,  e.g.  'All  roses  are 
plants,'  'All  plants  need  air/   every  one  who  thinks  naturally  will 
tacitly  transpose  them,  and  draw  the  conclusion  of  Barbara  in  the 
first  figure,  '  All  roses  need  air.'    It  is  true  that  this  conclusion  is  then 
of  the  form  PS,  but  the  form  S  P,  which  is  required  by  the  fourth 
figure,  can  be  easily  obtained  from  it  by  conversion,  c  some  things 


go    Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms.     [BOOK  i. 

that  need  air  are  roses/  On  the  other  hand  we  cannot  by  conversion 
recover  from  this  conclusion  in  the  fourth  figure  the  one  which  we 
drew  from  the  same  premisses  in  the  first ;  its  conversion  only  yields 
the  particular  proposition,  'some  things  which  are  roses  need  air/ 
Thus  in  this  case  the  conclusion  in  the  figure  of  Galen  actually  loses 
a  part  of  the  truth  which  is  established  by  the  premisses,  a  bad  recom- 
mendation for  a  process  of  inference,  the  function  of  which  is  always 
to  conclude  from  what  is  given  as  much  new  truth  as  possible.  This 
awkwardness  could  indeed  be  avoided,  as  was  shown  before,  but  the 
inference  would  not  thereby  be  made  more  natural.  Equally  un- 
natural are  Calemes  and  DimaiiS)  the  premisses  of  which  will  always 
be  transposed  by  the  unsophisticated  mind  and  applied  in  Cdarcnt 
and  Darii  of  the  first  figure  :  they  do  not  indeed  occasion  a  loss  of 
truth,  since  the  negative  conclusion  of  Calemes  admits  pure  conversion, 
while  that  of  Darii  is  particular  like  that  of  Dimalis*  It  is  only 
Fesapo  and  Fresiso  which  are  less  readily  reducible  to  the  first  figure, 
owing  to  the  negative  minor  premiss  which  results  in  both  and  the 
particular  major  which  results  in  the  latter ;  by  pure  conversion  of 
their  majors  they  can  be  transposed  into  Felapton  and  Ferison  of  the 
third  figure  instead,  and  this  change  will  have  tbe  same  effect  of  making 
the  conclusions  more  natural.  In  all  points,  therefore,  the  fourth 
figure  is  a  very  superfluous  addition  to  the  three  figures  of  Aristotle. 

91.  Aristotle  considered  the  inferences  in  all  the  three  figures  to  be 
valid,  but  only  that  in  the  first  to  be  perfect,  because  in  this  figure 
only  does  the  ground  upon  which  all  inference  depends  for  its  possi- 
bility, the  subordination  of  the  particular  to  the  universal,  find  formal 
expression  in  the  structure  of  the  premisses.  In  the  other  figures  too, 
Indeed,  (as  he  held),  the  inference  rests  upon  the  same  principle,  and 
the  relations  of  subordination,  which  are  necessary  and  sufficient  for 
drawing  a  conclusion  according  to  that  principle,  are  contained  in  the 
premisses  and  do  not  need  supplementing  by  information  from  with- 
out ;  but  they  are  not  exhibited  in  the  actual  structure  of  the  premisses; 
we  have  to  look  for  them  there.  To  make  good  this  formal  defect  in 
the  two  latter  figures,  Aristotle  has  shown  us  how,  without  any  change 
of  content,  their  premisses  may  be  transformed  into  those  of  the  first 
figure.  To  some  people  this  has  seemed  superfluous,  and  they  have 
objected  that  the  two  other  figures  also  conclude  according  to  prin- 
ciples of  their  own  and  requiring  no  other  evidence :  thus  the  funda- 
mental idea  of  the  second,  that  if  two  things  stand  in  contrary 
relations  to  the  same  mark  the  one  cannot  be  a  species  of  the  other, 
•is  clear  in  itself  and  independent  of  the  principle  of  subordination.  I 


CHAPTER  III,]  •  Reduction.  9 1 

doubt  this,  but  shall  not  pursue  the  point  further ;  for  to  hold  that 
the  conclusions  of  the  two  latter  figures  are  drawn  upon  any  principle 
at  all,  is  to  admit  that  the  ground  of  all  inferences  is  the  subordination 
of  the  particular  to  the  universal  \  for  to  what  did  those  figures  apply 
their  principles  if  not  to  justify  the  conclusion  by  subordinating  the 
content  of  the  premisses  to  them  ?  Aristotle  was  therefore  right  in 
his  general  idea  of  the  superiority  of  the  first  figure ;  we  may  also 
share  the  interest  which  he  took  in  justifying  the  other  figures  by  these 
changes  of  form ;  but  it  is  true  that  in  practice  it  is  seldom  of  much 
use  to  carry  them  out ;  in  considering  the  fourth  figure  just  now  we 
seemed  to  find  such  a  case ;  the  inferences  of  the  second  and  third 
figures  are  too  transparent  to  need  this  assistance. 

92.  It  is  therefore  sufficient  to  mention  that  in  the  names  of  the 
moods  of  the  two  last  figures  the  scholastic  logic  has  indicated  the 
operations  necessary  for  this  purpose  by  the  letters  mspc.  Thus 
m  implies  the  transposition  (metathesis)  of  the  premisses :  s  and  p  tell 
us  to  convert,  purely  (simpliciter)  or  impurely  (per  accidens\  the  pro- 
position whose  characteristic  vowel  they  follow:  the  meaning  of  c, 
reduction  to  impossibility  (per  impossible  ductio\  is  the  only  one  which 
is  not  quite  so  simple,  and  may  be  at  once  illustrated  by  fhe  case  of 
Baroco.  The  premisses  here  are,  '  all  P  are  MJ  '  some  S  are  not 
My  and  the  conclusion,  '  some  *$"  are  not  P.9  If  we  suppose  this 
conclusion  to  be  false,  it  follows  ad  contradictor  lam  that  f  all  £  are  PI 
If  this  were  so,  and  if  this  new  minor  premiss,  call  S  are  P99  were 
subordinated  to  the  given  major,  e  all  P  are  MJ  it  would  follow  in 
Barbara  of  the  first  figure  that  '  all  S  are  M.9  But  this  result  con- 
tradicts the  given  minor  *  some  S  are  not  M' ;  it  was  therefore  wrong 
to  deny  the  truth  of  the  conclusion  in  Baroco,  and  that  conclusion, 
f  some  S  are  not  P,1  is  right.  The  other  operations  scarcely  need 
illustrating.  We  have  lately  seen  how,  by  transposition,  m,  of  the 
premisses,  and  impure  conversion,  />,  of  the  conclusion,  which  was 
then  drawn  in  the  first  figure,  Bamalip  of  the  fourth  is  reduced  to  the 
first.  Camcsires  of  the  second,  c  all  P  are  Mj  '  no  S  is  M9  '  no  S 
is  Pj  gets  by  transposition,  m,  of  the  premisses  and  pure  conversion, 
s,  of  the  minor,  the  new  premisses  '  no  M  is  *$"/  *  all  P  are  MJ  from 
which  it  follows  in  Celarent  of  the  first  figure,  *  no  P  is  S';  this  con- 
clusion further  requires  pure  conversion,  s9  in  order  to  yield  £  no  S  is 
P,1  as  required  by  Cames/res.  Darapti  of  the  third  figure  runs,  *  all 
J/are  PI  '  all  M  are  *$y  '  some  S  are  P';  the  impure  conversion,  p, 
of  the  minor  gives  the  premisses  '  all  ,/J/ are  P,' i  some  S  are  J/"/  and 
the  resulting  conclusion  in  Darn  of  the  first  figure,  i  some  S  are  P9 


92     Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms.     [BOOK  i. 

requires  no  further  transformation^  being  immediately  identical  with 
that  of  Darapti. 

98.  Thus  far  we  have  conceived  of  the  premisses  as  categorical 
judgments  of  the  form  *  £  is  P?  But  the  course  of  our  thoughts  may 
also  suggest  them  in  an  hypothetical  of  disjunctive  form.  These 
differences,  important  as  they  are  for  the  judgments  as  such,  are  not 
so  for  the  formal  connexion  of  the  syllogism  ;  they  always  belong  to 
its  content,  and  it  is  only  necessary  to  take  note  of  them,  not  to  alter 
the  ordinary  syllogistic  rules  on  their  account.  This  is  most  obvious 
where  we  have  two  hypothetical  premisses,  in  each  of  which  two  of 
the  three  propositions  M S  P  are  connected  as  protasis  and  apodosis. 
Just  as  with  categorical  premisses  where  MSP  denote  three  concepts^ 
the  inference  in  Darn  is  as  follows :  '  P  is  always  true  if  M  is  true, 
Jfis  sometimes  true  if  £  is  true,  therefore  P  is  sometimes  true  if  S 
is  true ' ;  in  Camestres,  '  M  is  always  true  if  P  is  true,  M  is  never  true 
if  *$"  is  true,  therefore  T5  Is  never  true  if  S  is  true ' ;  in  Disamis^  £  M  is 
sometimes  true  if  P  is  true,  M  is  always  true  if  *$*  is  true,  therefore  P 
is  sometimes  true  if  S  is  true.' 

The  cases  are  more  peculiar  when  the  major  premiss  is  hypothetical 
and  connects  universally  a  consequence  F,  expressed  in  the  apodosis, 
with  a  condition  G,  contained  in  the  protasis,  while  the  minor  is 
categorical  and  affirms  or  denies  either  G  or  F  of  all  or  some  in- 
stances of  £  The  simplest  way  is  to  class  these  cases  with  the 
immediate  inferences  from  judgments,  for  condition  and  consequence 
are  related  as  sulalternans  to  mlalternala.  Firstly,  then,  the  fact  that 
the  condition  G  is  not  true  in  certain  cases  of  S  does  not  justify  us  in 
inferring  ad  mlalternaidm  that  the  consequence  F  is  not  true  in  the 
same  cases,  for  the  same  consequence  may  arise  from  other  and 
equivalent  conditions.  But  if  the  condition  is  true,  we  infer  the  truth 
of  the  consequence.  This  gives  rise  to  two  syllogisms,  since  G  may 
imply  either  that  F  is  true  or  that  it  is  not  true  ;  (i)  <  If  G  is  true  F 
is  always  true,  G  is  true  in  all  or  some  cases  of  S,  therefore  /''  is  true 
in  all  or  some  cases  of  S' ;  this  is  a  modus  ponendo  ponen$>  which  posits 
the  consequence  by  positing  the  condition,  and  it  evidently  answers 
to  the  moods  JBarlara  and  Darn  in  the  first  figure  :  (2)  « If  G  is  true 
Fis  never  true,  G  is  true  in  all  or  some  cases  of  S,  therefore  Fh 
not  true  in  all  or  some  cases  of  S;'  a  modus ponendo  fallens,  in  so  far 
as  it  does  away  with  the  consequence  Fby  positing  the  condition  of 
its  opposite,  and  obviously  a  counterpart  of  Celarent  and  Fcrio  in  the 
first  figure. 

In  the  opposite  direction,  ad  sulaliernantem,  the  truth  of  the  pro- 


CHAPTER  in.]  Hypothetical  Premisses.  9  3 

position  F  in  certain  cases  of  £  does  not  prove  the  truth  of  the  par- 
ticular condition  G  on  which  it  was  found  to.  depend  in  other  cases, 
for  the  same  consequence  J?  may  arise  from  several  equivalent  con- 
ditions. But  the  fact  that  F  is  not  true  in  certain  cases  of  S  does 
prove  that  all  conditions  upon  which  it  could  depend,  and  therefore 
the  particular  condition  G,  are  not  true.  The  following  syllogisms 
are  therefore  admissible  :  (3)  '  If  G  is  true  F  is  always  true,  F  is  not 
true  in  all  or  some  cases  of  S,  therefore  in  all  or  some  cases  of  S 
G  is  not  true/  a  modus  iollendo  fallens,  which  by  doing  away  with  the 
consequence  does  away  with  the  condition  which,  had  it  been  true, 
would  inevitably  have  given  rise  to  it ;  it  corresponds  clearly  to 
Camestres  and  Baroco  of  the  second  figure  :  (4)  '  If  G  is  true  F  is 
never  true,  F  is  true  in  all  or  some  cases  of  S,  therefore  in  all  or 
some  cases  of  >$"  G  is  not  true,'  a  modus  pomndo  fallens,  which  by 
positing  a  consequence  denies  the  condition  under  which  it  would 
have  been  impossible;  it  repeats  Cesare  and  Fesiino  of  the  second 
figure.  Lastly,  we  may  reflect  that  the  fact  that  G  is  not  true  may 
also  imply  that  F  is  or  is  not  true,  in  which  case  we  get  the  syllo- 
gisms, (5)  c  If  G  is  not  true  F  also  is  not  ever  true,  in  all  or  some  cases 
of  S  G  is  not  true,  therefore  in  the  same  cases  F  is  not  true,'  a 
modus  tollendo  fallens  without  any  peculiarity,  merely  translating  the 
pomndo  ponens  into  the  negative :  (6)  c  If  G  is,  not  true  F  is  always 
true,  in  all  or  some  cases  of  S  F  is  not  true,  therefore  in  these  cases 
G  is  true,'  a  modus  tolhndo  ponens,  which  was  wanted  to  complete  the 
possible  combinations  of  condition  and  consequence,  positive  and  ne- 
gative ;  it  posits  the  truth  of  a  condition  by  doing  away  with  the  con- 
sequence which  would  necessarily  follow  if  it  were  not  true.  An 
easy  change  in  the  form  of  expression  shows  that  these  two  last 
cases  also  belong  to  the  second  figure;  the  latter  of  them  might  be 
put  thus,  'If  non-G  is  true  Fis  always  true,  F  is  always  or  some- 
times not  true,  therefore  non~6r  is  always  or  sometimes  not  true/ 
As  this  exhausts  everything  that  can  be  proved  from  the  relation  of 
subalternation,  there  are  no  consequences  of  this  kind  which  could 
be  classed  under  the  third  figure. 

94.  These  syllogistic  devices  are  in  my  mind  of  less  importance 
than  a  circumstance  which  I  never  find  thoroughly  considered  in 
connexion  with  the  present  subject,  the  circumstance  that  all  these 
inferences  refer  merely  to  a  relation  between  the  condition  G  and  its 
consequence  F,  not  to  that  of  a  cause  G  to  its  effect  F.  It  is  only  in 
the  world  of  thought  that  a  condition  G,  if  it  is  once  supposed  to  be 
true,  always  has  the  consequence  which  by  a  necessity  of  thought 


94     Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms.     [  BOOK  i. 

belongs  to  it ;  in  the  real  world  the  cause  G,  even  if  it  exists  and  is 
operative,  may  always  .have  its  effect  F  frustrated  by  an  opposing 
force  U.  In  being  transferred  to  actual  events,  therefore,  all  these 
inferences  require  to  be  modified  in  ways  which  applied  logic  will 
show  us  :  thus  it  is  not  allowable  to  conclude  that  wherever  the  cause 
G  operates  its  effect  F  is  necessarily  a  fad,  nor  to  assert  that,  if  G  is 
a  cause  of  hindrance  to  F,  where  this  hindrance  exists  F  cannot 
exist ;  G  also  in  its  turn  may  be  hindered  by  a  Z7,  or  F  may  be 
realised  in  spite  of  it  by  a  third  cause  V.  In  pure  logic,  therefore,  it 
is  quite  an  improper  description  of  the  cases  which  we  have  been 
dealing  with  to  say,  that  their  minor  premiss  expresses  the  real 
existence  of  G  or  F\  the  truth  is  that  these  two  simple  letters  stand 
here  for  judgments  of  the  form  '  S  is  P'\  it  is  only  the  logical 
aclmissibility  or  necessity  of  this  connexion  of  thought  between  S  and 
P  which  the  minor  premiss  asserts  in  regard  to  certain  cases  of  S, 
while  the  major  connects  it  with  another  similar  relation  between  £ 
and  Qt  so  as  to  form  an  hypothetical  judgment  of  universal  validity. 
I  will  not  pursue  this  point  further  here  ;  I  have  made  my  exposition 
somewhat  prolix  in  expression  with  the  view  of  indicating  how  the 
matter  really  stands. 

05,  If  it  is  true  of  a  subject  Z  that  it  is  either  P,  Q,  or  R}  or  that 
it  is  both  /',  (?,  and  R,  or  that  it  is  neither  P,  Q,  nor  R,  we  first 
substitute  for  this  triple  predicate  the  simple  U,  and  call  U  in  the  first 
case  disjunctive,  in  the  second  positive,  in  the  third  negative.  If 
anyone  takes  the  not  absolutely  necessary  trouble  to  follow  the  appli- 
cation of  such  disjunctive,  copulative,  and  remotive  premisses  in  the 
syllogism,  he  will  find  these  results,  (i)  If  the  major  premiss  is  Z  U> 
and  in  the  minor  S  Z  an  S  is  subordinated  to  Z,  the  ordinary  con- 
clusions *S'£7of  the  first  figure  follow,  and  27  has  in  them  the  same 
meaning  as  in  the  major:  (2)  If  the  universal  major  is  Z  U,  the 
minor  S  U,  and  U  is  in  one  of  them  positive  or  disjunctive,  in  the 
other  negative,  we  get  the  negative  conclusions  SZ  of  the  second 
figure  with  the  quantity  of  the  minor :  (3)  from  the  major  U  Z  with  a 
positive  or  negative  U,  and  the  minor  US  with  a  Z7of  the  same  or 
the  opposite  quality,  there  result  the  conclusions  S  Z,  always  par- 
ticular, of  the  third  figure ;  (4)  in  the  two  latter  cases,  where  U 
having  become  the  middle  term  disappears  from  the  conclusion,  its 
multiplicity  is  entirely  without  significance ;  what  follows  follows  all 
the  same  if  the  position  of  one  only  of  its  members  in  the  two  pre- 
misses be  taken  into  account.  The  result  is  equally  little  affected 
if  the  universal  major  Z  U  has  a  minor  which  affirms  or  denies  of 


CHAPTER  in.]  Chains  of  Inference.  95 

the  particular  subject  Z  one  of  the  members  of  U.  If  the  major 
distinguishes  only  two  alternatives  and  says,  c  all  Z  are  either  P  or 
Q,'  and  the  minor  '  this  Z  is  P '  or  '  this  Z  is  not  P?  it  follows  that 
'  this  Z  is  not  <2 '  or  ( this  Z  is  Q!  These  consequences  explain 
themselves  from  the  nature  of  contradictory  opposition ;  they  can  be 
reduced,  but  without  any  conceivable  advantage,  to  the  first  figure ; 
4  every  Z  which  is  not  P  is  Q,  this  Z  is  a  Z  which  is  not  P9 
therefore  this  Z  is  a  QJ  The  same  unfruitful  reflexions  may  be 
extended  to  a  U  of  more  than  one  member  in  the  major  premiss,  for 
we  can  always  make  any  number  that  we  choose  of!  its  members 
into  the  subject,  and  say  (with  only  a  bipartite  U},  6  every  Z  which 
is  not  P  and  is  not  Q  is  either  R  or  T.s  Lastly,  polylemmas  (dilemmas, 
trilemmas)  are  syllogisms  with  a  disjunctive  U  of  many  members  in  the 
major  Z 17,  and  the  same  number  of  minors,  which  taken  together 
affirm  of  each  one  of  the  members  of  £7  the  same  further  consequence  T. 
These  are  not  cases  of  new  logical  forms  but  only  new  applications 
of  old  ones,  and  we  may  return  to  them  in  our  applied  logic. 

96.  On  the  other  hand,  I  have  no  intention  whatever  of  coming 
back  to  the  doctrine  of  chains  of  inference*  Every  conclusion  of  a  syllo- 
gism may  conceivably  become  the  major  premiss  of  another  syllo- 
gism :  the  first  is  then  called  the  prosyllogism  of  the  second,  and  each 
one  that  follows  the  episyllogism  of  the  one  which  preceded  it.  A 
mere  comparison  of  the  names  of  the  moods  shows  us  at  once  many 
properties  of  the  chain  thus  produced.  If  its  last  member  is  to  be 
universal,  the  whole  series  of  prosyllogisms,  and  therefore  the  whole 
chain,  must  be  in  the  first  two  figures ;  the  entrance  of  any  member 
in  the  third  figure  produces  a  particular  conclusion,  which  never  leads 
back  again  to  universal  conclusions.  If  one  of  the  syllogisms  has  a 
negative  conclusion,  the  conclusions  of  all  episyllogisms  are  negative  ; 
and  a  chain  can  only  end  with  a  conclusion  at  once  positive  and 
universal  if  it  is  in  Barbara  through  its  whole  course.  It  is  more- 
over usual  to  require,  on  the  analogy  of  the  simple  syllogism,  that  the 
major  premiss  of  the  first  prosyllogism  should  furnish  the  predicate 
P  of  the  ultimate  conclusion,  and  the  minor  of  the  last  episyllogism 
its  subject  Si  it  would  only  need  patience  to  find  the  rules  for  the 
formation  of  such  a  series,  but  I  cannot  see  of  what  use  they  would  be, 
If  the  conclusion  of  a  prosyllogism,  which  is  also  the  major  *  premiss 
of  the  episyllogism,  is  not  expressed,  the  series  give  rise  to  the  two 
forms  of  Sorites.  The  Aristotelian  form,  1A  is  B>  B  is  C,  C  is  Z>? 

1  ['  Minor '  premiss,  in  the  Aristotelian  Sorites.     The  author's  words  only  apply 
to  the  Gokleniaa  form.] 


96    Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms.    [BOOK  i. 

therefore  A  Is  D"  Includes  each  concept  in  the  one  which  follows  • 
it  thus  proceeds  from  the  lower  to  the  higher,  and  Is  produced  by 
suppressing-  the  conclusions,  which  we  could  elicit  from  each  pair  of 
members  as  follows,  '  B  is  C,  A  is  B,  therefore  A  is  C,'  and  then, 
c  C  is  J9,  A  is  C,  therefore  A  is  Z?.'  The  other  form,  a  late  discovery 
of  Professor  Goldenius  of  Marburg  (1547-1628)  takes  the  opposite 
direction;  its  premisses,  '  B  is  A,  C  is  B,  D  is  C  .  .  .,'  suppress  the 
conclusion  of  the  two  first  members,  c  C  is  A,'  which  as  major  pre- 
miss to  the  third  gives  the  conclusion  of  the  chain  in  the  first  figure, 


A.     Syllogistic  Infer  Mice.     Inference  ly  Subsiimplion.     Inference 
fy  Indue  lion.     Inference  by  Analogy. 

97.  The  logical  truths  of  which  the  mind  had  gradually  become 
conscious  in  dealing  with  its  ideas  were  provisionally  summed  up  by 
the  disjunctive  judgment  as  follows:  every  ,5,  which  is  a  specific  form 
of  Jlf,  possesses  as  its  predicate  a  particular  modification  of  each  of 
the  universal  predicates  of  /]/  to  the  exclusion  of  the  rest.  The 
problem  which  remained  was  to  discover  the  intellectual  operations  by 
which  this  required  specific  mark  could  be  determined  for  a  given  S. 
This  problem  is  not  solved  by  the  Aristotelian  syllogisms;  they  confine 
themselves  to  placing  the  subject  of  their  conclusion  in  relation 
merely  with  the  universal  form  of  the  predicate  mentioned  in  the 
major  premiss;  so  that  in  spite  of  the  manifold  development  given  to 
them  and  their  possible  varieties  by  the  acuteness  of  earlier  logicians, 
they  are  merely  the  expression,  formally  expanded  and  completed,  of 
the  logical  truth  already  embodied  in  the  disjunctive  judgment.  Like 
the  impersonal  judgment.,  which,  by  distinguishing  subject  and  predi- 
cate',, made  formally  explicit  a  division  already  indicated  in  the  concept, 
without  telling  us  anything  new  about  the  mutual  relation  of  the 
members,  thus  produced  the  Aristotelian  syllogism  in  its  first  and 
most  perfect  figure,  to  which  we  mentally  refer  the  others,  merely 
distinguishes  in  two  separate  premisses  the  universal  rule  and  its 
particular  application,  which  were  already  similarly  related  in  the 
disjunctive  judgment.  Thus  the  Aristotelian  syllogisms,  constructed 
as  they  all  art;  on  the  principle  of  placing  one  concept  within  the 
circuit  of  another  without  further  defining  its  position,  may  be  in- 
cluded, under  the  general  name  of  inference  ly  suhsumption,  and 
considered  as  the  first  and  most  elementary  form  of  the  new  group  of 
intellectual  operations.  We  will  now  attempt  to  show  what  is  the 
next  step  in  advance  which  they  compel  us  to  take, 


CHAPTER  in.]     Circle  in  the  subsumptive  syllogism.  97 

98.  As  the  mo§t  graphic  illustration  of  the  idea  upon  which  infer- 
ence  by  subsumption  is  based  I  choose   the   mood  Darzt,  which 
expressly  brings  a  particular  case  in  the   minor  premiss  under  the 
universal  law  contained  in  the   major.     6  All  men  are  mortal,'  says 
this  mood,  'and  Caius  is  a  man/  whence  it  concludes,  'Therefore 
Caius  is  mortal/  clearly  meaning  that  by  this  conclusion  a  truth  which 
was  not  established  before  is  now  made  certain  by  the  truth  of-  the 
two  premisses  and  their  relation  to  one  another.     But  as  early  as  the 
scepticism  of  antiquity  the  objection  was  made,  that  it  is  not  the 
premisses  which  guarantee  the  truth  of  the  conclusion,  but  that  the 
conclusion  must  already  hold  good  in  order  that  the  premisses  may 
do  so.     Where,  indeed,  would  be   the  truth  of  the  major  premiss, 
*  all  men  are  mortal/  if  it  were  not  already  certain  that  Caius  partici- 
pates in  this  property  ?     And  where  would  be  the  truth  of  the  minor 
premiss,  e  Caius  is  a  man/  if  it  were  still  doubtful  whether  among 
the  other  properties  of  humanity  he  had  that  of  mortality  also,  which 
the  major  itself  alleges  as  a  universal  mark  of  every  man  ?     Instead 
then  of  proving  the  truth  of  the  conclusion  by  their  own  independent 
truth,  the  two  premisses  themselves  are  only  true  on  the  supposition 
of  its  truth,  and  this  double  circle  seems  at  first  to  make  the  syllogism 
logically  quite  inoperative. 

99,  The  weight  of  this  objection  is  not  to  be  got  rid  of  by  denying 
it :  we  will  follow  out  its  applications  in  various  cases.     If  we  suppose 
the  major  premiss  MP  to  be  an  analytical  judgment,  if,  that  is,  we 
assume  P  to  be  a  fixed  mark  without  which  the  content  of  M  cannot 
be  completely  conceived,  then  certainly  the  universal  validity  of  the 
major   is   independently  established;    but    then   the   minor    cannot 
subordinate  an  S  to  M  without  already  attributing  to  it  this  indispens- 
able Pj  that  is,  without  presupposing  the  conclusion  in  which  that 
attribution  ought  first  to  find  expression.     If  for  instance  we  reckon, 
weight  in  the  concept  of  body,  we  form  the  major  premiss,  'all 
bodies  have  weight,'  without  fear  of  contradiction ;  but  we  cannot  go 
on  in  the  minor  to  call  air  a  body  without  involving  the  thought  that  air 
too  is  heavy,  which  we  are  not  supposed  to  know  until  the  conclusion. 
In  general  terms,  the  principle  of  subsumption   requires   that  the 
subordinated  individual  should  share  the  marks  of  its  universal ;  but, 
conversely,  nothing  can  be  subordinated  to  a  universal  without  already 
having  the  marks  which  the  universal  prescribes  to  it. 

The  case  would  be  different  if  we  supposed  the  major  premiss 
MP  to  be  a  universal  synthetical  judgment.  Then  the  content  of  M 
could  be  fully  conceived  without  involving  the  conception  of  P^ 


98     Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms*     [BOOK  i. 

though  at  the  same  time  we  should  be  certain,  on  whatever  grounds, 
that  P  is  always  combined  with  M.  The  minor  premiss  would  then 
merely  have  to  show  in  S  the  marks  which  make  it  an  M,  and  then, 
and  not  till  then,  the  conclusion  would  add  the  P  which  belongs  to  £  in 
virtue  of  its  subordination  to  M9  but  which  had  not  before  been  part  of 
the  conception.  In  the  practical  employment  of  subsumptive  syllo- 
gisms these  assumptions  are  always  made.  When  we  assert,  'all  men 
are  mortal/  we  conceive  the  physiological  character  of  man  to  be  fully 
determined  by  the  rest  of  his  known  organisation,  and  regard  mor- 
tality as  a  mark  which  need  not  be  explicitly  thought  of  when  we 
mentally  characterise  him,  because  it  follows  inevitably  from  the 
organisation  which  determines  our  conception.  And  thus  in  the  case 
of  Caius  it  is  enough  to  establish  in  the  minor  premiss  the  fact  that  he 
has  this  essential  organisation,  in  order  in  the  conclusion  to  ascribe 
to  him  its  inevitable  consequence.  This  is  still  more  clear  if  we  con- 
ceive the  major  premiss  as  hypothetical,  and  think  of  P  as  not  a  fixed 
and  permanent  but  a  fluctuating  mark  of  M^  a  consequence  which 
follows  upon  M  under  a  certain  condition  x,  a  mark  which  under  this 
condition  M  assumes  or  loses,  a  state  into  which  it  falls,  or  an  effect 
which  it  produces.  Then  we  have  merely  to  subordinate  S  to  M 
in  the  minor  premiss  in  order  to  conclude  that  S  also,  if  the  same 
condition  x  operates,  must  exhibit  the  mark  P,  And  as  a  matter  of 
fact  this  is  the  form  to  which  most  of  the  effectual  applications  of  the 
syllogism  in  science  are  reducible ;  they  almost  all  show  that  S,  being 
a  species  of  M9  will  develop  or  experience  under  the  condition  x  the 
same  general  effect  P  as  we  know  in  M,  But  as  before  with  the 
analytical  major  premiss  the  question  arose,  with  what  right  the  minor 
could  be  asserted,  so  here  with  a  synthetical  major  the  question  arises, 
with  what  right  we  can  affirm  the  universal  validity  of  this  major  itself. 
Mortality  is  to  be  a  new  mark,  necessarily  accruing  to  the  organisation 
of  man :  but  this  universality  can  only  subsist  on  the  assumption  that 
the  conclusion  is  true,  and  it  falls  to  the  ground  if  some  capricious  Caius 
is  found  who  does  not  die.  It  is  clear  what  the  answer  to  this  will 
be  :  *  of  course,'  it  will  be  said,  *  every  universal  major  premiss  is  false 
if  there  is  a  single  instance  in  which  it  is  not  confirmed,  and  there  is 
always  this  danger  when  the  universal  in  question  has  been  formed 
only  by  an  unjustifiable  generalisation  from  a  number  of  observed 
instances :  but  where  the  necessary  connexion  of  M  and  P  is  in- 
herently demonstrable,  the  very  universality  of  its  truth  provides 
against  the  contingency  of  a  single  capricious  instance  which  might 
contradict  it.  In  the  example  before  us  the  matter  is  doubtful :  to  the 


CHAPTER  in.]  Establishment  ofmajor  and  minorpremisses.  99 

ordinary  mind  the  universal  mortality  of  man  is  only  an  assumption 
based  upon  the  overwhelming  impression  of  countless  instances, 
to  which  as  yet  no  contradictory  instance  has  been  found :  to  the 
physiologist,  as  a  consequence  of  the  known  human  organisation,  it 
is  certainly  a  matter  of  settled  conviction,  but  not  one  which  can  be 
proved  with  the  exactness  he  would  wish.  But  in  other  cases  the 
universal  validity  of  the  synthetical  major  premiss  is  guaranteed  either 
by  an  immediate  perception,  or  by  proofs  which  reduce  a  given 
matter  to  such  a  perception,  and  in  these  cases  the  syllogism  suffices 
for  securing  a  particular  piece  of  new  knowledge ;  for  all  that  this  re- 
quires is  perfectly  practicable,  viz.  the  subordination  of  an  S  to  an  M, 
which  here  really  fulfils  the  function  of  a  middle  term  in  connecting  *$" 
with  a  previously  unconnected  P! 

100.  I  leave  it  for  the  present  an  open  question  whether,  and  how 
far,  the  immediate  perception  of  the  universal  truth  of  a  synthetical  judg- 
ment is  possible ;  for  so  much  is  at  once  clear,  that  in  any  case  we 
shall  be  only  very  rarely  in  a  position  to  rest  the  content  of  a  universal 
major  premiss  upon  this  ground ;  countless  universal  judgments  are 
expressed  and  used  for  inferences,  without  the  possibility  of  either 
themselves  passing  for  immediate  perceptions  or  being  reduced  to 
such  by  any  practicable  method  of  proof.  This  wide  field  of  in- 
tellectual activity  cannot  be  simply  set  aside  as  invalid,  nor  can  it 
subsist  without  logical  rules  of  its  validity.  These  rules  we  have  to 
look  for,  and  there  are  two  which  we  want.  For  the  effective  use 
of  the  syllogism  it  is,  firstly,  necessary  that  we  should  learn  to  find 
universal  major  premisses,  based  neither  on  an  immediate  certitude  nor 
upon  the  antecedent  experience  of  their  truth  in  every  single  instance ; 
it  must  be  possible  to  assert  the  universal  mortality  of  men,  both 
.  before  it  is  understood  as  the  necessary  consequence  of  certain 
conditions,  and  also  before  we  have  tested  every  individual  man  to 
see  whether  he  is  mortal.  A  second  rule  is  necessitated  by  the  minor 
premiss.  There  are  many  cases  in  which  we  are  able  to  subordinate 
an  *$*  to  M  because  we  have  found  in  S  all  the  marks  which  M  pre- 
scribes to  its  several  species,  but  in  most  cases  this  is  impracticable ; 
even  in  the  case  of  the  Caius  of  our  minor  premiss  no  one  will 
consider  it  necessary  or  possible,  that  in  order  to  acquire  the  right 
to  put  him  in  the  genus  man  we  should  test  all  the  properties  of  his 
organisation.  If  then  the  really  fruitful  exercise  of  thought  is  to  be 
possible,  there  must  be  a  method  for  finding  minor  premisses  which 
.subordinate  a  given  subject  to.  a  genus  before  it  has  been  shown 
to  possess  fully  all  the  marks  of  that  genus.  The  two  methods  which 

H  2 


i  oo  Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms.    \  BOOK  i. 

I  am  here  requiring  admit  (though  this  is  not  of  essential  importance), 
of  being  attached  to  somewhat  modified  forms  of  the  second  and  third 
Aristotelian  figures. 

101.  The  problem  of  all  inferential  processes  is  naturally  this,  from 
given  data  or  premisses  to  develop  as  much  new  truth  as  possible ; 
how  this  is  done,  is  in  itself  quite  immaterial ;  the  method  will  be 
determined  by  the  form  of  the  premisses,  and  these  we  have  to  take 
as  experience,  internal  or  external,  offers  them.  Now  it  often  happens 
that  the  same  predicate  occurs  or  does  not  occur,  not  only  in  two, 
but  in  very  many  different  subjects  P,  S,  7,  V,  Wy  and  the  question 
is,  what  consequence  can  be  drawn  from  the  premisses,  PJIf,  SJIf, 
TJl/y  VMj  .  .  .  ,  which  belong  in  form  to  the  second  figure  of 
Aristotle.  It  is  clear  that  in  their  multiplicity  they  do  not  suggest  an 
inference  which  would  connect  together  any  particular  two  of  their 
subjects ;  so  far  as  we  aim  at  such  an  inference,  we  can  only  effect 
it  by  confining  ourselves  with  Aristotle  to  two  premisses  and  ob- 
serving the  rules  of  the  second  figure.  But  it  is  equally  open  to  us 
to  try  whether  this  recurrence  of  Mm  such  different  subjects  tells  us 
anything  about  the  significance  of  M  itself,  which  accordingly  would 
not  disappear  in  the  conclusion.  Such  an  experiment  is  what  the 
natural  mind  infallibly  makes  when  experience  furnishes  such  pre- 
misses, and  it  is  guided  in  its  experiment  by  the  universal  principle 
which  dominates  all  its  activity,  the  principle  of  translating  a  given 
coexistence  of  ideas  into  a  coherence  between  their  contents.  Where 
we  observe  the  same  mark  in  different  subjects,  we  are  predis- 
posed to  think  that  the  agreement  is  not  a  chance  one,  and  that 
the  different  subjects  have  not  therefore  stumbled  upon  the  same 
predicate  each  through  a  special  circumstance  of  its  own,  but  are  all 
radically  of  one  common  essence,  of  which  their  possession  of 
the  same  mark  is  the  consequence.  P,  S,  Ty  Fwill  accordingly  be 
different,  but  still  co-ordinate  as  species  under  a  higher  concept  2 ;  it 
is  not  as  different  individuals,  but  only  as  species  of  the  genus  2, 
that  they  bear  the  common  mark  M  as  a  necessary  mark  of  that 
genus.  Our  conclusion  therefore  runs  as  follows,  'all  2  are  M*\ 
and  in  this  conclusion  2  stands  for  the  higher  universal  to  which  we 
subordinate  the  individual  subjects,  and  for  the  true  subject  of  the 
M  which  before  appeared  as  a  common  attribute  of  those  individuals. 
Such  a  process  of  inference  is  the  simplest  case  of  Induction,  and 
under  this  name  forms  our  second  member  in  the  group  of  inferences 
based  upon  the  subordination  of  manifold  elements  to  the  unity  of  a 
universal 


CHAPTER  mo    Defect  and  justification  of  induction,        101 

102.  This  process  however  seems  only  to  solve  imperfectly  the 
problem  which  was  set  to  it,  that  of  producing  universal  major  pre- 
misses for  subsumptive  syllogisms.  For  everybody  agrees  in  object- 
ing to  induction,  that  if  it  is  complete  its  information  is  certain  but 
not  new,  while,  so  long  as  it  is  incomplete,  it  is  new  but  not  certain. 
If  P9  S,  J7,  V  are  all  the  species  of  2  which  exist,  and  if  each  already 
has  a  premiss  informing  us  that  it  is  M9  the  conclusion  can  only  sum 
up  these  premisses  in  a  universal  judgment,  'All  2  are  M3;  but  it 
cannot  even  logically  be  changed  into  the  general  judgment,  '  Every 
2  as  such  is  M3 ;  on  the  contrary,  it  remains  quite  uncertain  whether 
the  species  of  2  merely  participate  as  a  fact  in  the  common  Mt  and 
each  ultimately  for  a  special  reason  of  its  own,  or  whether  the 
universal  nature  of  2  really  contains  the  one  and  selfsame  reason 
which  makes  M  a  necessity  to  all  its  species.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
besides  those  subjects  which  are  combined  with  M  in  the  premisses,  there 
are  other  species  of  2  of  which  those  premisses  say  nothing,  then  the 
conclusion  is  an  unjustified  inference  ad  subalfernanfem  from  the  truth 
of  a  limited  number  of  instances  to  the  truth  of  all,  an  inference  which 
may  have  probability  in  various  degrees,  but  never  reaches  certainty. 

It  appears  to  me,  however,  that  these  observations,  right  as  they 
are  in  themselves,  confuse  the  pure  meaning  of  a  logical  form  with 
the  difficulties  of  its  effective  application,  and  that  there  was  the  same 
error  in  the  criticism  made  upon  the  value  of  the  Aristotelian  syllo- 
gism. The  leading  idea  of  that  syllogism,  that  every  individual 
derives  its  right  and  obligation  to  the  possession  of  its  predicates 
through  dependence  upon  its  universal,  is  without  doubt  .logically  a 
perfectly  valid  principle,  and  exhibits  in  its  true  light  the  internal  con- 
struction of  the  content  of  thought  in  question.  It  does  not  lose 
this  logical  significance  because  the  truth  of  the  universal  includes  or, 
if  we  prefer  it,  presupposes  its  truth  in  all  particular  instances  ;  on  the 
contrary,  the  very  meaning  of  the  syllogistic  principle  is  that  the  two 
are  inseparable.  Whatever  therefore  may  be  the  way  by  which  in 
practice  the  mind  has  arrived  at  the  truth  of  the  premisses,  when 
they  are  once  found  the  first  Aristotelian  figure  does  express  by  its 
structure  the  inner  connexion  of  the  completed  content  of  thought, 
though  it  probably  does  not  at  all  express  the  division  of  intellectual 
labour  by  which  we  made  it  our  own.  Considered  in  this  way  the 
subsumptive  syllogism  is  the  logical  ideal,  to  the  form  of  which  we 
ought  to  bring  our  knowledge,  but  it  is  not  the  general  instrumental 
method  by  which  we  compose  that  knowledge  out  of  the  material 
given  to  us. 


1 02   Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,     i  BOOK  i. 

I  have  a  similar  remark  to  make  about  induction ;  the  logical  idea 
upon  which  it  rests  is  by  no  means  merely  probable,  but  certain  and 
Irrefragable.  It  consists  in  the  conviction,  based  upon  the  principle 
of  identity,  that  every  determinate  phenomenon  M  can  depend  upon 
only  one  determinate  condition,  and  accordingly '  that,  where  under 
apparently  different  circumstances  or  in  different  subjects  P,  S,  T,  U 
the  same  M  occurs,  there  must  inevitably  be  in  them  some  common 
element  2,  which  is  the  true  identical  condition  of  M  or  the  true  subject 
of  M.  It  would  be  quite  unjustifiable  to  object,  that  as  a  matter  of 
experience  the  same  consequence  M  is  often  produced  by  different 
equivalent  conditions,  and  the  same  predicate  M  may  occur  in  ex- 
tremely different  subjects.  Such  an  objection  just  shows  the  con- 
fusion, which  we  condemned  above^  between  the  logical  rule  and  the 
conditions  of  its  application,  If  there  are  two  equivalent  conditions 
for  a  result  M9  it  is  not  in  virtue  of  that  which  makes  them  different,  P 
or  *$",  but  of  that  which  is  the  ground  of  their  equivalence,  that  they  are 
really  conditions  of  the  same  result :  so  long  as  we  cannot  separate 
this  common  characteristic  in  the  two,  we  have  not  yet  found  the  true 
"2  of  the  conclusion,  and  have  not  therefore  carried  out  the  induction 
in  the  way  in  which  it  demands  to  be  carried  out.  Again,  if  the  same 
M  is  found  as  predicate  in  a  number  of  extremely  different  subjects, 
and  subjects  (as  is  usually  the  case  in  practice)  the  several  sums  of 
whose  marks  are  only  partially  known,  we  may  of  course  make  a 
great  mistake  if  we  combine  what  is  common  to  the  known  marks  of 
all  of  them,  and  then  assume  it  to  be  2,  the  true  subject  of  the  mark  in 
question  M.  I  do  not  deny  that  in  the  practice  of  induction  we  are  often 
placed  in  such  unfavourable  circumstances ;  but  all  these  difficulties 
in  carrying  out  the  inductive  principle  do  not;  alter  its  universal 
logical  validity  when  it  asserts,  that  wherever  different  conditions 
have  the  same  result  M,  or  different  subjects  the  same  predicate  M, 
there  must  be  discoverable  one  and  only  one  quite  determinate  2, 
forming 'the  single  invariable  condition  or  the  single  true  subject,  to 
which  the  predicate  or  the  result  M  is  to  be  universally  and  ne- 
cessarily ascribed  in  a  conclusion  of  the  form,  f  every  s  is  M'  We 
leave  it  to  applied  logic  to  observe  the  rules  by  which  we  may  succeed 
in  discovering  this  S, 

103.  I  introduce  the  third  form  of  this  group  under  the  somewhat 
arbitrary  name  of  the  inference  of  analogy.  In  the  third  Aristotelian 
figure,  MP,  MS,  as  in  the  second,  the  structure  of  both  premisses 
being  exactly  the  same,  there  is  nothing  in  their  position  to  lead  us 
to  distinguish  major  from  minor,  or  to  limit  their  number  to  two.  On 


CHAPTER  in,]   Defect  &nd  justification  of  analogy*  103 

the  contrary,  experience  will  often  show  us  a  larger  number  of  them, 
MP,  MS,  MT,  M  U;  will  show  us,  in  other  words,  that  a  number 
of  different  marks  does  or  does  not  occur  in  the  same  subject. 
These  data  cannot  be  rejected  by  the  mind,  and  it  employs  them  to 
form  an  inference  which  is  just  like  the  one  described  above,  only  in 
the  reverse  direction.  Here,  as  there,  it  is  guided  by  the  assumption 
that  the  different  predicates  have  not  united  in  the  same  subject  M 
by  a  number  of  unconnected  chances,  but  that  they  must  be  co- 
herent and  owe  their  coexistence  to  the  presence  of  one  condition ; 
they  belong  to  M  because  M  is  a  n,  and  it  is  this  sum  of  marks 
which  in  its  completeness  constitutes  the  nature  of  n ;  and  M^  being 
a  species  of  n,  has  a  right  to  unite  them  all  in  itself.  Thus  from 
these  premisses  we  form  the  conclusion,  CM  is  a  in,'  and  have  so 
executed  our  second  task  of  rinding  for  the  subsumptive  syllogism  a 
minor  premiss  by  which  a  concept  M  (there  called  S)  is  subordinated 
to  another  concept  n  (there  called  M), 

104.  Yet  this  task,  like  the  former  one,  seems  to  be  but  badly 
executed,  for  analogy,  like  induction,  is  liable  to  the  charge  that,  if 
complete,  it  tells  us  nothing  new,  and  if  incomplete,  nothing 
certain.  If  the  premisses  already  give  M  the  marks  necessary 
to  make  it  a  n,  we  gain  nothing  in  knowledge  of  fact  by  actually 
bringing  it  under  this  concept ;  the  change  is  merely  in  the  form 
of  our  apprehension  of  the  given  content.  But  in  most  cases 
the  premisses  give  only  a  part  of  the  predicates  necessary  to  n, 
and  from  the  presence  of  these  we  conclude  without  certainty  to  that 
of  the  rest,  by  which  alone  the  whole  of  n  is  realised  in  M.  When 
we  have  to  do  with  concrete  objects,  which  in  their  totality  consist  of 
countless  marks,  in  great  part  unknown  to  us,  in  part  difficult  to 
observe,  this  is  always  the  case :  from  a  few  properties  which  we 
actually  observe  in  an  object,  we  conclude  that  it  is  a  metal,  an  animal 
of  a  certain  kind,  an  instrument  for  a  certain  purpose.  It  is  needless 
to  say  that  numerous  mistakes  in  the  employment  oj  analogy  arise 
from  this  fact ;  but  here  also  the  difficulty  of  the  application  does  not 
diminish  the  value  of  the  logical  principle.  That  principle  asserts, 
that  no  rightly  conceived  content  of  thought  consists  of  an  uncon- 
nected heap  of  marks,  which  we  may  increase  at  pleasure  by  adding 
no  matter  what  new  elements  -9  what  other  marks  as  yet  unobserved 
can  combine  with  the  observed  marks  and  what  cannot,  is  already 
decided,  not  indeed  by  one  mark,  but  by  a  given  combination  of 
several,  in  which  each  is  determined  by  all  the  rest ;  this  is  why  we 
are  able  from  the  incipient  form  of  M  given  us  by  the  premisses  to 


1 04  Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,     i  BOOK  i. 

infer  its  further  completion  and  continuance ;  there  is  always  there- 
fore one  and  only  one  II,  which  makes  legitimate  and  possible  the 
union  of  marks  given  in  M,  and  at  the  same  time  the  addition  of 
others  not  given.  This  ideal  of  thought,  which  in  itself  is  quite  true, 
only  requires,  like  every  form  of  thought,  to  be  realised  in  suitable,  not 
unsuitable,  matter.  It  is  not  any  casual  pair  of  predicates  in  an  M 
•which  suffice  for  inferring  the  rest ;  many  such  combinations  may 
belong  to  some  other  concept  n1  or  n2  as  well  as  to  n ;  in  contrast 
with  such  unessential  marks  we  shall  require  essential  ones  in  the 
premisses,  a  requirement  which  is  always  made  in  practice,  and 
which  it  is  left  to  special  knowledge  of  the  matter  in  question  to  meet. 
The  most  important  source  of  inexactness,  however,  is  that  all  the 
forms  of  inference  hitherto  mentioned  give  the  predicates  only  a 
universal  form,  without  indicating  their  measure,  specific  modifications, 
and  mutual  determination.  So  long  as  the  premisses  only  say,  <M  is 
heavy/  'Mis  yellow/  'J/is  liquefiable/  etc.,  we  certainly  find  in  such 
data  no  decisive  ground  for  pronouncing  M  either  to  be  gold  or  to 
be  sulphur :  but  this  is  just  why  such  premisses  are  only  met  with  in 
abstract  logic ;  in  actual  practice  attention  is  always  given  also  to  the 
particular  amount,  nuance,  and  combination  of  the  predicates,  and  from 
this  incipient  characterisation  its  continuity  with  the  completed  n  is 
inferred.  It  is  just  this  universal  practice  of  the  natural  mind  for 
which  we  have  to  find  a  theoretical  basis  in  new  logical  rules,  and 
these  we  must  now  go  on  to  consider. 

It.  Mathematical  inferences.     Inference  ly  substitution. 
Inference  by  proportion.     Constitutive  equation. 

105.  I  will  put  together  once  more,  and  from  different  points  of 
view,  the  motives  which  impel  us  to  go  beyond  the  syllogisms  and 
look  for  new  forms  of  thought,  and  for  this  purpose  I  will  first  touch 
upon  the  nature  of  the  judgments  which  the  ordinary  theory  con- 
ceives of  as  members  of  the  syllogism,  In  judgments  of  the  form 
*  S  is  P/  as  I  have  already  observed,  language  expresses  the  pre- 
dicate with  a  universality  with  which  it  does  not  belong  to  its  real 
subject,  and  logic  usually  concedes  this  when  it  asserts  that  not  only 
does  the  predicate  contribute  to  the  determination  of  the  subject,  but 
the  subject  also  to  that  of  the  predicate.  When  we  say, '  this  rose  is 
red/  we  do  not  mean  that  it  has  a  general  indefinite  red,  or  any 
casual  shade  of  colour  which  happens  to  be  included  under  the  name 
red ;  it  is  rose-red  only  that  we  always  have  in  our  ralnd3  or,  more 


CHAPTER  in.]     Inadequacy  of  syllogistic  inference,     l\     105 


accurately  still,  the  precise  red  of  this  rose.  If  then  we 
express  our  thought  exactly,  we  should  have  to  say,  c  this  rose  is'red 
with  the  redness  of  this  rose/  In  this  apparently  quite  barren  pro- 
position the  logical  activity  would  show  itself  in  the  fact,  that  the 
perceived  property  of  the  rose  is  no  longer  apprehended  as  an  isolated 
thing,  without  any  other  home  in  the  world  ;  in  regarding  it  as  a  kind 
of  red  in  general,  which  occurs  elsewhere  and  holds  good  indepen- 
dently of  this  instance,  the  mind,  as  we  said  before1,  objectifies  its 
perception  ;  it  gives  to  what  is  perceived  a  definite  place  in  the  world3 
which  makes  it  something  on  its  own  account,  and  not  a  merely 
subjective  excitation  of  the  percipient  at  the  moment.  In  this  lies  the 
logical  gain  which  always  results  when  the  particular  content  of  a 
perception  is  replaced  in  the  judgment  by  the  universal  of  which  it  is 
an  instance.  But  at  the  same  time  of  course  there  will  be  a  logical 
loss,  if  we  get  no  further  than  the  expression  of  this  universal,  and  if 
the  other  part  of  the  perception  does  not  get  its  due  by  addition 
of  the  particularisation  which  is  necessary  to  make  the  universal 
named  equivalent  to  the  individual  intended.  This  loss  is  sustained 
by  all  ordinary  judgments  of  the  form  just  mentioned,  and  the 
Aristotelian  syllogisms  too  confine  themselves  to  dealing  with  the 
universal  M  or  the  universal  P. 

"'  106.  In  this  way  they  leave  unsolved  the  particular  problem  which 
the  disjunctive  judgment  suggested,  and  fail  generally  to  satisfy  the 
practical  needs  of  thought  as  a  living  process.'  For  already  in  the 
disjunctive  judgment  it  was  asserted,  that  it  is  not  the  universal  pre- 
dicate of  its  genus  which  belongs  to  the  individual,  but  a  definite 
modification  of  it,  /»,  to.  the  exclusion  of  the  rest.  What  this  p  is, 
ought  to  have  been  made  out  by  the  syllogism;  and  it  could  only 
have  done  so  by  supplying  to  the  major  premiss,  which  connects  the 
genus  with  the  universal  P,  a  minor  bringing  out  the  peculiarity  in 
virtue  of  which  S  is  this  particular  species  of  the  genus  and  no  other,  and 
must  therefore  have  for  predicate  this  and  no  other  modification  of  P. 
This  has  not  been  done;  the  minor  premiss  also  only  mentioned 
generally  the  subordination  of  the  individual  to  the  genus,  but  not 
its  specific  difference  from  other  species  of  it  ;  hence  the  conclusion 
could  only  say  what  belongs  to  the  individual  as  a  species  of  its  genus, 
not  as  this  species.  It  hardly  needs  to  be  further  explained  that 
this  falls  short  of  what  the  actual  processes  of  thinking  demand.  If 
we  argue,  'heat  expands  all  bodies,  iron  is  a  body,  therefore  heat 
expands  iron/  or,  'all  men  are  mortal,  Caius  is  a  man,  therefore 

»  [Above,  §  3.] 


1 06   Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,     c  BOOK  i. 

Caius  is  mortal/  everyone  will  feel  the  barrenness  of  this  procedure, 
and  will  reply,  'Undoubtedly  heat  expands  all  bodies,  but  each  body 
in  a  different  degree ;  undoubtedly  all  men  die,  but  the  liability  to  die 
in  one  man  is  different  from  that  in  another ;  what  we  want  to  know 
for  technical  purposes  or  for  administering  a  life-insurance  company 
is,  how  iron  expands  in  distinction  from  lead,  or  how  the  mortality  of 
Caius  is  to  be  estimated  in  distinction  from  that  of  other  men.' 
This  then  is  what  the  new  forms  have  to  do ;  they  have  to  make  the 
individual  felt  as  a  definite  species  of  the  universal,  and  so  enable  us 
to  argue  from  its  distinctive  difference  to  its  distinctive  predicate. 

107.  From  another  point   of  view  we   may  notice  the   fact,  that 
in  logic  it  has  been  too   exclusively  the  custom  to  use  categorical 
judgments  as  illustrations,  and  therefore  also  to  represent  the  in- 
clusion  of  one  concept  within  another  as  the  most   frequent  and 
most   important  of  logical   operations.     In   the   living   exercise    of 
thought  this  is  by  no  means  the  case ;  we  are  seldom  concerned  in 
practice  to  determine  a  mark  which  belongs  to  a  concept  once  for 
all,  or  in  the  circuit  of  which  the  concept  is  to  be  classed;   most 
frequently  we  want  to  know  what  variable  mark  P  will  occur  in  a 
concept  S  if  S  is  subjected  to  the  condition  x.     Questions  of  this 
kind  are  being  raised  at  every  moment  by  life,  science,  and  art.     We 
must  admit  that  the  ordinary  syllogistic  method  does  not   entirely 
overlook  such  cases ;  but  it  is  only  an  imperfect  way  of  dealing  with 
them  to  make  P  the  universal  result  of  the  coexistence  of  x  with  M 
in  a  major  premiss,  and  then  to  ascribe  P  to  S,  again  only  univer- 
sally, by  subordinating  S  to  M  or  MX.     What  good  is  it  to  say, 
e  if  a  man  is  offended,  he  gets  angry,  Caius  is  a  man,  therefore  if  he 
is  offended  he  will  get  angry'?     What  we  want  to  know  is,  how 
Caius,  being  the  person  he  is,  will  get  angry,  arid  consequently  how 
far  we  may  go  with  him.     The  subordination  of  Caius  to  the  con- 
cept of  humanity  helps  but  little  to  answer  this  question ;  we  must 
look  for  the  special  characteristics  which  distinguish  Caius  from  other 
persons,  and   must  then  have  the  means  of  calculating  the  effect 
which  offence  will  have  upon  these  characteristics.     This  may  be 
briefly  expressed  thus :    our  inferences  cannot  be  derived  from  ex- 
tensive relations  between  the  given  concepts,  but  only  from  their  con- 
tent ;  without  making  the  unprofitable  circuit  through  the  universal 
genus,  we  have  to  determine  directly  from  the  given  marks  of  a 
subject,  and  from  the  accruing  condition  JP,  what  new  marks  will 
show  themselves  or  what  changes  will  take  place  in  the  old  ones. 

108.  Considered  from  this  point  of  view,  the  new  forms  which  we 


CHAPTER  in.]  Inference  by  'substitution!  107 

have  to  look  for  group  themselves  with  the  inferences  from  analogy* 
For  these  also  concluded  from  the  presence,  absence,  and  com- 
bination of  certain  marks  in  an  S  the  necessary  presence,  absence, 
and  mode  of  attachment  of  other  marks  in  the  same  subject.  We 
may  doubt  indeed  whether  such  inferences  from  content  to  content, 
from  mark  to  mark,  are  possible  on  merely  logical  grounds,  and 
whether  the  few  which  really  are  possible  are  not  already  anticipated 
by  the  familiar  logical  doctrines  of  the  compatibility  of  disparate  pre- 
dicates, the  incompatibility  of  contraries,  and  the  necessary  choice 
between  contradictories:  statements  such  as,  c where/  is  there  q  must 
be/  will  after  all  (it  may  be  said)  be  supplied  by  experience  alone,  with 
the  single  exception,  with  which  we  wish  to  have  no  more  to  do 
here,  when  q  is  already  included  in  the  content  of  p  or  p  in  the  extent 
of  q.  In  itself  this  doubt  is  right ;  all  assertions  about  the  necessary 
connexion  or  incompatibility  of  two  predicates,  with  the  exception  of 
the  cases  last  mentioned,  can  never  be  based  "upon  any  evidence  but 
that  of  observation  ;  but  it  is  still  a  question  whether  logic,  with  the 
means  hitherto  at  its  disposal,  has  made  even  these  necessarily  pre- 
supposed facts  yield  all  the'  consequences  which  they  might  be  made 
to  yield :  that  it  has  not  done  so,  I  can  show  more  shortly  by  exhibit- 
ing the  actual  forms  of  inference  to  which  I  refer  :  in  the  natural  use 
of  the  mind  they  are  current  and  familiar,  and  all  that  is  done  here 
is  to  give  them  the  place  which  belongs  to  them  in  a  system  of  logic* 
100.  Let  us  leave  to  the  major  premiss  of  our  new  figure  the  form, 
*  all  M  are  P '  or  M  ==  P ;  to  the  minor  however  we  will  give,  not 
the  indefinite  form,  { £  is  an  M  in  general/  but  the  definite  one 
S  =  s  M\  that  is,  S  is  that  species  of  M  which  we  get  if  we  conceive 
the  whole  structure  of  the  marks  in  M  as  "determined  or  modified  by 
the  influence  of  a  specific  condition  s.  The  conclusion  will  then,  have 
to  be,  '  S  is  (rPy  and  it  will  assert  that  *S*,  so  far  as  it  is  this  dis- 
tinctive species  of  M  characterised  by  $,  possesses,  not  the  universal 
mark  P,  but  that  specific  impression  of  it,  <r  P,  which  the  influence  of 
s  must  produce  in  the  structure  of  M.  To  avoid  misunderstanding, 
it  should  be  observed  that  the  influence  of  a  condition  s  upon  the 
whole  structure  of  M  may  transform  the  different  marks  of  M  in 
extremely  different  ways ;  each  one  of  these  transformations  is  a  result 
of  s,  and  on  that  account  I  have  employed  the  kindred  letter  o-  in  o-P: 
on  the  other  hand  it  is  not  generally  right,  though  it  may  be  so  in 
particular  cases,  to  make  the  modification  of  a  mark  equivalent  to  the 
modifying  condition ;  therefore  the  conclusion  here  could  not  be  indi- 
cated by  sP.  In  the  form  however  which  we  have  given  to  the 


i  o8   Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,     c  BOOK  i. 

COD  elusion,  it  would  be  merely  the  indication,  not  the  solution,  of  a 
problem.  What  is  wanted  is  to  give  a  name  to  this  o-  P9  and  to  show 
how  P  is  changed  by  the  influence  of  s  upon  M,  This  remains  im- 
practicable so  long  as  we  produce  M  merely  in  this  simple  form  of  a 
universal  concept  provided  with  a  name :  in  order  to  know  how  s 
influences  M,  we  must  analyse  the  content  of  ./I/into  its  several  parts, 
and  observe  in  what  manner  they  combine.  Nobody,  for  instance, 
will  undertake  to  judge  how  the  working  of  a  machine  will  change 
under  the  influence  of  a  force  s,  so  long  as  he  merely  has  the  machine 
before  his  eyes  as  a  simple  object  of  perception,  M9  a  steam-engine 
in  general;  he  must  first  get  to  know  the  inner  structure,  the  con- 
nexion of  the  parts,  the  position  of  a  possible  point  of;  action  for 
the  force  s}  and  the  reaction  of  its  initial  effect  upon  the  /parts  con- 
tiguous to  that  point.  Accordingly,  it  is  only  by  substituting  for  the 
condensed  expression  or  concept  M  the  developed  sum  of  all  its 
constituent  parts,  with  attention  to  their  mutual  determinations,  that 
we  can  hope  to  follow  the  influence  of  s,  and  so  determine,  firstly,  what 
is  the  whole  nature  of  S  which  =  sM^  and,  as  a  consequence,  what  is 
the  modification  a-  P  of  the  predicate  P  which  belongs  to  this  S.  As 
a  matter  of  fact,  this  second  part  of  the  problem  is  always  included  in 
the  first ;  the  specific  modification  of  a  particular  predicate  for  S  can- 
not possibly  be  found  without  first  finding  the  total  change  produced 
in  M  by  s,  on  which  the  modification  depends  ;  for  if  P  were  part  of 
a  different  concept  N^  the  effect  on  it  of  the  same  condition  s  would 
not  be  the  same  as  when  it  is  a  part  of  M.  For  this  reason  I  shall 
take  no  more  notice  of  the  inference  to  vP,  but  shall  consider  the 
problem  of  the  new  form  to  be  to  determine  sM>  and  give  it  therefore 
the  form, 

Major  premiss  :  M -=•  a  ±  bx  +  ex1 , . . 

Minor  premiss  :  S  =  sM. 

Conclusion       :  S  =  s(a  +  bx  +  ex*  .  .  .) 

from  which,  in  regard  to  single  predicates,  e,  g.  #,  there  would  follow 
the  definite  conclusion,  6  S  is  JT  .  bxj  instead  of  the  indefinite  one, 
'  S  is  bx.9 

110.  There  is  always  a  danger  in  expressing  very  different  and  yet 
connected  cases  by  the  simplest  possible  symbols ;  to  avoid  misunder- 
standing, therefore,  1  add  the  following  observations.  By  a,  &,  c,  x  I 
wish  to  be  understood,  speaking  generally,  different  marks  of  a  con- 
cept Mt  which,  when  completely  enumerated,  constitute  the  whole  of 
M.  But  in  each  different  concept  these  marks  stand  in  the  most  dif- 
ferent kinds  of  relation  to  one  another,  and  these  relations  are  not 


CHAPTER  in. 3       Mathematical  symbols  in  logic.  109 

expressed  in  my  formula ;  the  double  sign  +  has  been  employed  as  a 
faint  indication  of  their  possible  variety.  These  signs,  -f  and  — ,  do  not 
suffice  for  a  full  expression  even  in  a  case  where  M  does  not  mean  a 
conceptual  content  of  qualitatively  different  marks,  but  a  mere  whole  of 
quantity  composed  of  the  commensurable  quantitative  parts  at  Z>,  c>  x. 
The  only  symbol  of  a  more  exhaustive  kind  would  be  that  of  the 
mathematical  function  in  general,  which  we  used  before,  M  =  F 
(0S  ^  c>  oc . .) ;  but  this  would  have  the  disadvantage  of  merely  calling 
up  to  thought  all  modes  of  connexion  between  the  parts,  without 
giving  a  sensuous  illustration  of  any.  The  form  of  the  series 
a  +  bx-kcx*  is  also  an  arbitrary  symbol ;  the  x  only  indicates  a  pos- 
sible difference  of  value  in  the  marks,  one  of  which,  x,  leaves  only 
one  other,  a,  entirely  free,  while  it  accompanies  the  rest  as  a  determin- 
ing condition.  The  ^  of  the  minor  premiss  and  conclusion  appears 
here  as  a  multiplying  factor ;  this  is  similarly  intended  to  represent  to 
sense,  by  the  simplest  and  most  familiar  form  in  which  one  quantity 
can  influence  another,  the  countless  different  ways  in  which  any  con- 
crete condition  may  act  upon  the  manifold  content  of  any  given 
subject.  If  we  express  by  a  letter  placed  underneath  on  the  right 
any  kind  of  change  produced  by  a  condition  in  any  kind  of  given 
matter,  and  represent  -Zf/as  a  function  of  a,  by  c,  x  (i.  e.  M=<l>  (a,  &,  c,  x) ), 
we  should  in  general  only  be  able  to  represent  the  conclusion  by 
S  =  $s  (a,,  #„  c»  x8),  not  by  S  =  <£  (aa,  &„  ca,  xt) ;  for  it  is  obvious 
that  the  effect  of  $  may  not  always  be  merely  to  change  the  single 
marks,  retaining  their  general  connexion  (as  expressed  by  the  second 
formula),  but  also  (as  expressed  by  the  first)  to  change  this  connexion 
itself;  in  fact,  a  condition  may  so  transform  the  whole  structure  of  a 
concept  that  in  its  new  shape  it  has  to  be  subsumed  under  a  different 
concept  M1  or  N  instead  of  the  previous  M.  The  admission  which 
I  have  now  to  add  makes  it  unnecessary  for  me  to  go  further  into  this 
point. 

111.  The  advantage  which  we  anticipate  from  this  figure  of  syllogism 
ly  substitution,  the  first  of  this  second  group,  depends  ultimately  upon 
our  knowing  what  the  several  parts  of  the  conclusion  mean,  i.  e.  what 
that  value  of  a8  or  lx&  is  which  arises  from  the  influence  of  s  upon 
the  developed  expression  of  M.  This,  however,  if  it  is  not  to  be 
learnt  simply  by  experience,  can  only  be  arrived  at  by  thought  if  all 
these  mutually  related  parts  are  pure  quantities,  and  the  relations  be- 
tween them  those  of  mathematical  combination  and  separation.  Thus 
the  effect  in  use  of  our  figure  is  confined  to  the  region  of  mathematics, 
and  primarily  to  the  relations  of  pure  quantities.  Only  the  peculiar 


i  io  Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,    c  BOOK  t. 

nature  of  numbers,  each  one  of  which  has  an  expressible  relation  to 
every  other,  allows  us  to  disclose  the  hidden  content  of  M,  by  substi- 
tuting its  quantitative  parts,  in  such  a  way  that  the  condition  s  can 
really  operate  upon  it,  and  that  by  applying  the  various  rules  of  cal- 
culation, by  cancelling  incompatible  and  compounding  compatible 
elements,  the  change  which  s  necessitates  in  M  can  be  really  carried 
out  and  the  form  of  the  new  result  exhibited.  On  the  other  hand,  if 
we  replace  commensurable  quantitative  parts  by  incommensurably 
different  marks  of  a  concept,  these  advantages  disappear  again ;  the 
content  of  J/ is  only  imperfectly  disclosed  by  such  a  method  of  sub- 
stitution ;  for  we  have  no  rule  here,  as  we  have  in  the  case  of  numbers, 
by  which  to  measure  the  effect  of  a  condition  acting  upon  these 
heterogeneous  elements.  It  is  true  that  even  in  such  cases  we  apply 
the  general  idea  of  substitution :  if  we  want  to  know  how  a  condition  s 
will  act  upon  a  thing,  of  which  we  have  only  the  concept  M  which  its 
natural  history  supplies,  we  analyse  M  into  its  marks ;  but  the  calcu- 
lation of  the  effect  which  s  will  have  on  each  and  all  of  them,  is  based 
merely  upon  more  or  less  indefinite  analogies,  suggested  by  experience 
or  some  chance  feeling  of  probability, 

112.  The  fact  that  the  use  of  the  syllogism  by  substitution  is  con- 
fined to  mathematics,  cannot  hinder  us  from  giving  it  a  place  in  the 
systematic  series  of  forms  of  thought.    For  in  the  first  place  we  must 
not  forget  that  calculation  in  any  case  belongs  to  the  logical  activities, 
and  that  it  is  only  their  practical  separation  in  education  which  has 
concealed  the  full  claim  of  mathematics  to  a  home  in  the  universal 
realm  of  logic.    But  it  is  not  only  because  they  are  indispensable  to  a 
part  of  the  work  of  thought,  that  these  forms  have  their  place  here; 
even  in  those  cases  where  their  demands  cannot  be  realised,  they  are 
still  the  ideals  of  our  logical  effort.     For  if  they  can  be   applied 
directly  to  none  but  quantitative  relations,  it  is  true  on  the  other  side 
that  wherever  we  are  quite  unable  to  reduce  the  object  of  our  investi- 
gation to  those  relations,  our  knowledge  of  it  remains  defective,  and 
that  no  other  logical  form  can  then  help  us  to  the  answer  which  a 
mathematical  treatment  of  the  question,  if  it  were  practicable,  would 
give  us.    It  is  hardly  necessary  in  our  days  to  draw  attention  to  the 
fact,  that  natural  science  owes  its  existence  to  mathematics ;  in  other 
fields  also  we  have  learnt  to  prize  the  important  aid  of  quantitative 
statistics  in  discovering  the  laws  which  govern  the  combinations  of 
society;  and  even  in  sciences  which  from  the  nature  of  their  objects 
are  farthest  removed  from  mathematics,  we  often  feel  very  clearly  the 
need  of  connecting  them  with  quantitative  ideas.    Moral  philosophy 


CHAPTER  in.]  Applications  to  ^ncommen$^t,rable  objects,     in 

may  decide  that  every  crime  is  punishable,  without  needing  a  mathe- 
matical justification  for  the  assertion;  but  every  punishment  which 
has  really  to  be  inflicted  must  have  a  measure,  and  this  must  be 
regulated  by  the  measure  of  badness  in  the  criminal  will  which  has  to 
be  punished.  If  only  it  were  practicable,  the  penal  law  itself  would 
.  draw  conclusions  in  our  figure  of  syllogism ;  it  would  break  up  every 
crime  by  substitution  into  its  several  elements,  and  from  sM,  i.e.  by 
calculating  the  particular  values  of  the  single  elements  of  the  crime  in 
this  instance,  and  so  the  particular  value  of  the  whole,  it  would  deduce 
o-P,  i.e.  the  kind  and  amount  of  punishment  which  the  particular 
instance  deserves. 

113.  There  are  other  things  however  besides  pure  mathematics,  and 
science  has  certainly  succeeded  in  establishing  links  of  connexion, 
even  between  incommensurable  phenomena  or  attributes,  which  allow 
us  to  infer  from  one  to  another.  "  For  logic  on  its  part  the  next 
problem  must  be,  to  look  for  the  forms  in  which  such  inference  is 
possiblej  and  so  to  supplement  the  imperfection  of  the  substitutive 
syllogism.  It  would  partly  seem  indeed  that  science  has  only  suc- 
ceeded in  thus  bridging  the  incommensurable  by  doing  away  with  the 
incommensurability,  and  showing  that  two  facts,  a  and  b,  which  at  first 
appear  to  our  perception  entirely  different  in  quality,  really  depend  upon 
quantitative  differences  between  commensurable  circumstances :  I  may 
recal  how  physics  has  reduced  the  qualitative  differences  of  our  sensa- 
tions of  colour,  tone,  and  heat  to  merely  mathematical  differences  in 
commensurable  motions  of  commensurable  elements.  If  however  we 
look  more  closely  at  these  cases,  we  find  the  fact  to  be,  not  that  our  sen- 
sations, a  and  b,  are  reduced  to  motions,  a  and  ft  commensurable  with 
one  another  and  with  the  sensations,  but  merely  that  the  occurrence  of 
a  or  j3  and  its  effect  upon  us  is  represented  as  the  condition  upon  which 
the  sensation  a  or  b  necessarily  arises.  The  perceived  colour  a  re- 
mains just  as  incommensurable  as  ever  with  the  vibration  of  ether,  a,  by 
which  its  origin  is  explained ;  and  if  experience  did  not  teach  us  that 
a  is  the  consequence  of  a,  we  should  have  no  logical  means  of  divining 
from  a  the  nature  of  its  cause  a.  What  therefore  science  does  in  these 
cases  is  really  to  connect  incommensurable  elements  in  a  way  which 
allows  us  to  conclude  from  one  to  the  other.  The  original  propo- 
sition that  a  and  a,  b  and  ft  do  thus  mutually  point  to  one  another,  is 
due,  as  I  said,  to  experience ;  in  deriving  it  from  facts  the  laws  of 
thought  are  doubtless  applied,  but  there  is  no  special  form  of  thought 
involved  such  as  could  solve  the  insoluble  problem  of  making  com- 
mensurable what  is  really  incommensurable.  But  when  experience 


H2   Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,     i  BOOK  i. 

has  Informed  us  of  the  coherence  of  two  such  elements,  a  and  a,  then 
thought  concludes  that  this  coherence  will  be  maintained  even  in  the 
event  of  their  both  changing,  and  that  therefore  a  definite  change  of  a 
into  a1  must  always  be  answered  by  one  and  only  one  definite  change 
of  a  into  a\  Again,  these  changes  themselves,  a -a1  and  a —a1,  are 
not  directly  commensurable,  either  in  kind  or  amount :  if  the  number 
of  vibrations  of  the  sound-wave  is  increased  by  the  amount  $=a  — a1, 
it  is  true  that  a  definite  increase,  d=a  —  al,  in  the  heard  tone  depends 
upon  it ;  but  this  change  in  the  pitch  is  a  process  quite  different  in 
kind  from  the  increase  in  the  number  of  vibrations,  and  cannot  be 
compared  with  it ;  each  quantity  can  still  only  be  measured  by  a 
standard  of  its  own,  and  their  mutual  coherence  can  be  expressed  as  a 
fact  and  nothing  more.  But  the  changes  in  pitch  are  commensurable 
with  one  another,  and  so  are  the  changes  in  the  number  of  vibrations ; 
and  if  we  refer  these  changes  to  d  and  S  as  their  respective  units,  we 
may  ask,  By  how  many  units  m  of  the  kind  d  does  the  pitch  change, 
if  the  number  of  vibrations  changes  by  p,  units  of  the  kind  £  ?  m  and  p, 
then  stand  in  a  purely  numerical  relation.  This  relation  may  be  infi- 
nitely various ;  but,  as  before,  I  shall  not  indicate  the  possible  variety 
any  further  in  the  form  which  I  give  to  this  inference.  I  choose  for  its 
name  and  scheme  the  simplest  form  of  proportion,  E:  c  =  T\  /,  which, 
though  it  only  illustrates  the  case  in  which  min  is  a  constant  quantity, 
still  sufficiently  symbolises  the  logical  idea  implied  in  the  process. 

114.  I  will  illustrate  that  idea  once  more  by  a  very  elementary 
example.  Two  angles  E  and  e  are  commensurable;  so  are  two 
segments  of  a  circle  J'and  /;  but  an  angle  and  a  segment  are  in- 
commensurable and  cannot  be  directly  measured  by  any  common 
standard :  so  too  the  difference  of  two  angles,  which  again  represents 
an  angle,  is  incommensurable  with  the  difference  of  two  curves,  which 
again  forms  a  curve.  Nevertheless,  if  it  is  once  established  that  a 
certain  length  of  curve  /  belongs  to  an  angle  e  at  the  centre  of  a 
circle  of  a  given  diameter,  and  if  we  form  the  angle  J£T  by  m  times  t 
and  the  corresponding  curve  7*  by  n  times  /,  then  the  pure  numbers 
m  and  n  are  commensurable,  which  tell  us  how  many  times  the  two 
intrinsically  incommensurable  units  /  and  e  have  to  be  multiplied  in 
order  to  find  two  corresponding  members  in  the  two  series  of  angles 
and  curves.  For  the  circle  geometry  tells  us  that  m^n.  Given  therefore 
the  two  units,  e  and  /,  we  only  require  to  know  a  definite  number  E 
of  e  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  proper  value  of  T  by  the  proportion 
E:e^T\i.  Expressed  as  a  syllogism,  then,  the  whole  process 
would  answer  to  the  scheme, 


CHAPTER  in.]  Limit  aliens  of  inference  by  proportion.       113 

Major  premiss  :  E :  *=  T:  L 
.Minor  premiss  :  E~F  (e). 
Conclusion  :  T~F(e).t 
e 

115.  I  need  hardly  point  out  that  upon  this  inference  by  proportion^ 
In  the  simple  scheme  of  which  I  include  all  more  complex  relations 
between  m  and .«,  rests  ultimately  the  whole  possibility  of  bringing 
qualitatively  different  occurrences  into  such  mutual  dependence  as 
allows  us  to  calculate  one  from  another.  It  is  also  scarcely  necessary 
to  observe  that  we  can  only  expect  this  figure  to  be  fully  effective,  .so 
far  as  we  succeed  in  reducing  the  relations  of  things  to  terms  of  pure 
quantity  :  we  should  justify  this  limitation  in  the  same  way  as  we  did 
the  similar  limitation  of  the  syllogism  by  substitution.  In  a  more 
lax  way  we  are  constantly,  judging  of  .things,  even  in  ordinary  life,  on 
the  ground  of  inexact  proportions,  which  mostly  pass  into  mere  com- 
parisons :  a  general  likeness  is  found  between  the  relation  of  a  to  b 
and  that  of  a  to  (S,  but  the  equal  exponent  of  both  is  not  precisely 
specified,  and  so  the  inferences  drawn  generally  carry  little  convic- 
tion ;  e.g.  c  If  one  of  these  relations  under  a  certain  condition  c  has  a 
certain  result  y,  the  other  will  have  a  generally  similar  result  under 
the  same  condition/ 

I  have  only  one  more  remark  to  add,  in  repetition  of  what  I  have 
already  said,  viz.  that  the  form  of  proportion  indicates  a  limit  of 
knowledge.  We  find  in  it  the  interdependence  of  two  members 
E  and  T  merely  expressed  as  a  fact,  and  as  such  utilised  for  further 
purposes ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  question  remains  unasked  and 
unanswered,  in  what  way,  by  what  means,  through  what  mechanism, 
so  to  say,  the  one  member  jE'sets  about  bringing  the  other  T7  into 
any  sort  of  dependence  upon  itself,  especially  into  this  particular  sort. 
Of  course  there  are  a  great  many  composite  phenomena,  in  the  case  of 
which  this  question  too  can  be  answered:  scientific  investigation,. as 
we  said,  has  reduced  many  pairs  of  apparently  disparate  properties  or 
occurrences  to  merely  qualitative  differences  of  commensurable  terms, 
and  we  are  then  able  to  see  how  it  comes  about  that  T  must  be  con- 
nected with  E9  and  a  particular  increase  of  the  one  with  a  particular 
increase  of  the  other.  But  there  is  a  limit  to  this  possibility :  the 
ultimate  discoverable  laws  of  phenomena  will  always  be  found  to 
involve  determinate  relations  between  disparate  elements,  which  we 
can  only  accept  as  facts  and. utilise  in  the  form  of  proportion,  without 
being  able  to  show  the  reason  why  the  two  elements  must  be  propor- 
tionals. We  refer  many  phenomena  to  the  law  of  gravitation,  the 


1 14  Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,     i  r.   ;.  i. 

intensity  of  which  is  reversely  as  the  square  of  the  ilMance;  but 
hitherto  at  any  rate  no  attempt  has  succeeded  in  showing  how  the 
distance  contrives  to  weaken  the  force.  We  show  how  the  srnsibk? 
pitch  increases  with  the  increasing  number  of  vibrations,  and  how  «>ur 
sensations  in  general,  and  in  fact  all  our  mental  activities,  fhntrre  pro- 
portionally to  physical  motions  in  our  organs  ;  and  yet  after  all,  lomv, 
and  vibrations,  mental  functions  and  physical  motions,  rnn;i:ii  for- 
ever intrinsically  incommensurable,  nor  do  we  ever  vxperieiiee  how 
the  one  contrive  to  compel  the  others  to  corresponding  rliam.rr~>* 
From  one  disparate  thing  to  another  our  thought  has  no  iiK-aii^  of 
transition;  all  our  explanation  of  the  connexion  of  things  K0rs  |ln 
further  back  than  to  laws  which  admit  of  being  expressed  in  tin-  form 
of  proportion ;  and  these  laws  make  no  attempt  to  fii.->e  the  tuo  «,•!«.•• 
ments  into  an  undiscovcrable  third,  but  leave  them  both  in  lheii  full 
difference,  and  merely  point  out  that,  in  spite  of  their  mutinl  im- 
penetrability, they  come  as  a  fact  under  a  common  law  by  wim.h  ihry 
mutually  determine  one  another. 

116.  In  the  actual  application  of  the  inferences  from  propi  u-fions 
another  defect,  hitherto  only  briefly  indicated,  is  Uidily  Mipp!euj«-n!ei:i 
by  attending  to  an  idea  which  necessarily  accompanies  thi-ru  ;  flir> 
supplementary  idea  we  have  now  explicitly  to  rejoin iisr  n>  having  a 
place  of  its  own  in  the  systematic  series  of  intellectual  operations  ih«' 
last  place  in  the  present  group.  In  the  above  scheme!  (he.  proportion 
between  the  changes  of  two  marks  E  and  7rw;is  repre?iente.d  a*  ii  H 
always  subsisted  between  the  two  marks  as  such,  it  Unii;,.*;  imliUereiu 
in  what  subject  they  occur.  Now  there  are,  it  is  true,  pm]i«  .ites 
which  upon  logical  grounds,  on  account  of  their  roi»tr.try  or  con- 
tradictory opposition,  or  because  the  one  in  any  can:  iw.Imlr--  ?hr 
other,  must  be  either  present  together  or  absent  together  in  rvery  sub- 
ject: but  there  are  no  marks  whose  quantities  and  quantitaJivt?  daises 
must  always  stand  in  the  same  proportion  to  one  another,  xviialevrr 
be  the  nature  of  the  subject  in  which  they  are  united.  On  III"  o»tr 
trary,  it  is  just  this  nature  which  determines  the  exponent.  «»f  ilir-ir 
proportion;  and  the  same  universally  expressed  mark:*  K  awl  7', 
which  in  one  S  can  only  coexist,  in  the  ratio  mm,  are  in  iiu^ilm 
Sl  only  possible  in  another  ratio  nl:ml.  Meat  expautls  all  burlirs, 
but  the  ratios  of  the  degree  of  expansion  to  an  equnl  iwrt*;ist?  of 
•  temperature  are  different  in  cliflcrent  bodies.  In  practice,  whw  we 
always  have  to  do  with  individual  subjects,  and  have  ihm»  in  initici 
throughout,  we  do  not  need  to  state  this  limitation  expressly;  iutt 
logic  is  bound  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  only  cm  the  assumption  of 


CHAPTER  in.]  'Constitutive*  concepts .  115 

the  limitation  can  we  talk  of  using  proportions.  Nothing  but  the 
specific  character  of  a  given  subject,  in  obedience  to  which  all  its 
marks  mutually  determine  one  another,  justifies  us  in  concluding  from 
a  known  value  of  one  of  them  to  the  corresponding  value  of  another 
according  to  a  proportion  which  holds  good  for  this  subject  only. 
This  merely  brings  us  back  to  the  idea  which  lay  at  the  root  of  ana- 
logy; for  it  was  only  on  the  strength  of  the  coherence  of  all  mutually 
determined  marks  in  a  concept,  that  we  felt  justified  in  inferring  from  a 
limited  grou.n  of  them  to  the  necessary  presence  or  absence  of  others, 
as  we  might  infer  from  the  beginning  of  a  pattern  to  its  continuance. 
This  tacitly  assumed  condition  must  therefore  be  added  in  order  to 
complete  the  expression  of  the  proportional  syllogism,  and  its  major 
premiss  ought  to  stand  thus,  £  If  S  is  an  M>  for  this  S  it  is  always 
true  that  T :  i  =  E  :  e'  And  the  problem  which  logic  presents  to 
us  would  not  be  merely  to  establish  this  major  premiss  through  ex- 
perience, in  order  then  to  bring  a  particular  case  under  it  in  the 
minor,  c  S  is  M' ;  it  would  rather  be  to  show  how  a  concept  M  can 
be  found  at  all,  such  that  the  proportions  required  between  every  two 
of  its  marks  can  be  derived  from  it. 

117.  The  means  for  the  discovery  of  such  an  authoritative  or  con- 
stitutive concept  have  already  been  indicated  ;  they  lie  in  the  fact  that 
every  mark  is  determined  throughout  by  every  other,  though  in  very 
various  ways.  The  effect  of  this  variety  will  be  that,  while  in  certain 
cases  the  presence  of  a  single  proportion  between  any  two  marks  is 
sufficient  to  determine  the  rest,  in  others  the  knowledge  of  certain 
essential  marks  is  necessary  in  order  to  deduce  the  unessential  from 
them,  but  knowledge  of  the  unessential  is  not  enough  to  establish 
with  certainty  the  whole  content  of  the  concept.  But  I  shall  be 
clearer  if  I  preface  these  reflexions  by  an  instance  of  the  actual 
realisation  of  our  requirement  in  the  shape  of  a  very  familiar  and 
simple  mathematical  form  of  thought.  Analytical  geometry  possesses 
in  the  equations  >  by  which  it  expresses  the  nature  of  a  curve,  just  that 
constitutive  concept  of  its  object  which  we  are  looking  for.  A  very 
small  number  of  related  elements,  the  indeterminate  abscissae  and 
ordinates  in  their  combination  with,  constant  quantities,  as  constituting 
a  primary  proportion,  contain,  implicit  in  themselves  and  derivable 
from  them,  all  relations  which  necessarily  subsist  between  any  parts  of 
the  curve.  From  the  law  expressing  the  proportionality  between  the 
changes  of  the  ordinates  and  the  abscissae  every  other  property  of  the 
curve  can  be  developed,  its  course,  its  openness  or  closedness,  the 
symmetricalness  or  unsymmetricalness  of  its  parts,  the  uniformity  or 

I  2 


1 1 6   Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,     i  B. 


JOK   I. 


measure  of  alteration  in  its  curvature  at  every  point  in  it,  the  direc- 
tion of  its  concavity  or  convexity,  the  area  which  it  contains  between 
any  given  limits.  It  is  in  view  of  these  developments  (the  further 
course  of  which  is  too  simple  to  need  mentioning  here)  that  we 
give  the  name  of  inference  from  constitutive  equations  to  the  method 
in  question.  The  method  itself  is  not  confined  to  these  geometrical 
problems ;  but  the  other  and  in  some  ways  much  more  interesting 
examples  supplied  by  other  branches  of  mathematics,  especially  the 
calculation  of  variations,  cannot  be  so  easily  represented  with  the 
simplicity  requisite  to  symbolise  the  form  of  thought  which  we  are 
considering.  Natural  science -also  could  furnish  approximations  at 
any  rate  to  what  we  are  looking  for.  Chemistry  would  possess 
constitutive  equations  for  analogously  compounded  bodies,  in  which 
the  different  chemical  elements  take  the  place  of  co-ordinates  and 
constants,  if  it  could  succeed  in  expressing  by  its  formulae  not  only 
the  quantitative  proportions  of  the  elements,  but  also,  more  exactly 
than  its  symbols  at  present  do,  the  rule  for  the  grouping  of  alums 
and  the  general  character  of  their  interaction. 

118.  Admitting  the  objection  to  the  whole  of  this  method,  that 
like  the  preceding  one  it  is  not  fully  effective  except  in  mulhemalics, 
we  rebut  in  the  same  way  as  we  did  before  the  censure  which  it 
seeks  to  convey,  and  only  examine  it  more  in  detail  with  a  view  of 
rinding  new  ways  to  supplement  what  is  still  defective  in  the  method. 
It  is  true  that  the  apparent  wealth  of  development  from  geometrical 
equations  is,  from  a  logical  point  of  view,  more  specious  than  real. 
In  order  to  determine  the  form  of  the  curve  we  give  one  of  the 
co-ordinates  x  arbitrary  values,  calculate  the  corresponding  values 
of  y  from  the  equation,  and  then  connect  the  extremities  of  the 
perpendiculars  (y]  erected  upon  the  extremities  of  the  abscissae  (a*)  so 
as  to  form  a  continuous  line;  the  curve  is  therefore  only  the  geo- 
metrical locus  in  which  the  countless  results  of  a  countlcssly  repented 
proportion  between  different  values  of  the  co-ordinates  arc  combined. 
As  for  all  the  new  properties  which  we  proceed  to  deduce,  concavity, 
uniform  or  varying  curvature,  closedness  or  openness,  falling  or  rising- 
of  the  curve  to  this  or  that  side,  though  at  first  they  look  like  new 
marks,  they  also  are  really  nothing  but  relations  of  magnitude  and 
position  between  spatial  constructions,  relations,  it  is  true,  between 
different  elements,  but  otherwise  of  the  same  nature  as  those  assumed 
between  the  co-ordinates.  Starting  with  a  proportion  between  two 
marks  x  and  j>,  we  do  not  arrive  at  really  new  marks,  qualitatively 
incommensurable  with  the  first ;  we  advance  merely  from  given  homo- 


CHAPTER  in.]          Transition  to  classification*  117 

geneous  relations  to  new  homogeneous  relations,  and  the  derivability 
of  the  latter  from  the  former,  as  well  as  their  apparent  novelty,  depends 
merely  upon  the  nature  of  space  and  upon  the  rules  which  geometrical 
perception  has  followed  in  reducing  spatial  relations  to  the  universal 
laws  of  arithmetical  quantities.  These  inferences  therefore  are  far  from 
meeting  our  requirement.  The  case  is  very  different  when  we  have  to 
deal,  not  with  mere  spatial  magnitudes,  but  with  concrete  objects,  in 
which  a  number  of  qualitatively  incommensurable  marks  are  united,  and 
In  which  moreover  science  is  unable  to  explain  these  primarily  incom- 
mensurable elements  as  merely  different  combinations  of  commensur- 
able ones ;  in  the  face  of  these  difficulties,  thought  will  still  have  to  look 
for  a  form  which  promises,  approximately  at  any  rate,  the  same  advan- 
tages as  those  which  mathematics  with  their  easier  problem  offers  in  full 

119.  The  group  of  mathematical  forms  of  inference  ends  naturally 
here,  with  the  emphatic  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  point  which 
does  not  admit  of  being  dealt  with  mathematically,  the  disparateness 
of  marks,  is  precisely  the  point  which  we  cannot  avoid  considering. 
The  place  of  the  equation  will  be  taken  externally  by  the  form  of 
definition,  for  this  combines  a  number  of  heterogeneous  marks  into  a 
whole,  but  distinguishes  in  them  a  group  of  essential  from  another  of 
unessential  ones ;  the  former  are  regarded  as  containing  the  law  for 
the  combination  of  the  whole,  the  latter  as  dependent  on  and  deter- 
mined by  the  former  in  accordance  with  that  law.  Lastly,  this 
privileged  group  of  essential  marks  can  only  be  found  by  a  com- 
parison of  the  given  concept  with  those  which  resemble  it,  and  thus 
we  are  driven  to  systematic  forms  of  grouping  different  things,  and, 
primarily,  to  classification. 

C.  The  Systematic  Forms.      Classification.      Explanatory  Theory. 
The  Dialectic  ideal  of  Thought. 

120,  When  we  began  the  account1  of  the  formation  of  our  con- 
cepts, we  were  already  at  the  opening  of  the  road  which  we  have  now 
to  travel.  We  already  recognised  the  matter  of  an  idea  to  be  a  totality 
of  different  marks,  united  according  to  some  definite  rule  that  governed 
their  connexion ;  we  already  expected  to  find  such  a  rule  only  in  a 
group  of  marks  possessed  in  common  by  different  but  comparable 
ideas  ;  and  already  we  noticed  by  anticipation  the  ascending  scale  of 
higher  and  higher  concepts  which  results  if  we  continue  this  process 
of  comparing  that  which  admits  of  comparison.  I  say,  f  by  anticipa- 
tion/ because  the  suggestion  then  made  has  not  so  far  been  turned 
1  [Sections  20-33.] 


1 1 8   Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms.    [BOOK  i. 

to  account  in  the  later  developments  of  logical  activity.  Judgments 
and  syllogisms  based  on  subsumption  have  only  required  us  to  con- 
sider the  one  relation  which  obtains  between  a  concept  S  and  its 
proximate  higher  universal  M\  there  was  no  occasion  for  following 
up  the  relations  of  M  itself  to  the  higher  grades  of  the  series  of 
concepts  above  it.  For  our  only  object  was  to  make  sure  that  a 
predicate  P,  which,  for  whatever  reason,  belonged  to  an  J/,  must 
also  belong  to  every  S  that  falls  within  that  M,  and  for  this  purpo.se 
the  logical  structure  of  M  itself  was  to  a  great  extent  a  matter  of 
indifference.  As  middle  term  it  bore  the  name  of  concept,  but  the 
character  of  a  concept  was  in  no  respect  essential  to  it;  any  simple 
mark,  any  sum  of  marks,  whether  combined  under  a  definite  rule, 
or  merely  brought  together  anyhow  in  thought,  was  good  enough 
to  constitute  such  a  middle  concept.  It  was  only  our  concluding  re- 
flexions, which  I  shall  not  recapitulate  here,  that  drew  our  attention 
to  the  necessity  that  the  middle  term  should  be  a  concept  as  we  under- 
stood it  at  first,  if  we  are  to  derive  from  it  the  right  and  obliga- 
tion of  a  subject  to  possess  the  marks  that  it  displays;  for  it  is 
only  when  thus  understood  that  the  concept  really  forms  the  complete 
rule  under  which  the  whole  content  presented  by  the  subject  coheres 
and  is  organised. 

121.  In  saying  this  we  are  not  simply  returning  to  an  earlier  stand- 
point. In  considering  the  most  primary  and  simplest  forms  of  thought, 
the  logician  can  as  a  rule  only  elucidate  their  results  by  the  use  of 
examples  which  contain  more  logical  work  than  he  means  them  to 
illustrate.  For  these  examples  must  be  drawn  from  language;  and 
language  is  not  the  expression  of  a  thought  which  has  stood  still 
where  it  began,  but  of  the  developed  thought  which  has  advanced  by 
•a  multitude  of  successive  steps  beyond  the  imperfect  results  of  iis 
earliest  endeavours,  and  which  now  conceals  the  recollection  of  them 
under  the  more  elaborate  setting  which  it  has  now  given  to  its 
objects.  And  it  may  therefore  seem  as  if  our  present  problem,  the 
formation  of  an  essential  concept,  had  been  solved  already  in  the 
above-mentioned  passage ;  but  it  needed  more  than  the  logical  acts 
which  were  then  under  discussion  to  generate  the  ideas  which  were 
there  employed  as  instances;  such  ideas  could  only  arise  by  help  of 
the  processes  which  have  now,  familiar  as  they  are,  to  be  considered 
in  their  place  in  our  system.  Thought,  in  that  earlier  stage,  met  the 
countless  multiplicity  of  composite  images  presented  by  perception,  on 
the  one  hand  with  the  desire  to  grasp  each  individual  image  as  a  whole 
whose  parts  are  connected  under  a  definite  law,  on  the  other  with  the 


CHAPTER  in.]    Unconscious  and  logical  classification,        119 

consciousness  that  such  a  law  could  only  be  discovered,  by  the  com- 
parison of  many  comparable  individuals  and  the  retention  of  the 
common  element  in  all  But  such  a  comparison  depended  for  the 
value  of  its  results  on  one  condition,  namely,  that  the  attention  which 
executed  it  should  be  directed  to  a  number  of  objects  £,  ^?,  T,  whose 
common  element  really  consisted  in  the  pervading  law  of  their  whole 
structure,  and  not  to  a  number  of  others  £7,  F,  W,  differing  in  all  re- 
spects except  the  possession  in  common  of  a  limited  group  of  marks. 
Then,  in  the  beginnings  of  thought,  there  was  no  logical  rule  for 
this  selective  guidance  of  the  attention;  on  the  other  hand,  it  was 
even  then  most  effectively  secured  by  the  psychical  mechanism,  which 
makes  those  compound  ideas  reproduce  one  another  predominantly 
in  memory  which  are  similar  in  the  whole  form  of  their  connexion, 
and  specially  commends  them  to  the  attention,  to  the  exclusion  of 
those  whose  structure  is  dissimilar  and  whose  agreement  is  confined 
to  isolated  groups  of  marks. 

122.  In  the  actual  course  of  its  development,  therefore,  thought 
is  first  directed  to  those  universal  concepts  which  really  contain  the 
law  for  the  complete  formation  of  the  individuals  for  which  they  are 
required ;  it  is  not  until  it  has  some  special  motive  in  investigation  that 
it  frames  universals  in  which  things  otherwise  unlike  are  grouped 
under  a  fraction  of  similar  elements.  Thus  when  we  were  speaking 
of  the  first  formation  of  concepts,  the  current  instances  of  subor- 
dination, e.g.  of  Caius  and  Titus  to  the  concept  of  man,  or  of  the  oak 
and  beech  to  that  of  plant,  seemed  to  us  quite  natural  and  intelligible  ; 
it  was  as  if  the  mere  direction  to  grasp  the  common  element  in  the 
individuals  was  enough  to  put  us  upon  the  track  of  these  really 
authoritative  concepts  M.  And  yet  the  same  direction  might  equally 
well  have  led  us  to  invent  for  negroes,  coal,  and  black  chalk  a  common 
name  N,  expressing  the  union  of  blackness,  extension,  divisibility, 
weight,  and  resistance :  only  the  tendencies  of  the  psychical  me- 
chanism favoured  the  first  and  hindered  the  second  of  these  appli- 
cations of  the  logical  rule. 

123.  These  tendencies,  which  have  hitherto  unconsciously  put  us 
on  the  right  way,  we  have  now  to  translate  into  logical  activity ;  in 
other  words,  we  have  to  become  conscious  of  the  reasons  which 
justify  us  in  setting  up  a  certain  universal  M  exclusively  as  the 
authoritative  rule  for  the  formation  of  a  number  of  individuals,  instead 
of  some  other  Nto  which  we  might  have  been  led  by  comparing  the 
same  individuals  upon  a  different  principle.  Logic  has  shown  us  that 
a  single  form  of  interdependence  between  several  related  points  gives 


1 2  o  Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms.     [  BOOK  i. 

rise  to  different  results;  we  saw  that  trie  truth  of  the  particular 
followed  from  that  of  the  universal,  but  not  that  of  the  universal  from 
that  of  the  particular ;  and  that  while  we  could  always  infer  from  a 
definite  reason  to  a  definite  consequence,  a  given  consequence  need 
not  always  lead  back  to  only  one  reason,  but  might  lead  to  several 
equivalent  ones.  Applying  this  to  the  organisation  of  a  concept,  we 
find  in  it  certain  marks  a  b  c  the  presence  of  which  has  a  determining 
influence  upon  the  presence,  absence,  or  modification  of  others, 
while  the  presence  of  these  others,  a£y,  does  not  necessarily  affect 
the  former,  but  is  equally  compatible  with  different  ones,  pgr.  This 
is  the  ground  for  the  difference  already  mentioned  between  -essential 
marks,  a  be,  and  unessential,  a/3y;  it  is  only  in  the  union  of  the 
former  that  we  could  expect  to  find  the  authoritative  concept  for  the 
individuals  compared,  for  it  is  only  this  union  which  determines  the 
other  marks  and  therefore  includes  none  but  those  individuals  which 
are  of  kindred  structure  throughout ;  the  latter  group  of  marks,  on 
the  contrary,  would  leave  the  former  undetermined,  and  would  there- 
fore, if  conceived  as  a  universal,  comprise  a  number  of  individuals 
otherwise  entirely  different. 

124.  Our  problem  accordingly  would  be,  to  distinguish  the  essen- 
tial marks  from  the  unessential.  This  is  easy  so  long  as  we  have  to 
do  with  objects  which  we  can  observe  in  different  circumstances ;  in 
that  case  the  variable  properties,  which  come  and  go  as  the  con- 
ditions change,  contrast  of  themselves  with  the  permanence  of  what 
is  essential.  It  is  different  when  there  is  no  possibility  of  such 
observation,  and  where,  in  the  absence  of  varying  circumstances,  our 
object  is  to  separate  the  essential  from  the  unessential  in  permanent 
and  invariable  marks  of  the  same  concept:  we  have  then  to  substi- 
tute comparison  of  different  instances  for  observation  of  changes. 
Suppose  abcdio  be  the  group  of  marks  in  one  case  of  a  given  con- 
cept ;  then,  if  in  a  second  case  of  it  d  is  wanting  or  is  replaced  by  a 
quite  different  ft,  it  follows,  on  the  assumption  that  all  the  parts  of 
the  concept  cohere,  that  the  remaining  marks  also  experience  a 
change;  I  denote  the  second  case  byavJVd,  to  indicate  that  the 
alteration  of  d  to  d  does  not  cause  the  entire  disappearance  of  any  one 
of  the  marks  in  their  universal  sense,  but  only  the  transition  of  each 
from  one  of  its  possible  modifications  into  another,  the  form  of  their 
combination  remaining  the  same.  In  this  case  d  does  not  belong  to 
the  essential  marks;  it  is  the  group  ABC,  including  as  modifica- 
tions ale  and  ctPc1,  which  regulates  the  organisation  of  the  con- 
cept. But  this  first  step  informs  us  only  that  the  marks  united  in 


CHAPTER  in.]      Essential  and  ^inessential  marks.  121 

A  B  C  do  as  a  fact  remain  together ;  it  does  not  show  what  internal 
coherence  they  have ;  the  value  of  the  several  elements  of  the  group 
may  be  very  different  \  it  is  possible  that  only  A  B  or  A  C  or  B  C 
contain  the  real  law  for  the  formation  of  the  whole,  while  the  third 
mark  is  merely  a  necessary  sequel  or  allowable  addition  to  the  other 
two.  As  the  mind  is  not  yet  in  a  position  to  investigate  the  actual 
object  with  all  the  appliances  of  science,  its  only  method  of  deciding 
this  doubtful  question  is  to  continue  the  same  process.  We  must 
compare  ABC  also  with  instances  of  the  form  A  B  T;  if  the  differ- 
ence of  the  last  mark  is  here  too  accompanied  by  no  more  than  the 
previous  deviation  in  the  others,  and  the  connexion,  of  the  whole 
remains  the  same,  the  coexistence  and  relation  of  A  and  B  will  be 
the  dominant  rule  for  the  original  alcd.oi  will  represent  that  union  of 
essential  marks  which  makes  the  presence  of  the  rest  possible  or 
necessary,  or  at  any  rate  determines  their  amount,  connexion,  and 
relation  to  the  whole.  If  we  conceive  this  process  continued,  we 
find  ourselves  on  the  way  to  classification.  We  can  now  no  longer 
confine  our  consideration  to  the  individual  if  we  would  determine  its 
concept ;  that  can  only  be  done  in  this  first  of  the  systematic  forms, 
that  is,  by  investigating  its  nature  in  its  relation  to  others,  and  judging 
from  its  position  in  an  ordered  series  what  degree  of  formative  in- 
fluence its  several  marks  exercise  upon  its  whole  nature  and  be- 
haviour. The  authoritative  principle  of  its  formation  will  appear  to 
us  to  lie  in  that  inner  circle  of  marks  which,  when  we  ascend  through 
the  next  universal  to  higher  and  higher  degrees  of  universality,  re- 
mains together  the  longest  and  unchanged  in  its  general  form ;  and 
the  only  way  to  conceive  completely  the  nature  of  the  particular  is 
to  think  of  this  supreme  formative  principle  as  being  specialised 
gradually,  in  the  reverse  order  to  the  grades  of  universality,  by  new 
accretions  which  come  within  the  influence  of  its  reaction. 

125.  The  desire  to  get  an  explanation  of  the  inner  structure  of 
the  composite  object  by  this  systematic  arrangement,  lies  at  the  root 
of  all  scientific  classification,  but  is  not  equally  satisfied  by  every 
form  of  it  :  before  going  on  to  consider  the  only  form  which  will 
serve  our  purposes  here,  I  will  therefore  briefly  mention,  as  a  pre- 
liminary, the  artificial  or  comlmatory  classifications,  which  are  de- 
signed specially  to  meet  the  general  demand  for  clearness  and  sum- 
marisation, or  certain  particular  requirements  of  applied  thought. 
We  first  by  partition  break  up  the  content  of  a  given  universal  con- 
cept M  into  its  universal  marks  A  B  C . , .,  and  each  of  these  by 
disjunction  into  its  various  modifications  which  cannot  coexist  in  the 


122   Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,     i  BOOK  i. 

same  subject,  A  into  ^a2^...,  B  into  ff-Pb*...,  C  into  clc*c\ 
Then,  on  the  principle  of  the  disjunctive  judgment,  every  species  of 
M  must  possess  one  modification  of  each  of  the  universal  marks  of 
M  to  the  exclusion  of  the  rest.  If  for  the  sake  of  simplicity  we 
confine  ourselves  to  two  marks,  of  which  the  one,  A,  falls  by  dis- 
junction into  only  two  members,  a  and  b,  the  other,  -#,  into  three, 
a,  ft  and  y,  the  binary  combinations  arrived  at  in  the  ordinary  way, 
a  a,  ap,  ay,  ba,  b$,  by,  will  comprise  all  conceivable  species  of  M. 
Lastly,  it  makes  the  collective  survey  of  them  more  easy  if  we  place 
the  modifications  of  the  particular  mark  which  forms  the  basis  of 
classification  before  the  other  marks,  as  was  done  above,  or  in  the 
form  J/=  a(a  +  p  +  y]  -f  b  '(a  +  P  +  y).  The  simplest  instance  of  this 
classification  is  the  arrangement  of  dictionaries ;  the  fixed  order  of 
the  letters  in  the  alphabet  here  gives  the  basis  of  division,  not  only  in 
the  first  instance,  but  also  for  the  numerous  subordinate  combina- 
tions contained  under  the  head  of  each  letter.  The  obvious  ad- 
vantage of  this  lexicographical  classification  is,  that  it  gives  a  survey 
.  of  the  material,  not  only  embracing  all  the  words  of  the  language, 
that  is,  all  members  of  the  object  to  be  divided,  but  also  making 
them  easy  to  find,  and  this  first  advantage  it  shares  with  all  successful 
attempts  at  artificial  classification ;  but  when  we  go  beyond  this  we 
find  that  the  degrees  in  which  they  contribute  to  the  real  knowledge 
of  their  objects  are  very  various. 

126.  We  observe  firstly  that  this  method  of  combination  only  takes 
account  of  the  marks  of  the  given  concept  in  their  isolation,  not  in 
that  mutual  interdependence  in  which  alone  they  really  constitute  the 
concept.  Thus  it  is  true  that  the  sum  of  the  combinations  dis- 
covered includes  all  species  of  M}  but  it  may  also  include  others 
besides  them,  which  would  be  true  species  if  the  concept  were  merely 
the  sum  of  its  marks,  but  are  not  true  because  it  implies  their  union 
in  a  certain  definite  form  which  these  other  species  contradict.  The 
concept  of  a  triangle  does  not  consist  in  the  fact  that  we  think  three 
angles  and  three  sides,  but  in  the  fact  that  three  sides  intersect  one 
another  so  as  completely  to  bound  a  plane  space  and  by  this  very 
fact  produce  the  angles.  It  is  this  connexion  of  the  sides  and  angles 
which  makes  equiangular  unequilateral  and  rectangular  equilateral 
triangles  impossible :  in  a  classification  by  mere  combination  these 
would  have  found  a  .place  along  with  .the  equiangular  equilateral,  the 
rectangular  isosceles,  and  other  possible  kinds.  If  the  content  of  M, 
as  in  this  instance,  is  completely  known  and  can  be  exactly  con- 
structed, these  impossible  forms  are  excluded  by  our  knowledge  of 


CHAPTER  in.]    Defects  of  combinatory  classification.          123 

the  fact,  and  the  only  use  of  including  them  in  a  provisional  classi- 
fication would  be  to  stimulate  attention  to  the  nature  of  M,  and  to 
the  reasons  which  make  the  valid  kinds  possible  and  the  invalid  Im- 
possible. If  on  the  other  hand  M  is  a  generic  concept  derived 
from  experience,  the  inner  organisation  of  which  can  only  be  re- 
presented imperfectly  by  description,  not  exactly  by  construction, 
the  species  which  we  have  not  actually  observed  but  should  have 
been  led  to  infer  by  the  method  of  combination,  remain  doubtful ; 
further  observation  may  discover  them,  further  knowledge  of  facts  may 
show  them  to  be  impossible ;  the  use  of  assuming  them  provisionally 
may  here  also  be  to  stimulate  advance  in  one  of  these  two  directions. 

127.  If  the  method  of  combination,  when  applied  to  objects   of 
experience,  is   liable  to  the  uncertainty  whether  its  results   do   not 
include  more  than  the  facts,  it  is  true  on  the  other  side  that,  as 
ordinarily  practised,  it  gives  no  guarantee  that  they  exhaust  the  facts. 
It  is  beyond  the  power  of  human  imagination  to   anticipate  com- 
pletely all  the  modifications  to  which  a  mark  may  be  subject;  our 
attention  will  always  be  confined  to  those,  fip*f,  which  we  happen 
to  have  observed ;  another  modification,  /%  which  does  not  come 
within  the  circle  of  our  experience,  will   be  missing  in  our  classi- 
fication along  with  all  the  species  in  which  it  may  possibly  occur, 
and  this  gap  will  not  be  filled  up  until  our  experience  has  grown. 
This  is  the  ground  for  a  logical  rule,  which  is  valuable  when  the 
decision   of  a   question    involves   exhaustive   knowledge   of  all  the 
possible  cases  of  some  object  Z;  the  rule  is  to  go  on  dividing  and 
classifying  them  by  simple  contradictory  opposition.     The  sum  of  all 
possible   cases   of  Z  is  always  of  the   nature  Q  or  of  the   opposite 
non-0;  the  cases   of  the  form   Q  are  always  either  R  or  non-J?? 
those  of  non-(?  always  either  5*  or  non-^;  so  that  at  whatever  point 
the  division  is  broken  off,  all  possible  cases  are  included  by  it.  .  Such 
a  method,  indeed,  is  only  fruitful  when  we  are  so  happy  in  our  se- 
lection of  the  first  opposites  Q  or  non-(?,  or  of  all  the  subordinate 
opposites  in  the  same  grade,  S,  non-S,  R,  etc.,  that  we  can  show 

'  without  much  trouble  whether  or  no  the  .characteristic  in  question  Z 
is  exhibited  in  each  of  the  alternative  cases. 

128.  It  is  moreover  evident  that  in  classification  by  combination 
there  can  be  no  logical  rule  obliging  us  to  employ  .certain  marks  at 
the  top  as  bases  of  division  in  the  principal  groups,  and  certain  others 
lower  down  in  their  subdivisions.     So  long  as  the  concept  M  which 
is  to  be  divided  is  considered  merely  as  a  sum  of  its  marks,  with- 
out regard  to  their  mutual  relations,  any  one  of  them  has  a  right  to 


124  Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,     i  BOOK  i. 

form  the  principal  division  by  its  modifications,  and  any  other  may 
be  subordinated  to  it  as  basis  of  a  subdivision.  The  obvious 
disadvantages  of  this  uncertainty  are  avoided  in  practice  by  con- 
comitant reflexion  and  an  estimate  of  the  different  values  of  the 
marks,  based  upon  a  knowledge  of  the  facts  or  a  right  feeling,  often 
merely  upon  an  instinctive  taste  :  all  that  logic  can  contribute  to 
these  precautions  is  the  general  direction  not  to  choose  as  bases  of 
division  notiones  communes^  i.e.  marks  which  are  known  to  occur  in 
the  most  different  objects  without  exercising  any  recognisable  in- 
fluence upon  the  rest  of  their  nature.  The  positive  direction  answer- 
ing to  this  prohibition,  viz.  how  to  find  the  decisive  bases  of 
division,  logic  leaves  entirely  to  be  given  by  special  knowledge  of 
the  matter  in  question.  And  as  regards  complex  concrete  objects 
at  any  rate,  so  long  as  fundamental  divisions  were  based  upon  single 
marks,  the  specialist  has  always  been  open  to  the  criticism  that  he 
sometimes  removes  closely  related  species  to  different  and  often  very 
distant  parts  of  the  system,  while  he  brings  others  which  are  totally  and 
strikingly  unlike  into  surprising  proximity.  This  is  quite  intelligible 
when  we  consider  the  different  influence  which  the  marks  have  on 
the  structure  of  the  whole  concept.  There  is  no  reason,  for  instance, 
why  the  mark  B,  so  long  as  it  occurs  in  the  modified  form  6,  should 
not  conspicuously  affect  the  formation  of  the  whole,  and  in  that  case 
all  the  species  under  the  head  of  b  will  remain  connected  in  form ; 
but  the  same  mark  may  entirely  lose  this  influence  as  soon  as  it 
enters  into  the  group  of  marks  in  the  modified  form  /3 ;  then  the 
species  under  the  head  of  /3  follow  all  the  variations  due  to  the  now 
influential  difference  of  the  other  elements  A  CD,  and  examples  of 
M,  otherwise  most  unlike,  now  find  themselves  in  the  closest 
proximity.  This  is  what  happened  to  the  Linnccan  system,  which 
selected  the  number  of  stamens  as  the  basis  of  division  ;  the  result  of 
this  view  was,  that  in  the  cases  where  the  whole  organisation  of  the 
plant  made  the  stamens  of  importance,  the  related  species  were 
brought  together ;  where  this  was  not  the  case,  they  were  separated, 
and  different  species  were  united.  An  instructed  taste  will  partially 
obviate  this  evil  also,  by  selecting  different  bases  of  division  for 
different  sections  of  the  whole  system.  Nothing  but  an  unseasonable 
logical  pedantry  could  require  that  a  system  which  had  begun  by 
dividing  its  whole  object-matter  according  to  the  modifications  ale 
of  one  mark  A,  should  go  on  to- arrange  all  the  groups  formed  by  <r, 
h  or  <r,  according  to  modifications  of  one  and  the  same  second  mark 
B  •  it  may  be  that  'the  variations  of  a  mark  C  are  exclusively  of 


SafAPTER  in.]  €  Concept '  and  'Idea!  125 

importance  for  the  group  with  a,  and  those  of  a  fourth  mark  D  for 
the  group  with  £,  and  the  classification  which  proceeds  upon  this 
view  approaches  by  that  means,  and  by  that  means  only,  to  the  real 
essence  of  the  thing.  The  risk  which  such  a  method  runs  of  not 
discovering  all  the  species  completely,  must  be  avoided  in  some 
other  way;  classification  does  not  create  the  complete  material,  but 
assumes  its  completeness  to  be  guaranteed  elsewhere. 

129.  Classifications  would  belong  entirely  to  applied  logic  if  they 
aimed  at  nothing  more   than   complete  summarisation,  such  as  is 
required  either  when  we  wish  to  deal  with  a  subject  practically  or 
when  we  are  just  beginning  to  consider  it  logically.    But  they  do  more 
than  thus  merely  prepare  the  ground ;   they  themselves  represent  a 
logical  ideal,  which  has  its  necessary  place  in  the  systematic  series  of 
the  forms  of  thought ;  the  very  fact  that  a  manifold  material  has  been 
brought  into  the  connexion  of  a  classified  system,  is  of  itself  supposed 
to  tell  us  something  as  to  the  nature  of  each  and  all  of  its  members, 
and  not  to  be  a  mere  preliminary  to  future  enquiry.     This  appears 
in  the  objections  which  we  make  to  forced  classifications ;  we  not  only 
require  the  lines  along  which  we   must    look,  in  order,  to  find  a 
particular  species,  to  be  precisely  laid  down  beforehand  in  a  series  of 
concepts,  but  we  expect  the  actual  places  in  which  the  several  species 
are  found  to  correspond  in  position  to  the  affinities  of  the  species 
themselves.     For  practical  purposes  any  order  will  serve  that  is  handy 
for  the  person  who  is  going  to  use  it,  but  the  order  which  logic 
demands  must  be  true  to  the  facts.     Now  if  we  wish  to  form  a  com- 
plete idea  of  any  composite  object,  it  does  not  matter  with  which 
of  its  parts  we  begin,  provided  only  that  the  order  in  which  we  add 
each  new  part  is  adapted  to  the  particular  point  with  which  we  have 
chosen  to  start :    any  idea  of  a  given  content  so  arranged  forms  a 
concept  of  it,  sufficient  to  distinguish  it  from  others  and  to  show  what 
it  is  itself.     Amongst  these  various  concepts  of  the  same  M  there  is 
one  distinguished  from  the  rest  by  having  for  its  starting-point  the  law 
which  determines  the  order  of  all  the  other  marks,  and  this  is  the  one 
which  we  try  to  find.   We  have  already  given  the  name  of  'constitutive '• 
to  such  a  privileged  concept ;  it  might  also  be  called,  in  opposition  to: 
the  mere  conceptual  form  in  general,  the  logical  idea1  of  the  object, 
or,  in  the  vernacular,  its  thought-,    for  it  is  thus  that  our  language 
distinguishes  the  'idea'  of  plant  or  organism,  as  its  formative  law,  from 
the  concept  of  it,  which  merely  comprises  the  sum  of  the  necessary  ; 
marks  and  the  form  in  which  they  happen  to  be  combined. 

1  ['Idee.'] 


126  Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,     c BOOK  i. 

ISO.  It  will  help  us  to  realise  what  has  just  been  said  if  we  mention 
here  two  incidental  notions  which  always  attach  themselves  readily  to 
this  search  for  the  idea  of  an  object,  conspicuously  in  the  attempt  of 
naturalists  to  improve  the  artificial  classifications  of  plants  and  animals 
by  reference  to  their  natural  affinities.  In  these  cases  we  are  prone 
to  regard  the  universal  idea  of  animal  or  plant  as  a  living  and 
operative  force,  whose  unvarying  and  consistent  activity  gives  rise  to  a 
series  of  different  forms,  accordingly  as  external  conditions  determine 
one  or  more  of  its  points  of  incidence  and  oblige  it  to  change 
correspondingly  the  whole  course  of  its  action.  Another  way  in 
which  we  are  equally  prone  to  regard  it  is  as  an  unvarying-  end, 
which  regulates  its  modes  of  operation  according  to  the  relations  in 
which  it  finds  itself  placed,  and  in  the  different  forms  which  it  is 
thereby  compelled  to  assume  realises  one  and  the  same  purpose  in 
various  ways  or  with  various  degrees  of  completeness.  From  this 
point  of  view  the  different  species  classified  together  express  the  result 
of  the  interaction  between  the  universal  idea  and  the  particular 
relations,  with  which  as  universal  it  has  nothing  to  do.  It  will  be 
admitted  that  these  ways  of  looking  at  the  matter  place  it  before  us  in 
a  clear  and  vivid  light,  but  it  will  also  be  objected  that  they  are  both 
quite  foreign  to  logic.  The  objection  is  unanswerable;  our  intention 
however  is  not  to  turn  the  ideas  of  active  tendency  and  purp<  >se  to 
account  for  the  benefit  of  logic,  but  to  show  that  even  in  their  proper 
place  they  only  have  meaning  on  the  assumption  of  a  purely  It  )gical 
notion3  which  we  will  now  explain.  If  it  is  to  be  possible  for  the  same 
end  to  be  fulfilled  under  changing  circumstances,  it  must  also  be 
possible  to  express  its  content  by  a  group  of  ideas,  #,  in  which  these 
different  forms  of  fulfilment  cohere  as  possible  species,  and  from 
which  they  necessarily  result  if  each  one  of  the  marks  of  Z  and  each 
of  their  mutual  relations  is  successively  subjected  to  all  the  changes  of 
which,  as  parts  of  Z,  they  are  respectively  capable.  If,  again,  an 
active  tendency  is  to  change  its  activity  under  varying  conditions  and 
to  manifest  itself  in  new  results,  the  combination  of  forces  in  which  it 
consists  must  be  expressible  by  equations3  from  which  all  these  new 
formations  necessarily  follow  as  soon  as  we  give  the  quantities  enter- 
ing into  the  equations  all  the  values  successively  which  their  natures 
allow.  Activity,  then,  whether  intentional  or  unintentional,  never  pro- 
duces anything  but  what  is  abstractedly  possible  to  thought,  and  this 
becomes  necessary  to  thought  as  soon  as  we  affirm  one  of  a  number 
of  related  points  upon  which  the  rest  depend.  It  is  this  which  we 
have  in  view  here:  we  regard  the  idea  for  which  we  are  looking, 


CHAPTER  in.]  Logical groitnd  of  natural  classification,    1 2  y 

neither  as  the  intention  of  a  reflective  consciousness  striving  for 
fulfilment,  nor  as  an  active  force  which  causes  its  results,  but  merely 
as  the  conceived  or  conceivable  reason,  the  consequences  of  which 
under  certain  conditions  are  the  same  in  thought  as  those  which  must 
follow  in  reality,  under  the  like  conditions,  from  an  intelligent  purpose  or 
a  causative  force.  Keeping  this  in  mind,  we  may  tolerate  a  phraseology 
which  imports  into  logic  the  idea  of  an  end  or  of  a  tendency  to 
development :  it  will  nevertheless  be  better  to  avoid  these  expressions, 
and  not  to  use  what  is  found  only  in  the  real  world  as  a  name  for  the 
mere  reason  upon  which  in  thought  the  reality  rests. 

131.  Another  point  which  logic  cannot  neglect  may  be  introduced 
here  as  a  sequel  to  these  accessory  notions.  We  are  not  surprised 
in  a  self-realising  tendency  if,  under  certain  conditions,  it  fails 
in  its  endeavour ;  and  we  find  it  intelligible  that  an  end  should  be 
attained  under  different  circumstances  with  different  degrees  of  com- 
pleteness. Thus  both  these  notions  very  naturally  give  rise  to  the 
assumption  that  different  realisations  or  examples  of  the  formative  idea 
are  of  different  values,  and  that  they  are  not  merely  co-ordinated  in 
a  general  way  as  species  under  the  universal  concept  of  their  idea, 
but  form  within  this  co-ordination  an  ascending  or  descending  scale 
in  which  each  one  has  its  uninter changeable  place  between  certain 
others.  The  attempts  at  natural  classification,  which  endeavour  to 
satisfy  our  modern  requirements,  are  dominated  throughout  by  this 
thought ;  and  it  remains  to  show  that  this  familiar  tendency  to  pass 
from  classification  by  mere  combination  to  classification  in  the  form 
of  a  developing  series,  is  justified  on  general  logical  grounds,  and  that 
this  is  the  place  to  justify  it. 

If,  as  is  too  often  the  case  at  the  beginning  of  logic,  we  regard 
a  concept  M  merely  as  a  sum  of  marks  universally  expressed,  there  is 
no  sense  in  rating  one  of  its  species  higher  than  another.  Every  £ 
either  contains  all  the  marks  of  its  universal  M,  and  in  that  case  it  is 
a  species  of  it,  or  it  does  not  contain  one  or  other  of  them,  and  then 
it  is,  not  an  imperfect  species,  but  no  species  at  all  of  M.  But  living 
thought  in  actual  practice  is  far  from  acquiescing  in  this  hard  anti- 
thesis ;  it  distinguishes  species  which  correspond  or  are  adequate  to 
their  generic  concept  in  various  degrees.  The  possibility  of  making 
this  distinction  depends  primarily  upon  quantitative  measurements  to 
which  the  several  marks  and  their  relations  are  possibly  or  necessarily 
accessible.  The  structure  of  generic  concepts,  incalculably  as  it  varies 
in  particular  instances,  agrees  in  the  main  in  containing  a  number 
of  parts  or  related  points,  each  comprising  a  group  of  simple  marks 


128   Tlicory  tf  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,     c  BOOK  i. 

and  standing  to  the  others  in  all  sorts  of  relations.  By  £  simple 
marks  '  here  I  uot  only  sensible  properties  such  as  red,  sweet, 

hot,  but  others  also  like  heavy,  extended,  irritable,  which,  though  no 
doubt  they  contain  the  result  of  previous  observations  of  complex 
modes  of  behaviour,  contain  it  in  so  simple  a  shape  that  our  logical 
imagination  has  long  accustomed  itself  to  attach  them  to  their  subjects 
as  stable  and  simple  predicates.  To  all  these  elements  of  the  concept 
quantitative  differences  extend.  No  mark  of  any  one  of  its  parts  is 
conceivable  without  a  definite  degree  of  its  specific  kind  of  intensity, 
and  the  degrees  may  vary  infinitely ;  the  number  of  the  parts  them- 
selves can,  like  every  number,  be  increased  or  diminished,  and  every 
part  moreover  can  alter  its  logical  value  by  expanding  the  simplicity 
which  belongs  to  it  as  a  member  of  the  genus  into  a  complex  organ- 
isation of  its  own  inner  nature  ;  and  lastly,  every  relation  between  the 
various  constituents  of  the  concept  varies  in  value  according  to  the 
value  of  those  constituents,  or  admits  of  greater  or  less  closeness 
according  to  some  standard  of  its  own.  The  joint  effect  of  all  these 
possibilities  of  variation  is  to  produce  a  number  of  species  noticeably 
different.  If  we  suppose  that  when  a  mark  P  of  the  generic  concept 
M assumes  the  value/,  the  influence  which  it  always  exercises  upon 
the  other  marks  is  so  intensified  as  entirely  to  change  the  form  of  the 
whole  content  of.M,  the  resulting  species  will  no  longer  be  a  species 
of  Hft  but  of  some  other  genus  N.  And  those  values  of  P  which 
approach  this  decisive  limit  but  do  not  reach  it,  will  produce  forms 
which  still  fall  under  the  genus  M,  but  approximate  gradually  to  the 
structure  which  is  characteristic  of  N.  It  is  upon  th:s  that  the 
difference  is  based  between  species  which  are  more  and  less  appro- 
priate or  adequate  to  their  common  generic  concept ;  each  species  is 
in  a  certain  respect  more  perfect  the  farther  it  is  from  passing  over  into 
another  genus,  and  that  is  the  logically  most  perfect  whose  divergences 
from  all  proximate  genera  make  up  the  greatest  total  amount. 

132,  I  believe  I  am  justified  in  saying  that  this  point  of  view 
belongs  entirely  to  logic,  and  is  independent  of  the  views  which  we 
may  form  on  other  and  material  grounds  as  to  the  value,  meaning, 
and  function  of  anything  which  has  the  law  of  its  existence  in  a 
generic  concept.  I  will  therefore  illustrate  it  by  examples  which  are 
not  affected  by  these  incidental  considerations.  The  equation  of  the 
ellipse,  a»y  +  32or2  =  a2  &*,  leaves  the  two  axes  a  and  b  to  be  chosen 
at  pleasure,  and  the  formula  claims  that  it  will  always  produce  an 
ellipse  whatever  values  we  may  assume  for  a  and  b,  and  even  therefore 
if  one  of  them  be  assumed  to  =  o.  But  in  that  case  the  curve  passes 


CHAPTER  in.]       Species  belonging  to  two  Genera.  129 

into  a  straight  line,  and  the  result  which  this  value  gives  falls  ac- 
cordingly under  the  concept  N,  that  of  straight  line,  which  is  different 
from  that  of  the  ellipse.  But  this  example  shows  at  the  same  time,  what 
we  did  not  choose  to  assert  universally  above,  that  the  extreme  species 
of  a  genus  M,  when  produced  in  this  way,  not  only  must  belong  to  a 
new  genus  N,  but  may  also  continue  to  come  under  the  former  genus  M. 
It  is  true  that  the  central  equation  of  the  ellipse  can  tell  us  nothing 
about  this  case  when  b  =  o,  because  it  then  ceases  to  indicate  a 
curve.  But  there  is  another  expression  of  the  essential  formation 
of  an  ellipse  which  is  still  valid;  namely  the  rule  that  the  sum  of  the 
radii  vectores,  drawn  from  two  fixed  points  on  the  major  axis  to  one 
and  the  same  point  on  the  periphery,  is  constant  and  equal  to  the 
major  axis.  In  the  present  case  where  the  ellipse  has  shrunk  into  a 
straight  line  the  two  extremities  of  the  line  are  identified  with  those 
two  fixed  points,  the  foci  of  the  ellipse,  and  for  every  intermediate 
point  c  we  have  the  sum  of  the  distances  ac  +  cb,  that  is,  the  sum 
of  the  two  radii  wcfores,  equal  to  the  length  a  b  of  the  straight  line. 

If  a  heavy  rod  of  the  fixed  length  a  b  stands  with  one  end  a  on  a 
perfectly  smooth  horizontal  surface,  and  with  the  other  I  leans  against 
a  perfectly  smooth  vertical  wall,  the  pressure  of  its  weight  makes  equili- 
brium impossible  and  it  falls.    An  easy  calculation  shows  that  the  path 
described  during  its  fall  by  any  point  C  in  its  length  is  an  ellipse.    At 
the  same  time  it  is  clear  that  the  end  b-  must  slide  down  the  wall  in 
a  straight  line  perpendicularly,  while  the  point  a  must  move  away 
upon  the  smooth  surface  in  a  straight  line  horizontally.    As  then  every 
point  in  the  line  is  affected  by  the  same  group  of  conditions,  these 
rectilinear  motions  also  must  be  regarded  as   specific  forms  of  the 
elliptical  path  required  generically  by  those  conditions.     They  are  in 
fact  the  two  extreme  cases  which  we  get  if  we  make  first  one  and 
then  the  other  axis  =  o ;  the  end  of  the  rod  then  moves  in  a  straight 
line  in  the  other  axis.     The  middle  point  of  the  rod  supplies  another 
singular  case ;  the  axes  of  its  elliptical  path  are  equal,  and  thus  it 
describes  the  arc  of  a  circle.     The  nature  of  the  problem  before 
us  compels  us  therefore  .to  conceive  the  circle  as  a  species  of  ellipse, 
and  the   central   equation  which  we   have   mentioned  makes  it  at 
once  clear  how  this  is  possible.     This  example  therefore  shows  us 
that  by  changes  in  the  quantity  of  one  of  their  parts  the  species 
of  a  genus  M  approach  gradually  to  the  formative  law  of  another 
genus,  and  that  there  may  be  limiting  instances  which  are  species 
both  of  M  and  of  N,  because  they  satisfy  the  requirements  of  both 
concepts;   by  merely  examining  the   actual  constituents  of  such  a 


130  Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,     c  BOOK  i. 

limiting  instance  it  is  impossible  to  tell  by  which  generic  law  its  form 
is,  strictly  speaking,  determined ;  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge 
this  question  is  decided  upon  incidental  grounds  of  various  kinds. 

133.  On  the  other  hand,  these  examples  leave  an  ambiguity  which 
must  be  removed  in  regard  to  the  standard  by  which  we  measure  the 
degree  of  perfection,  or,  to  put  it  shortly,  the  height  of  each  species. 
Mathematical  figures  have  no  history  telling  of  their  life  and  growth  ; 
being  merely  legitimate  possibilities  of  thought  without  real  existence, 
they  can  be  produced  for  our  imagination  in  the  most  various  ways, 
and  it  is  in  the  abstract  indifferent,  and  in  any  particular  case  depends 
on  the  nature  of  the  problem  in  question,  from  what  point  we  begin 
their  construction,  or  under  what  generic  concept,  what  universal  rule 
of  construction,  we  bring  them.  If  we  look  at  them,  not  geometri- 
cally, but  aesthetically,  I  mean  if  we  attend  to  the  total  impression  of 
the  figure  as  it  is,  not  to  the  way  in  which  it  came  into  being,  circles 
and  straight  lines  contrast  decidedly  with  ellipses.  In  the  impression 
of  the  ellipse  as  we  perceive  it  the  inequality  of  axes  is  a  necessary 
element;  on  the  other  hand  it  is  true  that  the  greater  this  inequality  is, 
the  more  does  the  curve  approach  the  extreme  forms  which  we  wish 
to  exclude,  that  of  the  two  straight  lines  which  coincide  with  one  or 
the  other  axis.  The  characteristic  impression  of  the  genus  would  be 
best  produced  by  an  ellipse  equally  removed  from  the  equation 
a  —  b  =  o,  that  of  the  circle,  and  from  the  equation  a  —  I  =  a,  that 
of  the  straight  line.  By  combining  both  equations  we  might  define 
the  condition  of  this  impression  by  saying  that  one  axis  must  be 
double  the  other,  and  this  would  be  tolerably  correct;  only  that  a 
thing  cannot  be  mathematically  determined  which  does  not  depend 
simply  on  mathematical  laws.  Our  logical  imagination  is  dominated 
in  every  direction  by  similar  tendencies.  Nothing  is  commoner  than 
for  a  person  who  speaks  of  a  quadrangle  to  mean  really  a  parallelo- 
gram, or  often  even  a  square;  and  this  inexactness  in  expression  is 
very  natural ;  the  imagination  wants  to  realise  the  concept  in  per- 
ception, but  can  only  hold  one  image  at  a  time,  and  it  therefore 
chooses  the  image  which  is  logically  most  perfect ;  and  it  is  the  fact 
that  the  parallelogram,  by  increasing  inequality  either  of  the  sides  or 
of  the  angles,  continually  approximates  to  the  ultimate  form  of  the 
straight  line,  in  which  all  the  four  sides  coalesce.  The  observation 
of  natural  objects  evinces  the  same  tendency ;  we  always  regard  as 
the  typical  and  most  expressive  examples  of  each  genus  those  species 
in  which  all  the  marks  are  at  the  highest  value  which  the  combination 
prescribed  by  the  genus  allows,  in  which  therefore  no  mark  is  ex- 


CHAPTER  in.]      Higher  and  lower  species  in  logic.  131 

cliisively  prominent  and  none  is  reduced  to  zero,  but  all  combine,  as 
far  as  possible  equally,  to  produce  the  impression  of  stable  equilibrium 
in  the  whole. 

134.  I  will  here  repeat  an  observation  which  I  made  before.  I 
am  not  afraid  that  anyone  will  criticise  this  mode  of  estimating  the 
relative  height  of  species  on  the  ground  that  it  has  nothing-  to  do 
with  logic ;  its  defect  is  rather  that  it  starts  from  inadequate  logical 
grounds,  and  does  not  adapt  itself  sufficiently  to  the  nature  of  its 
objects.  To  put  it  shortly ;  that  the  highest  perfection  of  a  species 
depends  upon  the  equilibrium  of  its  marks  as  described  above,  is  the 
opinion  to  which  we  must  come  on  purely  logical  grounds,  so  long 
as  we  have  no  positive  knowledge  to  supply  us  with  some  other 
standard  of  measurement  based  upon  the  essential  characteristics  of 
the  genus  in  question.  It  may  lie  in  the  nature  of  things  that  a  genus 
M  can  not  maintain  this  equilibrium  of  marks,  but  is  destined  by 
diminishing  one  and  intensifying  another  to  pass  over  into  another 
genus  JV;  in  that  case  its  species  will  be  more  perfect  in  proportion 
as  they  approach  more  nearly  to  this  point  of  transition  at  which  they 
cease  to  belong  to  their  own  genus.  We  find  that  the  most  im- 
portant attempts  at  natural  classification  are  deeply  imbued  with  this 
idea  of  a  destination  to  be  attained,  which  is  constantly  impelling  the 
several  genera  to  advance  beyond  themselves ;  I  therefore  introduce 
it  here  intentionally,  in  order  to  notice  its  significance  for  logic,  with 
which  in  itself  it  has  nothing  to  do.  We  have  already1  separated 
the  idea  of  productive  activity  from  the  concept  of  tendency,  and  the 
idea  of  purpose  from  the  concept  of  end  ;  we  must  in  the  same  way 
separate  here  the  idea  of  obligation  from  the  concept  of  destination. 
Everyone  will  see  that  the  effect  of  this  separation  is  to  do  away  with 
all  that  is  characteristic  in  the  meaning  of  these  three  concepts;  but 
this  is  just  what  we  are  aiming  at.  It  is  not  the  concept  of  "des- 
tination itself  which  we  are  importing  into  logic,  but  merely  that  of 
the  logical  relation  upon,  which  it  is  essentially  based,  and  of  which 
it  is  itself  so  graphic  an  illustration  that  we  can  hardly  avoid  the  term 
as  a  figurative  expression  of  the  logical  truth.  A  destination,  then, 
which  has  to  be  reached,  differs  from  a  final  state  which  merely 
happens  to  be  reached  by  some  process  of  change  ;  in  the  former 
case  the  group  of  marks  which  characterises  the  end  attained  contains 
also  the  authoritative  principle  upon  which  the  marks  are  connected 
and  upon  which  they  change  as  they  do ;  in  the  latter,  the  processes 
which  lead  to  the  end  may  take  various  directions,  forwards  and 
1  [Above,  §  130.] 
K  2 


132    Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms.    [BOOK  i. 

backwards,  to  this  side  and  that.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  we  can  no 
longer  doubt  as  to  the  purely  logical  sense  of  the  word  when  we 
speak  of  a  '  destination'  to  which  the  several  genera  have  to  approach, 
Hitherto  we  have  looked  upon  the  generic  concept  J/as  the  ultimate 
authoritative  principle  which  regulates  the  series  of  its  species,  and 
that  species  therefore  as  the  highest  which  exhibits  this  concept  in  the 
most  perfect  equilibrium  of  its  marks ;  now  we  are  reminded  by  a 
consideration  originally  foreign  to  logic,  that  the  case  may  be  differ- 
ent, and  that  the  formation  of  the  series  of  species  in  M  need  not 
really  depend  on  anything  in  the  generic  type  of  M  itself,  such  as 
could  be  discovered  by  merely  examining  its  own  constituent  marks ; 
that,  on  the  contrary,  the  formation  of  this  genus  is  not  rightly  ex- 
plained until  we  compare  it  with  another  genus  -A/Into  which  it  passes, 
and  with  a  third  L  from  which  it  came  by  a  similar  transition,  and 
these  again  with  those  which  went  before  and  came  after  them ;  not 
till  this  comparison  has  been  made  do  we  get  the  direction  in  which 
the  progress  towards  perfection  takes  place  within  a  higher  genus  Z, 
of  which  L  M'N  are  species ;  then,  in  the  series  of  species  in  any 
particular  genus  M9  those  species  will  be  the  highest  which  have 
advanced  the  farthest  in  the  direction  in  which  M  as  a  whole  is 
developing  towards  the  most  perfect  expression  of  the  higher  Z 
which  includes  it.  It  remains  to  show  that  this  line  of  thought,  to 
which  we  were  originally  led  by  an  extraneous  suggestion,  has  its 
necessary  place  here  in  the  internal  economy  of  logic. 

135.  It  is  scarcely  needful,  however,  to  show  this.  We  have 
seen  that  we  could  only  produce  the  universal  concept,  which  in- 
cludes a  number  of  individuals  under  it,  by  uniting  their  permanent 
and  common  marks ;  then  we  saw  that  this  constant  group  of  marks 
might  contain  elements  of  very  different  values,  and  in  order  to 
separate  those  which  are  not  only  constant  but  contain  the  rule  to 
which  the  rest  must  conform  on  joining  them,  we  had  to  compare 
the  universal  already  found  with  other  universals,  and  species  with 
species;  that  which  still  cohered  in  this  wider  field  of  change  we 
regarded  as  the  true  essence  of  a  genus  M,  the  species  of  which  were 
to  be  ranked  higher  or  lower  in  proportion  as  they  realised  it  more 
or  less  perfectly.  But  this  process  has  no  natural  ending;  the  same 
questions  continually  recur;  the  marks  which  constitute  M  will 
themselves  differ  in  value,  and  the  only  way  to  distinguish  the  essen- 
tial from  the  unessential  will  be  again  to  compare  M  with  L  and 
N,  to  form  the  higher  genus  Z  from  the  law  which  persistently 
governs  the  formation  of  them  all,  and  to  measure  the  value  of 


OJ 


CHAPTER  in.]      Form  of  classification  by  development.       i 

MLN,  as  well  as  that  of  their  several  species,  by  the  degree  in 
which  they  realise  this  law  Z,  instead  of  by  the  degree  in  which  each 
species  expresses  the  more  special  law  of  its  own  proximate  genus. 
This  progress  might  go  on  to  infinity,  or  to  the  point  at  which  we 
succeeded  in  finding  a  highest  ideal  A,  exhibiting  the  mode  of  con- 
nexion to  which  all  kinds  of  existence,  real  and  thinkable,  must 
conform :  from  this  A  a  classification  might  be  derived  in  the  form  of 
a  development  which  evolved  from  itself  the  whole  content  of  the 
universe,  and  this  development,  if  it  were  possible,  would  give  the 
only  logical  security  that  every  species  had  a  place  in  the  series  of 
cognate  species  answering  to  the  degree  of  essence  which  it  ex- 
pressed. Thus  the  problem  of  natural  classification  leads  of  itself 
beyond  the  isolated  treatment  of  a  particular  problem  to  the  sys- 
tematic organisation  of  the  whole  world  of  thought  And  this 
tendency  has  in  fact  guided  the  most  important  attempts  at  such  a 
classification.  Those  who  have  wished  to  exhibit  the  development  of 
plants  or  animals  in  an  ascending  scale,  or  the  events  of  history 
(for  this  form  of  thought  claims  to  apply  to  processes  also),  have 
always  been  obliged  to  justify  their  selection  of  a  particular  standard 
for  measuring  the  increase  in  value  of  the  several  members  of  the 
series ;  this  justification  they  have  always  had  ultimately  to  find  in 
certain  general  views  as  to  the  meaning  of  all  being  and  process, 
views  which  are  either  formally  expressed  at  the  very  beginning  of 
the  enquiry,  or  make  themselves  tacitly  felt  throughout  it  as  a 
guiding  principle. 

138.  Natural  classification,  then  (to  sum  up  under  the  traditional 
name  the  procedure  just  described),  differs  from  combinatory  or 
artificial  classification  in  taking  account  of  the  mutual  determination 
of  marks  which  in  the  latter  received  only  subordinate  attention, 
while  in  its  result  it  is  distinguished  by  its  serial  form,  in  which  the 
members  arc  not  merely  placed  side  by  side,  but  follow  each  other  in 
a  definite  order  leading  from  the  province  comprehended  or  do- 
minated by  one  species  into  that  of  another ;  this  order  begins  with 
those  members  which  answer  least  to  the  logical  destination  of  the 
whole  system,  and  ends  with  those  which  express  in  the  most  com- 
plete and  pregnant  way  the  fulfilment  of  that  destination.  But  the 
simplest  case  here  supposed,  that  in  which  the  series  has  only  one 
direction,  is  not  necessarily  the  only  one.  In 'the  first  place  it  is 
conceivable  that  single  marks  in  each  species  may  vary  without 
altering  the  characteristic  structure  of  the  species  at  all,  so  far  at 
least  as  we  can  see :  in  that  case  the  different  instances  of  this  species 


134    Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,    i  i:,™  i, 

are  equal  in  value,  and  the  series  may  thus  be  increased  in  breadth 
by  co-ordinated  members  without  growing  in  length.  It  is  also 
possible  that,  owing  to  different  or  opposite  variations  in  several 
marks,  a  species  M  may  not  only  pass  over  into  one  proximate 
species  N,  but  branch  out  into  several,  N,  0,  <?,  with  which  it  has 
equal  affinity  and  which  contribute  equally  to  carry  out  the  general 
development ;  these  will  then  become  starting-points  for  new  series, 
which  either  continue  side  by  side  or  subsequently  coalesce  again 
somehow  with  the  central  series.  Thus  the  form  of  natural  classifi- 
cation in  general  is  that  of  a  web  or  system  of  series;  even  the 
culminating  point  of  the  system  need  not  be  a  strict  unity,  for  the 
most  perfect  attainment  of  the  logical  destination  is  compatible  with 
a  variety  of  precisely  equivalent  forms. 

137.  As  the  occasion  suggests  it,  I  will  mention  two  me  ire  con- 
cepts in  frequent  use,  which  may  find  a  logical   explanation    here. 
The  new  kind  of  value  which  each  species  acquires  in  proportion  as  it 
approaches  the  end  to  which  they  are  all  developing,  docs  not  exclude 
the  other  kind  which  we  mentioned  earlier,  depending'  on  the  equili- 
brium which  it  exhibits  in  the  marks  of  its  proximate  genus.     The 
two  values  subsist  side  by  side,  though  the  one  impairs  the  other. 
We  feel  the  conflict  between  them  in  our  aesthetic  judgment  of  phe- 
nomena.   Every  species  which   expresses   its  genus  in    the   stable 
equilibrium  of  its  marks,  impresses  us  as  perfect,  relatively  or  abso- 
lutely :  such  a  species  forms  the  type  of  the  genus,  that  typo  which  is 
the  indispensable  though  not  the  sole  condition  of  beamy  in   the 
beautiful,  and  which  gives  even   to  what   is   abstractedly  ugly  the 
formal  right  to  a  subsidiary  place  of  its  own  in  artistic  representation. 
On  the  other  hand,  species  in  which  this  equilibrium  is  disturbed  by 
approximation  to  an  end  higher  than  can  be  attained  within  the  limits 
of  the  genus,  give  us  the  ambiguous   impression  which   we   call 
'interesting/  like  dissonances  in  music,  which  do  not  satisfy  us  but 
prepare  us  for  a  higher  satisfaction.     Idea!  as  opposed  to  /i>yv  would 
mean  a  phenomenon  in  which  the  equilibrium  of  marks  required  to 
make  it  typical  coincides  happily  with  the  highest  development  in 
regard  to  its  logical  destination ;  logic  does  mot  exclude  the  possi- 
bility of  such  a  coincidence,  and  art  may  perhaps  find  It  realised 
or  be  able  to  realise  it  in  a  phenomenon  in  repose,  though  more 
probably  only  in  some  situation  of  the  phenomenon, 

138.  Lastly,  it  will  be  asked,  how  classification  by  development 
reaches  its  required  conclusion,  the  certainty,  namely,  that   it   hatt 
really  found  that  supreme  law  or  logical  destination  which  governs 


CHAPTER  in.]  This  form  is  only  an  ideal.  135 

the  particular  object  or  the  universe  at  large.  To  this  we  can  only 
answer,  that  by  way  of  mere  logic  it  is  quite  impossible  to  arrive  at 
such  a  certainty.  The  form  of  classification  by  development,  like 
all  logical  forms,  is  itself  an  ideal,  an  ideal  which  is  demanded  by 
thought,  but  which  can  only  be  realised,  so  far  as  it  can  be  realised 
at  all,  by  the  growth  of  knowledge.  Nor  indeed  is  this  an  excep- 
tional condition,  such  as  would  lay  this  first  of  our  systematic  forms 
under  a  disadvantage.  The  judgment  also  enjoins  a  connexion  of 
subject  and  predicate  which  thought  has  to  make  if  it  wishes  to 
come  into  contact  with  its  object  in  its  own  way;  the  hypothetical 
judgment,  for  instance,  tells  us,  that  only  by  annexing  a  condition  to 
the  subject  £  is  it  possible  to  ascribe  to  it  a  predicate  P  which  is  not 
already  contained  in  the  concept  of  S;  but  logic  does  not  tell  us 
what  condition  x  is  necessary  in  order  to  secure  this  particular  P  for 
this  particular  S ;  it  waits  for  special  knowledge  to  put  its  injunctions 
into  practice.  The  theory  of  the  syllogism  also  teaches  us  how  to 
draw  conclusions  when  the  premisses  are  given,  but  it  does  not  give 
us  the  premisses,  nor  does  it  guarantee  their  truth,  except  so  far  as 
they  may  themselves  be  conclusions  deducible  from  other  premisses  ; 
these  latter  then  serve  as  the  material  given  to  thought,  and  lead 
back  finally  to  some  truth  which  is  no  longer  logically  deducible. 
Similarly  all  that  the  theory  of  natural  classification  asserts  is,  that 
every  group  of  complex  and  coherent  objects,  and  therefore  (since 
everything  coheres)  the  whole  realm  of  the  real  and  the  thinkable, 
must  be  regarded  as  a  system  of  series  in  which  concept  follows  con- 
cept in  a  determinate  direction ;  but  the  discovery  of  the  direction 
itself,  and  of  the  supreme  directing  principle,  it  leaves  to  positive 
knowledge  to  make  as  best  it  can. 

139.  It  is  not  this  objection,  but  a  difficulty  of  another  kind, 
which  obliges  us  to  continue  our  enquiry.  The  difficulty  will  be 
most  easily  understood  by  reflecting  on  the  place  which  classification 
occupies  in  our  system.  As  a  certain  arrangement  of  concepts,  it 
answers  primarily  to  our  first  main  section,  the  theory  of  the  concept 
itself ;  but  we  were  obliged  to  pass  on  from  the  concept  to  the  judg- 
ment, for  we  found  changes  in  the  content  of  thought  which  could 
not  be  apprehended  by  conception  alone ;  on  the  contrary,  the  con- 
cept presupposed  relations  between  its  marks  which  it  needed  the 
judgment  to  interpret  clearly.  Classification  answers  moreover  to 
the  first  form  of  judgments,  the  categorical ;  as  in  these  the  subject 
simply  had,  assumed,  or  lost  its  predicates,  so  here  the  supreme 
authoritative  concept  appears  by  itself  as  the  sole  producer  of  all  its 


1 36    Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,    \  i^  i. 

species,  as  the  source  from  which  tlizy  cmana/e.  But  the  hypothetical 
judgment  met  the  categorical  with  the  objection  that  a  single  subject 
S  cannot  by  itself  give  rise  to  any  multiplicity;  and,  similarly,  all 
theories  of  emanation  will  have  to  ask  themselves  the  question,  what 
second  condition  it  is  which  makes  their  first  principle  develope  at 
all,  and  whence  come  the  data  in  reaction  against  which  it  is  obliged 
to  expand  into  these  particular  forms  and  no  others,  A  correspond- 
ing advance  is  called  for  here ;  and  it  will  prepare  the  way  it  we 
consider  it  in  still  closer  connexion  with  the  characteristics  of  das>i~ 
fication  described  above.  We  -made  it  an  objection  to  artificial 
classification  that  it  may  lead  to  impossible  instances,  while  in 
classification  by  development  we  gave  proportionately  moiv  attention 
to  the  mutual  determination  of  marks ;  we  assumed  that  a  c  liani.ro  in 
one  mark  reacts  upon  the  rest,  that  through  this  change  one  conn-pi 
passes  into  another,  and  that  one  species  answers  belter  than  another 
to  its  concept.  This  clearly  implies  that  in  ihe  formal  ion  of  its 
species  the  concept  depends,  not  only  on  itself,  or,  in  ligi.iraiive 
language,  on  its  own  purpose,  but  also  on  another  pnsvcr  whit  h 
determines  what  kinds  of  realisation  of  that  purpose  are  po^iM** 
or  impossible,  adequate  or  inadequate.  This  power  \ve  have  to 
investigate. 

140.  The  problems  of  thought  are  not  completely  solved  until  it 
has  developed  forms  for  the  apprehension  of  everything  which  p«T« 
ception  offers  to  it  as  an  object  and  stimulus  of  its  activity.  This  re- 
quirement, that  all  thinkable  matter  should  be  included,  is  not  sit  i>  lied 
by  classifications.  Their  natural  objects  are  always  thust;  stationary 
generic  forms  with  stereotyped  marks,  which  we  believe  ourselves  to 
have  before  us  in  perception  as  fixed  points  for  manifold  relations 
but  which  are  far  from  constituting  the  whole  of  what  ux;  nally 
perceive.  The  several  genera  are  not  found  in  reality  arrange!  in 
the  system  in  which  classification  exhibits  them ;  as  they  ju.'iiwlly 
appear  they  are  always  realised  in  numberless  individual'lnstanccs, 
separated  in  time  and  space,  and  subject  to  continual  c  italic  Unit  i» 
their  own  conditions  and  in  their  relations  to  one  another.  Kvnj  if 
we  admit  that  the  nature  of  each  generic  concept  contains  the  law 
which  every  instance  of  it  will  obey  If  It  occurs  under  certain  circum- 
stances, yet^  there  is  no  reason  in  the  concept  itself  fur  Ihe  hypo- 
thetical addition  which  we  make,  neither,  that  is,  for  the  prestrnci?  of 
that  instance  at  the  time  and  place  at  which  it  is  present,  nor  for  the 
occurrence  ^  or  non-occurrence  of  those  particular  dn:umsl;wu% 
Thought,  therefore,  does  not  embrace  in  the  form  of  tlu.ss»ificaiion 


CHAPTER  in.]    Classification  not  final  form  of  thought.    137 

all  that  there  is  for  it  to  embrace ;  and  that  which  appears  here 
merely  as  an  incidental  stimulus  to  the  universal  concept  to  produce 
this  or  that  species  of  itself,  must  also  be  taken  account  of  as  an 
essential  part  in  the  organisation  of  the  thinkable  world  as  a  whole. 

141.  These  considerations  are  not  disproved  by.  the  fact  that,  as  we 
observed  before,  classification  by  development  may  extend,  not  only 
to  generic  forms  of  the  real  and  the  thinkable  at  rest,  but  also  to 
progressive  processes.  For  when  it  is  attempted  to  represent  history 
as  a  development,  the  question  what  it  is  which  makes  process 
process,  the  coming  of  one  state  into  being  out  of  another,  equally 
escapes  the  grasp  of  logic,  When  they  are  reflecting  on  the  past  or 
forecasting  the  future,  these  speculators  may  picture  to  themselves 
certain  situations  as  temporary  states  of  equilibrium,  which  they 
assume  to  follow  one  another  on  the  stream  of  events  in  a  fixed  and 
necessary  order ;  but  how  the  transition  from  one  to  another  actually 
comes  about,  they  cannot  tell  us.  Nor  could  they  do  so  even  if  they 
undertook  the  endless  task  of  dividing  the  interval  between  two  such 
states  of  equilibrium  into  an  infinite  number  of  stages  ;  they  would  be 
able  to  show  that  the  concept  of  each  stage,  when  it  is  reached,  is  pre- 
liminary to  the  concept  of  the  next,  but  they  could  not  show  how  the 
reality  which  this  concept  expresses  brings  the  reality  expressed  by 
the  other  in  its  train.  We  must  reflect  moreover  that  in  the  real 
world  pure  concepts  do  not  occur  or  develop  themselves,  but  only  par- 
ticular examples  of  them,  each  with  all  its  marks  specifically  modified 
in  a  way  which  its  concept  allows  but  does  not  necessitate.  Not  only 
therefore  does  the  process  of  becoming  remain  a  mystery  which 
classification  cannot  explain,  but  the  result  of  the  process  results, 
not  from  the  concept  of  the  stage  preceding  it,  but  from  that  par- 
ticular realisation  of  the  concept  of  which  also  classification  takes  no 
account.  All  the  attempts  both  of  ancient  and  modern  times  to 
derive  the  world  by  way  of  emanation  from  an  original  concept, 
are  subject  to  the  same  defect  If  their  original  concept  is  really 
nothing  but  the  pure  thought  of  a  relation  which  certain  elements 
not  yet  named  necessarily  imply,  all  that  they  can  derive  from  it 
will  be  certain  forms,  likewise  universal,  in  the  shape  of  possi- 
bilities, or,»  as  I  have  no  objection  to  say,  necessary  requirements, 
which  in  the  event  of  being  realised  must  be  realised  in  a  certain 
way ;  but  they  have  no  means  of  deciding  what  this  way  will  be, 
or  of  showing  where  the  desired  realisation  will  come  from,  If  on 
the  other  hand  their  original  thought  expresses  a  relation  between 
elements  not  unnamed  but  definitely  characterised,  and  is  endowed 


i  38    TJieory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,    \  KUUK  i. 

itself  with  the  impulse  to  development  which  those  elements  do  not 
supply,  in  the  shape  of  an  inherent  restlessness  which  drives  it  to 
evolve  its  consequences,  this  is  only  to  admit  that  the  complete  form 
of  each  new  stage  of  development  docs  not  depend  only  on  the  con- 
cept of  the  preceding  stage,  but  on  the  special  form  in  which,  as  a 
fact,  but  without  any  reason,  that  concept  had  already  realised  itself, 
It  is  to  admit,  in  other  words,  that  alongside  of  their  categorical 
development  by  emanation  of  the  concept  out  of  itself,  another  power 
is  also  at  work;  this  power,  which  their  theory  entirely  disregards, 
consists  of  a  sum  of  authoritative  hypothetical  relations,  which  ordain 
that  if  the  marks  in  a  given  concept  have  as  a  fact  a  certain  value, 
and  if  certain  conditions  act  upon  these  marks,  the  form  of  the  new 
resulting  concept,  the  new  stage  of  emanation,  is  then,  but  also  not 
till  then,  completely  determined.  Lastly,  if  we  compare  the  theory  of 
emanation  with  the  method  of  the  inferences  by  subsumplion,  we  may 
say  shortly  that  what  it  lacks  is  the  second  premiss,  by  whlds  alone 
they  produce  from  the  universal  major  the  comparatively  more  special 
conclusion.  These  subsidiary  ideas,  which  are  here!  only  tacitly 
presupposed,  logic  has  to  supply  explicitly ;  it  cannot  ston  lit 
a  classification  based  upon  concepts  ^  but  must  point  out  also  she 
legitimate  connexion  of  \\\z  judgments  which  express  the  power  of  a 
mark  already  in  existence  to  determine  another  which  is  to  come  into 
existence  out  of  it. 

142.  But  it  is  not  necessary  to  confine  ourselves  to  that  side  of 
classification  where  it  fails  to  give  a  complete  solution  of  the  problem 
of  thought;  the  attainment  of  its  own  more  limited  end  implies  the 
same  tacit  assumptions.  Each  of  the  generic  concepts  classified  is 
necessarily  composed  of  marks  which  occur  in  other  concents  as  well 
It  would  be  lost  labour  to  construct  a  scale  of  genera  L  J/  Ar,  if  L 
had  marks  which  were  heard  of  nowhere  else  in  the  world,  and 
M  and  N  were  distinguished  by  similar  uniqueness.  The  marks 
must  rather  be  looked  upon  as  building-stones  lying  about  ready  for 
use ;  they  have  to  be  cut  differently  according  to  their  different  posi- 
tions, but  they  are  all  of  commensurable  material,  and  it  is  only  the 
different  ways  of  using  it  which  give  rise  to  concepts  of  different 
structure.  Now  in  classification  by  development  the  marks  united  in 
the  same  generic  concept  M  are  spoken  of  as  mutually  determining 
each  other ;  a  change  in  one  is  followed  by  changes  in  another ;  and 
the  progress  of  these  changes  not  only  produces  the  several  species 
of  the  genus  M,  bat  leads  beyond  them  into  the  genus  N.  What 
rules  can  this  influence  of  one  mark  on  another  follow  but  such  as 


CHAPTER  in.]  The  concept  transcended  in  classification.    139 

Involve  a  universally  valid  relation  between  the  natures  of  these 
marks}  And  as  the  marks  themselves  hold  good  beyond  the  limits 
of  the  particular  concept  M>  this  relation  also  must  be  independent 
of  M.  The  formation,  therefore,  of  the  several  species  of  M>  their 
possibility  or  impossibility,  and  ultimately  the  possibility  or  impossi- 
bility of  M  itself,  all  entirely  depend  on  what  is  allowed  or  not  allowed 
by  these  universal  laws  of  connexion  between  the  marks.  Accordingly, 
the  classification  of  concepts  cannot  fulfil  even  its  own  proper  function 
without  presupposing  a  system  of  judgments  or  universal  laws  regu- 
lating the  admissibility,  mode  of  connexion,  and  mutual  determination 
of  all  marks  which  are  to  be  united  in  this  or  that  generic  concept. 

143.  I  must  mention  here  an  apparent  contradiction,  the  removal 
of  which  will  conclude  these  preliminary  considerations.  We  have 
already,  in  treating  of  the  form  of  proportion,  spoken  of  the  necessity 
of  this  mutual  interdependence  of  marks;  we  there  corrected  ourselves 
by  saying,  that  when  a  constant  relation  exists  between  two  marks,  the 
measure  of  their  interaction  is  not  found  In  the  marks  as  such,  but  in 
the  nature  of  the  whole  in  which  they  occur  or  in  the  concept  of 
that  whole.  We  seem  here  to  be  retracting  this  statement,  but  we  are 
in  fact  confirming  it  For  the  very  point  which  we  have  now  made 
clear  is,  that  the  content  of  the  concept,  to  which  we  there  transferred 
the  decisive  influence,  is  nothing  but  a  number  of  marks,  each  extend- 
ing beyond  the  concept  itself,  and  all  connected  in  it  in  a  definite 
way.  Between  these  marks,  as  we  saw,  different  relations  are  possible ; 
it  may  happen  that  the  idea  of  one  involves  that  of  another ;  in  that 
case  every  subject  which  has  the  first  will  have  the  second  also; 
or  it  may  be  that  two  marks  exclude  each  other  as  contrary  and  . 
contradictory  members  of  a  common  element,  and  in  that  case  there  is 
no  conceivable  subject  in  which  they  can  exist  together;  between  these 
extreme  cases  lie  others,  in  which,  without  any  similar  logical  grounds, 
we  perceive  two  marks  to  be  combined  as  a  fact,  but  the  value  of  the 
one  does  not  always  imply  a  like  value  in  the  other.  These  are  the 
cases  to  which  our  observation  above  applied ;  for  the  reason  which 
narrows  the  range  of  this  variation,  and  fixes  the  precise  proportion  in 
which  two  marks  determine  each  other  in  any  particular  object,  lies  in 
the  simultaneous  presence  of  all  the  other  marks,  in  the  values  and  the 
mode  of  their  combination.  What  was  undecided  in  the  relation  of 
the  two  is  decided  by  their  relations  to  the  rest ;  if  the  different  . 
equations,  by  which  we  may  suppose  the  latter  relations  to  be  ex- 
pressed, are  only  satisfied  by  one  value  of  each  of  the  marks,  the 
formation  of  the  whole  is  completely  defined ;  where  the  number  of 


140    Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,    i  BOOK  i. 

equations  is  not  enough  for  this,  the  whole  is  still  partially  indefinite, 
and. exhibits  a  universal  concept  in  which  there  is  still  a  possibility  of 
different  species.     Thus  it  is  true  that  the  concept  determines  for  its 
subordinate   species  the  proportion  in  which  each  pair  of  marks 
condition  one  another ;  but  it  only  does  this  in  virtue  of  the  ordered 
mm  of  its  other  marks,  and  so  far  as  these  are  known  to  have  definite 
values,    Our  method,  in  fact,  has  always  been  based  upon  this  sup- 
position.   In  proposing  to  classify  a  generic  concept  by  developing 
its  species  out  of  it,  we  have  always  had  -to  assume  that  certain  of  its 
universal  marks  are  already  defined  by  their  places  in  the  series ;  not 
till  then  could  the  rest  acquire  that  definite  character  which  was 
necessary  to  complete  the  distinction  of  one  species  from  another. 
In  the  concept  itself  the  existence  of  this   primary  clefiniteness,  of 
which  the  rest  was  a  consequence,  was  only  a  possibility;  its  realisa- 
tion was  assumed  in  thought  independently  of  the  concept. 

144.  If  we  sum  up  these  considerations,  we  may  say  that  every 
individual  and  every  species  of  a  genus  is  what  it  is  through  the  co- 
operation of  the  complete  sum  of  its  conditions ;   these  conditions 
consist  in  the  fact  that  a  number  of  elements  or  marks,  which  might 
also  exist  in  separation,  are  as  a  fact  given  in  a  certain  combination, 
which  might  conceivably  be  different,  and  each  with  a  certain  quanti- 
tative value,  which  is  one  amongst  other  possible  values.     From  this 
given  union  of  conditions,  according  to  universal  laws  which  hold 
good  beyond  the  limits  of  these  elements,  this  perfectly  definite  result 
follows.    Every  such  result,  when  it  is  once  there,  can  be  compared 
with  others,  and  co-ordinated  with  them  as  species  with  species  or 
subordinated  to  them  as   species  to  genus;    but  these   concepts, 
which  hitherto  we  are  considering  as  the  key  to  the  understanding 
of  the  structure  of  their  subordinates,  must  not  be  credited  with  any 
mysterious  and  authoritative  power,  beyond  the  fact  that  they  are 
condensed  expressions  for  a  definite  union  of  separable  elements, 
which  act  and  react  upon  each  other  according  to   constant  and 
universal  laws,  and  .give  rise  in  one  combination  to  one  set  of  results, 
in  another  to  another. 

145.  It  is  evident  what  a  revolution  these  considerations  cause  in 
the  whole  view  of  logic :  we  see  it  in  the  logical  form  of  explanatory 
theory  which  modern  science  opposes  to  that  of  classification,  by 
which  antiquity  was  exclusively  dominated.     I  leave  it  to  applied  logic 
to  speak  of  the  methods  which  this  change  in  our  thoughts  necessitates 
in  practice,  and  confine  myself  to  pointing  out  briefly  how  the  logical 
view  of  the  world,  if  it  were  .attained  as  these  theories  understand  it, 


CHAPTER  in.}      Explanation  versus  classification.  141 

would  differ  from  that  of  the  theory  of  classification.  In  the  first 
place,  we  hear  no  more  of  a  categorical  emanation  of  all  real  and 
thinkable  matter,  proceeding  by  the  mere  impulse  of  a  plan  of 
development  contained  in  the  point  from  which  it  starts,  without  the 
aid  of  any  other  conditions ;  the  form  of  science  becomes  essentially 
hypothetical.  It  does  not  describe  what  is  and  what  comes  to  be ;  it 
defines  what  must  be  and  come  to  be  if  certain  conditions  are  giverj  \ 
the  question  whether,  and  in  what  order  and  connexion,  these  con- 
ditions occur,  is  excluded  from  the  province  of  logic  and  left  to 
be  answered  by  experience,  which  will  bring  the  facts  to  illustrate  the 
application  of  the  theory.  Nor  will  I  here  raise  the  question,  how 
this  theory  gets  at  those  universal  laws  by  which  it  decides,  that 
wherever  a  particular  group  of  conditions  is  given,  one  particular 
result  and  no  other  must  occur ;  it  is  sufficient  at  present  to  observe 
that  it  does  start  with  this  conception  of  a  law  which  fixes  the 
particular  result  of  a  particular  condition  universally.  This  means, 
that  wherever  the  condition  a  -f  b  is  found,  only  c  follows  from  it, 
and  the  nature  of  the  object  in  which  a  -f  I  is  found  has  no  power  to 
give  this  condition  directly  any  other  result  than  <r;  it  can  only  do  so 
when  other  conditions,  a  -f-  d,  are  present  in  it  as  well  as  a  -f  £,  and 
the  former  co-operating  with  the  latter  oblige  c  to  change  into  y;  and 
this  co-operation  also  takes  place  by  a  universal  necessity  quite  inde- 
pendent of  the  nature  of  the  particular  object  and  equally  binding 
upon  all  others.  And  in  the  new  result  y  the  law  which  connected  c 
with  a  -4-  b  is  not  eliminated,  but  continues  to  operate  concomitantly ; 
for  a  +  d  alone  would  not  have  produced  y,  but  $. 

From  these  universal  laws  arises  that  mechanical  character,  of 
which  the  adherents  of  these  theories  make  a  boast,  and  their  logical 
antagonists  a  reproach.  The  tendency  to  derive  a  series  of  pheno- 
mena 'organically,'  as  the  phrase  is,  from  the  meaning  of  a  conception 
•which  develops  itself  in  them,  is  met  by  the  assertion  that  a  mere 
meaning  which  wants  to  develop  itself  does  not  produce  anything,  but 
that  everything  exists,  and  exists  only,  when  the  complete  sum  of 
conditions  is  given  from  which  it  follows  necessarily  by  universal 
laws ;  it  must  be  regarded  as  the  result  of  these  conditions  alone, 
and  explanation  consists  merely  in  showing  that  a  given  and  perfectly 
determinate  thing  is  the  inevitable  consequence  of  the  application 
of  universal  laws  to  given  and  equally  determinate  circumstances. 
Animated  by  this  "logical  spirit,  which  is  found  most  pronounced 
in  the  mechanical  sciences,  explanatory  theories  are  averse  both  to 
using  and'  looking  for  universal  generic  concepts,  and  to  schemes 


142    Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,    i  iw*  i. 

of  classification.  According  to  them  a  phenomenon  has  been 
merely  observed,  not  understood,  as  long  as  it  can  be  referred  only 
to  the  special  characteristics  which  distinguish  one  concept  from 
others,  and  not  to  the  prescription  of  a  universal  authority  which 
is  equally  binding  upon  everything  thinkable  and  everything  real. 
It  is  their  pride  not  to  need  generic  concepts  and  their  arrangement 
in  a  system  of  classes,  but  to  show  that,  whatever  the  context  from 
which  a  phenomenon  gets  its  meaning,  we  know  all  about  it  as  soon 
as  we  know  the  sum  of  related  points  combined  in  it ;  for  whatever 
is,  is  merely  an  example  of  what  must  come  to  be  when  the  universal 
laws  are  applied  to  this  or  that  particular  group  of  given  elements. 
Even  the  position  which  is  sometimes  taken  up  as  the  utmost  that 
can  be  conceded  on  the  other  side,  does  not  satisfy  the  demands  of 
these  theories,  the  position  that  everything  obeys  universal  laws,  but 
each  domain  of  reality  its  own,  and  that  the  laws  of  living1  and 
spiritual  existences  are  different  from  those  of  lifeless  and  material 
ones.  It  is  indeed  obvious  that  those  special  laws  to  which  an}'  given 
phenomena  are  immediately  subordinate,  and  with  winch  therefore 
they  are  most  closely  connected  in  matter  and  form,  vary  with  the 
varieties  of  the  subjects  which  they  express ;  but  there  could  not  be 
two  worlds  depending  on  two  supreme  and  independent  laws,  unless 
they  had  nothing  to  do  with  each  other  and  no  effects  from  the.  one 
were  ever  felt  within  the  limits  of  the  other :  anyone  who  speaks  of 
one  world,  embracing  those  different  groups  of  self-developing  things 
and  events,  must  start  with  a  single  law  valid  for  all  reality,  or  a 
single  unbroken  circle  of  law,  of  which  all  the  special  laws  of  different 
domains  are  particular  cases,  and  from  which  they  arise  as  .soon  as  it 
is  supplied,  in  a  succession  of  minor  premisses,  with  the  different  con- 
ditions which  differentiate  the  several  domains  of  active  existence, 

146.  In  accordance  with  my  plan  of  dividing  the  problems  of 
logic,  I  have  omitted  from  the  preceding  account  of  explanation  all 
mention  of  the  means  which  the  theory  employs,  partly  for  discover- 
ing the  universal  laws  which  it  assumes  each  coherent  group  of 
existence  to  obey,  partly  for  detecting  in  the  manifold  variety  cif  ex- 
perience those  inner  coherences  themselves  which  the  subordination 
of  different  elements  to  the  same  common  principles  admits  or  re- 
quires. I  have  reserved  to  applied  logic  the  utmost  freedom  to  follow 
the  course  of  these  efforts ;  all  that  came  within  our  systematic  survey 
of  the  operations  of  thought,  of  which  we  are  now  approaching  the 
conclusion,  was  the  form  which  explanation  would  like  to  give  to 
the  connexion  of  all  thinkable  matter,  and  in  which,  if  it  could  really 


CHAPTER  in.]       Scientific  explanation  itnsatisfactory.       143 

be  given  completely,  the  final  goal  of  intellectual  aspiration  would 
seem  to  be  attained.  As  to  this  goal  itself,  however,  I  do  not  share 
the  prevailing  conviction  of  the  present  day.  Explanatory  theory  is 
almost  the  only  form  in  which  the  scientific  activity  of  our  time 
exhibits  itself;  the  consciousness  (so  late  in  making  itself  felt)  of 
the  principle  which  that  theory  has  to  follow,  strongly  separates  all 
modern  science  from  that  of  antiquity  and  the  middle  ages,  and  the 
methods  of  investigation  developed  in  consequence  of  it  form  the 
precious  treasure  which  places  the  modern  art  of  discovery  far  above 
that  of  ancient  philosophy.  Yet  the  opposition  so  unremittingly 
made  to  this  form  of  thought,  when  it  claims  exclusive  dominion  over 
the  thinkable  world,  shows  that  the  belief  that  it  leaves  nothing  more 
to  wish  for  is  not  universal.  If  we  consider  first  the  familiar  forms 
which  that  opposition  assumes  in  .our  collective  view  of  the  world,  we 
shall  be  able  to  disengage  from  it  the  purely  logical  residuum  of  feeling 
which  the  explanatory  theories  fail  to  satisfy. 


147.  The  assertion  that  all  existence  is  subject  only  to  universal 
laws,  and  that  every  individual  is  nothing  more  than  it  must  become 
according  to  those  laws,  if  conditions,  which  might  have  been  com- 
bined differently,  have  as  a  fact  combined  in  a  certain  form,  is  most 
obviously  distasteful  on  aesthetic  grounds  and  to  artistic  natures. 
Beauty,  it  is  felt,  cannot  be  understood  upon  such  a  view;  it  only 
seems  of  value,  and  to  be  really  itself,  if  the  ultimate  form  which 
excites  our  admiration  is  the  result  of  a  single  power,  a  result  which 
is  indeed  inevitable,  but  which,  besides  being  inevitable,  is  also  the 
fulfilment  and  manifestation  of  a  living  impulse :  it  would  appear 
unintelligible,  if  it  were  merely  a  lucky  case  of  harmony  between 
casually  coincident  elements.  I  have  tried  elsewhere  to  show  that 
this  aesthetic  objection  is  wrong,  if  it  goes  on  to  deny  the  universal 
validity  of  the  explanatory  or  mechanical  theory.  As  understood  by 
that  theory,  the  meeting  of  the  various  conditions"  is  never  a  matter  of 
chance,  but  always  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  past  states  of 
the  world.  If  we  follow  out  this  thought,  it  leads  us  back  to  some 
combination  of  elements  which  we  regard  as  the  initial  state  of  the 
world;  and  there  is  then  nothing  to  prevent  us  from  supposing 
that  this  combination,  which  might  conceivably  have  been  different, 
contained  within  it  the  marvellous  germ  of  beauty,  which,  making 
itself  felt  through  the  whole  mechanical  chain  of  consequences,  gives 
birth  by  single  acts  of  its  own  to  the  beauty  of  single  phenomena. 
Or  again,  if  we  wish  to  avoid  the  difficult  conception  of  an  initial 


1 44    Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,    i  BOOK  i. 

state,  there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  take  a  section,  as  It 
were,  of  the  world's  course  at  any  point  of  time  that  we  choose,  and 
suppose  the  combination  of  all  the  forces  then  acting  simultaneously, 
just  because  it  is  that  combination  and  not  any  other  equally  con- 
ceivable, to  be  the  one  and  sufficient  reason  of  all  individual  beauties. 
Such  a  supposition  would  give  room  for  everything  which  our  aesthetic 
feeling  considers  necessary  to  maintain  the  dignity  of  beauty;  it 
would  merely  have  somewhat  changed  the  place  of  the  single  im- 
pelling power;  this  power  would  no  longer  lie  self-centred  in  the 
individual  beautiful  thing;  it  would  continue  to  be  active  in  the 
individual,  but  only  as  the  after-effect  of  a  universal  which  permeates 
all  individualities.  By  thus  putting  back  the  origin  of  beauty  we  do 
not  run  counter  to  aesthetic  requirements;  on  the  other  hand,  the 
mechanical  theory,  obliged  as  it  is  to  assume  some  existing  slate  of 
things  in  which  the  continuity  of  development  according  to  universal 
laws  is  exhibited,  has  no  motive  for  conceiving  that  state  as  mran'mg- 
less  rather  than  full  of  meaning,  as  irrational  rather  than  rational,  as 
the  source  of  caprice  in  the  world's  course  rather  than  of  ronsistent 
purpose.  There  is  however  one  point  which  the  requirements  oj 
aesthetic  feeling  and  the  admissions  of  scientific  explanation  equally 
imply,  namely,  that  the  secondary  premisses,  which  we  bnri£  muler 
the  universal  laws  and  by  which  we  denote  the  facts  to  which  the 
laws  apply,  cannot  have  the  casual  origin  which  they  cloubllrss  seem 
to  us  to  have  when  we  are  absorbed  in  some  particular  fit-Id  of 
enquiry  and  have  taken  them  out  of  their  mutual  connexion.  They 
must  themselves  be  systematised  and  form  parts  of  a  whole,  that  whole 
which  comprehends  all  real  objects  to  which  the  universal  laws  apply. 
The  minor  premisses  to  our  general  view  of  the  world  must  not  be 
conceptions  of  a  number  of  disconnected  possibilities  in  hypothetical 
form,  each  of  which,  if  it  occurred,  would  lead  by  universal  laws  to  a 
definite  result ;  they  ought  to  distinguish  categorically  each  possi- 
bility which  occurs  -from  those  which  do  not  occur,  and  exhibit  it  an 
a  legitimate  member  with  a  place  of  its  own  in  the  universal  order  of 
reality. 

148.  This  requirement  is  partly  supported,  partly  modified,  by 
metaphysical  considerations.  For  what  would  be  the  meaning  of 
assuming  on  the  one  side  a  realm  of  universal  laws,  and  on  the 
other  a  sum  of  reality  which  conforms  to  them,  if  no  farther  relation 
existed  between  the  two  and  made  this  subjection  intelligible  ?  And 
in  what  coulcl  the  subjection  consist  if  not  in  the  fact  that  the  be- 
haviour prescribed  by  the  laws  is  from  the  very  first  an  actual  pro- 


CHAPTER  in.]  Form  of  the  ultimate  Ideal  of  Thought.     145 

perty  of  all  reality,  a  constant  mark  alongside  of  the  different  or 
changeable  marks  by  which  one  real  thing  is  distinguished  from 
another?  No  truth  at  any  rate  can  be  applied,  as  we  are  in.  the 
habit  of  saying,  to  a  given  content,  unless  the  content  itself  answers 
to  it ;  every  application  is  merely  the  recognition  that  what  we  wish 
to  apply  is  the  very  nature  of  that  to  which  it  is  to  be  applied.  Now 
a  limited  number  of  observations  enables  us  to  discover  that  every- 
thing real  exhibits  certain  constant  characteristics,  and  these  charac- 
teristics then  take  the  shape  in  our  mind  of  expectations  which 
will  be  confirmed,  and  which  we  bring  with  us  when  we  make  further 
observations;  thus  we  easily  come  to  regard  them  as  something 
which  exists  independently  in  fact  as  well  as  in  our  thoughts,  and  is 
prior  to  the  object  in  which  we  shall  find  fresh  confirmation  of  it ; 
hence  all  that  strange  phraseology  which  regards  universal  laws  as 
powers  ruling  on  their  own  account,  to  which  everything  real,  what- 
ever its  origin  and  whatever  its  nature,  is  subsequently  obliged  to 
submit.  If  we  avoid  this  wrong  conception,  and  connect  that  which 
we  substitute  for  it  with  that  to  which  our  aesthetic  requirements 
give  rise,  the  one  and  undivided  object  in  which  our  thought  now 
seeks  satisfaction  is  a  being,  which,  not  in  consequence  of  a  still 
higher  law  but  because  it  is  what  it  is,  is  the  ground  both  of  the 
universal  laws  to  which  it  will  always  conform,  and  of  the  series  of 
individual  realities  which  will  subsequently  appear  to  us  to  submit  to 
those  laws.  I  have  no  intention  of  exhausting  this  subject  here,  and 
I  pass  over  many  difficulties  which  we  shall  have  to  notice  later, 
some  of  them  in  the  course  of  our  present  logical  enquiries,  others  in 
their  metaphysical  context :  it  is  enough  here  to  follow  out  the 
logical  form  of  thought  which  the  mind  must  look  for  if  it  tries  to 
satisfy  the  want  just  described. 

149,  This  form  will  no  longer  be  quite  that  of  inference  as  de- 
scribed above.  The  universal  law,  to  which  the  major  premiss  there  gave 
the  first  place,  instead  of  standing  out  from  the  other  elements  as  their 
essential  condition,  will  now  accompany  them  as  a  latent  idea,  always 
understood  but  not  expressed ;  its  former  place  is  taken  by  the  universal 
nature  of  the  sum  of  existence  which  is  developing  itself  in  the  world. 
Nor  is  this  nature  conceived  as  an  ideal  content  at  rest,  which  could  not 
be  set  in  motion  without  extraneous  conditions,  but  as  the  subject  of  a 
movement  which  enters  into  its  very  constitution  and  without  which 
it  would  not  be  what  it  is.  The  particular  form  which  the  moving 
content  assumes  at  each  successive  moment,  depends  on  the  one  side 
upon  its  permanent  purport  and  permanent  direction,  on  the  other 


146    Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms,    i  BOOK  L 

upon  its  particular  position  or  the  particular  point  to  which  it  has 
thus  far  developed,  -not  through  extraneous  influences  but  through 
its  own  movement.  It  would  be  possible,  but  would  only  lead  to 
prolixity,  to  express  the  essential  truth  in  this  kind  of  Idea  without 
importing  into  it  the  conception  of  motion;  we  should  then  find 
ourselves  requiring  an  idea  which  includes  in  the  system  of  its  species 
and  sub-species  the  whole  •  of  reality ;  but  the  differences  and  the 
order  of  these  species  would  not  be  determined  independently  of  the 
idea  by  pre-existing  marks  and  their  modifications ;  the  idea  itself 
would  contain  the  reason  for  the  presence  of  the  marks,  for  their 
possible  divisions,  and  for  the  arrangement  of  the  resulting  varieties 
according  to  their  value,  in  fact  the  whole  reason  for  its  own  classifica- 
tion. We  may  formulate  our  requirement  most  shortly  as  follows ;  the 
form  of  thought  for  which  we  are  looking  must  have  only  one  major 
premiss  for  all  its  conclusions,  and  this  premiss  must  express  the 
movement  of  the  world  as  a  whole;  its  minor  premisses  must  not  he 
given  to  it  from  elsewhere,  but  it  must  produce  them  from  itself  in 
the  form  of  necessary  and  exhaustive  varieties  of  its  meaning,  and 
thus  must  evolve  in  an  infinite  series  of  conclusions  the  developed 
reality  which  it  had  conceived  as  a  principle  capable  of  development 
in  the  major  premiss, 

150.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the  impulse  to  organi.se  the  whole 
world  of  thought  upon  this  pattern  is  foreign  to  the  mind  when  left 
to  itself;  it  has  been  at  work  at  all  times,  and  whenever  a  view  of  the 
world  more  or  less  like  the  theory  of  mechanical  explanation  lias 
developed  itself,  this  impulse  has  met  it  with  the  reiterated  demand 
that  the  world  and  all  things  in  it  should  be  regarded  as  a  living 
development.  For  it  is  in  the  phenomenon  of  life  that  we  believe  our- 
selves to  see  these  claims  of  the  mind  completely  satisfied  ;  as  there  the 
original  type  of  the  organism  is  made  into  the  efficient  power  which 
produces  the  incentives  and  conditions  for  its  own  consistent  de- 
velopment, so  we  would  have  the  world  as  a  whole  evolve  from  itself 
the  occasions  which  are  the  necessary  conditions  of  its  gradual  self- 
realisation.  We  need  not  here  notice  the  errors  in  this  belief  in  the 
independent  development  of  the  individual  organism ;  it  is  enough 
that  it  appears  to  be  a  graphic  instance  of  wRat  we  are  looking  for. 
The  same  image  has  also  been  a  constant  favorite  with  the  theory 
which,  for  the  last  time  in  our  day,  avowedly  aspired  to  a  vision  of  the 
universe  springing  out  of  the  unity  of  an  idea,  which  develops  itself 
and  creates  the  conditions  of  its  progress.  For  it  was  in  no  attitude 
of  investigation  and  reflexion,  by  no  means  of  logical  and  discursive 


CHAPTER  III.]  PlaCB  of  '  Speculation  '  in  logU.  147 

thinking,  bringing  independent  minor  premisses  under  universal 
majorSj  that  the  Hegelian  philosophy  even  wished  to  derive  the 
world  from  its  single  principle  :  it  only  proposed  to  look  on  and  see 
how  the  development  followed  from  the  inherent  impulse  of  the  idea. 
And  for  this  intellectual  vision,  this  'speculative*  thinking  in  the  original 
sense  of  the  word,  it  believed  itself  to  have  found  a  guide  in  the 
dialectical  method,  a  guide  which  enables  the  spectator  to  follow  the 
true  course  of  the  self-realising  development.  I  shall  still  keep  to  my 
principle  of  saying  nothing  in  this  survey  of  logical  forms  about  the 
practical  rules  for  securing  their  application  to  the  matter  of  thought, 
and  therefore  leave  for  a  later  occasion  what  is  to  be  said  about  this 
method  as  a  method  ;  but  I  shall  appropriate  the  antithesis  between 
speculation  and  explanatory  theory  for  the  purpose  of  describing  the 
final  shape  which  we  aim  at  giving  to  all  thinkable  matter,  and 
call  the  form  of  speculative  thought  this  third  member,  with  which  the 
series  of  comprehensive  and  systematic  forms  comes  to  an  end. 

151.  And  yet  I  feel  that  I  must  not  conclude  quite  so  shortly ;  I 
must  return  once  more  to  an  observation  which  I  have  already  made. 
•  All  fqrms  of  thought  which  we  are  considering  are  ideals ;  they  in- 
dicate the  final  shapes  which  thought  wishes  to  give,  or  to  be  able  to 
give,  to  the  matter,  great  or  small,  which  it  has  before  it,  in  order  to 
satisfy  its  own  inherent  impulse  by  showing  the  coherence  of  all  that 
coexists.  Nor  is  the  validity  of  these  ideals  at  all  impaired  by  the 
fact  that  human  knowledge  is  not  able  to  apply  them  to  every 
given  instance.  It  may  be  that  we  are  not  always  in  a  position  to 
discover  the  universal  laws  which  govern  a  particular  circle  of  phe- 
nomena ;  and  it  may  be  that,  if  we  had  discovered  them,  we  should 
not  succeed  in  bringing  all  particular  cases  under  them  so  completely 
that  the  necessity  of  any  given  result  was  at  once  apparent.  But  we 
should  not  push  forward  our  enquiries  in  this  direction  so  untiringly, 
if  we  were  not  convinced  that  the  principle  of  the  explanatory  theory  is 
universally  valid,  and  that  its  validity  is  independent  of  our  present  ability 
to  verify  it  in  every  conceivable  instance.  Perhaps  the  form  of  spe- 
culative thought  is  in  a  still  more  unfavorable  position ;  the  conditions 
under  which  human  thought  is  placed  may  be  altogether  inadequate 
to  achieve  the  speculative  ideal  in  more  than  a  few  instances,  perhaps 
even  in  one ;  yet  this  ideal  also  will  retain  its  binding  force,  and  con- 
tinue to  express  the  form  in  which,  if  we  could  give  it  to  the  whole 
material  of  thought,  our  mind  would  find  all  its  demands  satisfied. 
This  form  also,  therefore,  has  a  right  to  its  place  in  the  systematic 
series  of  forms  of  thought :  that  it  is  the  last  in  the  series  is  clear 

L  2 


148    Theory  of  Inference  and  Systematic  Forms. 

without  proof,  for  it  leaves  no  elements  remaining  in  mere  uncon- 
nected juxtaposition,  but  exhibits  everything  in  that  coherence  which 
had  been  all  along  the  aim  of  thought.  At  the  same  time  It  points 
beyond  the  province  of  logic.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  ex- 
planatory theory  it  might  still  seem  as  though  the  universal  laws, 
which  thought  produces  from  itself  alone,  gave  a  right  to  decide 
a  priori  what  reality  will  be  like;  speculation  does  not  deny  this 
right,  but  by  making  the  content  of  a  supreme  principle  the  one  and 
only  ultimate  ground  of  everything,  both  of  the  power  of  these 
universal  laws  themselves,  of  the  direction  in  which  the  world  as  a 
whole  develops,  and  of  the  individual  forms  which  in  consequence 
reality  assumes  at  each  moment,  it  indicates  that  the  final  fulfilment  of 
all  logical  aspiration  could  not  be  attained  by  new  logical  forms,  but 
only  by  material  knowledge  of  that  supreme  self-developing  principle 
which  speculation  presupposes. 

In  concluding -this  account  I  am  conscious  how  much  its  method 
deviates  from  those  which  are  in  vogue  at  the  present  day.  We  are 
so  accustomed  to  being  told  the  history  of  things,  and  to  feel  our 
curiosity  satisfied  when  we  have  discovered  or  invented  an  origin  for 
them,  that  even  logic  is  flooded  with  psychological  explanations  and 
derivations  of  its  doctrines  :  on  the  other  hand  it  strikes  us  as 
antiquated,  odd,  and  unmeaning  if  anyone  attempts  to  arrange  the 
forms  of  thought  in  a  progressive  series  according  to  the  nature  of 
its  problems,  instead  of  following  the  order  in  which  the  mental 
activities  necessary  to  their  solution  develop  in  the  individual  soul 
I  am  content  that  this  should  be  so,  and  hope  that  in  the  form  of  my 
exposition  my  readers  will  recognise  the  premonitory  influence  of  the 
idealistic  philosophy  to  which  it  is  intended  to  lead :  I  have  no  fear 
that  by  choosing  this  form  I  have  distorted  the  substance  of  truths 
which3  on  any  view  of  logic,  must  be  equally  regarded  as  established. 


BOOK  II. 


APPLIED    LOGIC. 


PREFATORY  REMARKS. 

152.  WE  are  so  much  accustomed  to  oppose  the  world  of  our 
thoughts  to  an  external  reality,  that  as  soon  as  we  speak  of  an  object 
to  which  the  forms  of  our  thinking  are  to  be  applied,  it  seems  as  if  we 
can  mean  thereby  nothing  but  this  external  reality.  When  we  call  to 
mind  the  natural  sciences,  which  occupy  so  large  a  portion  of  the 
field  of  science  at  the  present  day,  we  are  confirmed  in  this  opinion ; 
on  the  other  hand,  when  we  think  of  mathematics  and  jurisprudence 
we  are  likely  to  be  shaken.  The  external  reality  supplies  neither  the 
objects  with  which  the  mathematician  deals  nor  the  methods  by  which 
he  deals  with  them.  That  which  it  yields  does  but  give  him  aa  occa- 
sion to  turn  his  investigations  in  this  or  that  direction.  The  true 
objects  of  his  enquiry  are  always  nothing  but  the  forms  which  our 
intuition  or  our  thinking  finds  in  itself  or  creates,  and  of  which  the 
appearances  of  the  outer  world  remind  us,  without  ever  perfectly  cor- 
responding to  them.  And  his  business  is,  in  accordance  with  laws  of 
reasoning,  which  at  any  rate  are  not  derived  from  any  external  ex- 
perience, to  develop  the  countless  necessary  conclusions  which  follow 
from  the  various  possible  combinations  of  these  forms.  Nor  is  this 
development  speedily  achieved :  these  consequences  do  not  unfold 
themselves  in  such  a  way  that  we  need  but  to  look  on  and  watch :  on 
the  contrary  logic  has  at  all  times  turned  to  mathematics  (for  the  two 
are  coeval)  for  examples  of  delicate  profound  and  fruitful  methods  of 
enquiry. 

Jurisprudence  certainly  owes  the  occasion  of  its  origin  to  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  actual  world  in  which  man  with  his  needs  and  claims 
is  placed ;  but  it  tries  to  shape  this  world  and  our  relations  to  it  by 
ordinances,  which,  though  as  against  nature  they  are  products  of  our 


1 50  Prefatory  Remarks.  [BOOK  n. 

free  choice,  are  yet  the  necessary  consequences  of  ideas  of  right  and 
justice,  consequences  of  a  truth  that  ought  to  be,  which  has  its  home 
nowhere  but  In  our  own  minds.  And  so  logical  acumen  is  just  as 
constantly  employed  here  also  in  setting  forth  ever  more  precisely  and 
irrefragably  the  connexion  of  the  several  conclusions  already  drawn 
both  with  one  another  and  with  the  highest  principles  from  which 
they  flow. 

Thus  both  these  branches  of  science  show  that  lo*gic  need  not  go 
to  the  external  reality  to  find  objects  for  its  application, — that  it  finds 
fully  work  enough  in  investigating  the  connexion  of  that  which  is 
possible  in  thought  and  necessary  in  thought, — that  finally  the  inner 
world  of  our  conceptions  is  wide  enough  to  contain  unknown  regions, 
still  to  be  discovered  by  means  of  systematic  enquiry. 

153.  Keeping  to  this  line  of  thought  we  may  now  turn  to  the 
natural  sciences.  Even  the  external  world  which  we  assume  is  after 
all  an  object  of  our  enquiry  only  so  far  as  (in  some  way  or  other 
which  does  not  here  concern  us)  it  has  become  a  world  of 
conceptions  in  us;  we  survey,  dissect,  and  investigate  not  that  in- 
visible something  which  we  suppose  to  lie  outside  us,  but  the  visible 
picture  of  it  that  is  formed  in  our  consciousness.  We  may  believe 
that  we  are  compelled,  as  the  result  of  prolonged  labour,  to  accept 
certain  connexions  according  to  law  between  the  unknown  parts  of 
this  unknown  external  something ;  but  all  these  assertions  (whatever 
they  may  be)  are  after  all  grounded  solely  upon  the  relations  which 
prevail  either  persistently  or  in  succession  between  the  contents  of 
our  thoughts.  Whatever  may  be  the  causes  which  produce  this  suc- 
cession, the  laws  by  which  it  is  regulated  can  only  be  known  by  itself, 
i.  e.  by  the  order  in  which  certain  thoughts  follow  certain  others  in 
our  minds,  by  the  constant  union  of  some  thoughts,  and  the  impos- 
sibility of  uniting  others.  It  is  enough  then  even  for  the  treatment  of 
the  external  world  to  regard  it  in  the  first  instance  as  a  world 
of  thought  set  up  somehow  or  other  in  us;  whether  the  appear- 
ances which  surround  us  correspond  to  a  real  world  of  external 
things,  or  whether  they  be  products  of  a  creative  faculty  of  imagi- 
nation in  us,  guided  by  unknown  impulses,  the  discovery  of  the 
connexion  between  them  will  always  necessitate  the  same  methods 
of  enquiry. 

I  wish  the  reader  to  bear  in  mind  what  I  have  said  as  we  pass  to 
applied  logic.  My  purpose  in  saying  it  here  is  only  to  indicate  the 
position  taken  up  in  the  following  enquiries :  in  the  course  of  these 
enquiries  we  do  no  violence  to  the  ordinary  way  of  thinking;  let 


.]  Prefatory  Remarks.  151 

the  reader  while  he  reads  these  chapters  conceive  of  the  efforts  of 
thought  as  directed  to  a  real  external  world;  only  when  he  finds 
no  notice  yet  taken  of  the  relation  of  this  world  to  our  thought, 
I  hope  he  will  find  a  justification  of  this  course  in  these  few 
prefatory  remarks,  and  be  content  to  wait  till  the  third  part  of  my 
treatise  for  an  enquiry  into  the  significance  of  the  issue  which  is  here 
put  aside. 


CHAPTER    L 
The  forms  of  Definition. 

154.  INNER  states,  sensations  and  ideas,  feelings  and  impulses,  can- 
not be  conveyed  like  material  things,  which  may  be  separated  from 
their  original  possessor  and  passed  on  as  they  are  from  hand  to  hand, 
We  can  communicate  them  only  by  subjecting  our  neighbour  to  con- 
ditions under  which  he  will  be  compelled  to  experience  them  or  to 
beget  them  anew  in  himself. 

If  we  had  to  communicate  for  the  first  time  something  yet  unknown, 
which  was  too  simple  to  be  created  by  thinking,  or  too  complex  to  \u: 
exhausted  by  it,  our  only  resource  would  be  to  produce  the  exttrudl 
conditions  of  perception.  If  our  neighbour  had  never  seen  light,  or 
heard  sounds,  or  felt  bodily  pain,  our  only  course  would  be  to  put 
his  eye  within  reach  of  a  source  of  light,  to  bring  waves  of  sound  to 
act  upon  his  ear,  and  by  the  application  of  a  stimulus  to  his  body  to 
let  him  experience  that  feeling  of  pain  with  which  we  ourselves  had 
made  acquaintance  in  precisely  the  same  way.  If  we  wish  to  enable 
him  to  recognise  a  person  whom  he  as  yet  does  not  know,  the  de- 
scription of  the  countless  little  marks  which  distinguish  that  person 
from  others  will  never  make  sure,  but  by  pointing  with  the  finger  we 
can  show  him  precisely  whom  we  mean.  We  need  do  no  more  than 
thus  barely  mention  the  fact  that  wherever  it  is  applicable  this  direct 
reference  to  the  object  itself  or  to  some  likeness  of  it  is  always  useful. 
But  in  view  of  the  questions  which  here  concern  us  we  further  pre- 
suppose two  things, — first  a  large  stock  of  past  experiences  common 
to  the  persons  who  are  to  communicate  with  each  other,  and  secondly 
a  language  intelligible  to  both  parties,  to  the  several  words  of  which 
each  attaches  (to  a  large  extent  at  least)  the  same  ideas.  Then  by  a 
series  of  spoken  words  we  call  to  our  neighbour's  recollection  the 
ideas  conjoined  with  them  in  that  order  which  is  for  him  the  internal 
condition  of  his  creating  or  experiencing  in  his  own  consciousness 
that  which  we  wish  to  communicate. 

155.  This  form  of  communication  also  includes  much  else  that  our 


Communication  of  Ideas.  J53 

logical  enquiry  can  only  take  note  of  by  the  way,  Both  poetry  and 
eloquence  aim  by  this  method  at  something  more  than  imparting 
'  Ideas:  they  count  upon  the  attachment  to  the  images  thus  called  up  of 
feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain,  of  approval  and  disapproval,  of  exalta- 
tion and  aversion.  The  effects  which  they  thus  produce  are  powerful 
but  uncertain.  Different  minds  are  indeed  pretty  uniformly  organised 
for  the  mere  apprehension  of  matters  of  fact,  and  their  general  habits 
of  perception  do  not  change;  but  in  estimating  the  degrees  of  emotion 
which  we  annex  to  what  we  perceive  we  must  allow  not  only  for 
original  differences  of  temperament,  but  also  for  the  changefulness 
of  the  mood  of  the  moment,  which  depends  upon  what  we  have  just 
gone  through.  Thus  different  persons  are  very  differently  receptive 
even  of  actual  facts ;  still  less  can  we  hope  by  the  imperfect  recollection 
of  such  facts,  which  is  all  that  speech  can  rouse,  to  create  in  others 
precisely  the  same  emotion  which  they  produced  in  ourselves.  How 
much  may  be  done  by  skilful  guidance  of  the  train  of  ideas  and  by 
well-measured  expressions  to  lessen  the  uncertainty  of  the  result  is  a 
question  for  the  art  of  poetry  and  rhetoric.  Our  own  problem  is 
narrower  and  is  limited  to  the  communication  of  that  which  has  been 
already  refined  from  a  state  in  which  we  are  acted  upon  into  an  idea 
which  we  apprehend, — i.  e.  of  thoughts,  not  of  feelings  and  moods; 

156.  The  certainty  even  of  this  kind  of  communication  seems  to 
be  imperilled  by  the  fact  that  after  all  the  same  words  do  not  always 
have  the  same  meaning  for  the  speaker  and  the  hearer.  It  must  be 
allowed  that,  apart  from  subsequent  confusion  of  originally  different 
roots,  there  are  in  every  language  many  words  which  denote  several 
very  different  things, —  in  consequence  no  doubt  of  a  resemblance 
which  these  things  bear  to  one  another,  but  still  of  a  resemblance 
which  is  not  always  so  obvious  now  to  him  who  uses  the  traditional 
words  as  it  was  to  the  first  inventor  of  these  metaphorical  expressions. 
And  even  when  a  word  denotes  the  -same  thing  for  all,  that  does  not 
ensure  that  all  have  the  same  conception  of  the  thing  denoted.  The 
special  circumstances  under  which  each  individual  became  acquainted 
with  the  thing,  the  peculiar  point  of  view  from  which  he  .first  regarded 
it,  the  connexion  in  which  he  found  it  and  from  which  he  had  to 
detach  it,  give  a  peculiar  colouring  to  his  picture  of  it,  and  dispose 
him  to  other  conclusions  than  those  anticipated  by  the  speaker  when 
he  named  the  common  word,  hoping  thereby  to  give  some  particular 
turn  to  the  course  of  his  hearer's  thoughts.  It  is  impossible  to  deny 
these  facts,  dangerous  to  disregard  them  altogether,  yet  foolish  to 
press  them  too  far :  the  intercourse  of  daily  life  sufficiently  proves  to 


The  forms  of  Definition.  c  BOOK  n. 

how  large  an  extent  speech  enables  us  in  spite  of  *  them  perfectly  to 
understand  each  other's  thoughts  about  the  most  various  matters. 
There  will  certainly  remain  ideas  which  it  is  hard  to  communicate 
with  precision  ;•*  but  were  there  no  such  difficulties  there  would  be  no 
good  in  seeking  rules  for  helping  us  by  the  appropriate  use  of  un- 
.  equivocal  words  to  remove  the  ambiguity  of  others  and  to  fix  their 
meaning  so  that  all  who  wish  to  converse  may  use  them  in  the  same 
sense.  It  must  be  left  to  the  unfettered  acumen  of  the  speaker  to 
determine  what  words  may  be  accepted  as  precise  enough  to  explain 
other  words ;  but  however  far  we  may  feel  constrained  to  go  back 
along  this  line  and  to  remove  all  ambiguity  from  the  instruments  of 
communication  which  we  wish  to  use  before  we  use  them,  there  will 
still  be  only  two  possible  ways  for  us,  abstraction  and  construction. 

157.  We  explain  a  conception,  which  we  will  call  M,  by  abstraction, 
when  we  first  refer  to  a  number  of  known  instances,  in  each  of  which 
M  forms  a  part  of  the  notion,  and  then  bid  the  hearer  separate  from 
these  instances  that  which  does  not  belong  to  the  conception  M  which 
we  wish  to  communicate.  This  is  the  way  in  which  all  our  general 
conceptions1  and  general  ideas2  were  originally  formed ;  in  the  case  of 
a  general  idea  that  which  was  common  to  a  number  of  impressions 
comes  of  itself  to  stand  out  as  the  object  of  a  new  separate  idea ;  in 
the  case  of  a  general  conception  this  process  is  consciously  directed 
by  attention  and  reflexion.  And  when  we  are  at  a  loss  we  all  come 
back  to  this  same  way.  The  man  of  no  logical  training  does  so  when 
to  the  question  what  he  understands  by  M  he  replies,  in  the  fashion 
which  the  Platonic  Socrates  so  often  complains  of,  only  by  giving 
examples  which  contain  M>  leaving,  to  his  questioner  the  trouble  of 
separating  the  common  element  which  he  wants  to  get  at  from  that 
which  is  foreign  to  it.  But  the  logically  trained  thinker  also  pro- 
ceeds really  in  the  same  way :  however  carefully  he  may  choose  his 
terms  so  as  to  express  the  universal  itself  without  any  reference  to 
particular  instances,  yet  this  expression  is  only  obtained  by  a  tacit  com- 
parison of  a  number  of  cases.  It  is  only  by  such  a  comparison  that 
we  learn  what  marks  of  M  must  be  precisely  fixed  in  order  that  the 
expression  may  exclude  all-  that  is  foreign  to  M9  what  other  marks 
must  be  left  undetermined  in  order  to  include  in  M  everything  that  is 
properly  an  instance -of  it.  And  lastly,  only  by  the  fact  that  instances 
are  to  be  found  are  we  convinced  that  this  M9  which  we  are  taking 
the  trouble  to  determine,  is  capable  of  determination,  that  it  represents 
a  problem  which  has  an  intelligible  solution,  not  a  mere  tissue  of  iri- 
1  [' Begriffe.']  a  ['Vorstellungen.'] 


CHAPTER  I.]  A  bstraction.  155 

compatible  elements  whose  union  may  be  demanded  in  words  but 
cannot  be  really  carried  out. 

158.  It  is  thus  useful  to  follow  this  method  of  abstraction  in  every 
case,  and  even  when  we  may  have  arrived  at  a  determinate  conception 
in  some  other  way,  at  any  rate  to  confirm  it  by  a  supplementary 
reference  to  instances.  Wherever  our  aim  is  to  fix  some  very  simple 
conception  which  underlies  a  whole  group  of  kindred  ideas,  it  is  the 
only  method  possible.  Such  a  conception  can  only  be  pointed  out 
by  taking  away  from  known  instances  of  it  all  that  does  not  belong  to 
it;  we  can  never  put  it  together  out  of  its  component  parts,  for  it  has 
none.  The  labour  expended  upon  this  impossible  aim  always  ends 
in  a  vicious  circle,  since  among  the  materials  that  are  to  be  used  in 
the  construction  the  very  thing  that  was  to  'be  constructed  is  taken  for 
granted,  whole  and  entire,  however  much  it  may  be  concealed  under 
strange  expressions.  Thus,  for  example,  in  our  idea  of  becoming  the 
two  ideas  of  being  and  not-being  are  no  doubt  united  as  two  con- 
nected points  of  relation  ;  but  if  we  should  try  to  characterise  becom- 
ing as  the  unity  of  the  two  we  should  not  attain  our  object  In  the 
first  place  we  should  be  bound  to  fix  the  precise  sense  to  be  here 
assigned  to  the  expression  'unity'  which  in  itself  is  very  ambiguous. 
It  cannot  mean  the  mere  co-existence  in  the  same  consciousness  of 
the  two  ideas  of  being  and  not-being,  for  obviously  becoming  is  the 
content  of  a  relation  that  exists  between  the  contents  of  these  two 
ideas.  But  if  we  try  to  unite  being  and  not-being  as  predicates 
applicable  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  manner  to  one  and  the 
same  thing,  we  do  not  arrive  at  becoming,  but  simply  find  ourselves 
confronted  by  the  impossibility  of  actually  executing  in  thought  a  task 
which  involves  such  a  contradiction.  Suppose  then  that  we  separate 
again  the  being  and  the  not-being  of  this  thing  and  say  that  the  one 
predicate  is  applicable  to  it  when  the  other  is  not : — even  by  this  change 
we  do  not  get  hold  of  becoming ;  it  falls  between  the  two  moments  of 
time  and  is  to  be  found  in  neither.  We  shall  have  therefore  to  bring 
them  together  once  more:  but  as -long  as  they  are  separate  from  one 
another  becoming  will  lie  outside  of  them,  we  can  only  get  hold  of  it 
when  we  look  for  it  neither  in  being  nor  in  not-being,  nor  in  a  passive 
unity  of  the  two,  but  in  the  transition  from  one  to  the  other.  Eut  in 
this  idea  of  transition,  or  In  any  idea  however  it  be  expressed  that  we 
like  to  substitute  for  it,  we  shall  recognise  (only  under  another  title) 
what  is  essentially  our  idea  of  becoming.  This  relation  therefore 
between  being  and  not-being,  being  altogether  sui  generis,  cannot  be 
conceived  by  means  of  anything  but  itself, — is  'only  to  be  got  by 


6  The  forms  of  Definition, 

traction  from  the  instances  in  which  it  forms  a  part  of  the  thoughts 
,  to  be  created  by  the  putting  together  of  ideas  which  as  yet  do  not 
itain  it.  Precisely  the  same  considerations  hold  with  respect  to  the 
[ally  simple  conceptions  of  being,  acting,  thinking,  affirming,  deny- 
;  and  the  geometry  of  Euclid  follows  precisely  the  same  method  in 
ermlning  the  surface  as  the  limit  of  the  space  occupied  by  a  body, 

line  as  the  limit  of  the  surface,  the  point  as  the  limit  of  the  line, — 
sach  case  teaching  the  learner  to  get  the  simpler  conception,  which 
nrder  to  grasp,  by  abstracting  what  does  not  belong  to  it  from  the 
re  complex  conception  which  lies  nearer  to  sense  or  which  has  just 
^n  determined. 

L59.  The  opposite  method  would  fully  deserve  the  name  of  con- 
action  only  if  it  enabled  us  completely  to  put  together  the  idea  to  be 
iveyed  out  of  a  definite  number  of  unequivocal  parts  by  a  series 

acts  of  thought  which  we  were  required  in  unambiguous  Ian- 
ige  to  execute  upon  those  parts.  Almost  the  only  conceptions 
t  really  admit  of  this  treatment  are  the  mathematical  conceptions 
i  some  others  that  arise  out  of  the  applications  of  mathematics, — 
iceptions  which  as  creations  of  our  thought  contain  only  what  our 
ught  has  combined  in  them.  They  admit  of  it  because  the  several 
as  which  make  up  the  whole  conception  can  be  completely  enu- 
rated,  and  because  not  only  each  of  these  ideas  but  each  of  the 
vs  in  which  they  are  to  be  joined  together  is  such  that  we  can  state 
•  characteristic  quantity  by  which  it  is  distinguishable  from  others 
its  kind,  as  well  as  the  special  quality  which  distinguishes  it  from 
>se  of  another  kind.  Here  then  nothing  remains  indeterminate  that 
»uld  be  determined ;  he  who  follows  the  directions  given  must  see 

picture  he  is  desired  to  form  rise  before  his  mind's  eye  with  just 
t  degree  of  individuality  or  generality  which  the  speaker  wished  to 
e  it. 

f  on  the  other  hand  we  wish  to  convey  a  notion  of  some  really 
sting  thing  we  are  met  by  well-known  difficulties.  Our  mental 
ture  of  a  real  thing  is  not  made  up  of  a  limited  number  of  points 
•elation  which  are  to  be  brought  into  combinations  also  limited  in 
ober,  but  is  compounded  of  a  countless  number  of  ideas.  And  of 
se  component  ideas  those  that  belong  to  different  senses  cannot  be 
apared  with  one  another,  while  even  those  of  the  same  sense  can 
y  be  designated  by  general  names,  and  scarcely  admit  of  precise 
asurement.  And  lastly  It  is  beyond  our  power  to  make  a  complete 
vey  of  the  combinations  of  all  these  elements,  nay  we  cannot  per- 
'e  them  at  all  except  so  far  as  they  consist  of  an  external  arrange- 


CHAPTER  i.]  Description.  157 

ment  in  Space  and  Time,  and  even  then  we  cannot  find  any  compre- 
hensive expression  for  them  in  our  ignorance  of  any  pervading  law  of 
their  formation. 

In  the  presence  of  this  fulness  of  detail  construction  shrinks  into 
description.  In  describing  we  try.  If  we  understand  our  business,  first 
to  fix  the  main  outlines  of  the  whole  idea,  whether  this  be  done  by  a 
simple  construction,  or  by  taking  as  illustrations  similar  things  already 
known  and  proceeding  by  alteration  and  transposition,  by  the  removal 
of  some  features  and  the  addition  of  others,  to  elicit  from  them  the 
leading  lines  of  the  picture  we  wish  to  convey.  Then  we  fill  in  the 
mass  of  details,  never  completely,  for  they  are  usually  inexhaustible, 
but  skilfully  selecting  those  by  the  mention  of  which  we  may  hope 
that  the  hearer's  attention  will  be  at  once  stimulated  to  supply  from 
his  own  memory  those*  that  are  not  mentioned.  We  need  but  remind 
the  reader  of  the  wonderful  effects  which  the  poet  produces  in  this 
manner,  bringing  a  whole  picture  before  us  with  a  touch ;  though  the 
uncertainty  of  the  result  is  equally  manifest.  The  way  in  which  each 
man  supplies  what  is  not  mentioned  varies  according  to  his  nature : 
were  it  possible  to  bring  to  view  in  detail  the  different  pictures  which 
the  same  description  calls  up  in  different  hearers,  their  variations 
would  show  what  an  inadequate  basis  a  description  must  be  for  the 
support  of  definite  conclusions.  For  scientific  purposes  therefore 
description  needs  a  regulation  of  its  method,  and  this  it  finds  in  the 
rules  of  definition. 

160.  For  the  definition  of  a  conception  M  it  is  usual  to  require  a 
statement  of  the  next  higher  generic  conception  G  (the  genus  prox- 
imu?n\  and  of  the  characteristic  mark  d  (the  differentia  specified)  by 
which  M  is  distinguished  from  other  kinds  of  G.  By  requiring  the 
generic  conception  G  we  set  bounds  to  the  arbitrary  and  capricious 
course  of  description.  In  describing  you  were  free  to  begin  at  any 
point  whatever,  and  then  gradually  to  add  the  remaining  points  in  any 
line  that  you  pleased,  so  long  as  you  could  be  sure  of  producing  in 
the  end  a  clear  picture  of  what  you  meant.  But  even  in  a  description 
you  would  not  attain  your  end  without  the  employment  of  many 
general  conceptions.  Now  instead  of  an  arbitrary  choice  of  these, 
the  rales  of  definition  require  you  to  start  from  that  universal  concep- 
tion in  which  the  largest  part  of  the  constructive  work  before  you  lies 
completed  and  ready  to  hand,  and  which,  being  denoted  in  speech  by 
an  unequivocal  name,  may  be  assumed  to  be  familiar  to  every  mind, 
fitted  to  serve  as  the  outline  for  the'  filling  in  of  the  details  by  which 
the  intended  picture  is  completed. 


158  The  forms  of  Definition.  t  \\.  -,.  -IK 1 1. 

If  we  are  told  that  a  creature  we  have  never  yet  seen  is  a  bird,  this 
genera!  conception  gives  us  at  once  a  clear  picture  of  a  number  of 
members  united  in  a  characteristic  manner,  and  at  the  same  time  of 
the  peculiar  kind  of  locomotion  and  vital  action  to  which  they  arc 
instrumental.  The  further  special  characteristics  are  easily  added  to 
this  outline,  for  it  indicates  of  itself  the  places  to  which  they  severally 
belong.  We  should  never  get  such  a  clear  idea  of  the  unknown 
creature  if  we  had  to  put  it  together  out  of  its  primary  components. 
It  would  be  an  endless  task  to  enumerate  all  the  variously-coloured 
spots  on  its  body  with  their  position  and  the  extent  to  which  they 
may  be  displaced,  so  as  to  give  a  notion  even  of  what  it  looks  like. 
Still  more  endless  would  it  be  to  add  to  this  the  peculiarities  of  life 
and  habit,  which  all  belong  at  any  rate  to  our  idea  of  the  anim;il  in 
question  if  not  strictly  to  our  mental  picture  of  it. 

We  see  then  the  value  of  the  abbreviation  effected  by  sUutintt  from 
a  general  conception  that  can  be  assumed  as  known;  we  under- 
stand also  that  we  must  choose  for  starting-point  not  merely  any 
higher  universal,  but  expressly  the  gcuus  proxhnum^  which  in  its 
characteristics  and  in  the  mode  of  their  combination  comes  closest  to 
the  conception  to  be  defined,  and  so  clearly  prescribes  the  point  at 
which  and  the  manner  in  which  we  are  to  add  each  of  the  last 
characteristics  by  which  the  conception  is  finally  determined.  I'Jy 
starting  from  a  higher  universal  than  this  we  should  not  only  Imgthcsi 
again  the  rest  of  our  task,  which  definition  was  intended  to  shorten, 
but  we  should  run  a  risk  of  failure.  For  we  should  then  have  to  add 
a  whole  series  of  further  characteristics  in  order  to  exclude  iwrythintf 
foreign  in  the  long  descent  from  that  less  determinate  univer.sal  to  UK? 
particular  species  in  question:  and  each  new  characteristic  would  opi-u 
a  new  source  of  error ;  for  it  is  hardly  possible  to  determine  quite 
precisely  the  mode  and  manner  in  which  each  is  to  be  added  io  those 
that  have  preceded  it  without  appealing  to  a  picture  which  it  may  he 
assumed  that  each  man  already  has  in  his  mind.  The  notion  of  that 
genus  proximum  therefore  would  not  by  this  method  bo  produced 
afresh  with  that  definiteness  and  certainty  with  which  it  could  be 
recalled  to  the  memory  at  once  by  the  mention  of  its  name,  and  whidi 
it  must  have  if  it  is  to  serve  as  an  outline  for  the  filling  in  of  the  final 
characteristics  of  the  conception  which  we  desire  to  convey.  All  that 
we  could  get  by  this  method  would  be  more  or  less  of  a  riddle.  For 
when  we  propound  a  riddle  what  we  do  is  this,— we  tell  our  hearers 
without  more  ado  to  attach  to  a  very  indefinite  universal  (a  mere 
something  that  may  be  anything)  predicates  that  can  be  united  only 


CHAPTER  L]      Definition  by  Genus  and  Differentia.        159 

in  one  very  definite  subject,  leaving  it  to  his  ingenuity  to  find  this 
subject  or  in  the  first  instance  the  genus  proximum  which  admits  of 
their  union. 

161.  As  yet  we  have  spoken  of  the  definition  as  a  methodical  de- 
scription. If  it  is  to  retain  this  character  it  would  have  with  regard  to 
M  to  state  completely  the  modified  forms  p1  <£•  rl  assumed  in  the  case 
of  M  by  P  Q  R  the  general  predicates  of  the  genus  G.  Instead  of 
all  these  characteristics  the  usual  rule  for  definition  requires  us  to  set 
down  only  one  characteristic  dt  the  specific  difference,  by  which  M  is 
distinguished  from  all  other  species  of  the  genus  G.  Definition  thus 
has  a  more  limited  and  therefore  a  more  practicable  aim  than  descrip- 
tion :  instead  of  setting  forth  positively  the  whole  content  of  M  it 
has  only  to  state  the  mark  by  which  M  may  be  separated  from  all 
that  is  not  M.  This  is  the  origin  of  the  terms  definitio  and  Spurns, 
both  of  which  imply  only  the  marking  off  of  one  thing  from  another. 
And  in  fact  the  general  aim  of  definition  must  be  thus  limited.  As 
thought  advances  we  feel  no  doubt  the  need  not  only  to  distinguish, 
but  to. know  completely  what  we  have  distinguished;  then  we  make 
further  demands  upon  definition ;  then  we  refuse  to  admit  as  a 
specific  difference  anything  but  one  of  those  characteristics  that  really 
make  a  species,  i.  e.  one  whose  occurrence  decisively  modifies  the 
forms  assumed  in  M  (the  thing  to  be  defined)  by  all  the  other  cha- 
racteristics of  the  genus  G  which  are  not  mentioned  in  the  definition.  - 
These  heavy  demands  however  can  be  completely  satisfied  only  at 
the  conclusion  of  an  enquiry  which  has  made  us  perfectly  acquainted 
with  the  nature  of  M,  and  which  thus  enables  us  to  solve  the  problem 
which  remains,  of  fixing  a  final  and  classical  expression  for  that 
nature. 

But  besides  this  there  are  other  no  less  pressing  problems.  We 
may  have  to  begin  a  speculative  enquiry,  which  has  to  find  a  number 
of  yet  unknown  propositions  that  are  true  of  M;  or  in  a  practical 
matter  we  may  have  to  determine  what  is  the  proper  consequence  of 
a  given  situation  M:  in  either  case  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance 
that  this  M,  to  which  the  propositions  we  are  going  to  assert  or 
the  decision  we  are  going  to  arrive  at  must  apply,  should  be  marked 
off  by  precise  and  easily  traceable  boundaries, — nay  at  first  this  is  the 
only  thing  that  is  of  importance.  For  this  purpose  any  characteristic 
•d  will  suffice,  even  the  most  insignificant,  provided  only  that  it  be 
really  an  exclusive  mark  of  M.  In  the  first  case,  that  of  a  specula- 
tive enquiry,  the  further  course  of  the  enquiry  itself  will  either  reveal 
the  reason  which  connects  the  validity  of  a  series  of  propositions  with 


160  The  forms  of  Definition.  [.BOOK  n. 

the  presence  of  this  obscure  characteristic  d,  or  will  show  that  they 
are  valid  over  a  wider  or  narrower  field  than  this,  so  thai  d  Is  not  the 
proper  characteristic  of  their  subject.  In  the  other  case,  that  of  a 
practical  matter,  the  exact  meaning  of  a  legal  situation  to  which  a 
law  is  to  apply  must  be  completely  considered  beforehand  while  the 
question  is  still  de  lege  fercnda ;  but  he  who  has  to  carry  out  the 
lex  lata  rightly  demands  that  this  previous  consideration  shall  have 
given  the  law  the  form  of  a  definition  which  distinguishes,  not  by  the 
most  profound  but  by  the  most  obvious  mark,  the  cases  to  which 
a  decision  shall  apply  from  those  to  which  it  shall  not.  These  are 
problems  which  applied  logic  cannot  decline,  and  we  overlook  them 
when  we  think  too  disparagingly  of  this  traditional  form  of  definition. 
We  misunderstand  the  sound  sense  of  many  such  definitions  in  prac- 
tical philosophy  and  jurisprudence  when  instead  of  the  marks  of  Hf, 
which  they  intend  to  give  and  do  give  completely,  we  see  in  them 
nothing  but  an  inadequate  statement  of  the  whole  nature  of  J/,  which 
it  is  not  their  purpose  to  give  at  all. 

162.  It  will  be  convenient  to  notice  in  this  context  the  distinction 
which  is  commonly  drawn,  but  not  always  in  the  same  sense,  between 
nominal  and  real  definitions.  We  may  utter  a  name  or  replace  it  by 
another;  but  we  can  never  define  anything  but  its  meaning,  i.e.  our 
idea  of  that  which  it  Is  intended  to  signify  :  the  thing1  itself  again  is 
not  in  our  mind,  but  only  the  picture  we  have  formal  of  it.  These 
two  kinds  of  definition  therefore  seem  to  be  identical ;  and  they  arc 
In  fact  identical  for  everything  that  exists  only  in  our  minds,  and 
whose  whole  nature  therefore  is  exhausted  by  our  idea  of  it.  There  is 
no  real  definition  of  a  geometrical  figure  that  can  be  distinguished 
from  its  nominal  definition ;  any  correct  definition  that  we  give  of  it 
expresses  at  once  the  whole  nature  of  the  thing  in  question,  and  the 
whole  meaning  of  the  name. 

In  other  cases  however,  the  distinction,  between  these  two  modes 
of  definition  Is  one  that  it  is  worth  while  to  make.  If  we  call  the 
soul  the  subject  of  consciousness,  of  thinking,  feeling,  and  willing,  this 
may  be  appropriately  called  a  nominal  definition ;  It  specifics  a  con- 
dition which  a  real  thing  must  satisfy  if  It  is  to  be  entitled  to  the  name 
of  a  soul  But  who  or  what  this  thing  is  whose  peculiar  nature 
enables  it  to  satisfy  this  condition,  is  still  quite  an  open  question ;  we 
have  not  fixed  the  real  definition  of  the  soul  till  we  have  got  a  theory 
which  proves  either  that  only  a  supersensuous  and  Indivisible  being, 
or  that  only  a  connected  system  of  material  elements  can  be  the 
vehicle  of  consciousness  and  Its  various  manifestations.  It  was  a 


CHAPTER  LI          Nominal  and  real  Definitions.  1 6 1 

nominal  definition  of  beauty  that  Kant  gave  when  he  said  that  it  is 
to  be  found  not  in  the  conformity  of  the  beautiful  object  with 
some  conception,  not  in  its  capacity  to  satisfy  a  desire  .in  us,  but  in 
the  fact  that  it  pleases  directly  and  without  reference  to  any  interest. 
The  real  definition  of  beauty  would  have  to  point  out  the  precise 
relations  between  various  things  or  components  which  enable  every 
object  in  which  they  occur  to  produce  this  pleasing  effect.  And  so  we 
may  say  in  general  terms,  when  experience  shows  us  a  group  of 
characteristics  p  q  r  often  occurring  and  continuing  together,  or  when 
in  the  course  of  our  investigations  we  light  upon  a  coincidence  which 
induces  us  to  put  them  together  and  to  regard  the  group  as  a  subject 
for  further  enquiry,  we  proceed  in  the  first  instance  to  form  for  the 
group  a  conception  J/5  of  which  a  nominal  definition  can  always  be 
given,  because  it  has  only  to  set  forth  the  predicates  which  led  us  to 
invent  the  name,  or  the  effects  which  we  expect  from  the  thing  to 
which  the  name  is  applied.  But  a  real  definition  cannot  always  be 
given :  for  there  is  no  assurance  that  we  have  not  combined  in  M 
characteristics  whose  union  we  thought  ourselves  justified  for  some 
reason  or  other  in  assuming  or  desiring,  when  there  is  in  fact  nothing 
to  be  found  in  which  they  really  are  or  can  be  united.  It  is  a  com- 
mon error  to  mistake  this  mere  indication  of  a  problem  we  should 
like  to  solve  for  the  solution  itself;  and  on  this  account  the  dis- 
tinction between  these  two  kinds  of  definition  is  useful  as  a  warning. 

163.  We  have  to  beware  of  three  faults  which  vitiate  a  defini- 
tion. 

In  the  first  place  its  assertion  M  =  Z  must  be  no  tautology ;  but 
it  becomes  a  tautology  whenever  M  itself  is  explicitly  or  implicitly 
assumed  among  the  ideas  combined  in  Z  by  which  M  is  to  be  ex- 
plained. This  fault  (called  dradus  in  definimdo)  is  often  committed 
through  carelessness  which  no  rules  can  prevent ;  but  we  are  almost  of 
necessity  driven  to  it  whenever  we  try  to  give  a  formal  definition  of 
some  simple  thing  which  does  not  fall  under  any  more  general 
conception. 

In  the  second  place  a  definition,  since  it  has  to  fix  a  conception, 
must  be  a  universal  proposition,  true  of  everything  which  falls  under 
the  conception.  Now  if  every  M  =  Z,  it  follows  by  contraposition, 
that  no  M  is  not-Z:  if  then  further  reflexion  or  fresh  experience 
teaches  us  that  after  all  there  are  some  M  which  are  not-Z,  we  know 
that  the  definition  M  =  Z  was  too  narrow  (defmiendo  angitsiior)  and 
was  not,  as  it  ought  to  have  been,  true  of  every  M. 

Lastly  a  definition  must  be  convertible:  if  every  M-=Z,.it  must 

M 


1 62  The  forms  of  Definition.  [BOOKII. 

also  be  true  that  every  Z-=.M\  whenever  therefore  further  reflexion 
or  fresh  experience  shows  that  some  Z  are  not  M,  we  know  that  the 
definition  M  =  Z  was  too  wide  (definiendo  latior),  and  included  some 
non-j¥"  which  it  ought  to  have  excluded. 

To  point  out  how  to  avoid  these  faults  would  be  more  useful  than 
thus  merely  to  name  them ;  all  we  can  do  in  that  way  however  is  to 
indicate  their  usual  source,  viz.  the  limited  range  of  our  observation, 
which  as  a  rule  opens  to  each,  individual  only  one  and  the  same 
fragment  of  the  entire  field  covered  by  a  conception,  and  further  the 
one-sidedness  into  which  our  thinking  is  apt  to  lapse  if  it  does  not 
constantly  receive  fresh  stimulus  from  without.  In  the  temperate 
zone  the  way  in  which  plants  awake  in  summer  and  sleep  in  winter 
makes  a  strong  impression  upon  our  feelings;  animal  life,  with  its 
continuous  activity,  seems  to  offer  a  complete  contrast.  Now  we 
certainly  should  not  base  upon  this  a  scientific  distinction  between 
animal  and  plant;  yet  countless  comparisons,  employed  by  poet  and 
orator,  show  that  we  are  accustomed  to  consider  this  yearly  alternation 
as  the  essential  characteristic  of  the  plant.  But  a  definition  which 
expressed  this  would  be  at  once  too  narrow  and  too  wide :  it  would 
exclude  tropical  plants  whose  life  is  an  uninterrupted  growth,  and 
would  include  hibernating  animals,  which  in  this  climate  easily  escape 
our  attention,  directed  as  that  is  mainly  to  the  domestic  animals.  It 
may  easily  happen  that  one  who  wishes  to  establish  on  a  new  basis 
the  rights  and  duties,  both  political  and  social,  of  all  the  members  of 
the  state,  thinks  only  of  the  male  world  to  which  the  conduct  of  these 
transactions  is  usually  confined,  and  then  his  proposals  will  be  too 
wide,  in  as  much  as  he  demands  for  all  what  he  intends  for  men  only, 
or  too  narrow,  in  as  much  as  he  expressly  enacts  for  men  only  what 
must  obviously  apply  to  all  From  this  we  may  draw  a  lesson  of 
universal  application:  we  should  never  attempt  to  treat  a  problem  off- 
hand, when  it  is  possible  to  extend  the  limits  of  our  own  experience 
by  converse  with  others  or  by  taking  count  of  views  which  are  already 
recorded  in  the  literature  of  the  subject.  Learning  is  not  in  itself 
inventive,  but  like  any  other  training  and  discipline,  it  makes  us  more 
secure  against  extreme  errors  than  if  we  proceed  by  the  mere  light  of 
nature. 

164.  We  further  require  in  a  definition  elegance  and  brevity,  which 
I  will  illustrate  by  a  simple  instance.  If  we  define  a  circle  as  a 
curved  line  all  the  points  of  which  are  equidistant  from  its  centre,  we 
first  of  all  make  an  actual  mistake  in  giving  too  wide  a  definition. 
For  if  on  the  surface  of  a  sphere  we  draw  a  serpentine  line  which 


CHAPTER  L]  Faults  to  be  avoided.  163 

crosses  and  recrosses  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere  making  equal  curves 
on  either  side,  all  the  points  of  this  line  are  equidistant  from  the 
centre  of  the  sphere. 

If  further  the  line,  in  returning  to  its  origin  in  the  great  circle, 
describes  an  uneven  number  of  these  double  curves,  it  will  consist  of 
an  infinite  number  of  pairs  of  points,  forming  the  opposite  extremities 
of  so  many  diameters  of  the  sphere.  The  centre  of  the  sphere  there- 
fore bisects  the  rectilinear  distance  between  the  two  points  of  each 
pair;  and  so,  in  every  sense  which  can  here  be  given  to  the  word, 
it  would  also  be  the  centre  of  the  sum  of  all  these  pairs,  I.  e.  of  this 
line,  which  nevertheless  would  not  be  a  circle.  We  ought  therefore 
to  have  said  that  aacircle  is  a  curved  line  in  one  plane  which  fulfils  the 
above  condition. 

But  elegance  further  demands  that  a  definition  shall  not  contain 
more  ideas  than  are  indispensable  for  the  complete  determination  of 
the  given  conception.  So  we  may  be  called  upon  to  speak  not  of  a 
curved  line  but  of  a  line  simply :  if  a  line  fulfils  the  annexed  condition 
it  follows  without  more  ado  that  it  cannot  be  straight.  The  condition 
itself  however  is  not  correctly  expressed.  A  definition  should  not 
employ  among  its  instruments  of  explanation  ideas  which  are  them- 
selves unintelligible  without  the  conception  to  be  defined.  In  this 
case  the  idea  of  the  centre  is  certainly  such  an  idea.  If  we  had  not 
yet  got  the  idea  of  a  circle  (and  in  fact  there  is  nothing  in  this  case  at 
least  to  suggest  this  idea  to  us,  after  we  have  omitted  the  characteristic 
of  curvature  from  our  definition)  we  could  at  first  think  of  the  centre  of 
a  line  only  as  the  point  of  bisection,  and  we  should  not  discover  our 
error  till  we  attempted  to  construct  a  circle  on  that  understanding. 
Instead  therefore  of  this  sense  of  the  term  centre  which  common 
usage  suggests,  and  which  compelled  us  to  be  so  painfully  discursive 
just  now  in  speaking  of  our  serpentine  line,  the  definition. requires  the  ^ 
precise  statement  in  general  terms  of  the  meaning  which  the  word  is 
to  bear  for  all  figures  whatsoever.  This  statement  can  easily  be 
given,  but  I  may  omit  it,  as  it  follows  therefrom  that  if  there  be 
a  point  in  a  plane  which  is  equidistant  from  all  the  points  of  a  line  in 
that  plane,  that  point  is  the  centre  of  the  line.  But  if  we  now  intro- 
duce this  definition  of  centre  into  our  definition  of  a  circle,  the  state- 
ment of  the  further  condition  under  which,  the  line  in  one  plane 
becomes  a  circle  comes  to  be  a  mere  tautology,  and  the  meaning  of 
the  whole  definition  is  evidently  nothing  more  than  that  a  circle 
is  a  line  in  one  plane  for  which  there  is  a  point  in  the  same 
plane  from  which  all  its  points  are  equidistant.  The  definition  is 

M  2 


1 64  The  forms  of  Definition*  \  BOOK-  1 1 . 

substantially  correct ;  yet  fault  may  be  found  with  its  form.  For  now 
after  omitting  the  term  centre  we  remember  that  it  was  only  the 
presence  of  that  term  that  forced  us  to  look  for  the  equidistant  point 
in  the  same  plane.  Not  this  actual  centre  only,  but  any  point  in  an 
axis  drawn  through  It  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  line  fulfils 
the  condition  of  being  equidistant  from  all  points  of  the  line.  It  is 
enough  therefore  to  say  that  a  circle  is  a  line  in  one  plane  such  that 
"  a  point  may  be  found  from  which  all  its  points  are  equidistant.  It  is 
needless  to  mention  that  there  are  several  such  points  and  to  say 
where  they  lie :  the  attempt  to  construct  the  line  according  to  this 
direction  will  at  once  teach  us  both.  But  once  more  even  in  this 
form  the  definition  is  not  quite  all  that  can  be  desired.  It  docs 
indeed  say  that  all  the  points  of  a  circle  are  equidistant  from  one  and 
the  same  point,  but  it  does  not  formally  state  whether  or  no  all  points 
that  are  equidistant  from  this  point  are  points  in  the  circle.  They 
are  so  in  fact  provided  they  lie  in  the  same  plane,  and  thus  in  order 
to  express  this  along  with  the  rest  we  may  finally  say  that  a  circle  is 
a  line  which  contains  all  the  points  in  one  plane  which  arc  equidistant 
from  any  point. 

165.  Different  opinions  may  be  entertained  as  to  the  requirements 
of  definition  which  I  have  just  illustrated  by  the  example  of  the  circle. 
Every  one  will  allow  that  it  is  a  serious  fault  to  employ  ideas  which 
(like  centre  in  this  case)  though  a  meaning  may  be  given  them  apart 
from  the  conception  to  be  defined,  yet  are  not  fully  intelligible  without 
it,  except  perhaps  in  the  context  of  a  scientific  treatise.  But  it 
may  be  thought  that  the  addition  of  superfluous  characteristics  is 
unobjectionable,  since  it  makes  the  definition  easier  to  understand 
without  impairing  its  correctness.  Nevertheless  it  should  be  avoided 
For  the  addition  of  some  characteristic  z  that  might  be  dispensed  with, 
is  apt,  as  we  are  not  told  that  we  might  dispense  with  it,  to  make  us 
think  that  it  is  inserted  in  order  to  distinguish  the  M  we  arc  defining 
from  a  non-J/  to  which  everything  in  the  definition  is  applicable 
excepting  only  z.  If  we  say  a  circle  is  a  curved  line  in  one  plane 
such  that  there  is  a  point  from  which  all  its  points  are  equidistant,  the 
form  of  the  statement  suggests  that  there  are  also  straight  lines  wiiich 
satisfy  that  condition.  It  matters  little  in  so  simple  a  case  as  this ; 
but  in  more  complex  cases  serious  disadvantage  may  be  the  result  of 
this  apparently  harmless  addition  of  superfluous  matter.  At  the  least 
it  hampers  us  in  the  drawing  of  conclusions,  which  after  all  was  our 
sole  purpose  in  laying  down  the  definition.  It  may  happen,  for 
instance,  that  it  has  been  quite  clearly  established,  perhaps  in 


CHA  I-TF.R  i.]  Popular  Definitions,  165 

some  Indirect  way,  that  Q  has  the  whole  sum  of  predicates  that  are 
sufficient  according  to  the  correct  definition  for  the  subsumption  of 
Q  under  M,  but  that  it  Is  difficult  or  impossible  to  prove  directly  that 
Q  also  has  the  predicate  z  which  Is  superfluously  added  in  the  defini- 
tion actually  given  :  there  will  then  be  a  quite  useless  hesitation  about 
bringing-  Q  under  M  and  actually  drawing  the  conclusion  which  that 
would  justify.  And  so  we  may  say  generally  that  it  is  right  to 
demand  that  a  definition  shall  contain  only  those  terms  that  are 
indispensable  for  the  specification  of  the  object,  but  shall  exclude 
all  merely  descriptive  elements :  if  it  does  not  enable  us  very  readily 
to  form  a  picture  of  the  thing,  this  will  be  atoned  for  by  the  certainty 
of  the  conclusions  we  can  draw  from  it. 

160.  Hitherto  we  have  been  considering  the  usual  form  of  definition 
by  the  proximate  genus  and  the  specific  difference  as  the  only  valid 
form.  But  the  untrained  intellect  is  wont,  to  the  annoyance  of  the 
logicians,  to  use  another  mode  of  definition,  and  to  say,  for  instance, 
in  its  familiar  uncouth  way,  sickness  is  when  something  pains  me.  Such 
a  phrase  certainly  needs  to  be  amended,  yet  not  exactly  in  the  way 
which  logicians  rather  intolerantly  require.,  but  rather  in  the  way  in 
which  physical  science  actually  defines  many  of  its  conceptions.  The 
ordinary  form  is  properly  adapted  only  for  defining  the  meaning  of  a 
substantive:  when  we  kive  to  do  with  adjectives  and  verbs  it  is  not 
only  shorter  but  more  correct  to  give  them  their  proper  place  in  the 
grammatical  structure  of  the  definition,  and  to  let  them,  bear  plain 
reference  to  their  subject,  seeing  that  it  is  only  as  expressing  states  or 
properties  of  a  subject  that  they  have  any  inclining.  It  is  quite  right 
therefore  to  define  adjectives  like  sick  or  elastic  by  such  propositions 
as  *  a  living  organism  is  sick  when  its  functions  depart  from  a  certain 
course;'  *ii  body  which  on  the  cessation  of  external  constraint  resumes 
its  original  shape  is  daslic?  And  in  defining  the  meanings  of  the  verbs 
to  lire  and  ///  sin  it  would  be  quite  proper  to  name  first  the  subjects  to 
which  they  can  be  applied,  an  organic  body  and  a  spirit  that  is 
conscious  ami  wills,  and  then  the  conditions  under  which  they  are 
to  be  predicated  of  t//w  subjects.  It  is  absolutely  useless  to  begin 
by  tin-owing  all  these-  ideas  into  the  substantive  form  and  ranking 
them  under  the  head  of  states  or  properties  or  modes  of  action:  that 
they  are  to  be  so  ranked  is  at  once  apparent  if  we  leave  them  their 
adjectival  or  verbal  form  and  give  them  their  proper  place  in  the 
sentence.  The  usual  mode  of  definition  on  the  contrary  has  the 
disadvantage  of  making  us  far  too  apt  to  separate  from  its  subject 
and  treat  as  independent  what  is  nothing  but  a  state  or  property 


1 66  The  forms  of  Definition,  i  BOOK  IL 

of  something  else.  When  we  have  once  framed  the  substantives 
sickness,  sin,  freedom,  it  is  hard  to  keep  quite  clear  of  the  strange 
mythology  which  speaks  as  if  these  terms  stood  for  things  with  a 
being  of  their  own,  and  traces  their  development,  without  ever 
seriously  coming  back  in  the  course  of  its  enquiry  to  their  real 
subjects,  though  it  is  only  as  properties,  states,  or  activities  of  these 
that  they  exist,  and  though  their  apparent  development  is  every 
moment  bound  up  with  the  real  development  of  these  subjects. 

167.  Under  the  head  of  conceptions  to  be  defined  we  have  hitherto 
considered  only  comparatively  simple  ones,  conceptions  of  figures, 
things,  properties,  and  easily  intelligible  relations :  but  among  the 
words  used  in  speech,  every  one  of  which  may  under  certain  circum- 
stances call  for  a  definition,  we  often  find  very  complex  relations 
between  a  great  variety  of  points  of  attachment  comprehended  in  one 
simple  expression.  No  one  who  was  not  hide-bound  by  prejudice 
would  require  that  the  explanation  of  such  conceptions  should  take 
the  regular  form  of  a  simple  definition ;  and  to  find  special  names  for 
all  the  other  very  various  methods  which  may  be  employed  would  be 
nothing  but  useless  pedantry.  The  universal  principle  of  applied 
logic  is  simply  that  all  ways  are  allowable  which  lead  to  the  goal  ; 
it  hopes  for  no  more  than  to  remove  our  doubts  as  to  which  way  is 
passable  right  up  to  the  end,  and  which  not,  by  pointing  out  that 
which  has  long  ago  been  tested :  it  never  forbids  our  seeking  new 
ways  to  satisfy  new  needs.  It  is  always  allowable  therefore  to  begin 
with  a  preliminary  description,  with  comparisons  and  analogies,  with 
discussions  of  any  kind,  in  order  to  familiarise  the  hearers  with  the 
meaning  of  the  subsidiary  ideas  we  wish  to  employ  and  the  peculiar 
combinations  we  wish  to.  establish  among  them,  and  having  thus 
prepared  the  way  to  proceed  to  set  forth  what  we  wished  to  explain 
in  a  formula  which  is  brief  and  intelligible,  though  it  presupposes  what 
has  gone  before  and  cannot  be  separated  from  it. 

This  reminds  us  however  of  another  twofold  division  of  all  defini- 
tions. We  may  characterise  M  by  the  aggregate  of  marks  displayed 
by  the  conception  when  it  is  present  to  our  minds  in  its  complete- 
ness :  this  kind  of  definition,  which  we  illustrated  just  now  in  the  case 
of  the  circle,  may  be  called  descriptive  definition  :  we  have  recourse  to 
it  mainly  in  the  case  of  actual  things  which  we  only  know  from  the 
outside  and  whose  definition  therefore  is  in  fact  nothing  but  a 
methodical  description.  But  we  can  also  fix  M  by  pointing  out  a 
way  in  which,  not  by  the  mere  addition  of  other  ideas,  but  by  freely 
using  and  manipulating  them  at  will,  this  idea  can  be  produced  with 


CHAPTER i.]  Genetic  Definition.  167 

certainty.  •  This  I  would  call  genetic  definition,  understanding  thereby 
(and  this  I  wish  particularly  to  emphasise)  not  a  statement,  of  the 
process  by  which  the  content  of  the  conception  M  is  actually  found, 
but  only  an  indication  of  the  way  in  which  the  mental  picture  of  this 
content  M  may  or  must  be  formed.  *  Let  a  straight  line  revolve  in 
one  plane  about  one  of  its  extremities,  and  combine  the  successive 
positions  of  the  other  extremity :' — that  is  a  genetic  definition  of  a 
circle.  The  circle  as  such  is  not  made  at  all :  but  supposing  a  par- 
ticular circle  such  as  we  draw  to  have  been  already  made  in  some 
way  or  other,  we  may  certainly  form  a  mental  picture  of  it  in  the  way 
indicated  by  this  definition.  But  we  may  form  that  mental  picture 
equally  well  by  supposing  the  length  of  the  two  axes  of  an  ellipse  to 
alter  till  both  are  equal  to  r;  or  by  supposing  a  cone  to  be  intersected 
by  a  plane  at  right  angles  to  its  axis.  And  thus  an  idea,  whose 
content  has  in  itself  no  genesis,  may  admit  not  only  of  one,  but  of  so 
many  genetic  definitions  as  there  are  ways  of  forming  the  idea  of  this 
content  by  the  manipulation  of  other  ideas.  Among  these  genetic 
definitions  then,  using  the  term  in  a  somewhat  extended  sense,  we 
may  include  the  above-mentioned  miscellaneous  methods :  they  try  by 
indirect  means  to  make  us  form  a  mental  picture  of  M>  when  it  is 
impossible  or  inconvenient  to  say  directly  what  M  is. 

168.  Strictly  speaking,  whenever  we  undertake  to  define  a  con- 
ception ./I/,  our  aim  is  to  give  it  a  higher  degree  of  defmiteness 
than  it  yet  has.  But  in  fact  the  problem  usually  narrows  itself  to  the 
transformation  of  a  clear  idea  (clam  fcrceptio)  which  we  already  have 
of  J/5  into  a  distinct  one  (distinctd)^  or  of  a  mere  mental  picture.,  which 
does  but  comprehend  M  in  a  loose  general  way  as  a  connected  whole 
made  up  of  parts  which  are  familiar,  into  a  real  conception  of  M, 
These  two  expressions  may  be  regarded  as  equivalent.  For  accord- 
ing to  old  established  usage  we  are  justified  in  saying  we  have  a  clear 
idea  of  anything  when  we  think  of  it  as  one,  and  as  a  connected 
whole,  and  lastly  as  distinguished  from  others  with  precision  enough 
to  avoid  confusion ;  but  it  does  not  become  distinct  till  to  this  is 
added  the  general  law  which  regulates  the  connexion  of  the  parts, 
and  further  the  characteristics  which  it  has  in  common  with  other 
species  of  a  certain  genus,  and  lastly  those  particular  characteristics 
which  distinguish  it  from  all  the  other  species  of  its  own  genus. 
In  treating  of  Pure  Logic  we  identified  this  increase  in  defmiteness 
with  the  transition  (in  technical  language)  from  an  idea  or  mental 
picture  to  the  conception  or  actual  comprehension  of  a  thing. 

But  now  there  arc  cases  in  which  our  idea  of  an  M  which  is  to  be 


1 68  The  forms  of  Definition. 

defined  is  far  from  possessing  the  clearness  here  supposed :  names 
are  handed  down  to  us  which  have  become  part  of  our  language 
though  their  meaning  has  never  been  precisely  fixed.  Thus  we  speak 
of  virtue  and  sin,  of  good  and  the  highest  good,  of  appearance  and 
reality,  with  a  full  conviction  that  we  mean  something  very  definite 
by  these  names,  and  ready  to  draw  important  inferences  from  them 
in  reference  to  that  to  which  we  apply  them.  But  at  last  the  diffi- 
culties in  which  we  entangle  ourselves  convince  us  that  strictly  speak- 
ing we  did  not  know  precisely  what  we  meant,  that  we  had  not 
completely  fixed  the  conditions  which  must  be  satisfied  in  order  to 
justify  the  application  of  these  names,  that  we  had  in  short  trusted  to 
hazy  ideas,  the  clearing  up  of  twhich  is  of  the  very  first  importance. 
This  we  try  to  effect  in  a  very  simple  way.  If  we  were  entirely 
ignorant  of  the  meaning  which  M  was  intended  to  bear,  we  should 
have  no  means  of  finding  it  out;  but  also  it  would  never  have  oc- 
curred to  us  to  apply  this  name  had  not  some  part  of  its  meaning 
(say  a)  been  fixed  beyond  a  doubt— that  very  part  namely  which 
now  impels  us  to  use  the  term  the  rest  of  whose  meaning  is  still  hazy. 
This  a  we  first  take  tentatively  as  a  complete  definition  of  M,  and 
consider  whether  a  corresponds  to  what  we  mean  by  M.  It  is  a 
matter  of  common  experience  that  in  cases  where  we  are  not  in 
a  position  to  express  trie  meaning  of  M  in  positive  terms  we  may  yet 
see  whether  an  idea  a  that  is  offered  as  a  definition  of  it  is  adequate 
or  not.  Thus  when  we  are  trying  in  vain  to  recollect  a  name  we  can 
yet  pronounce  with  perfect  certainty  that  a  suggested  name  is  not  the 
right  one ;  and  further  any  resemblance  it  may  have  to  the  right  one 
makes  an  impression  on  us,  and  sometimes  reminds  us  at  once  of 
what  we  want,— at  any  rate  it  helps  to  make  plain  the  other  points  in 
which  the  right  name  differs  from  the  suggested  one.  We  are  in  the 
same  case  here :  a  is  not  utterly  wrong  and  incapable  of  comparison 
with  M :  the  comparison  of  the  two  therefore  does  not  lead  to  the 
bare  negation'  of  their  identity,  but  puts  us  on  the  track  of  a  sup- 
plementary b  which  must  be  added  to  a,  or  an  alteration  b  which  must 
be  effected  in  a  in  order  to  make  it  answer  exactly  to  M.  Now 
putting  M  down  as  equal  to  a  4-  b  we  make  a  second  attempt  and 
repeat  the  same  course  of  comparing  and  supplementing  by  fresh 
terms  c  and  d,  till  at  last  we  get  a  definition  M  =  a  +  b  +  c  +  d  which 
in  its  expanded  sum  of  characteristics  exactly  coincides  with  what  we 
meant  by  M.  In  this  very  simple  process  of  thought  rather  than  in 
a  strictly  inductive  method  lay  the  art  which  the  Platonic  Socrates 
used  ages  ago  to  clear  up  hazy  conceptions. 


CHAPTER   II. 

Of  the  limitation  of  Conceptions. 

109.  IN  the  course  of  an  Investigation  we  may  be  led  by  a  definite' 
purpose  to  trace  a  group  of  characteristics  ik  I  through  all  the  other- 
wise different  objects  in  which  it  occurs,  and  to  ask  what  influence  is 
exercised  by  its  presence  upon  the  rest  of  their  characteristics.  The 
result  of  this  comparison  then  will  itself  teach  us  whether  the  other 
characteristics  which  each  of  these  subjects  has  in  virtue  of  the  genus 
to  which  it  belongs-  are  modified  by  the  presence  of  iklin  any  re- 
markable and  particularly  in  any  constant  manner.  If  this  is  the  case 
we  often  form  out  of  i  /('/and  out  of  the  idea  of  a  more  or  less  pre- 
cisely determined  subject  a  new  generic  conception  M>  treating  all  the 
ideas  in  which  ik  I  occurs  as  species  of  M.  But  whenever  this  is  not 
the  case  (and  not  seldom  too  when  it  is)  we  content  ourselves  with 
treating' *t-he  presence  of  ikl  as  one  of  the  countless  variable  con- 
ditions, which  affect  other  ideas  so  far  as  to  necessitate  certain  altera- 
tions in  them,  but  do  not  themselves  form  a  generic  conception  under 
which  the  several  instances  in  which  they  occur  could  be  arranged  as 
species.  Now  a  living  language  is  believed  by  those  who -use  it  to 
have  already  sufficiently  distinguished  in  the  coinage  of  its  words  the 
two  kinds  of  cases  in  which  these  two  methods  are  severally  appro- 
priate. Of  course  they  will  allow  that  enquiry,  as  it  goes  deeper  and 
deeper,  will  discover  many  a  new  group  of  characteristics  i  k  I  having 
such  a  decisive  influence  upon  the  whole  bearings  of  every  concep- 
tion that  contains  it  as  to  make  it  worth  while  to  erect  this  group 
into  a  separate  generic  conception  j$/and  to  mark  it  by  a  name  :  and 
language  is  in  fact  constantly  enriching  itself  by  new  names  for  the 
ideas  thus  newly  discovered.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  they  will  also 
assert  that  none  of  the  conceptions  already  found  and  fixed  by  the 
creation  of  a  name  are  unworthy  of  this  distinction :  each,  they  insist, 
really  means  something  coherent,  which  is  thus  justly  cut  off,  as  a  whole 
with  well  marked  boundaries,  from  all  other  similarly  coherent  ideas. 


1 70  Of  the  limitation  of  Conceptions.          c  BOOK  n, 

170,  These  conceptions  which  our  inherited  language  supplies  are 
the  tools  with  which  our  thought  must  work — and  that  not  merely 
because  we  have  no  means  of  communication  except  the  words  which 
have  been  invented   to   express  them:    in   this  store  of  words  is 
treasured  up  the  concentrated  result  of  the  thought  which  the  human 
mind  has  from  the  earliest  times  bestowed  upon  the  world  to  which 
it  has  access,  and  we  may  suppose  that  the  same  impulses  which  led 
it  to  fix  its  conceptions  ia  this  form  would  also  in  the  first  instance 
assert  themselves  in  us  were  we  to  go  through  the  same  labour. 

But  that  these  impulses,  however  natural  they  may  be  to  man,  yet 
leave  room  for  doubt  is  shown  by  the  divergence  that  constantly 
occurs  in  the  application  of  the  conceptions  thus  formed.  When  the 
question  arises  whether  some  predicate  P  is  to  be  affirmed  or  denied 
of  a  subject  S,  one  maintains  that  *S  is  a  kind  of  M  and  therefore  is  a 
P\  another  objects  that  S  is  no  M  and  therefore  no  P;  a  third 
allows  that  S  is  indeed  no  My  but  an  N,  but  declares  that  this  does 
not  matter,  and  that  what  is  true  of  M  holds  good  of  N  also,  while  a 
fourth  insists  that  the  difference  between  M  and  N  establishes  a 
difference  between  the  two  in  respect  of  P. 

The  divergence  that  here  shows'  itself  culminates  in  two  opposite 
tendencies,  dominating  the  whole  of  our  thought.  The  one  is  a 
tendency  to  exaggerate  every  difference  that  presents  itself  into 
absolute  difference,  and  with  the  familiar  formula  '  this  is  something 
quite  different '  to  resist  all  argument  from  one  case  a  to  another  case 
b  which  resembles  a  but  is  not  exactly  like  it :  this  tendency  becomes 
in  life  and  in  science  the  spirit  of  the  pedant  and  the  philistine.  The 
other  is  a  tendency  to  ignore  the  fact  that  a  difference  which  is  not 
absolute  difference  may  yet  have  a  qualified  value,  and  with  the 
barren  phrase  {  all  is  one  at  bottom '  to  obliterate  all  the  fixed  bound- 
aries which  define  the  province  of  each  conception,  thereby  destroy- 
ing the  only  grounds  upon  which  certain  predicates  are  attached  to 
certain  subjects  and  to  no  others:  .this  becomes  in  thought  and 
action  the  principle  of  a  no  less  ruinous  libertinism.  A  glance  at  the 
momentous  consequences  of  these  confusions  makes  us  alive  to  the 
necessity  of  clearly  understanding  what  reasons  there  are  to  justify 
us  in  dividing  the  whole  extent  of  the  intelligible  world  into  definite 
conceptions,  where  the  boundaries  of  their  several  provinces  are  to  be 
drawn,  and  what  value  is  to  be  assigned  to  this  demarcation. 

171.  We  are  led  to  very  various  issues  by  the  attempt  to  answer 
these  questions  even  where  they  are  easiest  and  least  pressing,  viz. 
in  regard  to  the  simple  contents  of  sensuous  impressions.     We  have 


CHAPTER  ii.]  Disparate  Sensations.  171 

a  right  to  assume  absolute  difference  between  simple  sensations  ABC 
when  we  cannot  imagine  any  intermediate  steps  by  which  the 
peculiarity  of  one  could  gradually  pass  over  into  that  of  another,  and 
when  further  we  cannot  think  of  any  mixture  of  two  of  them  which 
would  give  a  new  simple  sensation,  and  when  lastly  there  are  no 
degrees  of  contrast  between  them  such  as  would  enable  us  to  estimate 
the  difference  between  A  and  B  as  greater  or  less  than  that  between 
A  and  C  or  between  B  and  C.  We  find  these  relations,  or  rather 
this  lack  of  any  assignable  relation,  between  A  B  and  C  If  A  stand 
for  colour,  B  for  sound,  and  C  for  smell.  We  may  keep  the  old 
name  and  call  them  disparate  or  incomparable. 

This  conclusion  will  not  be  affected  by  various  secondary  con- 
siderations which  may  be  urged.  It  may  be  pointed  out,  for  instance, 
that  all  three  exist  only  as  states  of  our  consciousness.  To  this  we 
reply  that  they  all  are  indeed  sensations,  and  may  be  called,  according 
to  the  usage  of  logic,  species  of  sensation ;  but  that  the  conception 
of  sensation  in  general  cannot  serve  here  as  a  generic  conception 
in  the  sense  of  supplying  a  law  for  formation.  When  we  think  of 
the  shape  of  an  obtuse-angled  triangle  as  subordinated  to  the  general 
conception  of  a  triangle,  we  have  in  the  latter  a  constructive  formula, 
whose  application  has  but  to  be  varied  within  its  own  limits  in  order 
to  show  us  that  there  are  right-angled  and  acute  triangles  besides  that 
one  species  from  which  we  started.  But  the  subsumption  of  colour 
under  the  general  idea  of  sensation  (for  it  is  only  subsumption  that  is 
possible  here,  not  subordination)  can  never  enable  us  to  conclude 
from  this  general  idea  that  there  are  such  sensations  as  sounds  and 
smells  besides  colours.  Although  these  three  then  are,  to  use  the 
ordinary  phrase,  kinds  of  sensation,  yet  within  the  limits  of  this 
universal  they  remain  quite  disparate  the  one  from  the  other. 

Again  as  states,  as  motions  or  affections  of  the  soul,  these  various 
kinds  of  sensation  may  produce  certain  secondary  effects  that  are 
comparable  with  one  another,  and  it  is  certainly  allowable  on  that 
account  to  compare  a  certain  colour  a1  with  a  certain  sound  31  or  a 
certain  smell  c1 :  but  still  that  which  produces  these  comparable  after- 
effects remains  itself  quite  incomparable.  And  we  must  make  the 
same  reply  to  the  physicist  and  the  physiologist,  when  the  processes 
which  must  take  place  in  the  outer  world  or  in  our  nerves  in  order  to 
produce  the  various  kinds  of  sensation  are  traced  back  by  them  to 
comparable,  or  perhaps  even  to  closely  allied  movements  of  material 
particles :— -they  must  conclude  not  with  the  curious  assertion  that 
there  is  therefore  strictly  speaking  no  qualitative  difference  between 


172  Of  the  limitation  of  Conceptions*          i  BOOK  1 1 . 

these  sensations,  but  rather  with  this  other  asserticfh  which  is  true, 
viz.  that  in  spite  of  the  similarity  of  origin  there  is  not  the  slightest 
similarity  in  the  results.  There  is  no  room  for  doubt  here,  except 
In  so  far  as  the  unprejudiced  observation  of  ourselves,  which  is  here 
the^  sole  criterion,  is  unable  to  pronounce  decidedly.  This  is  the  case 
with  regard  to  taste  and  smell  Sourness  is  undoubtedly  common  to 
both ;  but  the  other  sensations  of  taste  and  smell  also  seem  to  form  a 
connected  group,  only  that  some  members  of  this  group  are  excited 
only  by  the  agency  of  liquids,  others  only  by  that  of  gaseous  matter. 
It  may  be  that  the  sensations  of  these  two  senses,  which  on  this 
account  must  have  different  organs,  are  themselves  homogeneous  and 
distinguished  only  by  secondary  sensations  dependent  upon  the 
position,  shape  and  action  of  their  respective  organs.  But  it  is  not 
the  business  of  logic  to  decide  this  question :  all  we  need  do  here  is 
to  warn  the  reader  when  he  has  a  direct  perception  that  two  modes 
of  consciousness  are  incomparable,  never  to  allow  this  to  be  over- 
borne by  sophistic  arguments  based  upon  the  similarity  of  their  ante- 
cedents or  consequents. 

172,  The  other  question,  not  as  to  our  right  to  separate  A  and  -#, 
but  as  to  our  right  to  join  together  all  that  we  comprehend  under  A, 
calls  for  a  similar  remark.  For  a  long  time  people  tried  to  dazzle 
the  public  with  the  stupid  paradox  that  black  and  white  were  no 
colours  because  they  did  not  like  the  prismatic  colours  depend  upon  a 
definite  number  of  undulations  of  light.  The  progress  made  of  late 
in  the  physiology  of  vision  have  completely  cut  away  this  ground ; 
but  ^even  if  this  had  not  been  done,  no  one  could  have  had  the  right 
to  override  language  in  this  fashion.  Long  before  we  knew  anything 
about  the  exciting  causes  of  our  sensations,  language  had  invented  the 
name  of  colour  for  a  group  of  sensations  which  by  a  homogeneous 
quality  directly  perceived  and  undeniable,  viz.  by  shining  or  whatever 
else  we  like  to  call  it,  are .  at  once  bound  together  and  separated  from 
tones  that  ring  or  resound  and  scents  that  are  smelt.  Granted  that 
the  name  shining  is  only  appropriate  to  white  and  not  to  black,  still 
the  fact  that  the  fundamental  quality  thus  imperfectly  designated  is 
shared  by  both  in  common  with  the  other  colours  admits  only  of  a 
verbal  not  of  a  real  denial,  and  the  common  usage  of  the  term  colour 
so  as  to  include  both  was  therefore  completely  justified  against  the 
unsupported  objections  of  the  savants. 

In  other  fields  also  we  find  similar  instances  of  the  encroachments 
of  scientific  theory,  not  always  harmless  in  their  results.  Thus 
chemistry  for  a  long  time  contributed  to  the  confusion  of  speech  by 


CHAPTER  ii.  j          Popular  language  justified.  173 

identifying  oxidation  and  burning.  Men  assuredly  spoke  of  burning 
long  before  they  knew  of  oxygen,  and  always  meant  by  it  a  process 
accompanied  by  visible  light  and  sensible  heat,  which  permanently 
altered  the  constitution  of  a  body :  a  glowing  iron  rod  therefore  was 
not  said  to  burn,  because  no  lasting  alteration  was  found  in  it  when 
cooled :  but  also  such  a  permanent  change  would  not  have  entitled 
the  process  which  produced  it  to  the  name  of  burning,  in  the  absence 
of  the  sensible  development  of  flame  and  heat.  The  notion  of 
burning  then  by  no  means  coincides  with  that  of  oxidation:  many 
substances  are  oxidized  without  burning,  and  on  the  other  hand, 
when  heated  antimony  is  immersed  in  gaseous  chlorine  and  combines 
with  chlorine,  throwing  out  flames  the  while,  this  process  is  un- 
doubtedly one  of  burning  though  not  oxidation.  Geometers,  again, 
knew  ages  ago  that  any  system  conceived  in  abstract  terms,  i.e.  arith- 
metically, provided  that  not  more  than  three  scales  be  required  for  the 
arrangement  of  its  various  elements,  may  be  presented  to  our  per- 
ceptions by  means  of  spatial  constructions.  Now  there  is  nothing  to 
prevent  a  mathematician  from  conceiving  systems  based  upon  any 
number  of  scales  greater  than  three,  only  it  is  plain  that  such  systems 
can  no  longer  be  envisaged  in  space,  and  that  the  name  £  dimensions ' 
which  could  be  applied  to  the  scales  in  its  ordinary  sense  of  dimen- 
sions of  space  so  long  as  they  were  only  three,  can  now  bear  only  the 
more  abstract  sense  which  I  tried  to  express  by  calling  them  scales. 
As  space  therefore  means  for  us  nothing  but  a  system  that  we 
envisage  in  this  peculiar  way  which  certainly  cannot  be  derived  from 
any  considerations  of  mere  number,  to  continue  to  speak  of  a  system 
of  four  or  five  dimensions  as  space  is  but  to  make  sport  of  logical 
distinctions.  Let  us  be  on  our  guard  against  all  such  attempts  :  they 
are  nothing  but  scientific  freaks,  which  intimidate  the  popular  con- 
sciousness by  utterly  useless  paradoxes  and  make  it  doubt  its  well 
established  rights  in  drawing  the  boundaries  of  its  conceptions. 

173.  When  we  now  ask  how  the  several  coherent  members  of  one 
of  those  disparate  kinds  of  content  A  B  and  C  are  related  to  one 
another,  we  find  that  these  relations  are  peculiar  and  not  always  of 
the  same  kind.  No  one  has  yet  succeeded  in  reducing  the  several 
kinds  of  taste  to  a  satisfactory  system :  but  the  path  which  common 
usage  takes  in  naming  them,  incomplete  though  that  nomenclature 
be,  seems  to  me  the  right  path.  Certain  primary  forms  are  dis- 
tinguished by  names  of  their  own,  as  sweet  /*,  sour  v,  bitter  TT,  and  the 
others  such  as  sour-sweet  *>/*,  bitter-sweet  /ATT,  are  regarded  as  com- 
pounds of  those  well-marked  primary  tastes.  Our  imagination  could 


1 74    '          Of  the  limitation  of  Conceptions.          [  BOOR-  n. 

never  have  lit  upon  this  mode  of  naming  them  had  it  not  been  guided 
thereto  by  the  direct  impressions  of  sense,  for  we  cannot  make 
differences  unless  they  are  already  present  actually  or  potentially  in 
the  data.  Now  these  names  imply  that  they  are  actually  present,  not 
of  course  in  the  sense  that  the  sour-sweet  is  an  aggregate  of  a  sour 
and  a  sweet  that  can  be  separated  as  much  as  if  they  were  tasted  at 
different  times,  but  in  the  sense  in  which  we  speak  of  a  mixture  as 
opposed  to  an  aggregate.  The  fact  that  such  a  mixture  is  possible 
here,  i.e.  that  sour  and  sweet  may  be  united  in  one  impression  in  a 
manner  that  we  can  scarcely  describe  but  easily  feel,  while  sweet  and 
red  cannot,  distinguishes  the  relation  of  the  several  tastes  to  one 
another  from  that  of  the  disparate  groups  ABC. 

It  may  be  objected  that  in  the  sour-sweet  the  difference  between 
the  sour  and  the  sweet  is  only  present  potentially  not  actually ;  that 
there  may  easily  be  a  third  impression  o>,  itself  simple  and  in  no  way 
compound,  yet  forming  a  connecting  link  between  \L  and  v ;  and  that 
this  then,  on  account  of  its  resemblance  to  both,  is  designated  in 
speech  by  the  two  limits  p  and  v  between  which  it  falls,  without 
implying  that  it  actually  is  a  mixture  of  the  two.  This  objection  I 
should  not  consider  sound  unless  there  were  present  in  &>  besides  that 
in  which  it  resembles  ju  and  v  an  independent  remainder  that  could 
not  be  accounted  for  by  the  combination  of  \L  and  v ;  where  this  is 
not  the  case  this  third  impression  o>  will  not  merely  be  called  a 
mixture  p  v  by  an  arbitrary  freak  of  fancy,  but  will  in  fact  be  that  and 
nothing  else.  But  the  primary  forms  \LVK  and  all  mixtures  of  these, 
•though  made  one  group  by  the  fact  that  they  all  alike  appeal  to  the 
sense  of  taste  C,  yet  within  those  limits  can  only  be  regarded  as 
disparate  from  one  another,  A  man  who  had  tasted  nothing  but 
sweet  could  never  by  any  conceivable  modification  of  the  feeling  it 
gave  him  discover  the  peculiar  nature  of  sour  or  bitter  that  he  had  not 
yet  experienced.  There  is  then  no  transition  from  /*  to  v  or  TT 
through  independent  connecting  links,  but  we  must  first  know  /*  v  and 
?r  and  then  get  the  intermediate  links  by  various  mixtures  of  these. 

We  find  the  same  relations  between  colours,  and  I  took  occasion 
in  an  earlier  passage1  to  justify  the  common  usage  of  speech  in 
always  distinguishing  a  limited  number  of  primary  colours,  and  in- 
serting the  rest  as  mixed  colours  between  them.  It  is  of  course 
possible  to  lead  the  eye  gradually  through  skilfully  selected  middle- 
tints  from  the  impression  of  one  colour  to  that  of  another  :  but  while 
red  passes  into  orange  or  violet  only  by  an  admixture  of  yellow  or 

1  [Page  21.] 


CHAPTER  ii.]  Scale  of  sounds.  175 

blue  which  can  still  be  felt  as  yellow  or  blue,  that  which  makes  red 
what  it  is  does  not  pass  over  into  that  which  makes  blue  what  it  is. 
A  man  who  had  experienced  one  but  not  the  other  could  never  dis- 
cover in  the  simple  nature  of  red  anything  which  could  possibly  be 
modified,  heightened,  or  cooled  down  in  such  a  way  as  to  lead  him  to 
imagine  what  blue  is  :  he  would  have  to  learn  what  blue  is  before  he 
could  mix  the  two  extremes  together  so  as  to  arrive  at  the  inter- 
mediate violet.  The  modifications  of  which  the  several  primary 
colours  are  capable  must  also  be  regarded  in  the  same  way.  We 
undoubtedly  have-  the  right  to  consider  bright  blue  and  dark  blue 
as  kinds  of  the  same  blue  :  but  these  kinds  also  are  produced  by  the 
mixture  of  white  or  black  with  a  pure  blue  that  is  always  the  same 
though  never  visible  in  its  purity.  Only  I  would  once  more  briefly 
remind  the.  reader  that  all  that  I  have  hitherto  said  refers  only  to  the 
nature  of  our  sensations  after  they  have  arisen  in  our  consciousness, 
and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  physical  or  psychical  conditions  of 
the  act  of  sensation. 

174.  With  sounds  •  the  case  is  essentially  different.  After  a  com- 
parison of  several  sounds  we  distinguish  first  of  all  three  predicates. 
The  peculiar  tone  of  the  instrument  which  is  sounding,  whatever 
the  physical  antecedents  may  be,  is  for  our  feeling  a  simple  pro- 
perty which  defies  further  analysis,  more  analogous  to  a  taste  than  to 
anything  else.  However  strongly  we  may  be  moved  by  the  secondary 
effects  of  this  peculiar  tone  the  essential  nature  of  the  note  seems  to 
us  to  be  quite  independent  of  this,  and  also  of  its  second  property, 
viz.  its  loudness  or  strength :  we  regard  both  only  as  ways  of  pro- 
ducing the  same  note,  the  distinctive  nature  of  which  lies  in  its  pitch. 
But  in  this  third  aspect  sounds  do  not  like  colours  fall  into  a  number 
of  distinct  stages,  such  that  one  can  pass  into  another  only  by  mixture, 
but  they  rather  form  a  continuous  series,  in  which  the  difference 
between  two  more  distant  members  is  only  a  multiplication  of  the 
difference  between  two  adjacent  members.  It  is  impossible  to  make 
a  proportion  in  which  red  shall  stand  to  blue  as  yellow  to  any  fourth, 
colour :  but  the  difference  between  two  notes  can  always  be  stated  as 
a  multiple  of  some  difference  which  we  take  as  the  unit  This  differ- 
ence itself  is  of  a  quite  peculiar  kind  :  we  should  not  use  the  phrase 
c  higher '  and  c  lower '  in  speaking  of  sounds,  unless,  quite  apart  from 
the  frequency  of  the  sound-waves  which  we  certainly  do  not  feel,  our 
feelings  themselves  announced  one  note  as  a  heightening  of  another : 
but  this  quantitative  idea  cannot  be  referred  here  as  it  can  elsewhere 
to  a  qualitative  content  that  is  independent  of  it :  a  note  d  is  different 


1 76  Of  the  limitation  of  Conceptions.  E  BOOK  IT. 

from  another  c  even  in  quality  just  because  in  it  the  undefinable 
common  property  of  sounding  which  it  shares  with  c  is  f  heightened J 
in  that  peculiar  way  which  we  can  only  express  by  this  happy  meta- 
phor, or  at  most  by  the  more  technical  phrase  '  qualitative  intensity.' 
The  differences  of  notes  therefore  are  homogeneous  and  measurable 
in  extent,  which  the  differences  of  colours  were  not :  the  notes  inter- 
mediate between  two  others  are  not  formed  by  mixing  these  two 
together,  but  are  on  a  footing  of  perfect  equality,  as  original  members 
of  the  series,  with  those  members  between  which  we  place  them. 

And  lastly  the  whole  series  is  endless:  it  is  not  possible,  in 
addition  to  the  colours  known  by  experience,  to  imagine  a  new  colour 
of  which  we  can  have  an  idea  though  it  happens  that  our  eyes  never 
saw  it ;  the  scale  of  sounds,  on  the  contrary,  may  be  continued  ad 
infinitum  because  each  is  generated  out  of  its  predecessor  by  a  height- 
ening which  is  felt  to  be  homogeneous.  It  is  not  unmeaning  to  talk 
of  sounds  higher  or  lower  than  any  that  can  ever  come  within  our 
experience,  because  we  have  here  (what  we  could  not  have  if  we  tried 
to  imagine  new  colours)  a  distinct  idea  of  the  way  in  which  these 
sounds  would  differentiate  themselves  2/~they  were  audible. 

175.  With  some  modifications,  which  I  leave  the  reader  to  make, 
these  remarks  apply  also  to  the  series  of  our  sensations  of  heat :  but 
at  the  same  time  the  latter  exhibit  a  new  feature.  The  living  body's 
own  need  for  warmth  gives  a  peculiar  significance  to  certain  sections 
of  the  series ;  we  distinguish  cold,  cool,  lukewarm,  warm,  hot,  and 
fancy  that  these  terms  have  a  definite  meaning ;  but  not  only  would 
it  be  impossible  to  draw  a  hard  and  fast  line  where  cool  ends  for 
everybody  and  lukewarm  begins,  but  even  if  we  interrogate  our  own 
feelings  merely  we  are  obliged  to  confess  that  there  must  be  a  certain 
caprice  in  choosing  the  one  name  or  the  other.  We  may  connect 
with  this  contrast  of  heat  and  cold,  and  of  high  and  low  sounds,  a 
great  number  of  other  pairs  of  ideas,  the  content  of  which  is  not  so 
directly  derived  from  "sensations,  e.g.  great  and  small,  strong  and  weak, 
many  and  few,  old  and  young,  and  many  more  of  the  same  sort. 

However  decided  a  contrast  is  intended  by  the  two  terms  of  these 
antitheses  it  is  always  impossible  to  mark  off  the  province  of  the 
one  from  the  other, — they  constantly  and  insensibly  pass  into  one 
another.  But  when  we  go  through  such  a  series  the  passage  from 
atoz  and  that  from  z  to  a  are  very  clearly  different, — to  some  extent 
they  admit  of  definition,  and  our  immediate  feeling  at  any  rate  never 
fails  to  distinguish  them.  We  cannot  say  what  is  warm  nor  what  is 
cold,  but  we  can  say  without  any  doubt  whether  a  is  warmer  or  colder 


CHAPTER  iL]  Arbitrariness  of  Scale.  177 

than  I :  in  this  case  the  decision  is  a  matter  of  sensation ;  in  passing 
from  a  to  b  we  are  conscious  of  a  change  which  is  the  opposite  of 
that  which  we  experience  in  passing  from  b  to  a.  We  cannot  say 
what  great  and  small  mean,  but  the  statement  that  a  is  greater  than  b 
is  quite  free  from  ambiguity,  and  may  be  defined  to  mean  that  if  I  is 
taken  from  a  there  is  left  a  positive  remainder  S.  And  it  is  the  same 
with  the  other  examples :  these  adjectives  are  all  derived  not  from  the 
apprehension  of  one  idea  but  from  the  comparison  of  several,  and 
denote  relations  which  have  no  fixed  value  or  meaning  apart  from 
a  second  point  of  comparison.  These  adjectives  therefore  are  in- 
definite in  the  positive ;  only  their  comparatives  have  an  unambiguous 
meaning.  Where  the  positive  form  is  used  in  speech  it  means  that  the 
comparative  term  may  be  applied  to  the  thing  denoted  when  com- 
pared with  an  unexpressed  standard,  which  either  in  the  estimation  of 
the  speaker  or  in  common  opinion  is  the  normal  or  usual  state  of  the 
thing  in  question. 

176.  There  is  one  more  point  to  consider  in  connexion  with  sound 
and  sensations  of  heat.  Sounds  being  in  themselves  of  perfectly  equal 
value  we  have  no  inducement  to  select  some  few  of  them  as  fixed  points 
and  to  give  them  prominence  by  naming  them.  But  on  aesthetic  grounds 
we  want  to  articulate  the  whole  series.  As  the  simple  sensation  of 
a  note  is  undefmable  we  characterise  it  by  stating  the  cause  which  will 
at  any  moment  produce  precisely  that  note,  i.  e.  the  frequency  of  the 
vibrations  upon  which  it  depends.  But  there  is  no  reason  for  prefer- 
ring one  number  to  another,  and  as  every  member  of  the  series  may 
be  defined  with  equal  ease  in  the  way  named,  the  musical  scale  has  in 
fact  no  absolute  starting-point.  It  is  true  that  other  circumstances, 
viz.  the  harmonic  relations  of  notes,  which  I  must  here  pass  over  in 
spite  of  the  interest  which  they  have  even  for  the  logician,  lead  us  to 
arrange  the  series  in  octaves ;  but  even  this  arrangement  has  no  fixed 
starting-point ;  we  may  begin  at  any  height  we  please. 

Our  sensations  of  heat  do  not  admit  of  such  a  simple  definition  by 
their  causes;  we  are  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  other  observable 
effects  of  their  unknown  cause,  viz.  the  expansion  and  contraction  of 
bodies.  To  take  the  melting-point  of  ice  as  the  point  from  which  the 
degrees  of  temperature  should  be  measured  in  an  ascending  and 
descending  scale  was  to  choose  a  quite  arbitrary  zero  to  reckon  from, 
though  one  very  well  adapted  to  its  purpose:  for  the  fluidity  or 
solidity  of  water  is  a  point  of  cardinal  importance  in  the  meteoric  and 
organic  processes  which  surround  us.  But  it  is  after  all  merely  a  zero 
in  our  calculation,  not  in  the  thing  calculated,  Starting  from  the  un- 

K 


178  Of  the  limitation  of  Conceptions,  c  BOOK  n. 

known  amount  of  heat  (call  it  x)  which  is  present  at  the  melting-point 
of  ice,  all  we  do  is  to  reckon  the  increase  or  diminution  of  this 
amount  by  multiples  of  a  unit-degree  chosen  expressly  for  this  purpose. 
Thus  12°  is  not  the  double  of  6°,  but  the  difference  between  o°  (which 
is  equal  to  x)  and  12°  (which  is  equal  to  x  -f  12  units)  is  twice  as 
great  as  the  difference  between  o°  or  x  and  6°  (which  is  equal  to  x 
+  6  units). 

The  reader  may  see  by  this'  simple  illustration  that  though  a  series 
or  a  complex  system  cannot  be  articulated  and  arranged  in  a  regular 
order  unless  there  be  a  corresponding  regularity  in  its  own  relations, 
yet  thought  frequently  has  to  take  a  quite  arbitrary  starting-point  and 
an  arbitrary  standard  in  order  to  master  and  make  use  of  this  regularity; 
and  that  such  an  arbitrary  arrangement,  though  admitted  by  the 
nature  of  the  object  and  justified  in  its  results,  yet  must  not  be  looked 
upon  as  a  property  inherent  in  the  object  itself. 

177.  Practical  life  offers  many  illustrations  of  this  remark.  We 
here  have  to  do  with  qualities  which  either  attach  to  various  persons 
and  things  in  very  varying  degrees,  or  which  in  one  and  the  same 
subject  take  successively  a  continuous  series  of  values,  from  which 
proportionate  effects  are  expected.  But  it  is  only  in  nature  that 
effects  vary  continuously  in  accordance  with  the  conditions:  where 
the  result  does  not  follow  till  it  is  produced  by  human  action,  the  exact 
observance  of  the  desired  proportion  is  generally  prevented  by  the 
fact  that  the  labour  required  would  be  out  of  all  relation  to  the  end  in 
view.  We  have  to  content  ourselves  with  breaking  up  the  whole 
series  of  values  into  sections  and  acting  as  if  the  conditions  were  the 
same  throughout  each  section,  fixing  the  result  at  an  average  amount, 
which  will  be  too  great  for  the  first  and  too  small  for  the  last  members 
of  that  section  of  the  series.'  Thus  for  the  purposes  of  taxation  we 
divide  the  series  of  properties,  from  absolute  poverty  up  to  the  highest 
pitch  of  wealth  that  is  likely  to  be  found,  into  a  number  of  classes ; 
in  calculating  the  premium  to  be  paid  on  a  life-insurance  we  reckon 
age  by  years  or  at  lowest  by  some  considerable  fraction  of  a  year ; 
in  calculating  interest  we  keep  to  a  day  as  an  indivisible  unit  Again 
it  may  happen  that  a  quality  gradually  attains  a  certain  pitch  to  the 
attainment  of  which  we  desire  to  attach  certain  consequences,  though 
we  cannot  say  at  what  moment  the  decisive  condition  is  fulfilled. 
That  maturity  of  body  and  mind  which  we  have  in  our  minds  when 
we  say  that  a  man  is  of  full  age  or  has  attained  his  majority  is 
•certainly  attained  by  different  persons  at  different  times  of  life;  but  it 
is  impossible  to  find  out  the  actual  moment  in  each  individual  case? 


CHAPTER  IT.]          Illustrations  from  Practice.  1 79 

not  merely  because  it  would  necessarily  be  an  endless  business  to 
appraise  the  total  merit  of  the  person,  nor  yet  because  such  a 
censorious  proceeding  would  be  unjustifiable,  but  because,  though  the 
higher  grades  of  maturity  and  immaturity  are  easily  recognisable, 
there  is  really  no  certain  mark  to  distinguish  them  in  doubtful  cases. 
But  for  all  that  the  needs  of  social  life  require  that  a  definite  time  be 
fixed ;  so  the  law  has  to  fix  it  summarily,  and  attaches  to  the  com- 
pletion of  certain  days  and  hours  the  beginning  of  certain  rights  and 
duties3  though  no  one  supposes  that  the  capacity  and  the  obligation 
which  were  absent  yesterday  have  actually  sprung  up  in  the  course 
of  the  night.  But  though  this  proceeding  is  summary  it  is  not  without 
reason :  the  choice  is  limited  to  times  which  correspond  without  any 
appreciable  difference  in  accuracy  to  the  requirements  of  the  situation; 
all  that  is  arbitrary  is  the  preference  of  one  out  of  a  number  that 
would  all  do  equally  well 

There  are  other  cases  in  which  we  are  still  further  from  finding  any 
precise  standard  in  the  nature  of  that  which  has  to  be  settled,  and 
must  look  for  it  in  the  further  ends  whose  attainment  is  to  be  facilitated 
by  the  settlement.  Such  are  the  fixed  periods,  within  which  certain 
conditions  must  be  satisfied  in  order  to  establish  some  legal  claim  or 
to  avoid  some  legal  obligation :  though  the  outlines  of  these  arrange- 
ments are  determined  by  the  object  specified,  their  details  aim  at 
nothing  but  logical  precision.  This  our  ancestors  effected  by  not 
measuring  the  more  important  periods  by  entire  units  of  time  of  the 
larger  kind,  but  adding  to  such  units  some  fraction  of  them,  some  days 
to  a  week,  some  hours  to  a  day ;  by  these  means  they  narrowed  the 
period  within  which  (to  use  a  common  but  rather  loose  phrase) 
a  man  might  have  fancied  that  he  was  satisfying  the  law.  The  police 
again  are  quite  right  when  in  order  to  prevent  disturbance  of  the  peace 
they  summarily  fix  the  number  of  persons  that  shall  be  held  to  con- 
stitute a  forbidden  assembly  at  three  or  five,  thereby  barring  disputes 
like  those  the  old  sophists  used  to  raise  when  they  asked  how  many 
grains  of  corn  are  required  to  make  a  heap,  or  how  many  hairs  must 
be  lost  to  make  a  bald-head. 

178.  To  return  from  this  digression : — whether  a  note  is  to  be 
called  high  or  low,  a  liquid  hot  or  cold,  are  questions  that  people 
never  quarrel  about:  there  are  no  interests  attaching  to  the  content  of 
these  conceptions  that  could  make  us  hesitate  to  admit  at  once  that 
their  meaning  is,  as  we  said,  relative.  It  is  different  with  good  and  bad. 
We  set  the  highest  value  on  the  fixity  and  absoluteness  of  these 
conceptions :  every  action,  not  simply  as  compared  with  others  but  as 

N  2 


1 80  Of  the  limitation  of  Conceptions,  c  BOOK  IL 

it  is  in  itself,  must  it  is  thought  be  unequivocally  included  in  the  one 
and  excluded  from  the  other ;  people  even  think  they  are  bound  to 
deny  that  there  are  any  degrees  of  goodness  in  the  good  or  of  bad- 
ness in  the  bad,  for  fear  lest  the  diminishing  values  of  the  two  should 
at  last  meet  in  the  indifferent  as  a  zero-point,  and  a  constant  transi- 
tion be  thus  set  up  between  two  opposites  which  ought  rather  to 
be  severed  by  breaking  down  every  bridge.  But  this  logical  rigour  is 
utterly  at  variance  with  the  unprejudiced  judgment  which  we  all  bow 
to  in  real  life.  No  one  really  doubts  that  there  are  degrees  of  good- 
ness and  badness,  and  no  one  can  persuade  us  that  no  acts  are 
indifferent  till  he  has  artificially  limited  the  conception  of  an  act.  But 
it  really  is  no  use  to  try  to  fend  off  the  threatened  confusion  of  good 
and  bad  by  first  dividing  all  actions  into  those  which  can  be  judged 
morally  and  those  which  cannot,  and  then  proceeding  confidently 
to  divide  the  former  into  two  absolutely  opposed  groups,  the  good 
and  the  bad.  We  thereby  do  but  move  our  doubts  a  step  further 
back ;  for  the  question  now  is  where  is  the  line  to  be  drawn  between 
that  which  calls  for  a  moral  judgment  and  that  which  docs  not ;  and 
this  line  as  before  will  seem  to  vanish  in  a  perpetual  passing  of  the 
one  into  the  other. 

Again  the  relation  of  the  pleasant  to  the  beautiful  and  the  good, 
though  a  less  pressing  question,  is  one  of  great  interest  on  aesthetic 
grounds.  To  the  man  without  a  theory  they  seem  to  arrange  them- 
selves in  an  ascending  series,  not  merely  according  to  their  value  but 
according  to  the  meaning  of  their  content ;  not  of  coarse  in  the  sense 
that  by  mere  intensification  what  is  extremely  pleasant  would  become 
beautiful,  or  the  highest  beauty  pass  into  the  lowest  grade  of  goodness, 
but  in  the  sense  that  there  are  kinds  of  the  pleasant,  distinct  in 
quality,  which  begin  to  have  a  right  to  the  name  of  beautiful,  and 
forms  of  beauty  which  produce  an  aesthetic  impression  akin  to  moral 
approbation.  But  those  who  theorise  upon  morality  and  upon  art 
alike  resist  this  admission ;  they  deem  the  beautiful  falsified  if  it  has 
anything  to  do  with  the  good,  the  good  degraded  if  it  lias  anything 
in  common  with  the  beautiful,  and  through  this  with  the  pleasant, 
Here  too,  with  regard  to  beauty  at  least,  people  have  been  found  to 
deny  all  differences  of  degree,  and  to  maintain  that  what  is  beautiful 
at  all  is  entirely  beautiful,  and  that  if  you  allow  there  is  anything  more 
beautiful,  you  cannot  think  this  really  beautiful  at  all 

179.  Let  us,  in  order  to  settle  these  doubts,  look  around  for  other 
illustrations.  Of  the  straight  line,  from  its  nature,  there  is  of  course 
but  one  species  known  to  the  geometer;  but  in  curves  he  distinguishes 


CHAPTER  ii j        Transition  f ram  one  to  'another.  181 

countless  degrees  of  curvature  of  measurable  value,  so  much  so  that 
the  straight  line  itself  appears  as  the  extreme  limit  to  which  the  curve 
constantly  approximates  as  the  radius  increases.  Yet  in  spite  of  this 
unbroken  continuity  not  merely  does  the  geometer  persist  in  the 
general  statement  that  curved  and  straight  are  opposites  that  can 
never  be  reconciled,  but  no  doubt  ever  arises  in  its  application  to  a 
particular  line  which,  is  accurately  known ;  however  near  it  may  come 
to  a  straight  line  it  is  yet  quite  undeniably  curved,  so  long  as  the  radius 
of  curvature  has  any  finite  magnitude. 

Again  a  curve  may  in  one  portion  of  its  course  be  concave  to  an 
axis  to  which  it  is  convex  in  a  further  portion  ;  if  it  makes  this  change 
of  direction  in  an  uninterrupted  sweep  without  any  angle  that  breaks 
the  continuity,  there  is  no  doubt  that  its  tangent  at  the  turning-point, 
and  therefore  the  element  of  the  line  itself,  is  parallel  to  the  axis  in 
question,  and  so  neither  concave  nor  convex ;  but  although  both 
directions  thus  visibly  meet  in  one  zero  point  of  indifference  that 
belongs  to  neither,  yet  the  opposition  between  them  is  thereby  neither 
altered  nor  removed ;  on  this  side  of  that  point  the  curve  remains 
entirely  concave,  on  that  side  entirely  convex.  Take  a  simple 
instance :  between  i  and  2  we  may  insert  countless  fractions  rising 
gradually  in  value  from  i  to  2  ;  between  full  daylight  and  midnight 
darkness  countless  degrees  of  illumination  not  only  are  conceivable 
but  actually  occur;  between  pleasure  and  pain  there  lies  an  un- 
interrupted series  of  feelings  which  connect  the  one  with  the  other : 
but  i  does  not  on  that  account  become  equal  to  2,  nor  do  darkness 
and  pain  cease  to  form  a  perfect  contrast  to  light  and  pleasure ;  and 
at  the  same  time  each  member  of  these  pairs,  by  itself  and  without 
reference  to  the  other  member,  is  something  so  definite  that  we  never 
mistake  the  one  for  the  other.  These  illustrations  are  sufficient  to 
explain  the  statement  that  the  existence  of  countless  degrees  through 
which  two  opposites  A  and  B  pass  till  they  meet  in  a  common  zero- 
point  of  indifference,  does  not  destroy  the  difference  or  opposition, 
between  the  meanings  of  A  and  B  themselves. 

ISO.  And  so  even  if  the  moral  philosophers  had  succeeded  (and  it 
is  their  business  and  not  ours  at  present)  in  determining  what  they 
mean  by  good  A  and  bad  B  as  precisely  as  the  geometer  defines  what 
he  means  by  convex  and  concave,  they  would  still  have  had  no 
ground  for  denying  that  good  and  bad  have  degrees  and  meet  in  the 
indifferent,  in  order  to  maintain  unimpaired  the  distinction  between 
the  two.  The  specific  meanings  of  the  general  conceptions  good  and 
bad  are  not  in  the  least  degree  altered  because  particular  cases  to 


1 8  2  Of  the  limitation  of  Conceptions,  t  BOOK  11. 

which  the  terms  are  applied  partake  more  or  less  fully  of  the  character 
of  one  or  the  other  of  these  opposites.  But  the  zero-point  of  in- 
difference can  still  less  contribute  to  the  confusion  of  the  two,  for  its 
meaning  is  not  that  both  are  true  at  this  point,  but  that  neither 
is  true;  it  is  therefore  merely  a  point  of  separation, — on  this  side 
Is  only  good,  on  that  side  only  bad. 

On  the  one  hand  then  the  maintenance  of  the  distinction  between  good 
and  bad  is  no  reason  why  people  should  deny  that  there  are  degrees 
of  good  and  bad ;  on  the  other  hand  we  must  insist  upon  an  explicit 
admission  of  the  fact  that  there  are  degrees.  To  deny  it,  to  repeat 
the  old  Stoic  paradox  omnia  peccata  esse  aequalia,  or  to  go  on  preach- 
ing that  even  the  smallest  error  is  still  not  truth  but  error  and  nothing 
else,  is  but  to  waste  time  in  tedious  assertions  which  as  they  contain 
only  half-truths  may  on  this  very  principle  be  called  errors  and 
nothing  else.  It  is  not  true  that  a  curve  is  once  for  all  a  curvey 
so  that  the  degree  of  its  convexity  or  concavity  is  quite  a  secondary 
consideration,  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  its  character  as  a  curve ; 
the  fact  is  that  one  curved  line  is  actually  more  curved  than  another, 
and  so  realises  more  intensely  the  character  common  to  both.  Simi- 
larly the  good  or  bad  intention  out  of  which  an  action  springs  can  not 
only  be  measured  in  a  secondary  way  by  the  importance  of  the  interests 
affected  by  the  act  or  of  the  circumstances  under  which  it  is  done, 
but  can  itself  be  estimated  according  to  its  degree  of  goodness  or 
badness ;  for  such  an  intention  is  by  no  means  a  mere  form  which 
is  alike  in  all  cases ;  it  is  an  inner  process  which  not  only  must  reach 
a  certain  degree  of  .intensity  in  order  to  generate  the  impulse  winch 
every  act  requires  or  to  overcome  certain  obstacles,  but  has  also  a 
certain  .degree  of  value  according  to  the  amount  of  the  good  or  evil 
which  it  consciously  aims  at  producing.  Error  again  is  not  merely 
not-truth;  that  would  not  distinguish  it  from  doubt;  it  is  a  departure 
from  truth,  and  has  therefore  a  measurable  magnitude,  indeed  is 
inconceivable  without  it;  a  man  whose  thoughts  are  occupied  with 
real  problems  therefore  will  not  be  so  silly  as  to  reject  in  identical 
terms,  as  mere  errors,  two  assumptions  of  which  the  one  is  so  far 
from  the  truth  that  it  leads  to  no  knowledge  at  all,  and  the  other 
so  near  that  it  leads  to  nearly  all  the  knowledge  of  the  subject  that 
can  be  expected. 

181.  It  may  be  that  the  series  of  the  pleasant,  the  beautiful,  and  the 
good  (the  further  consideration  of  which  I  leave  to  the  reader)  has 
already  suggested  another  relation  that  can  exist  between  a  series 
of  conceptions,  which  I  will  first  of  all  illustrate  from  geometry. 


CHAPTER  ii.]  The  distincfions  remain.  183 

Imagine  t\vo  pyramids  A  and  B  presenting  similar  horizontal  sections 
but  one  sloping  more  steeply  than  the  other ;  if  we  place  them  so 
that  the  apex  of  the  one  (the  less  steep)  lies  within  the  other  (the 
steeper)  and  upon  a  point  in  its  axis,  then  the  plane  which  passes 
through  the  intersection  of  their  surfaces  belongs  both  to  the  series 
of  planes  of  which  A  is  the  integral  and  to  the  series  of  other  planes 
the  endless  succession  of  which  is  summed  up  in  B :  similarly  we  can 
imagine  a  third  pyramid  C  which  should  in  like  manner  have  a  plane 
in  common  with  B. 

Now  the  generating  law  of  each  of  these  solids,  with  reference  to 
the  common  axis  of  all  three  and  the  position  of  the  apex  in  that 
axis,  may  be  stated  in  a  formula,  which  would  have  to  be  compared 
with  the  general  conception  of  A  B  and  C  respectively.  It  would 
then  appear  that  in  the  A  series  there  is  one  member  that  also  satis- 
fies the  requirements  of  B ;  and  therefore  that  as  to  this  member  it  is 
a  matter  of  doubt  or  of  indifference  whether  it  is  to  be  classed  under 
the  conception  A  or  JB, — not  because  it  satisfies  neither,  but  because 
it  perfectly  satisfies  both  at  once.  But  with  the  exception  of  this 
particular  case  all  the  instances  of  A,  all  the  other  planes  by  which 
the  compound  solid  thus  formed  could  be  intersected,  would  belong 
exclusively  either  to  A  or  to  B.  The  same  would  be  true  of  the 
plane  common  to  B  and  C. 

In  these  cases  then  it  is  due  to  the  very  nature  of  the  essentially 
distinct  conceptions  that  certain  members  of  the  series  which  they 
severally  characterise  become  ambiguouSj  so  that  by  themselves  and 
without  taking  count  of  some  secondary  point,  such  as  the  manner 
of  their  origin  and  development,  it  is  not  safe  to  ascribe  them  ex- 
clusively to  any  one  of  these  conceptions,  though  apart  from  these 
particular  cases  there  is  no  doubt  at  all  about  the  difference  of  the 
conceptions.  We  have  here  named  ABC  and  so  expressed  them  as 
conceptions,  leaving  the  particular  cases  unnamed.  But  the  purposes 
of  speech  may  sometimes  suggest  the  opposite  procedure.  We  may 
name  and  fix  certain  conceptions  MNO  which  have  quite  unam- 
biguous and  distinct  meanings  only  in  particular  cases,  which  we  may 
picture  to  ourselves  as  salient  points,  as  maxima  or  minima,  in  a  con- 
nected series.  We  shall  then  find  the  reverse  of  what  we  found  just 
now,  i.  e.  we  shall  find  many  contents  furnished  by  feeling  and  expe- 
rience which  have  a  place  indeed  between  two  of  these  conceptions, 
but  only  between  them,  corresponding  completely  to  neither. 

182.  As  illustrations  of  the  latter  procedure  we  may  take  compound 
conceptions  got  by  starting  not  from  one  but  from  many  points  of 


184  Of  the  limitation  of  Conceptions.  i  BOOK  H. 

comparison  at  once.  With  such  a  conception  no  doubt  every  instance 
agrees  which  in  each  of  these  respects  is  found  to  have  the  appro- 
priate mark ;  but  the  applicability  of  the  conception  becomes  doubtful 
In  many  other  cases,  which  from  one  point  of  view  would  certainly 
be  included  under  it,  but  from  another  which  must  also  be  considered 
would  certainly  not.  Various  thoughts  thus  cross  one  another  In 
the  conception  of  illness.  Illness  is  certainly  above  all  things  a 
departure  of  the  bodily  condition  from  a  supposed  fixed  standard 
But  a  malformation,  which  departs  considerably  from  the  natural 
structure  of  the  body,  still  cannot  be  called  an  illness,  so  long  as  it 
does  not  impair  the  vital  functions,  nor  so  long  as  it  remains  constant 
and  runs  no  natural  course  through  various  stages.  A  wound  always 
in  some  degree  alters  structure  and  function,  and  also  runs  a  natural 
course  ;  but  a  slight  wound  is  not  called  an  illness,  plainly  because  it 
does  not  involve  danger  nor  make  the  body  unserviceable  for  any  im- 
portant purposes  of  life ;  but  again  a  very  severe  wound  is  also  not 
called  an  illness  though  it  does  both ;  its  origin  is  too  sudden  and  too 
entirely  due  to  external  violence, — and  now  we  observe  that  when  we 
spoke  of  illness,  we  thought  of  a  state  which,  though  dependent  upon 
some  external  cause  for  its  origin,  yet  takes  its  definite  shape  from  the 
peculiar  interaction  of  the  internal  forces.  But  now  a  cold  is  such  a 
reaction  of  the  internal  forces  against  an  external  stimulus  :  but  a  cold 
is  scarcely  called  an  illness  so  long  as  the  element  of  clanger  is  absent : 
and  just  as  we  here  help  ourselves  out  with  the  milder  phrase f  unwell,' 
so  we  use  the  term  health  with  a  certain  latitude,  allowing  room  for 
the  slow  advance  of  a  number  of  disturbances  connected  with  individual 
idiosyncrasies. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  say  what  is  the  right  course  here.  It  is  impos- 
sible in  such  cases  to  find  a  definition  which  shall  be  in  harmony  at 
once  with  the  requirements  of  science  and  with  these  strange  caprices 
of  language :  if  we  want  to  determine  the  conception,  we  must  dis- 
regard usage  and  fix  it  arbitrarily.  In  the  instance  we  have  chosen 
this  is  scarcely  needed,  for  pathology  gets  on  very  well  without  any 
unimpeachable  definition  of  the  nature  of  illness  in  general ;  and 
the  physician  has  absolutely  no  need  for  logical  generalities  which  yield 
no  guidance  in  practice. 

But  in  other  cases  it  is  not  so.  In.  our  conception  of  crime  all 
sorts  of  considerations  cross  one  another,— we  consider  whether  it  was 
deliberate  or  precipitate,  what  was  the  degree  of  evil  intention,  whether 
it  was  attempted  only  or  perpetrated,  what  was  the  amount  of  harm 
done :  the  distinction  between  the  creations  of  art  and  the  products 


CHAPTER  ii.]  Development.  185 

of  manufacture,  or  the  relation  of  a  free  reproduction  to  a  literal  copy, 
presents  similar  ambiguities.  To  fix  the  limits  of  the  conceptions  is 
of  more  importance  here,  since  by  the  operation  of  law  certain  ad- 
vantages and  disadvantages  follow  regularly  and  directly  according  as 
a  given  case  is  judged  to  belong  to  the  one  or  the  other ;  but  here 
also,  though  we  take  count  of  common  usage,  it  is  yet  necessary  in 
the  main  to  distinguish  them  by  positive  enactment. 

183.  Obviously  we  may  set  down  any  conception  M  as  equivalent 
to  any  other  conception  N  when  we  have  by  further  specification  so 
changed  N  that  it  is  equal  to  M.  Thus  there  arise  a  number  of  in- 
cidental aspects  or  variations  of  the  expression  for  the  same  M,  which 
we  shall  further  on  find  to  be  of  use  in  enabling  J/to  be  subsumed 
now  under  this  law  and  now  under  that,  such  law  leading  to  a  new- 
assertion  about  M.  There  is  no  limit  to  the  extent  to  which  this 
procedure  may  be  legitimately  carried  so  long  as  the  transformed  M 
really  coincides  with  the  original  JM9  so  long  that  is  as  N  is  equal  to 
M.  We  may  even  bring  a  triangle  M  under  the  conception  of  a 
four-sided  figure  N,  provided  of  course  that  we  add  that  one  of 
the  four  sides  is  reduced  to  nothing.  This  may  seem  mere  trifling, 
but  it  is  useful  in  practice :  we  can  thus  for  instance  easily  picture  to 
ourselves  how  every  time  that  two  sides  of  a  polygon,  which  were 
before  separated  by  an  intervening  side,  are  made  to  meet  at  their 
extremities  by  the  vanishing  of  the  intervening  side,  the  sum  of  the 
angles  of  the  polygon  (in  this  case  four-sided)  is  diminished  by  two 
right  angles. 

This  use  of  transformation  will  engage  our  attention  further  on ; 
what  I  wish  here  to  emphasise  is  that  the  difference  between  the  two 
conceptions  thus  brought  together  is  of  course  not  altered  by  it.  The 
four-sided  figure  remains  just  as  distinct  from  the  triangle  as  it  ever 
was,  i.  e.  so  distinct  that  it  must  be  stripped  of  its  very  essence  before 
it  can  be  ranked  with  the  other ;  and  similarly  the  alterations,  whatever 
they  be,  that  must  be  made  in  order  to  turn  N  into  M,  give  the 
measure  of  the  abiding  difference  between  the  two  conceptions.  When 
we  are  dealing,  not  as  in  this  case  with  abstract  constructions  of 
thought  but  with  realities,  which  have  an  independent  origin  in  the 
region  of  fact,  such  transformations  have  very  little  value ;  they  are 
in  the  first  instance  mere  fancies,  whose  significance  cannot  be  ascer- 
tained without  special  enquiry.  In  thought  we  may  change  any 
given  form  of  crystal  into  any  other  that  we  please  by  cutting  off 
slices  here  and  there, — by  successive  alterations,  of  outline  we  may 
change  the  likeness  of  a  crocodile  into  that  of  a  bird, — from  any 


1 86  Of  the  limitation  of  Conceptions. 

one  chemical  element  we  may  in  thought  derive  all  the  others  by 
giving  successively  certain  other  values  to  the  coefficients  which  the 
fundamental  properties  of  matter  take  in  the  case  of  that  one.  But 
by  such  devices  we  cannot  make  the  conceptions  M  and  N  approx- 
imate to  one  another,  for  their  difference  remains  always  as  great  as 
the  number  of  steps  that  we  must  take  to  get  from  one  to  the  other  ; 
neither  can  we  thus  establish  between  the  actual  things  which  exem- 
plify these  conceptions  such  a  connexion  that  one  might  pass  over 
into  the  other.  For  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  prove  that  the 
physical  forces  of  the  elements  which  build  up  an  actual  crystal  of  the 
form  J/are  such  as  to  make  it  possible  for  the  same  elements  to  be 
also  in  equilibrium  when  arranged  in  the  form  N\  or  that  the  con- 
catenated system  of  forces  which  determines  the  structural  type  of  the 
crocodile  and  maintains  it  in  life  may  be  so  modified  by  other  natural 
Influences  that  the  form  of  a  bird  may  actually  grow  out  of  it,— that 
in  short  the  order  of  nature  actually  contains  impulses  which  realise 
the  changes  which  we  may  choose  arbitrarily  to  make  in  thought  or 
upon  paper.  We  cannot  but  remember,  though  happily  as  an  error 
which  we  have  outgrown,  the  wild  caprice  with  which  not  long  ago 
people  would  derive  a  word  in  one  language  from  any  casual  word 
in  another,  and  call  it  etymology ;  at  the  present  day  people  need  to 
be  warned  against  proceeding  in  a  similar  way  to  satisfy  the  newly- 
awakened  desire  to  conceive  all  the  various  kinds  of  organic  beings  as 
evolved  from  one  other,  all  fixed  specific  differences  being  done  away. 
But,  whether  Darwin  has  succeeded  or  not  in  his  attempt,  we  must  at 
any  rate  allow  that  he  has  taken  the  greatest  pains  to  point  out  the 
real  processes  of  nature  by  which  the  transformation  of  one  organic 
form  into  another  which  we  can  conceive  in  thought  may  have  been 
actually  brought  about. 


CHAPTER    III. 

Schemes  and  Symbols. 


184   Is  this  chapter  I  shall  continue  to  treat  of  the  same  subject 

as  ol  oregoingf  but  from  a  somewhat  altered  pomt  of  v^  K* 

extent  and  importance  of  the  difference  between  severaUdeal  con 

en  s  can  We  ascertained,  be  precisely  determined  only  whence  find 

tents  can  ^  a  ral  differences  of  the  same  kind,  i.e. 


as  we  need  require  in  the  cas^  JJ^fic       poses,  we  should 
accurate  determination  were  needed  for  _saenUb  :  p    P       , 
have  first  to  determine  the  values  of  Ae  v  nous  sc  ^P  ^  ^ 
several  alterations  take  :  place,  an  d  Aenw  to  ^ 

cases  at  any 


.adermay  ^^jc  the  significance  of 

rate  we  proceed  in  the  reyers  >  orow  ^^  of  ^ 


1 88  Schemes  and  Symbols.  CBOUK  n. 

may  allow  this  objection  without  taking  any  further  notice  of  it;  for 
what  I  here  wish  to  illustrate  is  not  a  logical  rule  but  a  propensity  of 
our  reason,  which  needs  to  be  checked  rather  than  to  be  indulged, 
but  which  as  it  is  ineradicable  needs  to  be  specially, mentioned.  It  is 
easy  to  understand,  I  mean,  how  out  of  the  above-mentioned  problem 
may  arise  the  wish  to  have  a  universal  scheme  in  which  not  only  all 
the  modifiable  relations  of  different  elements  that  we  can  think  of,  but 
also  the  values  of  the  difference  between  any  two  modifications  should 
be  laid  down  so  completely  that  the  difference  or  the  kinship  between 
any  two  conceptions  J/and  N  should  be  exactly  indicated  by  their 
position  in  the  universal  scheme. 

185.  To  illustrate  this  I  will  first  go  back  to  remote  antiquity,  to 
Pythagoras.  To  reconstruct  a  body  of  genuine  Pythagorean  philo- 
sophy out  of  the  scanty  and  for  the  most  part  very  questionable 
materials  at  our  command  is  a  task  which  I  will  not  undertake,  but  I 
think  I  am  able  to  state  what  may  have  been  the  fundamental  idea 
which  animated  it,  and  which  would  enable  us  to  understand  why  the 
sympathy  stirred  by  it  has  been  so  lasting  though  often  so  perversely 
expressed.  It  is  tolerably  certain  that  the  bent  of  the  school  was  first 
to  abstract  mathematics,  and  secondly  to  their  application  to  the  pro- 
cesses of  nature.  The  first  line  of  study  could  not  fail  to  lead  them 
to  picture  the  series  of  numbers  and  the  world  of  shapes  as  two  great 
coherent  systems,  and  further  to  bring  them  to  see  how  spatial  figures 
themselves  depend  upon  the  numerical  magnitudes  which  they  involve, 
The  second,  besides  other  less  known  results,  led  to  the  discovery  of 
the  relation  between  the  pitch  of  a  note  and  the  length  of  the  vibrating 
string,  and  thereby  no  doubt  suggested  the  general  idea  that  even 
phenomena  whose  differences  are  in  the  first  instance  felt  by  us  as 
differences  of  quality  "are  based  upon  mathematical  differences  that 
admit  of  comparison.  The  rash  generalisation  of  results  thus  won  is 
what  the  fancy  of  men  is  always  prone  to;  the  mathematically-trained 
Pythagorean  went  so  far  as  to  make  the  reflexion  that  if  it  be  once 
established  that  a  series  of  changes  in  phenomena  corresponds  to  a 
series  of  changes  in  magnitude,  then  every  other  conceivable  mathe- 
matical relation  along  with  all  its  modifications  must  have  its  counter- 
part in  the  phenomena, — or  conversely,  if  a  group  of  phenomena  is 
based  upon  definite  relations  of  magnitude,  the  coherence  of  all  the 
processes  of  nature  necessitates  the  conclusion  that  all  other  pheno- 
mena also  depend  in  like  manner  upon  relations  that  can  be 
mathematically  determined. 

This  I  conceive  to  have  been  the  origin  of  those  speculations  which 


CHAPTER  in.]  Pythagoreanism.  189 

Aristotle  expresses  by  saying  that  Pythagoras  regarded  the  principles 
of  numbers  as  the  principles  of  things  :  but  we  must  further  consider 
the  meaning  of  this  expression.  The  purport  of  the  Pythagorean 
philosophy  was  certainly  wider  than  we  might  be  led  to  suppose  by 
that  other  saying  of  its  author,  that  God  has  ordered  everything  by 
measure  and  number ;  i.  e.  it  was  not  limited  to  the  mere  application 
of" mathematics  to  nature,  if  that  means  merely  that  the  definite  mag- 
nitudes of  natural  forces  and  processes  modify  one  another  when 
brought  into  contact  according  to  the  same  mathematical  laws  that 
hold  good  for  magnitudes  in  general :  these  data  themselves,  to  which 
mathematics  are  only  applied  by  modern  '  mathematical  physics/  were 
regarded  by  Pythagoras  as  themselves  forming  a  system  whose  inner 
articulation  is  based  upon  the  same  relations  that  determine  the  struc- 
ture of  the  series  of  numbers  and  of  all  their  possible  combinations. 
I  wish  to  distinguish  in  this  theory  a  general  idea  and  the  particular 
form  given  to  it. 

186.  The  so-called  natural  philosophy  of  the  lonians  had  devoted 
itself  to  describing  the  processes  by  which  natural  bodies  were  formed 
out  of  their  primitive  matter  and  returned  to  it  again.  As  this  philo- 
sophy very  generally  used  for  this  purpose  the  ideas  of  condensation 
and  rarefaction,  it  may  appear,  in  virtue  of  its  employment  of  quanti- 
tatively determined  means,  to  be  closely  akin  to  the  Pythagorean 
theory.  The  two  are  nevertheless  very  far  apart:  for  the  lonians 
never  betray  any  desire  to  show  that  the  sum  of  that  which  is  thus 
produced  at  any  moment  of  its  existence  or  in  the  whole  series  of 
steps  by  which  it  comes  into  existence  forms  a  coherent  whole  of 
mutually  dependent  parts.  Pythagoras  on  the  other  hand  seems  to 
.have  troubled  himself  very  little  about  this  origin  of  the  world,  but  the 
world  as  it  was  after  it  had  come  into  existence  was  to  him  a  system, 
such  that  not  merely  were  its  parts  there,  one  beside  the  other,  but 
that  there  would  have  been  a  gap  in  it  if  while  one  phenomenon  were 
present  another  had  been  absent  If  a  and  b  and  d  are  present,  then 
if  c  is  there  at  all,  it  is  not  merely  there  along  with  the  others,  but  it 
is  there  because  the  law  according  to  which  the  series  a  1)  advances  to 
d  requires  it  as  the  third  member  of  the  series  which  is  indispensable 
to  the  presence  of  the  fourth  member  d :  or  if  c  is  absent,  it  is  not 
merely  absent  as  a  matter  of  fact,  but  because  the  law  which  regulates 
the  series  excludes  the  possibility  of  this  third  member  before  d.  The 
same  consideration  may  be  applied  to  other  series  in  the  actual 
world,  to  a  /3  y  8  and  to  <*  6  c  b,  and  this  application  was  made  by  the 
Pythagorean  school. 


i  go  Schemes  and  Symbols,  CBOOKH. 

How  they  conceived  the  relation  between  the  different  characters 
of  these  series,  which  I  wished  to  indicate  by  the  use  of  different 
alphabets,  is  a  point  upon  which  we  are  certainly  in  the  dark,  anc! 
upon  which,  as  we  may  gather  from  Aristotle,  the  fullest  information 
would  probably  throw  but  little  light;  but  with  respect  to  the  law 
which  in  each  of  these  series  binds  the  homogeneous  members  together, 
it  seems  to  be  indubitable  that  it  was  regarded  as  precisely  identical 
for  all  the  series,  i.e.  that  they  maintained  a  complete  parallelism 
between  the  relations  prevailing  in  the  various  groups  of  connected 
phenomena.  This  is  shown  in  the  supposition  that  the  earth  has  an 
invisible  fellow,  in  order  to  bring  the  total  of  the  then  known  planets 
up  to  ten,  to  which  number  the  arithmetical  mysticism  of  the  system  had 
once  for  all  assigned  a  peculiar  significance, — in  the  assumption  of  a 
fifth  element,  which  together  with  water,  earth,  fire,  and  air,  shall  cor- 
respond to  the  five  regular  solids,  tetrahedron,  cube,  octahedron, 
dodecahedron,  eicosahedron, — in  the  attempt  again  to  conceive  the 
distances  of  the  planets  as  arranged  according  to  musical  intervals,— 
and  even  in  the  meagre  form  of  their  tables  of  opposites.  To  us  of 
course  these  tables  do  but  illustrate  the  frequent  occurrence  of  this 
relation  of  opposition  between  two  conceptions  even  when  these  are 
arbitrarily  chosen,  but  the  fact  that  they  always  contain  ten  pairs 
seems  to  indicate  that  they  were  intended  to  represent  this  relation  as 
essential  for  all  the  different  stages  in  a  series  of  ten  members. 
Finally  when  they  assigned  life  to  the  number  six,  intelligence  and 
light  to  seven,  and  friendship  to  eight,  we  see  that  they  regarded 
not  merely  the  phenomena  of  nature,  but  also  those  of  mind,  and  in 
a  word  every  conceivable  thing,  as  ordered  according  to  the  same 
serial  law. 

This  philosophy  then  sought  and  fancied  that  it  found  precisely 
what  we  spoke  of  above,  viz.  a  universal  scheme  which  mounting  from 
simple  to  complex  was  supposed  to  embrace  the  whole  sum  of  pos- 
sible forms,  one  of  which  was  to  serve  as  a  pattern  for  the  formation 
of  every  actual  thing,  while  at  the  same  time  these  forms  or  types 
were  to  be  so  arranged  in  the  scheme  that  the  position  of  its  type 
directly  determined  the  significance  of  every  actual  thing,  and  the 
amount  of  the  difference  or  the  kinship  between  it  and  other  things 
formed  upon  the  model  of  other  members  of  the  series.  The  general 
idea  then  that  I  would  ascribe  to  the  Pythagorean  philosophy  is  this, 
viz.  not  merely  a  subsequent  arrangement  of  things  whose  nature  was 
originally  settled  without  reference  to  the  principle  of  this  arrange- 
ment, but  a  harmony  of  the  Cosmos— which  name  was  first  applied 


CHAPTER  in.]  Pythagoreanism.  191 

to  the  world  by  Pythagoras — based  upon  the  notion  that  all  things  are 
from  the  beginning  nothing  but  various  realisations  of  a  series  of 
types,  regulated  by  one  law  of  development  which  is  the  same  for  all 
187.  The  general  conception  is  undeniably  grand,  but  grandeur  is 
sadly  lacking  in  the  special  form  here  given  to  it.  Even  in  the  present 
state  of  the  mathematical  sciences,  various  as  are  the  magnitudes 
whose  interesting  mutual  relations  have  been  examined,  it  would  be 
impossible  to  find  adequate  types  or  symbols  or  abstract  expressions 
for  the  still  more  various  relations  that  subsist  between  the  elements 
of  the  actual  world  and  the  combinations  that  arise  out  of  them ;  but 
the  arithmetic  of  the  ancients,  which  the  Pythagorean  school  seems  to 
have  helped  to  develop,  furnished  in  its  then  state  but  very  few  and 
very  meagre  numerical  relations,  whose  significance  must  have  been 
much  exaggerated  and  from  the  beginning  very  arbitrarily  interpreted 
before  they  could  be  regarded  as  the  relations  upon  which  the  struc- 
ture of  the  world  is  based.  The  grounds  on  which  they  justified  their 
well-known  veneration  for  the  number  ten, — viz.  the  fact  that  all 
numbers  are  generated  by  the  repetition  of  unity ;  that  in  this  series 
the  even  numbers  alternate  with  the  odd  numbers,  which  cannot  be 
divided  by  l  the  principle  of  multiplicity,'  i.  e.  by  two,  and  which  are 
therefore  held  to  be  of  higher  rank ;  that  three  is  the  first  union  of 
odd  and  even,  four  the  first  square  of  a  multiple  number,  and  ten  the 
sum  of  these  exalted  four  first  numbers, —are  grounds  which  could 
not  be  admitted  except  by  a  system  of  symbolism  which  was  ready  to 
accept  any  interesting  motive  without  regard  to  its  connexion  with 
others :  though  the  real  grounds  of  that  veneration  undoubtedly  lay 
in  the  habitual  use  of  the  decimal  system.  If  these  thinkers  had  been 
acquainted  with  all  the  algebraical  and  transcendent  forms  of  func- 
tions which  are  the  instruments  of  modern  mathematicians,  how  much 
more  various  would  have  been  the  symbols  employed,  and  how  much 
more  delicately  would  they  have  been  adapted  to  the  nature  of  the 
several  phenomena !  The  same  tendency  still  survives  in  us  :  even  in 
cases  where  calculation  in  the  strict  sense  is  impossible  we  are  inclined  . 
to  use  the  term  'power'1  when  the  meaning  and  importance  of  a 
conception  is  raised  in  some  peculiar  manner,  as  for  instance  when 
each  of  the  centres  of  relation,  whose  determination  by  each  other 
constitutes  the  meaning  of  the  conception,  is  itself  exalted  into  a  small 
system,  whose  members  determine  each  other  in  the  same  way. 

We  can  imagine  then  how  the  Pythagoreans  (if  they  had  had  our 
knowledge)  might   have  illustrated  many  relations   of  dependence 
*  [In  the  mathematical  sense.] 


192  Schemes  and  Symbols.  E  BOOK  n. 

between  various  elements  by  the  relation  of  a  logarithm  to  Its  number, 
and  how  they  might  have  applied  trigonometrical  functions  to  explain 
any  kind  of  periodicity.  As  however  they  had  not  our  resources  at 
command,  and  as  even  these  would  still  be  insufficient,  it  would  be 
quite  useless  to  examine  in  detail  the  reasonableness  of  the  Pythago- 
rean symbols. 

188.  That  it  was  the  fate  of  the  whole  theory  to  be  variously  inter- 
preted and  misunderstood  is  easily  explained  by  its  nature.  According 
to  one  statement  of  Aristotle  it  was  the  principles  of  numbers  that 
Pythagoras  identified  with  ft&  principles  of  things.  This  seems  quite 
intelligible,  By  these  principles  of  numbers  must  be  meant  the  re- 
lations between  one  and  the  other  numbers,  the  way  in,  which  one 
can  be  repeated,  the  divisibility  or  indivisibility  of  the  rest, — in  a 
word  the  possibility  of  generating  the  whole  series  of  numbers  by  the 
use  of  these  constant  relations  and  operations,  or,  as  we  should  say, 
the  possibility  of  exhibiting  every  number  as  a  function  of  other 
numbers.  Things  then,  ought  also  to  have  the  same  inner  structure, 
their  series  ought  also  to  be  arranged  according  to  the  same  prin- 
ciples, so  that  the  nature  of  the  one  might  be  exhibited  as  a  function 
of  the  nature  of  the  other. 

But  it  is  also  asserted  by  Aristotle  along  with  others  that  the 
Pythagorean  school  declared  that  numbers  were  things,  or  at  any  rate 
that  things  were  numbers.  Even  this  is  quite  intelligible  to  any  one 
who  is  acquainted  with  the  history  of  philosophic  ideas  and  the 
customary  ways  of  expressing  them.  To  a  certain  extent  indeed  the 
Pythagoreans  would  have  been  right  in  making  this  assertion,  and 
this  justifies  us  in  supposing  that  they  actually  made  it ;  for  as  already 
said  what  they  intended  was  by  no  means  merely  to  apply  numbers 
to  the  quantitative  determinations  of  things  whose  real  nature  is 
independent  of  these  determinations, — e.g.  you  may  have  similar 
triangles  of  very  various  sizes :  their  numbers  were  meant  to  signify 
that  which  distinguishes  the  essential  character  of  one  thing  from  the 
essential  character  of  another ;  a  was  a  because  its  content  was  con- 
structed according  to  a  the  function-form  or  the  generating  law  of 
one  symbolic  number,  and  was  thereby  distinguished  from  b  which 
was  b  because  it  followed  ft  the  generating  law  of  another  symbolic 
number.  It  was  "quite  possible  then  to  say,  with  a  reservation  to  be 
presently  noticed,  that  the  essence  of  a  thing,  in  the  sense  of  that 
which  distinguishes  it  from  another  thing,  lies  in  the  number  im- 
manent in  it 

The  other  assertion  that  the  essence  of  things,  in  the  sense  of  that 


CHAPTER  in. j  Pythagoreanism. 

In  virtue  of  which  they  all  are  things,  or  their  reality,  consists  in  these 
numbers,  or  that  numbers  are  the  real  things,  was  perhaps  not 
positively  made  by  the  Pythagoreans  In  this  form  :  if  they  did  make 
It,  they  certainly  could  not  justify  the  latter  expression,  but  they 
could  assuredly  justify  the  former:  for  if  there  is  actually  nothing 
whose  nature  is  not  determined  by  one  of  these  symbolic  numbers, 
the  numbers  are  assuredly  the  conditio  sine  qua  non  of  every  reality; 
to  treat  them  as  more  than  this,  and  to  speak  of  the  numbers  them- 
selves as  the  real  things,  is  an  unwarrantable  straining  of  language, 
though  we  shall  presently  see  how  prone  to  it  the  thinkers  of  all  ages 
have  been. 

There  remains  one  great  imperfection  which  we  have  already 
mentioned.  The  same  typical  series  of  numbers  has  to  repeat  itself 
in  a  number  of  parallel  series  of  actual  things,  in  a  I  €  4  a  $  y  S, 
a  fc  c  &  ;  how  then  are  the  members  b  ft  fo  distinguished  from  one 
another  if  the  whole  nature  of  each  of  them  is  exhausted  by  the  same 
symbolic  number  ?  To  this  there  is  no  answer  possible :  at  this 
point  the  theory,  which  aimed  at  embracing  the  nature  of  things 
completely,  relapses  again  into  a  mere  application  of  a  general  law  of 
structure  to  various  cases  whose  characteristic  differences  must  be 
regarded  as  given.  But  this  is  what  makes  it  serviceable  for  our 
present  purpose  as  an  illustration  ;  it  thereby  becomes  an  attempt  to 
frame  a  universal  scheme  for  the  relations  of  kinship  and  difference 
between  all  the  groups  formed  by  kinds  of  content  that  can  ever  by 
any  possibility  come  to  be  considered. 

189.  In  order  to  justify  the  length  of  this  discussion  I  would 
point  to  the  extraordinary  tenacity  with  which  this  desire  to  find  a 
scheme  for  the  whole  contents  of  thought  has  maintained  itself 
through  the  course  of  ages.  It  showed  itself  first  in  this  form  of 
mystical  speculations  about  numbers  ;  over  these  we  may  pass  very 
lightly;  as  such  speculators  were  satisfied  with  anything  however 
meaningless  so  long  as  it  was  interesting  and  startling,  they  were,  to 
speak  plainly,  always  in  search  of  a  secret  truth  which  they  never  found, 
and  it  must  always  have  needed  a  very  sympathetic  hearer  to  find  in 
the  symbols  a  better  expression  for  the  meaning  put  into  them  than- 
could  have  been  obtained  without  them. 

Presently  the  speculators  ceased  to  found  their  dreams  oa  this 
purely  arithmetical  basis  and  wandered  away  in  various  directions. 
In  the  first  place  every  discovery  made  by  advancing  science  that  has 
any  important  bearing  upon  the  relations  of  things  has  almost  without 
exception  been  extended  into  a  scheme  for  the  articulation  of  the 

o 


194  Schemes  and  Symbols. 

whole  world.  For  a  long  time  people  traced  everywhere  the  be- 
haviour of  the  four  elements  of  the  ancients ;  and  in  later  days  the 
mystic  significance  of  this  number  four  did  not  pass  away,  it  was 
only  transferred  to  the  newly  discovered  constituents  of  organised 
bodies,  carbon,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  and  nitrogen  ;  it  agreed  admirably 
with  the  four  quarters  of  heaven,  for  zenith  and  nadir  of  course  fall 
outside  our  natural  line  of  sight ;  it  agreed  equally  well  with  the  four 
seasons  of  the  temperate  zones,  within  which  these  speculations  were 
carried  on,  and  with  the  four  indispensable  cases  of  nouns ;  at  a 
later  date,  as  the  theory  of  astronomy  came  to  completion,  the  contrast 
between  centrifugal  and  centripetal  tendencies  entered  into  men's 
notions  of  all  things  and  was  fused  into  one  with  the  opposition  of 
the  sexes  and  the  relation  of  acid  to  alkali ;  the  discovery  of  magne- 
tism and  electricity  caused  the  scheme  of  polarity  to  be  carried  even 
further  if  possible  into  the  consideration  of  all  conceivable  things. 

Other  speculators  proceeded  in  the  opposite  direction,  starting 
from  the  just  reflexion  that  even  the  relations  of  numbers  are,  in  part 
at  least,  only  instances  of  other  still  more  abstract  fundamental  re- 
lations; these  then  (they  hold)  must  be  sought,  and  will  be  found  if 
we  simply  reflect  upon  the  operations  by  which  our  intellect  does  in 
fact  arrive  at  its  ideas  of  all  things  whatever.  Now  every  idea,  or  at 
least  every  compound  idea,  is  made  by  setting  down  an  a,  distinguishing 
from  it  or  opposing  to  it  a  <$,  and  finally  bringing  both  into  a  relation 
c ;  thus  thesis,  antithesis,  and  synthesis  come  to  be  regarded  as  the 
scheme'  upon  which  all  reality  is  constructed  and  as  the  rhythm 
which  thought  must  maintain  in  the  orderly  consideration  of  that 
reality.  But  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  more  abstractly  these  symbols 
are  conceived  the  more  they  pass  over  into  notiones  communes  which 
do  indeed  apply  pretty  well  to  everything  but  give  us  no  adequate 
knowledge  about  anything.  Logic  then  meets  all  this  wild  talk 
with  the  demand  that  things  be  considered,  divided,  and  investigated 
simply  and  solely  with  reference  to  their  several  natures,  for  there 
is  no  universal  scheme  that  can  be  applied,  and  the  employment 
of  merely  fanciful  models  can  only  injure  the  impartial  quest  of 
truth. 

190.  Of  this  unfavourable  verdict  I  can  abate  nothing,  and  in  some 
remarks  which  I  wish  still  to  add  I  have  no  such  intention.  When 
the  content  M  of  a  conception,  an  idea,  or  a  perception  is  given 
to  us  in  such  a  manner  as  to  unite  in  the  form  /*  a  number  of 
characteristics,  or  parts,  or  points  of  relation,  it  is  a  quite  justifiable 
scientific  curiosity  that  prompts  us  to  enquire  how  the  examples  of 


CHAPTER  in.]  Demand  for  Symmetry.  .195 

M  will  behave,  how  they  will  be  altered  and  distinguished  from  one 
another,  when  we  vary  within  the  allowable  limits  either  the  parts  of 
M  only,  or  both  them  and  the  general  form  of  union  ju. 

In  the  first  place  if  we  keep  to  the  former  kind  of  alteration,  there 
will  usually  be  but  little  interest  in  tracing  all  the  kinds  of  M  that  are 
got  by  simply  changing  the  quantity  of  the  characteristics,  for  these 
kinds  will,  in  most  cases  at  least,  resemble  one  other  and  only  repeat 
the  same  thing  on  a  different  scale.  But  if  one  of  these  characteristics 
m  be  of  such  a  nature  that  for  it  the  opposition  of  negative  and 
positive  has  a  plain  and  palpable  meaning  (such  an  opposition  for 
instance  as  there  is  between  right  and  left,  attraction  and  repulsion, 
concave  and  convex,  and  generally  between  ascent  above  a  zero- 
point  and  descent  below  it)  then  it  concerns  us  greatly  to  know  what 
happens  to  M  when  we  substitute  —  m  for  -f  m  in  its  generating  law. 
Supposing  y  z=.fx  is  the  equation  of  a  curve,  we  always  take  the 
trouble  to  set  down  in  turn  the  positive  and  negative  values  of  x> 
and  not  till  we  have  united  the  results  thus  obtained  do  we  think  we 
have  arrived  at  the  nature  of  the  curve,  which  in  this  case  presents 
itself  to  our  perception  not  as  a  mere  generality,  but  as  the  whole 
which  is  got  by  combining  every  possible  example  of  the  general 
equation.  If  we  happen  to  see,  in  a  piece  of  ornamentation,  a  volute 
which  bends  downwards  to  the  right,  our  imagination  is  stimulated 
in,  a  similar  way;  even  if  we  have  no  mathematical  knowledge  of  the 
generating  law  of  this  curve,  we  understand,  by  reason  of  the  homo- 
geneousness  of  directions  in  space,  that  the  volute  might  be  repeated 
in  a  precisely  similar  though  opposite  bend  upwards  to  the  right,  and 
again  with  another  opposition  upwards  to  the  left  and  downwards  to 
the  left.  If  now  these  continuations,  suggested  by  the  beginning 
which  we  see,  are  not  carried  out,  though  the  surroundings  do  not 
give  any  obvious  reason  for  this  incompleteness,  our  aesthetic  feelings 
are  unsatisfied,  but  this  demand  for  symmetry  has  also  a  logical  foun- 
dation. It  is  of  the  very  essence  of  a  law  that  it  shall  apply  to  all 
variations  of  the  points  of  relation  which  it  comprehends ;  there  is 
therefore  a  contradiction  in  a  perception  which  suggests  a  law 
together  with  the  possibility  of  its  prevailing  universally,  and  yet 
actually  presents  it  as  prevailing  only  in  part :  what  we  miss  in  the 
perception  appears  as  a  defect  in  the  thing  :  we  supply  it  in  order  to 
remove  the  groundless  want  of  universality. 

We  always  feel  a  similar  impulse  in  examining  conceptions.  When- 
ever  in  any  M  one  of  its  determinants  may  vary  from  +  m  to  —  m, 
which  it  can  only  do  by  passing  through  the  intermediate  value  m  ==  o, 

0  2 


1 96  Schemes  and  Symbols.  t  BOOK  XL 

the  tripartite  division  thus  suggested  becomes  for  us  a  scheme,  which  we 
take  as  the  basis  of  our  investigation  of  the  whole  extent  of  M.  This 
is  the  point  which  I  wish  here  to  emphasize,  in  order  to  mark  the 
difference  between  this  proceeding  and  the  wild  dreams  we  have  just 
condemned,-— viz.  that  this  scheme  can  be  nothing  but  an  invitation 
to  turn  our  enquiry  in  a  particular  direction,  and  cannot  give  us  by 
anticipation  a  picture  of  the  result  at  which  we  shall  arrive.  It  does 
not  always  happen,  as  in  the  case  of  the  volute,  that  the  counterparts 
we  expect  can  be  found :  whether  the  change  from  +  m  to  —  m  gives 
other  possible  kinds  of  M  at  all  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  form 
of  union  fi.  Still  less  can  we  see  beforehand  whether  the  kinds  thus 
obtained  will  be  in  any  way  proportional  to  the  differences  of  the 
conditions,  and  if  so  in  what  way :  it  is  quite  possible  that  for  a 
certain  ft  this  absolute  opposition  of  4-  m  and  —  m  is  absolutely 
meaningless.  Our  method  then  will  be  to  let  /*  likewise  pass  through 
all  the  possible  forms  given  by  the  various  alternatives  ;  here  also  for 
mere  additions  of  quantity  we  shall  expect  only  a  series  of  similar 
results,  but  for  every  cardinal  point  at  which  p,  takes  a  qualitatively 
different  significance  or  passes  at  a  bound  into  its  opposite  we  shall 
expect  a  quite  new  formation  to  appear  in  M  which  depends  upon 
ft ;  and  lastly  for  every  remarkable  feature  which  we  find  in  a  special 
case  of  M  we  shall  expect  to  find  as  counterpart  an  equally  remark- 
able feature  in  a  similarly  conditioned  special  case  of  a  similarly 
constructed  N  (as  for  instance  when  we  find  that  waves  of  light 
behave  in  a  certain  way  we  look  for  corresponding  behaviour  in 
the  waves  of  sound) :  but  all  this  remains  only  a  question  put  to 
the  object,  to  which  we  await  the  answer  :  the  answer  which  enquiry 
yields  may  turn  out  quite  contrary  to  what  we  expect,  but  must  be 
accepted  whatever  it  be.  Where  those  dreamers  deceived  themselves 
was  in  supposing  that  whenever  their  scheme  which  they  assumed  to 
be  universal  was  applied  to  any  matter  whatsoever,  every  place  in  it 
would  always  be  filled  by  some  remarkable  form  of  that  matter,  none 
would  ever  remain  empty,  and  further  in  supposing  that  as  these 
various  matters,  passing  through  the  same  sequence  of  changes,  filled 
up  the  several  places  of  the  scheme,  the  forms  which  filled  the  same 
places  would  by  a  striking  resemblance  or  analogy  in  their  whole 
character  announce  themselves  as  connected,  as  akin  to  or  as  coun- 
terparts of  one  another.  When  this  was  not  the  case,  there  was  a 
strong  temptation  to  try  to  fill  up  the  gaps  by  groundless  suppo- 
sitions, and  to  restore  the  desired  symmetry  in  the  corresponding 
members  by  giving  undue  prominence  to  secondary  features'. 


CHAPTER  iii.j  The  Hegelian  Dialectic.  197 

191,  Among  modern  attemps  to  unfold  in  a  scheme  the  meaning  of 
the  world  there  have  been  some  grand  ones  which  even  seemed  to 
avoid  an  essential  fault  of  the  Pythagorean  theory.  In  another  work 
(<  Geschichte  der  Aesthetik  in  Deutschland/  p.  176  ff.)  I  have  examined 
at  length  the  motives  which  led  to  the  development  of  the  Hegelian 
dialectic,  the  most  important  of  these  attempts  ;  I  will  content  myself 
here  with  making  a  few  remarks  on  its  logical  character.  The  Pytha- 
goreans in  conceiving  development  in  countless  parallel  series  with 
different  contents  took  no  count  of  the  differences  by  which  the  corre- 
sponding members  of  the  various  series  are  separated  from  one  another 
in  spite  of  their  occupying  the  same  place  in  the  general  scheme.  The 
decimal  system,  with  its  ascending  powers  of  the  number  ten,  never 
led  them,  as  it  might  well  have  done,  to  treat  these  parallel  series  as 
themselves  successive  periods  of  one  and  the  same  main  series, 
resembling  one  another  in  their  internal  structure,  but  raised  one 
above  the  other  so  to  speak  by  the  height  of  the  level  at  which  they 
exhibit  this  structure,  like  the  octaves  in  the  musical  scale. 

The  imagination  of  the  modern  philosopher  has  supplied  this 
deficiency;  the  many  parallel  series  are  contracted  into  a  single 
series,  composed  of  cycles  of  similar  structure,  the  last  member  of 
each  cycle  making  a  starting-point  of  a  distinctively  new  character 
for  the  development  of  the  next.  If  it  is  possible  to  find  the  first 
member  of  the  whole  series  and  the  law  which  determines  the  form 
of  the  first  cycle,  the  variety  of  the  contents  which  form  the  members 
of  the  following  periods  may  be  explained  by  their  distance  from  the 
starting-point  and  the  transformation  which  the  initial  member  has 
undergone  at  each  step  of  the  way.  Hegel  then  requires  us  to  con- 
cede as  a  metaphysical  presupposition,  of  whose  correctness  logic 
cannot  judge,  that  the  world  is  no  sum  of  things  that  stand  and 
events  that  go  on  one  beside  the  other,  the  former  standing  quiet  til! 
they  are  stirred  to  change  by  a  stimulus  from  without,  the  latter 
determined  in  their  inter-action  and  in  their  whole  course  by  universal 
laws  that  hold  good  always,— but  that  instead  of  this  all  the  variety 
of  the  world  is  only  the  development  of  a  unity  that  never  rests,  all 
events  only  stages  in  this  development  or  secondary  effects  of  it,  ancl 
things  themselves  but  appearances,  either  transitory  or  begotten  anew 
at  every  moment,  whose  whole  being  lies  in  the  active  movements  of 
that  unity,  crossing  each  other  and  coming  to  a  focus  in  them  as 
subordinate  vehicles  of  that  development 

In  this  account  of  Hegel's  point  of  view  I  make  no  pretence  to 
unimpeachable  accuracy,  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  attain  in  a 


198  Schemes  and  Symbols.  [BOOK  it 

long  exposition  and  quite  impossible  in  a  short  statement ;  but  what 
has  been  said  is  enough  to  enable  us  to  understand  that  within  each 
dialectic  cycle  these  different  forms,  whose  significance  somehow 
constantly  increases,  cannot  simply  occur  one  beside  the  other,  but 
that  each  must  issue  out  of  the  preceding  one  :  development,  in  short, 
is  the  very  essence  of  the  system. 

192,  Now  no  development  is  imaginable  without  a  definite  direc- 
tion which  it  takes  in  contrast  to  others  which  it  does  not  take  ;  but  it 
is  equally  clear  that  in  this  case  above  all  others  it  is  impossible  for  the 
unity  which  develops  itself  to  receive  this  direction  from  without ;  it 
must  be  determined  by  the  nature  of  that  unity  itself.  But  here  we 
find  that  no  accurate  and  exhaustive  expression  can  be  obtained  for 
the  entire  nature  of  that  which  under  the  name  of  the  absolute  is 
regarded  as  the  one  basis  of  the  world,  but  that  what  we  mean  by  it 
in  a  sort  of  presentiment  is  fully  revealed  to  us,  nay  comes  to  be 
completely  itself  only  in  and  through  the  development,— indeed,  the 
very  name  indicates  this,  for  as  it  is  nothing  but  development,  it  can- 
not be  itself  before  it  has  begun  to  develop. 

The  only  point  of  departure  then  that  is  left  for  us  is  this  fact 
itself,  i.e.  the  knowledge  that  the  absolute  is  not  rest  but  development. 
Assuredly  then  its  development  must  take  that  direction  and  form 
which  follows  from  the  conception  of  development  itself,  and  which 
therefore  must  recur  in  every  example  of  the  conception.  This  opens 
up  a  very  simple  line  of  thought.  If  any  A  is  to  develop  itself,  it 
cannot  already  be  that  into  which  it  has  yet  to  expand  itself; 
neither  can  it  not  be,  or  be  void  of  content,  for  then  it  would  not  be 
the  determining  ground  of  that  which  is  to  be ;  as  yet  unexpancled 
and  shapeless  it  must  still  be  the  determinate  possibility  of  its  future 
growth,— in  a  word  it  must  be  '  in  itself^  or  potentially  that  which  it 
is  to  become.  But  its  nature  would  not  consist  in  development  if  it 
were  to  abide  in  this  potential  state ;  it  must  actually  become  that 
which  it  is  its  nature  to  be  able  to  become.  But  becoming  or  the  pro- 
cess of  development  is  only  an  intermediate  step  between  possibility 
and  fulfilment ;  as  merely  coming  to  be,  hovering  between  starting- 
point  and  goal,  that  which  is  developing  itself  would  be  neither  identical 
with  itself  as  it  was  in  its  potentiality,  nor  yet  already  that  which  it 
has  to  become.  This  at  once  enables  us  to  see  why  the  second  stage 
:  of  the  development,  in  which  that  from  which  we  started  is  as  it  were 
divided  against  itself,  was  called  by  Hegel  '  other  being '  or  «  being 
otherwise27;  we  see  it  still  more  clearly  when  we  remember  that  it  is 
1  ['Ansich.']  2  [<  Anderssein.'] 


The  Hegelian  Dialectic.  J99 

CHAPTER  III.]  ..•*•'»  & 


--j 

"^ft' 


of  'being  for  sell      is  givei    _  attainment  of  the  end  of  de- 

ing  the  completion  of  becommg,  the  attammen  of 

Jopment,the  ^  /^^^^Ln  ^  tte  ^T 
course  is  not  .a  simple  return,  i.e.  w  '  t      i      any  result 

mediate  stage  of  the  process  »  «£»£  ^          ^  ^  sense  of 
behind  or  wped  clean  out;  it  must  be  se  selfj  ;s  richer 

^^ 


to  a  return  of  the  latte  r  inc^  ^  ^  ^U  it  b»  passed;  thus 
pitch  the  result  of  tbe^mte  ml    through    ^  ^  ^  fonn  rf 

"hen  a  mind,  in  which  '""^^J^lowed,  had,  by  passing 
methods  which  its  though  ™  involving  aouw  and  the 

and 


pitc       e  ^  ^ 

"hen  a  mind,  in  which  '""^^J^lowed,  had,  by  passing 
methods  which  its  though  ™^  involving  aouw  and  the 
through  various  .expense  and  ^  J^^  of  these  truths,  i 
removal  of  doubt,  arrived  at  a  be  ennched.  I 

Would  merely  have  returned  o_itselt  ana  y  ^.^  of 

'-=* 


. 

to  possibility.  mnments  or  stages  of  '  being  in  itself,' 

ks  understood  the  three  mom  entsj  ^r      g^  ^^^^ 
.  other-being,'  .and  •  bemg  for   ts  If,  J 


of  the  conception  <***%*£*££  But  Hegel's  system  rests, 
them  in  everything  that  develop  J  £*  ^  content  of  the  universe, 

tbe  v 


as  we  said,  on  the  convicUon  fl^tbe  v        ^  ^^  are  but  stages 

«•  ~ 


as  we  sa, 

the  whole  intelligible  world,  «•  ~^  and  that  within  each  of 
in  the.  development  ^^^Un  prOceed  in  the  same 
these  great  provinces  the  several  a 

i  [«  Fiirsicbsein.'] 


2oo  Schemes  and  Symbols.  [BOOK  n. 

rhythmic  order,  each  founded  upon  and  issuing  out  of  that  which 
•goes  before,  and  that  accordingly  the  sum  of  all  that  Is  intelligible 
and  all  that  is  real  would  present  itself  to  us  if  we  knew  it  completely 
as  a  great  series,  whose  several  periods  are  similarly  constructed  but 
have  each  a  peculiar  significance  in  its  content  which  is  ever  rising 
higher  and  higher.  Upon  this  conviction  we  do  not  here  intend  to 
pronounce  any  judgment ;  but  it  remains  for  us  to  ask  what  is  the 
logical  value  of  the  dialectic  method  just  described. 

193.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  It  is  not  strictly  speaking  a  method  in 
the  sense  of  a  direction  how  to  find  something  that  we  are  in  search 
of ;  it  is  rather  a  scheme,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  have  used  the  word 
above,  which  only  invites  us  to  enquire  if  anything  is  to  be  found  in 
a  given  direction  or  in  a  spot  already  marked  out,  and  if  so  what  it  is, 
though  of  course  it  implies  a  confident  expectation  that  the  search 
can  never  be  in  vain.    If  we  try  to  apply  this  scheme  to  the  inde- 
pendent treatment  of  a  generic  conception  M9  in  order  to  arrange  its 
various  species  in  a  series  corresponding  to  their  essential  resemblances 
and  differences,  or  if  we  try  by  means  of  it  to  exhibit  in  their  true 
relations  to  one  another  a  series  of  conceptions  which  are  connected 
by  a  variety  of  other  circumstances  (as  e.  g.  right,  wrong,  crime,  and 
punishment  are  connected),  we  at  once  find  how  uncertain  It  leaves 
us  as  to  the  direction  in  which  our  thoughts  are  to  be  turned.     It 
is  possible  that  this  uncertainty  might  vanish  if  we  could  appeal  to 
a  complete  philosophy  which  had  already  set  down  in  a  universal 
series  the  history  of  the  development  of  all  that  is  thinkable,  and  had 
therefore  arrived  at  a  conception  of  right  so  perfect  as  to  reveal  at 
once  the  direction  of  its  further  dialectical  development.    But  to  say 
this  would  be  to  deny  from  the  beginning  the  applicability  of  the 
method  as  a  universal  direction  for  the  discovery  of  truth;   it  can 
prove  itself  such  only  by  this  independent  service  which  we  require ; 
i.  e.  it  must  be  able  merely  by  means  of  its  form  of  procedure  to  teach 
us  how  to  develop  any  given  conception  in  all  its  proper  conse- 
quences. 

Suppose  then  that  we  have  given  us  the  general  conception  of  right, 
for  evidently  the  other  three  that  we  named  refer  to  this  as  a  primary 
conception  already  fixed:  what  now  is  it  'in  itself  or  potentially? 
into  what  'other-being7  does  It  pass  over?  into  what  e being  for  self 
does  it  return?  It  is  at  any  rate  evident  that  a  right  involves  an 
estimate  of  relations  which  prevail  between  the  claims  of  various 
persons  to  exercise  their  wills  upon  some  object  which  brings  them 
into  collision.  It  follows  that  there  can  be  no  right  if  there  be  no 


CHAPTER  in.]  The  Hegelian  Dialectic.  201 

world  with  relations  and  objects  for  the  exercise  of  will,  or  if  there  be 
no  persons  who  can  direct  their  wills  to  the  same  ends  in  one  and 
the  same  world.  Right  then  is  only  potentially  right  and  not  yet  that 
which  according  to  its  conception  it  is  to  be,  so  long  as  it  only 
denotes  by  anticipation  the  approval  or  disapproval  of  relations  which 
do  not  yet  exist. 

Its  ' other-being '  is  also  quite  intelligible;  it  all  comes  to  the 
simple  truth  that  general  conceptions  mean  nothing  when  there  are 
no  particulars  for  them  to  connect;  the  'other-being*  of  right  con- 
sists in  the  various  rights  whose  conditions  lie  in  the  existence  of  this 
nature,  of  these  human  personalities  with  these  definite  wants  and 
claims;  after  the  general  doctrine  which  sets  forth  the  conception  of 
right  will  come  the  special  doctrine  which  contains  its  applications. 
This  direction  is  so  simple  that  we  do  not  need  to  wait  for  the 
dialectic  method  to  teach  it  to  us ;  but  that  method  does  not  help 
us  in  the  least  to  carry  it  out ;  for  after  all  experience  alone  can  teach 
us  what  conditions  do  in  fact  exist  which  give  occasion  for  the 
development  of  the  general  idea  of  right  into  special  forms  of  right. 

194,  There  is,  however,  yet  another  kind  of  advance  that  we  can 
conceive.  '  Other-being '  certainly  does  often  mean  the  passing  of 
the  universal  into  its  various  particular  forms;  but  I  have  already 
remarked  that  the  Hegelian  doctrine  lays  stress  upon  the  relation  of 
opposition  which  prevails  between  the  two  members,  including  the 
opposition  of  the  universal  to  the  particular :  this  idea  of  opposition, 
universalized  and  carried  to  its  extreme  pitch  in  the  conception  of 
contradiction,  gives  a  further  meaning  to  (  other-being/ — it  may  stand 
for  the  simple  contrary  of  that  which  the  first  (the  being  in  itself) 
stands  for.  In  pursuance  of  this  train  of  thought,  right  was  made  to 
pass  into  wrong ;  and  wrong  was  made  to  issue  in  punishment,  not 
indeed  as  the  4  being-for  itself,'  but  as  the  means  of  reasserting  the 
violated  right  by  the  negation  of  its  '  other-being,'  i.  e.  of  the  crime. 

Now  here  again  we  have  nothing  that  would  not  be  just  as  clear 
by  itself  without  all  this  apparatus  of  the  dialectic  method;  and 
further,  the  method  is  actually  confusing.  Any  unprejudiced  person 
would  say  to  himself  on  reflexion  that  all  right  has  living  reality  only 
when  living  persons  not  only  know  it  but  respect  it  in  their  actions, 
but  that  the  movements  of  men's  wills  are  not  in  fact  governed  by 
the  ideal  which  they  ought  to  follow;  wrong  and  crime  therefore 
appear,  not  as  something  necessary  that  must  exist,  but  as  something 
possible  that  may,  and  indeed  always  will,  exist,  to  judge  by  what 
experience  teaches  us  of  human  nature.  In  the  transition  which 


2G2  Schemes  and  Symbols.  [  BOOK  n. 

the  dialectic  method  gives  there  is  none  of  this  cautious  bridging  of 
the  gap  between  the  two  conceptions;  it  is  represented  as  part  of  the 
very  conception  of  right  that  it  shall  pass  over  into  wrong,  and  the 
paradox  is  not  to  be  justified  by  a  plea  which  will  be  presently 
considered. 

The  transition  to  punishment  as  the  third  stage  offends  us  less 
merely  because  we  supply  the  motives  which  are  in  truth  not  given  at 
all  by  the  method  itself.  The  method  does  indeed  demand  restoration 
of  the  right,  and  that  by  negating  its  negation  the  wrong ;  but  it  does 
not  tell  us  by  what  procedure  this  task,  stated  abstractly  as  the 
negation  of  the  wrong,  is  to  be  carried  out.  Why  should  it  take  the 
shape  of  punishment?  The  evil  disposition  out  of  which  the  wrong1 
sprang  is  equally  negated  by  disapproval  and  by  improvement,  the 
harm  done  by  payment  of  damages,  the  violation  of  the  dignity  of  the 
law  by  repentance,  and  by  a  fresh  recognition  of  its  bindingness.  All 
these  considerations  show  that  the  dialectic  method  was  of  no  use 
here  except  as  a  scheme,  with  places  marked  out  which  we  might 
seek  to  fill,  but  that,  though  we  were  tolerably  successful  in  filling- 
them,  the  content  with  which  they  were  to  be  filled  was  only  to  be 
got  from  a  quite  independent  examination  of  the  peculiar  nature  of 
the  object  in  question. 

195.  We  said  that  it  seemed  to  us  absurd  to  maintain  that  it  is 
part  of  the  very  conception  of  right  to  pass  over  into  wrong ;  but  this 
swinging  round  of  a  conception  info  its  opposite  has  been  so  often  and  so 
emphatically  claimed  as  a  higher  truth  discovered  by  dialectic,  that  it 
is  worth  while  to  return  to  the  point.  Hegel  remarks  *  that  at  first  of 
course  the  .understanding  fancies  it  can  apprehend  the  nature  and 
truth  of  the  real  world  by  a  number  of  fixed  conceptions  complete  in 
themselves  and  exclusive  of  each  other;  but  that  the  truth  is  that 
different  conceptions  do  not  simply  stand  one  beside  the  other  with 
equal  claims  to  represent  the  finite,  but  that  the  finite  of  its  own 
nature  does  away  with  itself,  and  passes  over  of  itself  into  its  con- 
trary. Thus  we  say  that  man  is  mortal,  regarding  death  as  something 
whose  ground  lies  merely  in  external  circumstances ;  and  according 
to  this  view  man.  would  have  two  distinct  properties,  that  of  living  and 
that  of  being  mortal  also.  But,  according  to  Hegel,  the  true  way  of 
regarding  the  matter  is  that  life  as  such  contains  the  germ  of  death, 
and  that  in  a  word  the  finite  in  itself  contradicts,  and  thereby  docs 
away  with  itself. 

Here  we  can  detect,  more  readily  than  we  can  in  some  of  the  other 
1  [Vol.  VI.  of  his  collected  works,  p.  152  f.] 


CHAPTER  in.]  The  Hegelian  Dialectic.  203 

passages  in  which  Hegel  treats  of  dialectic,  a  confusion  between  two 
different  statements.  It  is  to  the  conceptions  by  which  we  try  to 
apprehend  reality  that  fixity  and  completeness  are  attributed  in  the 
first  sentence :  it  is  not  the  conceptions  but  the  finite  thing  to  which 
we  apply  them  that  is  said  to  pass  over  into  its  contrary, — and  in  this 
latter  statement  lies  all  the  truth  that  the  passage  contains,  which  truth 
is  shown  by  what  follows  to  have  been  uttered  unintentionally  or  even 
contrary  to  the  intention  of  the  author.  For  when  the  finite  as  such 
does  away  with  itself,  it  does  so  not  because  the  general  conceptions 
which  apply  to  it  have  lost  their  definiteness  and  swung  round  into 
their  contraries,  but  because  it,  the  thing  to  which  those  conceptions 
are  applied,  as  finite  or  as  actual,  is  unable  permanently  to  fulfil  what 
is  required  of  it  by  these  conceptions,  though  each  of  them  is  true  of 
it  at  one  moment ;  through  a  defect  in  its  nature  it  passes  out  of  the 
province  of  one  unchanged  conception  into  the  province  of  another 
which  is  equally  unchanged.  But  the  conceptions  themselves  do  not 
alter  their  eternal  meaning  because  it  is  only  for  one  moment  perhaps 
that  they  are  a  correct  measure  of  the  changeable  objects  to  which 
they  are  applied. 

The  true  view  of  the  matter  then  cannot  be  that  life  as  such  bears 
in  it  the  germ  of  death,  and  that  the  finite  in  general  contradicts  itself: 
it  is  rather  the  two  parts  of  this  statement  that  contradict  each  other. 
Life  as  such  does  not  die,  and  the  general  conception  of  life  obliges 
the  living  thing  to  live,  not  to  die ;  it  is  only  the  finite,  mentioned  in 
the  second  part  of  the  statement,  i.e.  only  particular  living  bodies  that 
carry  in  them  the  germ  of  death.     And  even  they  do  so  not  in  virtue 
of  the  idea  of  life  which  is  realised  in  them,  but  assuredly  only  by 
force  of  external  circumstances,  i.  e.  only  because  that  combination  of , 
material  elements  through  which  alone  life  is  manifested  on  the  surface 
of  this  earth  is  unable  to  exhibit  an  undying  example  of  life,  though 
that  would  in  no  way  contradict  the  idea  of  life, — whether  this  inability 
be  regarded  merely  as  a  result  of  the  laws  of  nature  which  are  here  in 
operation,  or  as  part  of  a  universal  plan. 

Similarly  right  never  itself  passes  over  into  wrong,  but  sometimes 
the  will  of  a  living  person  which  ought  to  embody  it  may,  through 
want  of  judgment  or  through  the  impulse  of  passion,  be  led  into 
wrong  while  striving  to  do  right,  and  sometimes  the  law,  which,  men 
being  what  they  are,  could  not  be  administered  at  all  if  it  allowed 
exceptions,  may  do  a  wrong  in  a  particular  case  involving  complica- 
tions for  which  no  provision  has  been  made. 

Logic  then  can  in  no  way  accept  this  doctrine  that  conceptions 


2O4  Schemes  and  Symbols.  [BOOK  n. 

dialecticaily  do  away  with  themselves  :  but  the  real  world  as  we  find  it 
is  so  arranged  and  ordered  that  what  is,  though  it  does  not  do  away 
with  itself,  yet  does  of  its  own  nature  pass  from  the  province  of  one 
conception  into  that  of  another ;  and  the  fact  that  we  find  it  so  is 
worth  notice,  as  a  fact  about  things  that  is  to  say,  not  as  a  peculiarity 
of  the  intellectual  tools  by  which  we  come  to  know  them. 

106.  In  any  case,  even  apart  from  all  the  objections  here  raised, 
the  dialectic  method  would  in  the  end  give  us  only  an  arrangement  of 
our  conceptions,  —  an  arrangement  which  might  no  doubt  present  , 
various  points  of  interest  to  persons  fond  of  reflecting  and  comparing, 
and  might  move  their  feelings  by  the  discovery  of  analogies,  parallels, 
and  contrasts,  but  which  would  scarcely  open  up  a  new  way  of  know- 
ledge that  could  lead  to  definite  new  judgments  or  propositions,  or  to 
a  better  and  more  precise  settlement  of  questions  hitherto  doubtful 
To  supply  this  want  which  the  dialectic  method  fails  to  supply  is  pre- 
cisely the  aim  of  other  vast  attempts,  viz.  the  attempts  to  found  a 
logical  language,  a  universal  mode  of  characterising  conceptions^  or 
a  philosophical  calculus,  at  which  Leibnitz  laboured  so  long.  The 
mere  addition  of  a  series  of  large  numbers  would  be  an  endless  task 
if  we  were  obliged  to  have  a  distinct  image  of  each  one  of  the 
thousands  or  hundreds  of  units  composing  them,  and  to  build  up  each 
of  these  numbers  separately  and  at  last  their  sum  by  repeatedly 
adding  unit  to  unit.  But  our  system  of  ciphering  enables  us,  without 
the  need  of  distinctly  forming  even  any  collective  idea  of  the  numbers, 
to  set  units  under  units,  tens  under  tens,  hundreds  under  hundreds, 
and  then,  by  adding  up  each  of  these  simple  columns,  unerringly  to 
bring  out  a  result  which  itself  in  turn  we  are  quite  unable  to  represent 
adequately  in  a  single  picture  by  any  effort  of  our  imagination. 

Now  our  conceptions  so  far  resemble  numbers  that  they  also  con- 
tain for  the  most  part  a  variety  of  individual  images,  whose  union 
with  each  other  is  not  distinctly  before  us  at  every  moment,  but  only 
thought  of  in  one  collective  impression;  but  they  are  denoted  by 
words  far  less  perfectly  than  numbers  are  by  figures.  By  the  use  of 
words  that  are  akin  (though  we  are  often  no  longer  conscious  of  the 
fact)  speech  does  indicate  the  kinship  between  contents,  but  very 
imperfectly,  for  kindred  ideas  are  also  denoted  by  independent  roots : 
the  kind  of  kinship  between  them  is  no  less  imperfectly  expressed, 
for  the  small  variety  of  ways  in  which  derivatives  may  be  formed  is 
quite  inadequate  to  the  manifold  relations  that  have  to  be  indicated ; 
moreover,  instances  of  each  relation  occur  which,  as  the  first  to  take 
the  fancy  of  the  framers  of  language,  are  denoted  by  simple  words  in 


205 


CHAPTER  III.] 

which  the  characteristic  derivative  form  is  wanting;  and  it$a]ly  the 
name  of  a  conception  never  gives  us  all  the  ideas  that  make^-Wp-^. 
content  marked  by  simple  signs  and  united  in  such  a  way  that  when 
we  have  to  combine  several  conceptions  MNO  we  may  shut  our  eyes 
to  the  meaning  of  the  whole  and  apply  ourselves  to  combine  some 
of  the  component  ideas  with  the  same  certainty  of  arriving  at  new 
and  correct  results  that  our  system  of  ciphering  gives  us  in  numerical 
calculations. 

These  defects  of  language  then  we  are  called  upon  to  try  to 
amend ;  we  are  to  dissect  all  our  conceptions  till  we  have  found  the 
simple  primitive  ideas  of  various  kinds  which  admit  no  further 
analysis  and  the  simplest  ways  in  which  they  can  be  combined,  and 
we  are  to  characterise  these  by  fixed  signs,  in  order  to  obtain  by  their 
combination  a  symbol  for  each  conception  which  shall  adequately 
express  its  content,  We  need  not  think  that  the  object  of  this  under- 
taking is  the  formation  of  a  new  speakable  language,  which  could 
never  supplant  the  national  and  historical  forms  of  speech :  its  result 
would  be  a  collection  of  formulae  for  the  purposes  of  scientific  think- 
ing only,  to  which  recourse  might  always  be  had  for  the  settlement  of 
the  doubts  which  arise  from  the  employment  of  ambiguous  ex- 
pressions :  for  Leibnitz  flatters  himself  that  if  we  once  got  such  an 
instrument  disputants  would  always  cut  their  quarrel  short  by  an 
amicable  agreement — i  Let  us  reckon  it  out/ 

197.  This  is  no  doubt  one  of  those  enterprises  whose  execution 
alone  can  finally  decide  whether  they  are  practicable;  it  would  be 
over-hasty  to  deny  the  possibility  of  that  which  might  after  all  per- 
haps be  realised  by  a  happy  invention.  However,  the  utter  want  of 
success  hitherto  makes  the  inherent  difficulties  of  the  task  more 
evident  for  the  present  than  the  possibility  of  overcoming  them.  If 
all  we  had  to  do  were  to  make  a  system  of  signs  for  marking  the 
contents  of  our  conceptions,  the  problem  might  appear  difficult  but 
not  insoluble.  For  then  we  should  probably  begin  by  passing  over 
all  the  generic  conceptions  of  natural  history  and  limit  ourselves  to 
those  conceptions  whose  union  in  thought  leads  to  difficulties  which 
impede  science  or  the  practical  deliberations  of  life.  Nevertheless 
even  this  problem  is  harder  than  it  seems,  and  the  possibility  of 
solving  it  derives  only  an  apparent  confirmation  from  the  mathe- 
matician's language  of  signs  and  the  symbols  of  chemistry. 

It  is  characteristic  of  the  mathematician  that  he  reckons  only  with 
comparable  elements,  with  magnitudes,  the  simplest  combinations  of 
which  he  certainly  can  symbolise  quite  clearly  and  unambiguously ; 


206  Schemes  and  Symbols.  [BOOK  n. 

but  as  the  functions  and  equations  thus  obtained  grow  more  and 
more  complex,  we  see  more  and  more  plainly  even  here  a  sort  of 
deterioration  in  their  employment.  In  the  place  of  denominations 
which  really  exhibit  the  inner  structure  of  the  magnitude  in  question 
so  as  to  indicate  quite  plainly  how  they  are  to  be  treated  in  the  calcu- 
lation, we  r.nd  introduced  in  order  to  secure  the  necessary  con- 
ciseness arbitrary  symbols  which  no  longer  have  this  property,  but 
resemble  the  words  of  ordinary  language  whose  meaning  must  be 
known  quite  independently  of  their  sound.  The  expression  •/— -i 
still  expresses  the  origin  of  the  function  for  which  it  stands,  and  from 
this  we  can  determine  by  general  rales  what  results  when  we  multiply 
it  once  or  several  times  by  itself:  but  this  expression  has  already 
been  discarded  as  too  lengthy  and  replaced  by  the  other  expression 
i  which  as  it  stands  gives  no  clue  to  its  signification,  and  whose 
meaning  must  be  otherwise  already  known  if  it  is  to  be  used  cor- 
rectly. When  we  go  on  to  speak  of  B-functions  and  r-functions, 
these  expressions  are  certainly  concise,  but  we  can  only  understand 
them  by  representing  them  as  equivalent  to  other  lengthy  formulae, 
which  in  turn  are  only  made  Intelligible  by  a  previous  explanation  of 
the  meaning  to  be  attached  to  the  general  signs  of  magnitude  and 
symbols  of  combination  employed  in  them.  All  this  is  no  reproach 
to  mathematics,  nor  is  it  any  proof  of  the  impossibility  of  a  universal 
system  for  characterising  conceptions;  it  only  shows  that  any 
formulae  that  the  latter  could  give  us  would  not  by  themselves  tell 
us  all  we  need  know,  but  would  presuppose  a  great  deal  which  we 
should  have  to  learn  before  we  could  even  understand  them. 

The  symbols  of  chemistry  make  this  still  plainer :  as  yet  they  refer 
only  to  the  quantitative  relations  of  the  combining  elements,  and  to 
some  extent  to  the  supposed  form  of  their  union ;  what  letters  are  to 
stand  for  the  several  elements,  and  how  their  sequence  is  to  denote 
the  arrangement  of  those  elements,  we  must  of  course  learn  or  know 
by  heart,  as  both  can  only  be  determined  by  convention :  but  no  one 
can  tell  merely  by  looking  at  the  formula  thus  constructed  whether  it 
stands  for  a  gas  or  a  fluid  or  a  solid  body,  nor  what  its  density  is  or 
its  specific  gravity,  nor  what  its  colour  may  be,  whether  it  is  fixed  or 
volatile,  soluble  in  water  or  insoluble.  If  a  man  after  looking  at  the 
formula  answers  these  questions  correctly  he  does  so  upon  the  basis 
of  analogies  with  which  his  experience  supplies  him,  and  which  he 
could  not  draw  from  the  formulae  themselves  with  any  certainty  that 
they  would  be  correct.  And  yet  all  that  is  wanted  here  would  be  the 
determination  of  properties  or  modes  of  relation,  which  though  not 


CHAPTER  in,]          Possibility  of  such  a  scheme.  207 

absolutely  homogeneous  are  yet  as  physical  processes  dependent 
upon  one  another  and  functions  of  one  another,  and  therefore  give 
room  for  hope  that  laws  may  be  discovered  which  will  make  it  easy 
to  mark  by  signs  their  dependence  upon  each  other :  but  the  diffi- 
culties would  be  vastly  increased  when  we  tried  to  characterise  all 
our  conceptions  and  had  to  deal  with  the  combination  of  unhomo- 
geneous  elements  which  yet  have  a  necessary  relation  to  each  otfwl^ 

198.  But  it  is  not  a  system  of  signs  only  that  we  want,  nor  is  the 
success  of  mathematics  due  to  its  symbols,  though  the  skill  with 
which  they  have  been  chosen  has  no  dpqbt  furthered  its  advance. 
The  truth  is  that  the  usefulness  of  the  signs  rests  here  upon  the  fact 
that  we  already  have  unambiguous  rules,  which  enable  us  to  deter- 
mine what  follows  from  the  simplest  combinations  of  magnitudes, 
and  then  being  applied  anew  with  the  same  freedom  from  ambiguity 
to  the  results  thus  obtained  issue  in  these  elegant  and  certain  methods 
of  solving  problems.  It  is  these  rules  that  we  must  feel  the  want  of 
when  we  try  to  combine  conceptions  which  denote  something  more 
than  magnitudes  so  as  to  produce  a  certain  result ;  and  I  believe  that 
we  have  absolutely  no  reason  to  flatter  ourselves  with  the  hope  that 
these  rules  would  of  themselves  suddenly  become  perfectly  clear  so 
soon  as  we  had  analysed  into  their  ultimate  constituents  the  essences, 
contents,  and  matter  to  which  they  were  to  be  applied.  Assuredly  there 
is  no  need  to  insist  on  the  fact  that  increased  clearness  in  the  objects 
cannot  but  have  a  favourable  effect  on  the  certainty  of  our  conclusions 
regarding  them ;  but  in  the  main  it  is  not  by  analysing  our  concep- 
tions and  tracing  them  back  to  primary  conceptions,  but  by  dissecting 
our  judgments  and  tracing  them  back  to  simple  principles  that  we 
must  hope  gradually  to  fix  our  convictions  which  on  so  many  points 
are  still  in  flux. 

But  there  are  two  things  which  we  shall  require  to  know :  first  * 
what  are  the  necessary  consequences  which  follow  from  certain 
definite  relations  which,  as  we  either  arbitrarily  assume  or  are  forced 
to  believe,  hold  between  the  contents  of  various  conceptions ;  and 
secondly  what  general  laws,  not  proved  to  be  necessary  but  found  to 
hold  good  in  fact,  connect  various  ideas  in  such  a  way  that  our 
reason,  founding  upon  these  laws,  can  deduce  the  consequences  that 
will  then  necessarily  follow  from  given  conditions.  These  problems, 
which  concern  the  application  of  the  form  of  judgment,  we  must  for 
the  present  attempt  to  solve  without  the  valuable  assistance  which 
that  universal  system  of  signs  would  no  doubt  afford  if  it  were  once 
completed. 


Note  on  the  Logical  Calctilus. 

THE  Ite  $  calculus  has  been  often  taken  up  and  often 

abandoned  I  but  the  Boole  has  recently  made  an  elaborate 

and  careful  attempt  to  dfrry  it  out,  which  is  beginning  to  attract  atten- 
tion in  Germany  as  well  as  in  his  own  country.  Though  I  freely 
admit  that  the  author's  ingenuity  makes  his  able  work1  very  charming, 
I  am  unable  to  convince  fnyself  that  this  calculus  will  help  us  to  solve 
problems  which  defy  the  ordinary  methods  of  logic. 

Boole  does  indeed  insist  that  the  result  of  a  calculation  when  com- 
pleted must  be  expressible  in  logical  terms  ;  but  he  holds  that  between 
the  statement  of  the  problem  and  its  solution  a  course  of  operations 
may  be  introduced  whose  several  steps  allow  of  no  logical  interpreta- 
tion ;  and  he  appeals  to  the  extension  of  mathematics  by  the  intro- 
duction of  imaginary  quantities.  This  appeal  is  hardly  relevant. 
The  mathematician  could  not  avoid  imaginary  formulae :  he  lit  upon 
them  in  the  course  of  well-founded  calculations :  he  has  always 
sought  for  the  interpretation  of  the  enigmatic  expression  and  has 
actually  found  it  in  the  province  of  geometry.  In  the  logical  calculus 
on  the  contrary  this  working  in  the  dark  to  which  recourse  is  had 
from  time  to  time  would  have  to  take  place  by  means  of  symbols 
which  have  been  arbitrarily  chosen  to  denote  logical  elements  and 
the  relations  of  these  elements.  If  therefore  a  calculation  is  really 
of  use  only  when  it  allows  us  to  solve  single  problems  mechanically, 
without  requiring  us  to  be  conscious  at  every  moment  of  the  logical 
meaning  of  what  had  taken  place,  it  becomes  all  the  more  necessary 
that  the  rules  which  make  such  labour-saving  processes  possible 
should  be  determined  upon  purely  logical  principles  without  any  rash 
and  misty  analogy  from  the  province  of  mathematics.  Though  on 
this  point  I  entirely  agree  with  the  admirable  exposition  of  Schroder2, 
yet  I  cannot  entirely  follow  him:  his  demonstrations,  which  after 
the  manner  employed  by  mathematicians  follow  upon  the  statement 
of  the  theorems  to  be  proved,  have  in  my  opinion  no  significance 
beyond  that  of  establishing  that  the  whole  calculus  is  consistent  with 
itself  and  that  all  the  transformations  and  combinations  of  its  elements 
which  it  allows  lead  to  the  same  results  when  applied  to  the  same 

1  ['An  Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought/  London,  1854.] 

2  [*Der  Operationskreis  des  Logikcalciils,'  Leipzig, 


CHAPTER  in.]        Note  on  the  Logical  Calculus*  209 

problems  :  but  we  can  only  feel  confident  that  the  calculus  as  a  whole 
is  applicable,  when  it  has  been  directly  shown  that  each  universal 
proposition  is  only  the  transcription  of  a  logical  truth  into  the  sym- 
bolic language  that  has  been  adopted. 

It  has  long  been  the  custom  in  the  section  of  logic  that  deals 
with  artificial  classifications  to  make  use  of  letters  to  denote  the 
marks  which  combine  in  various  ways  to  form  the  different  species 
that  fail  under  a  concept.  Supposing  that  the  three  marks  ABC 
belonged  to  the  general  notion  J/,  the  principle  of  disjunction  would 
direct  us  to  reduce  each  of  them  to  its  subdivisions  #,  tf2<js...,  £t  <MB...  ;* 
the  complete  set  of  triplets  of  the  form  a^c,  of  course  not  counting 
repetitions  or  permutations,  would  represent  all  the  kinds  of  J/,  which, 
failing  any  closer  determinations,  may  be  regarded  as  equally  possible, 
These  groups  obtained  by  combination  express  p?r  se  merely  the 
simultaneous  presence  of  their  elements;  they  leave  the  nature  of 
the  connexion  between  the  latter  undetermined  in  two  respects. 

First  of  all  they  do  not  assign  the  final  form  which  is  to  be  the 
result  of  the  completed   combination.     Where  logical  classification 
is  aimed  at  this  want  is  supplied  by  the  image  which  is  retained  in 
thought  of  the  abstract  M\  of  which  the  kinds  are  in  question;  this 
J/  is  to  be  added  in  imagination  to  each  combination  a  b  <r,  as  the 
general  outline  which  the  union  of  the  elements  is  to  fill  in ;  apart 
from   such  an  occasion   for   the   procedure   by  combinations,  a  b  c 
taken  by  itself  only  designates  any  object  of  thought,  no  matter  how. 
constituted,  in  which  the  marks  #,  $,  and  c  are  found  together,  or  what 
is  more  important,  any  cast",  which  it  has  not  yet  been  possible  to 
characterise  more  closely,  in  which  the  conditions  </,  //,  and  c  are  found 
together.     This  uncertainty  does  not  exist  in  mathematics,  for  the 
form  which  the  result  of  the  calculation  is  finally  to  take,  is  here 
completely  and  solely  determined  by  the  definitely  assignable  nature 
of  the  connexion  which  this  science  requires  tq  be  introduced  between 
its  elements* 

Now  with  regard  to  this  second  point  also,  the  reciprocal  determina- 
tion of  their  component  parts,  the  formulae  employed  in  the  com-* 
lunations,  in  themselves,  contain  no  explanation  of  any  kind  In 
algebra  custom  has  made  them  an  expression  of  multiplication;  the 
particular  sign  of  this  operation  which  has  to  he  retained  in  the  case 
of  arithmetic  has  been  found  unnecessary,  in  the  case  of  algebraic 
calculations  at  least,  and  the  product  of  multinomials  has  been  found 
equal  to  the  sura  of  the  combination**  of  their  elements.  Logic,  on 
the  other  hand,  does  indeed  presuppose  every  mark  that  belongs  to 

p 


2io  Note  on  the  Logical  Calculus.  [BOOKIL 

a  whole  to  be  connected  in  a  particular  way  with  every  other,  but  it 
has  no  means  of  actually  expressing  these  specific  determinations, 
and  entrusts  them  to  our  independent  knowledge  of  the  subject.  But 
what  universal  laws  it  does  possess  on  its  own  account  with  regard  to 
the  connexion  of  the  marks  bear  no  resemblance  to  the  idea  of 
multiplication.  I  will  not  here  lay  much  stress  on  the  fact  that  the 
multiplier,  which  must  be  thought  of  to  begin  with  as  a  whole  number, 
leaves  the  value  of  the  multiplicand  as  a  separate  number  unaffected 
and  only  repeats  it  several  times  over ;  while  every  mark  c,  which  is 
annexed  to  a  combination  a  l>,  not  only  modifies  the  reciprocal  de- 
termination of  these  original  elements,  but  at  the  same  time  by 
adding  to  the  matter  of  the  thought  limits  the  extent  of  its  application. 
Anyone  who  cared  to  dispute  the  question  might  perhaps  find  it 
easy  even  on  this  point  to  make  more  of  the  analogies  between  the 
two  sets  of  relations  than  of  their  differences.  But  it  is  an  essential 
fact  for  our  purpose  that  while  multiplication  is  forced  to  retain  both 
the  recurrences  a  a,  b  b,  and  the  permutations  a  b,  b  a,  as  indispensable 
components  of  its  product,  logic  can  admit  no  meaning  in  the  former 
and  no  distinction  between  the  latter.  Thus  the  nature  of  the  case 
presented  no  occasion  for  departing  from  the  neutral  significance  of 
combination-formulae  which  can  have  many  kinds  of  meanings,  and 
applying  to  them  the  mechanism  of  calculation,  which  has  strictly 
speaking  no  suitability  to  them  except  as  symbols  of  quantities  that 
can  be  multiplied.  It  could  only  be  ventured  on  in  the  hope  that  the 
more  extended  application  of  the  calculus  would  compensate,  by 
results  which  no  other  means  could  attain,  for  a  cumbrousness  in- 
evitable at  the  outset,  seeing  that  exceptional  rules  were  necessary 
to  bring  such  an  inappropriate  mode  of  calculation  into  harmony  with 
its  logical  object-matter. 

Every  A,  according  to  the  law  of  Identity,  must  =  A.  Natural 
thought  has  no  motive  to  determine  such  an  A  over  again  by  a 
characteristic  At  in  the  same  way  in  which  A  would  be  determined 
by  a  second  mark  b.  No  doubt  we  speak  of  a  human  being  as  truly 
human,  or  emphatically  of  a  man  who  is  indeed  a  man ;  but  we  only 
employ  such  expressions  where  it  is  permissible  to  distinguish  the 
conception  M  of  an  ideal  from  the  conception  ^  of  the  particular 
facts  from  which  the  realisation  of  the  ideal  is  expected.  At  bottom, 
therefore,  we  are  not  determining  a  single  M  by  itself.  The  human 
being  M /*  that  is  thus  pronounced  to  be  truly  human,  corresponds 
to  its  determination  M  once  only  and  then  completely,  and  just  so 
in  another  aspect  corresponds  to  its  zoological  conception  /*  once 


CHAPTER  in.]        Note  on  the  Logical  Calculus.  211 

only  and  then  completely ;  such  a  thought  bears  no  resemblance  to 
the  attempt  to  determine  quadrupeds  over  again  by  repeating  the 
character  £  quadruped/  Nothing  but  the  machinery  of  the  calculus 
can  suggest  the  requirement  that  a  should  be  determined  by  a  as  in 
multiplication ;  but  then  the  formula  a  a  =  a  or  a2  =  a  which  is  now 
introduced  to  restore  logical  truth,  should  at  least  abstain  from  pro- 
fessing to  be  a  newly  discovered  fundamental  law  of  thought,  or 
indeed  anything  but  a  make-shift  contrivance  to  correct  an  improper 
procedure.  The  determination  of  a  by  a  is  logically  speaking  an 
operation  that  cannot  be  performed ;  it  is  only  because  and  in  as  far 
as,  in  the  context  of  our  thoughts,  such  a  fruitless  attempt  does  not 
result  in  cancelling  the  a  on  which  it  is  made,  that  it  is  permissible 
to  substitute  a  by  itself  for  the  a1  to  which  the  calculus  would  bring  . 
us ;  but  by  no  means  to  treat  this  c?  as  existent,  and  pronounce  it 
equal  to  a.  The  left  side  of  this  equation  contains  an  insoluble 
problem;  the  right  contains,  not  the  solution,  but  what  has  to  be 
acquiesced  in  because  there  is  no  solution. 

.  This  is  no  mere  verbal  dispute,  as  may  be  seen  from  some  con- 
siderations which  Boole  subjoins.  If  we  accept  <22  =  a  for  an  equation, 
it  is  an  easy  step  to  the  inferences  a*  —  a  =  o  or  a  —  a?  =  o ;  Boole 
resolves  this  last  formula  into  a(i  —  a)  =  o.  Now  the  law  of  excluded 
middle  teaches  us  that  everything  that  is  thinkable  is  either  a  or  not 
a ;  this  truth  is  expressed  by  Boole,  who  indicates  the  totality  of  the 
thinkable  by  the  symbol  i,  by  saying  that  not-a  is  what  remains 
of  this  totality  when  we  subtract  a  from  it;  so  that  (1—0)  is  the 
contradictory  opposite  of  a.  Now  the  meaning  of  giving  the  equa- 
tion the  form  in  which  one  side  is  zero  can  only  be  that  the 
combination  on  its  left  side"  has  no  extension  that  falls  under  it, 
and  cannot  therefore  occur  at  all  Thus  the  formula  0(1— a)  =  o 
becomes  the  expression  of  the  law  that  nothing  thinkable  can  be  at 
once  a  and  not-fl.  We  may  be  delighted  with  the  plasticity  of  the 
calculus  which  furnishes  such  a  graphic  expression  of  a  familiar 
truth ;  but  we  shall  be  the  less  prepared  to  admit  the  interpretation 
which  Boole  gives  his  formula  on  p.  50  of  his  work.  It  shows,  he 
contends,  that  the  law  which  is  regarded  as  the  highest  principle  of 
metaphysics  is  only  a  consequence  of  a  law  of  thought  which  is  really 
'mathematical  in  form;  that  it  is  because  this  law  finds  expression  in 
a  quadratic  equation  that  our  divisions  and  classifications  have  to  be 
performed  by  dichotomy ;  and  that  if  the  equation  had  been  of  the 
third  order  we  should  have  been  forced  to  proceed  by  trichotomy. 
I  am  sure  that  I  shall  not  be  guilty  of  trichotomy  in  the  sense  of 


212  Note  on  the  Logical  Calculus.  JBOOK  n. 

hair-splitting  if  I  object   to  this   extraordinary  piece  of  argument. 

Boole  himself  mentions  that  from  a?  =  a  we  can  further  deduce  ^  =  a, 

but  he  disposes  of  this  cubic  equation  with  the  remark  that  two  of 

the  factors  which  it  presupposes,  ±(i+^),  are  incapable  of  logical 

significance ;  and  it  was  clearly  the  same  reason  that  decided  him  at 

an  earlier  stage  to  attach  his  inferences  not  to  a*  — a  =  o  but  to 

a—  a2  =  o.     This  procedure  implies  an  idea  which  is  quite  correct; 

among  the  numerous  formulae  which  can  be  mathematically  derived 

from  the  supposed  logical  principle  a1  =  a  none  have  any  meaning 

but  those  which  express    something  that  is  of  use  in  logic ;    the 

validity  of  the  logical  law  does  not  depend  on  the  shape  of  the 

formula ;  it  is  the  value  of  the  formula  as  a  symbol  that  depends  on 

its  agreement  with  the  import  of  the  law.     But  the  quadratic  form 

itself  and  its  interpretation  are  altogether  a  mere  caprice.     I  shall 

not  insist  on  the  point  that  according  to  a~  =  a,  a  should  have  been 

at  once  substituted  for  <22,  which  would  have  brought  us  back  quite 

intelligibly  to  a  -  a  =  o ;  for  even  if  we  believed  it  possible  to  retain 

a*  as  a  real  result  of  a  practicable  determination  of  a  by  a,  and  as 

such  to  equate  it  with  #,  still  there  was  no  sort  of  logical  justification 

for  resolving  a  —  a*  into  a(i  —  a).     In  mathematics,  where  we  are 

speaking  of  magnitudes,  the  transformation  is  correct  and  in  it   i 

really  means  unity;  but  in  logic  the  difference  a —  a1  does  not  present 

the  least  motive  for  regarding  it  as  the  product  of  two  factors.    The  i, 

which  is  introduced  in  doing  so,  is  not  unity,  which  it  would  have  to 

be  if  the  resolution  were  to  be  mathematically  correct,  but  is  Boole's 

arbitrary  though  not  inappropriate  symbol  for  the  totality  of  the 

thinkable;    the  truth  that  a  and  i  —  a  taken  together  exhaust  this 

totality  must  therefore  be  established  to  begin  with,  in  order  to  so 

much   as   make   the   interpretation   possible  by  help  of  which  the 

formula  is  intended  to  yield  it. 

These  chimeras  have  not  found  their  way  to  Germany ;  but  I  have 
mentioned  them  at  length  because  of  their  connexion  with  a  general 
conception  which  docs  meet  with  some  assent  among  us.  We  do 
not  overlook  the  differences  between  arithmetical  and  logical  com- 
putation •  but  there  is  an  inclination  to  the  idea  of  a  more  general 
mathematical  calculus  *,  for  which  this  distinction  of  object-matter 
-would  be  indifferent.  And  it  is  true  that  every  single  act  of  thought, 
apart  from  the  logical  import  of  its  result,  admits  of  many  uniform 
repetitions,  and  the  result  admits  of  many  connections  and  rearrange- 
ments ;  further,  the  notions  of  equality,  inequality,  and  opposition  have 
1  [*  Eiaes  noch  allgemeineren  xnathcmatischen  Algorithrnus.'] 


CHAPTER  in j        Note  on  the  Logical  Calc^llus«  213 

significance  even  where  they  do  not  relate  to  magnitudes;  though  what 
consequences  they  have  in  such  cases  must  of  course  be  determined  for 
each  sphere  according  to  its  peculiar  nature.  Still,  when  it  has  been 
determined,  when,  that  is,  it  has  been  decided  under  the  jurisdiction  of 
logic,  what  result  must  be  derived  from  the  combined  or  separate  occur- 
rence of  several  acts  of  thought  and  their  particular  results  ;  then  the 
recurrences  'and  inter-connexions  of  all  these  elements  may  be  em- 
braced under  the  same  rules  of  union,  severance,  and  arrangement 
which  hold  good  of  all  that  is  recurrent  and  that  has  number.  Only 
the  laws  which  are  specifically  logical  and,  like  the  law  of  excluded 
middle,  govern  the  formation  of  the  actual  elements  which  are  to  enter 
into  this  new  connexion,  must  stand  on  their  own  feet;  and  it  is  an 
idea  as  incorrect  as  it  is  confused  to  expect  that  they  can  be  estab- 
lished by  any  mathematics  however  abstract  which  should  still  merit 
that  name  in  contradistinction  to  Logic.  On  the  contrary,  all  that 
such  a  science  would  have  to  teach  would  be  the  development  of  the 
simplest  logical  truths,  which  are  uniformly  true  of  the  manifold  and 
its  combinations,  whether  those  of  what  has  number  and  is  homo- 
geneous, or  those  of  what  has  mere  relations  and  is  heterogeneous. 
Many  things  may  be  proved  by  mere  verbal  deductions;  and  so  it  may 
be  held  an  important  task  to  reckon  up  these  truths,  in  their  abstract 
form  apart  from  their  applications ;  I  think  it  rather  tedious  than  in- 
dispensable. 

As  direct  expressions  of  such  extremely  simple  truth  we  at  once 
think  of  the  axioms,  the  separate  introduction  of  which  is  hardly 
more  than  a  matter  of  form.  Obviously  the  logical  calculus  must 
agree  that  a  =  a,  and  that  every  a  and  b  which  are  equal  to  a  third 
thing  c  are  equal  to  each  other;  only  the  definition  of  equality  de- 
mands a  few  words.  Logic  uses  a  to  indicate  a  general  mark,  a 
general  class,  or  a  general  case ;  and  is  therefore  able  to  accept  the 
language  of  the  calculus,  according  to  which  a  is  the  symbol  of  a  class, 
whose  extent  comprehends  all  individual  things  or  cases  of  whatever 
nature  which  share  the  character  a.  These  relations  of  extent  are  all 
that  the  calculus  notices ;  it  therefore  sets  down  two  class-symbols,  a 
and  I,  for  equal  when  they  present  to  thought  classes  composed  of 
identically  the  same  individuals  and  are  therefore  only  two  names  for 
the  same  class.  In  such  a  case  a  and  b  may  be  different  in  themselves, 
even  if  their  extensions  are  fully  coincident;  thus  equilateral  and 
equiangular  triangles,  if  nothing  but  their  extension  is  considered, 
are  of  course  merely  two  names  for  the  same  class;  still  in  logic 
we  could  not  pronounce  the  two  conceptions  equal  as  regards  the 


214  Note  on  the  Logical  Calculus.  [BOOK  n. 

contents  which  they  directly  declare  as  their  own  meaning.  It  follows 
just  as  simply  from  those  simplest  truths  that  it  is  always  possible  to 
comprehend  two  acts  of  thought  and  their  results  in  a  sum  a+b°, 
that  a-b  is  also  possible  in  logic  if  the  necessary  homogeneity  is 
obtained  -by  b  being  included  in  a;  that  the  other  combination  ab, 
which  collects  the  two  characters  into  one  idea,  represents  a  new 
class-symbol  with  a  defined  extension  ;  and  finally,  that  where  the 
problem  put  before  us  is  only  that  of  carrying  out  some  uniform 
mode  of  connexion,  no  difference  can  be  made  by  the  order  of  the 
summanda  or  factors  which  we  combine  to  make  a  sum  or  product. 

These  easy  analogies  between  mathematical  and  logical  reckoning 
are  less  deserving  of  mention  than  the  differences  which  are  derived 
from  the  specific  nature  of  logical  thought.  I  have  already  mentioned 
the  equation  a*  =  a ;  and  not  less  paradoxical  is  the  form  in  which 
the  law  a  +  a  =  a  veils  the  logical  truth  that  each  universal  concep- 
tion exists  once  only,  that  therefore  every  logical  assertion  about  what 
comes  under  such  a  notion  is  completely  exhausted  when  it  is  once 
thoroughly  admitted  of  the  conception  itself,  and  that  no  new  truth 
can  be  obtained  by  repeating  the  same  process  on  the  same  object. 
Just  so  the  theorems  a-\~al>-=a  and  a  (a +  !>}•=  a  remind  us  that 
every  assertion  which  is  once  granted  to  be  universally  true  of  a  is 
also  true  of  every  species  of  a  that  is  still  further  determined  by  any 
mark  £,  and  that  therefore  the  mention  of  a  I  beside  a  remains  in- 
effectual, in  other  words,  the  former  is  '  absorbed '  by  the  latter.  It 
is  only  the  improper  employment  of  the  sign  of  equation  that  gives 
these  theorems  their  appearance  of  peculiarity ;  all  that  they  really 
say  comes  to  this ;  wherever  the  mechanism  of  the  calculus  would 
naturally  lead  to  the  forms  <rr,  a  +  a,  a  +  aby  these  useless  incidents  of 
its  method  are  to  be  replaced  for  logical  purposes  by  a  simple  a. 

More  important  is  the  extended  use  which  the  calculus  makes  of 
the  law  of  excluded  middle;  for  the  principle  of  Duality,  which  appears 
at  this  point  as  a  new  law  of  thought,  conceals  nothing  more  than 
this  familiar  law.  If  we  use  a'  to  designate  the  contradictory  oppo- 
site of  a,  and  i  for  the  totality  of  the  thinkable,  then  we  have,  really 
as  equations,  the  formulae  a  +  a'=z  i,  according  to  which  all  possible 
matter  of  thought  is  exhausted  by  a  and  not-#,  and  act  =  o  which 
declares  the  impossibility  of  a  union  of  a  and  not-#.  No  further 
proof  is  either  possible  or  necessary,  whether  for  these  laws  or  for  the 
remaining  one  that  the  negation  of  not-0  brings  us  back  simply  to  a  and 
not  to  any  third  thing ;  they  arc  logical  truths  which  have  no  doubt 
received  4n  those  formulae  a  very  clear  and  convenient  expression™ 


CHAPTER  III.]  Note  OH  the  Logical  CdlculliS.  215 

The  old  Logic  had  its  chapters  about  immediate  inference,  con- 
version, and  contraposition  of  judgments,  and  endeavoured  by  help 
of  this  same  law  to  pursue  the  content  of  an  enunciated  judgment 
into  its  relations  to  judgments  not  yet  uttered.  Boole  in  a  more 
comprehensive  spirit  sets  before  himself  the  problem  of  developing 
the  different  and  mutually  exclusive  divisions  of  the  thinkable  that 
may  be  formed  by  the  affirmation  and  denial  of  the  concepts,  class- 
symbols,  or  elements  of  whatever  kind  united  in  a  judgment.  If  x 
and  y  are  the  given  elements,  and  x'  and  y'  their  contradictory  op- 
posites,  then  xy>  xy  >  x'y  and  x  'y'  are  evidently  the  four  classes  into 
which  all  that  is  thinkable  must  be  divided;  that  is,  the  constituent 
parts  of  the  complete  division  which  Boole  calls  the  expansion  or 
development  of  the  given  relation  between  x  and  y.  It  is  somewhat 
inconvenient  that  following  mathematical  tradition  he  designates  that 
relation  between  x  and  y  as  a  'Function'  of  the  two,  f(x^  y}\ 
logically  such  an  expression  can  mean  nothing,  unless  it  is  under- 
stood as  the  definition  or  predicate  of  some  M>  for  then  all  the 
constituents  xy>  xy',  etc.,  might  be  deduced  from  the  given  con- 
nexion between  x  and  j/,  and  with  them  the  coefficients  which  would 
Indicate  them  as  possible  or  impossible  within  the  extension  of  M. 
Boole  however  employs  for  the  moment  the  independent  function 
f(x,y]  in  order  to  develop  out  of  it  in  an  equally  general  way  the  law 
of  the  formation  of  those  coefficients.  His  original  equation  x*  =  x, 
as  he  can  find  for  it  only  the  two  arithmetical  analogies  cr  =  o  and 
i2  =  i,  induces  him  to  make  the  assumption  that  the  logical  and  the 
mathematical  calculus  would  completely  coincide  if  these  two  values  were 
the  only  ones  which  any  magnitude  could  assume  ;  and  conversely,  he 
takes  all  mathematical  operations  to  be  permissible  in  logic,  on  con- 
dition that  the  class-symbols  to  which  they  are  applied  are  treated  as 
magnitudes  which  admit  of  these  two  values  only".  So  taking  ax  +  lx' 
as  the  given  function  f(x\  and  f(i)  and  /"(o)  -as  the  two  values 
which  it  assumes  if  we  take  x  =  i  and  x  =  o  (x'  always  assuming 
the  opposite  values),  it  is  shown  that  _/*(.#)  may  be  obtained  by  the 
combination  of  the  two  values  :  f(x)  ==_/"(i)^+/(o)  x.  The  same 
consideration  leads,  in  the  case  in  which  the  given  function  contains 
the  two  elements  x  and  j/5  to  the  formula  : 


in  which  the  two  bracketed  values  refer  in  their  order  to  x  andj> 
respectively. 

If  any  stress  is  to  be  laid  on  this  scheme  of  the  logical  develop- 
ment of  a  function,  it  would  have  been  easy  to  establish  it  in  a  less 


2 1 6  Note  on  the  Logical  Calculus* 

.bizarre  fashion.  It  must  after  all  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  zero 
which  denies  every  magnitude  alike,  so  that  for  every  m,  o .  m  =  o  in- 
variably, and  the  unit  which  every  magnitude  contains  as  a  silent 
factor,  so  that  for  every  m,  i .  m  =  m  invariably,  are  exceptional  and 
not  merely  homogeneous  with  all  other  magnitudes  even  in  arith- 
metic. Granted  that  they  rank  as  magnitudes  when  considered  by 
themselves,  still  in  combination  or  multiplication  with  other  magni- 
tudes they  have  the  general  logical  import  of  affirmation  and  negation. 
What  was  required  in  the  above  theorem  was  only  this  logical  mean- 
ing, valid  indeed  for  arithmetic  but  not  derived  from  it ;  it  was  therefore 
improper  to  give  currency  to  the  illusion  that  logic  is  indebted  to  the 
peculiar  laws  of  arithmetic  for  the  instruments  with  which  it  operates. 
I  will  take  two  examples  to  show  what  I  mean. 

First,  if  J/=  ax  +  bx'  i  the  value  of  the  right  side  will  obviously 
be  reproduced  if  we  first  suppress  the  first  term  and  leave  the  second, 
then  suppress  the  second  term  and  leave  the  first,  and  finally  add 
together  the  two  that  are  left : 

ax  +  b  x  =  a  x  +  o  .  b  x'  +  b  xf  H~  o  .  a  x ; 

then  the  coefficients  can  of  course  be  expressed  by/*(i)  and/"(o),  and 
ax  +  l  x  =/(  i )  x  4~/(°)  x*. 

Againy  let  the  function  f(x.y)  =  ax-\-by  be  given  and  its  de- 
velopment with  reference  to  the  terms  xy,  xy',  x'y  and  x'y'  re- 
quired; and  further,  to  make  sure  of  what  we  are  speaking,  let  us 
regard  f  (x,  y}  at  the  same  time  as  a  definite  M,  whose  definition, 
or  specification  of  extent,  is  contained  in  the  right  side  of  the 
equation. 

Within  this  <#/,  the  combination  xy  is  possible  in  three  cases,  being 
the  ax's  which  are  also  j/,  the  #_/s  which  are  also  x,  and  the  ax's 
which  are  also  by  in  full,  or  the  bj?s  which  are  also  a  x  in  full ;  for 
none  of  these  combinations  are  expressly  excluded  by  the  right  side  of 
the  equation,  We  should  therefore  get  a  xy,  b  xy,  a  I  xy ;  but  as 
logically  speaking  the  a  b  are  included  besides  both  under  a  and  under 
b,  it  is  sufficient  to  exhibit  04-  b  as  coefficients  of  xy\  and  of  course 
a^b  =y(r,  i)  is  equal,  that  is,  to  the  value  of  the  right  side  for  #  =  1, 
y  =  i.  The  second  term  of  the  development  would  contain  xy' ;  the 
equation  tells  us  that  if  we  suppress  by  which  can  never  be  combined 
with  y  there  can  occur  within  the  compass  of  M  no  yf  or  not^ 
besides  a  x ;  consequently  a  is  the  coefficient  of  xy' ',  and  a  of  course 
=/*(i,  o).  Just  in  the  same  way  it  follows  that  within  M  there  can 
be  no  other  x'  or  not-x  but  by ;  consequently  b  x' y  is  the  third  term, 
and  b  of  course  =/"(o,  i).  Finally  the  equation  tells  us  that  the 


CHAPTER  III.]  Note  OH  the  Logical  C&lculuS*  2  1  J 

extent  of  M  is  entirely  exhausted  by  a  x  and  by,  and  contains  nothing 
that  is  neither  x  nor  JF;  hence  o  is  the  coefficient  of  x'y'^  and  it  again 
=/(o,  o). 

Thus  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  proposed  formula  of  function- 
development  can  be  justified  from  purely  logical  considerations,  and 
I  would  attempt  to  establish  this  on  more  general  grounds  if  I  saw 
more  clearly  what  is  the  purpose  of  the  whole  proceeding.  The  first 
examples  which  Boole  gives  can  only  be  regarded  as  exercises.  If 
clean  beasts  x  are  according  to  the  Jewish  law  those  which  divide  the 
hoof  y  and  chew  the  cud  z,  and  then  the  development  tells  us  there 
are  no  clean  beasts  which  divide  the  hoof  but  do  not  chew  the  cud, 
and  none  which  chew  the  cud  but  do  not  divide  the  hoof;  that  again 
there  are  no  clean  beasts  which  do  neither  the  one  nor  the  other,  and 
lastly  there  can  be  no  beasts  which  do  both  and  yet  are  not  clean  ; 
I  have  my  doubts  of  the  frequency  of  the  logical  desire  to  go  through 
these  deductions  of  given  fact  ;  but  if  any  one  feels  the  want,  it  is 
beyond  a  doubt  more  easily  satisfied  without  a  calculus  than  with  one. 
But  there  are  two  other  problems  which  Boole  hopes  to  solve  by  help 
of  such  use  of  formulae  ;  first,  if  a  number  of  elements  are  given  in 
any  combination,  the  equation  which  expresses  this  combination  is  to 
be  solved  with  reference  to  any  of  its  elements  at  pleasure  ;  and  then 
it  is  to  be  possible  to  eliminate  any  one  from  the  equation,  in  order 
to  display  the  relations  of  the  rest  to  one  another. 

As  regards  the  first  problem,  I  can  only  regret  that  Boole  abandons 
himself  recklessly  to  his  principle  of  permitting  himself  all  operations 
of  reckoning  if  only  their  result  can  be  logically  interpreted.  From 
the  given  proposition  £  All  men  y  are  mortal  x,'  he  obtains  by  contra- 
position 'No  man  is  not-mortal'  y  x'  =  o.  Now  as  x'  +  x=i  and 
therefore  xf  =  i  —  x,  we  get  y  (i  —  x)  =  o  or^  -  xy  =  o,  xy  -=>y  ;  then 


further  x=  -  ?  and  by  development  of  -  we  obtain  x=y  +  -  (i  —  -y)  or 

jr  jt> 

=j/+"j/?    tn*s   ne  ^kes   to  mean,  introducing  the  mathematical 

significance  of  the  symbol  -  :    'mortal  includes  all  men  and  an  in- 

definite number  of  what  is  not  man.'  Results  that  could  only  be 
obtained  in  such  unwarrantable  ways  would  certainly  form  no  exten- 
sion of  Logic.  Moreover,  in  this  case  such  arts  were  not  even 
necessary.  For  not  the  contraposited  form  y(i  —  x)=-  o  but  the 
original  y  =  x  should  have  been  employed,  only  with  the  precaution 
of  providing  x  from  the  beginning  with  a  particularising  factor  v, 


2 1 8  Note  on  the  Logical  Calculus.  [BOOK  n. 

y=iiix.  The  proposition  'All  men  are  mortar  means  simply  this 
and  nothing  in  the  world  besides;  it  merely  regards  y  as  subordinate 
to  an  A*  within  the  compass  of  which  there  is  something'  else  as  well. 
There  is  no  possible  meaning  in  finding  over  again  by  calculation 
precisely  what  was  presupposed,  and  what  is  self-evident,  that  is, 
that  x  comprehends  beside  the  v  x  which  are  y  a  further  indefinite 
number  of  kinds  which  are  notjf;  that  therefore  x  —y  +  wy'. 

With  respect  to  the  process  of  elimination,  I  shall  content  myself 
with  giving  an  example.  Every  logical  equation  can,  by  applying 
contraposition  to  the  affirmative  judgment  which  it  expresses,  be  re- 
duced to  the  form  in  which  one  side  is  zero;  for  the  equation  jy£  =  o 
simply  means  that  no  :v  is  3.  I  pass  over  Boole's  doctrine  about  the 
procedure  of  collecting  all  given  single  judgments  or  equations  into 
one  solitary  resultant  equation,  and  suppress  the  scruples  which  I  feel 
as  to  the  necessity  or  productiveness  of  such  an  operation. 

It  is  granted  then  that  the  equation  is  to  be  presented  in  the 
following  arrangement ;  />  a  b  •••}••  <y  <•/  // -f  r  a  b -f  $  af  If  =  o;  then  the  pro- 
duel,  of  the  euellicienls  juj  r  s  equaled  to  zero,  is  assigned  as  the  result 
of  the  simultaneous  diminution  of  a  and  b.  This  is  easily  seen  with 
llit*  ordinary  appliances  of  Logic,  For  logically  this  equation  cannot 
have  the  value  o  uulrss  each  of  its  terms  taken  by  itself  =  o.  Further, 
p  a  b  =  o  says  that  No  /*  a  is  b  ;  but  q  a  //  =  o  gives  by  contraposition 
All  qa  are  />»  and  so  in  Cesare,  Nu  q  a  is  pa,  or,  /></rt=o,  and  this 
again  gives  No  p  //  is  </,  or  by  contraposition,  All  J>  q  are  </.  Again 
r  a  //  =  o  gives,  No  r  a  is  b  ;  hut  ,v  </  //  =  o  gives  by  contraposition 
All  .r  c/  are  k\  so  \vc  get  in  CVsare,  No  s  a  is  ;•</',  or,  jr<z'  =  o,  or? 
No  rs  is  d.  If  \\v  subsume  the  set  ontl  conclusion  No  r.v  is  cf  under 
tlie  first  All  />  </  art:  a',  there  follows  in  the  same  figure,  No  r  s  is  pq 
or  p  </  r  ,v  =  o,  It  is  easy  to  see  that,  if  a  similarly  arranged  equation 
with  our  siili?  xoro  roniains  besides  a,  //,  and  r/,  //,  more  such  pairs  of 
opposiurs  <\  <:',  tin;  elimination  may  lie  continued  in  the  same  way.  But 
no  doubt  for  sufh  cases  there  is  value,  in  the  abbreviated  rule  that  the 
result  of  tlie  elimination  consists  in  the  equation  of  the  product  of  the 
cC'K'ftidetifs  to  zero,  If  the  equation  had  contained  besides  a  term  z  =  o 
independent  of  the  pairs  to  he  eliminated,  it  would  persist  without 
change,  and  might  be  added  to  the  preceding  term,  so  thai  in  the  result 
p  q  r  s  -I-  z  =  o  cadi  of  flu?  terms  by  itself  is  =  o.  Schroder  remarks  on 
this  question  at  p.  23  of  his  work  that  the  results  of  the  elimination  of 
a  symbol  a  from  several  isolated  equations  are  less  comprehensive  than 
those  of  an  elimination  from  the  combined  final  equation  ;  x  a+jya'  =  o 
and/'  a  +  q  &'  =  o  when  taken  apart,  only  give  xy  =  o  and/f  =  o;  while 


CHAPTER  in.]        Note  on  the  Logical  Calculus.  219 

on  the  other  hand  the  combined  equation  gives  xy  -f  q  x  +py  +fl  q  =  o ; 
and  for  this  reason  he  thinks  the  latter  order  of  procedure  preferable. 
Is  he  not  in  this  artificially  making  little  difficulties,  simply  out  of  the 
order  of  procedure,  which  must  ultimately  depend  on  the  development 
of  the  functions  ?  Why  are  we  forced  to  unite  the  four  terms  oc  a  =  o, 
y  CL  =  o,  pa  =  o}  and  q  a  =  o,  although  they  must  be  true  by  them- 
selves, in  two  equations,  instead  of  regarding  them  as  four  terms  to 
be  employed  at  pleasure  ?  Then  we  might  find  without  difficulty  all 
results  of  elimination  which  we  had  any  interest  in  ascertaining. 

I  do  not  maintain  that  the  same  syllogistic  process  will  easily  bring 
us  to  our  goal  in  every  case,  especially  in  more  complicated  cases. 
But  Boole  himself  insists  that  we  must  carefully  analyse  what  we 
mean  in  every  case,  before  translating  our  notions  into  the  language 
of  the  symbols;  and  I  certainly  believe  that  the  fulfilment  of  this 
postulate  would  enable  us  to  dispense  altogether  with  the  calculus, 
and  that  Logic  would  prove  rich  enough  to  allow  of  the  invention  of 
adequate  means  of  solution  corresponding  to  particular  problems, 
even  if  these  means  were  not  stereotyped  beforehand.  With  refer- 
ence to  this  point  I  mention  a  problem  which  Boole *  puts  and  which 
Schroder  repeats. 

It  is  assumed  to  be  known  from  an  analysis  of  experience  that  in 
a  certain  class  of  natural  or  artificial  products  the  combinations  of  the 
marks  a  be  d  e  are  subject  to  the  following  rules  ;  and  in  such  a  way, 
that  not  only  the  occurrence  but  also  the  non-occurrence  of  each 
particular  mark  belongs  to  the  conditions  from  which  the  presence  or 
absence  of  the  others  has  to  be  inferred. 

1.  Wherever  a  and  c  are  absent  at  the  same  time,  e  is  present, 
together  with  either  b  or  d,  but  not  with  both  ; 

2.  Where  a  and  d  occur,  but  not  e,  b  and  c  will  either  both  be  found 
or  both  be  missing. 

3.  Wherever  a  is  found  in  conjunction  with  either  b  or  e  or  with 
both  at  once,  either  c  or  d  will  be  found,  but  not  both  together. 

4.  Conversely,  where,  of  the  pair  c  and  d,  the  one  occurs  without 
the  other,  a  will  be  found  in  conjunction  with  either  e  or  b  or  with  both 
at  once. 

It  Is  required  to  ascertain  : — 

1.  What  can  be  inferred  from  the  presence  of  a  with  reference  to 
$,  c,  and  d\ 

2.  Whether  any  relations,  and  if  any,  what,  exist  between  ^  c,  and 
d,  independently  of  the  other  marks; 

1  ['  Investigation  of  Laws  of  Thought,'  p.  146  ff.] 


220  Note  on  the  Logical  Calculus* 

3.  What  follows  from  the  presence  of  I  with  respect  to  a,  c>  and  d^  and 

4,  What  follows  for  a^  c9  and  d  independently  of  the  other  marks. 
Boole  anticipates  that  no  logician  would  find  the  right  answers  to 

"these  questions  by  syllogistic  process,  unless  he  knew  them  before- 
hand; I  fully  admit  this,  but  who  would  be  tempted  to  select  that 
process  for  attacking  this  problem  while  the  more  suitable  one  offers 
itself  spontaneously?  We  have  only  to  make  a  list  (it  is  a  purely 
mechanical  process)  of  all  the  combinations  of  five  which  can  be 
formed  out  of  abode  and  a' b'  cf  d*  ef ,  avoiding  repetitions  and  the 
inclusion  of  contradictory  elements,  and  then,  or  while  making  the 
list,  to  suppress  those  which  are  excluded  by  the  totality  of  the  given 
conditions.  This  leaves  only  i  r  combinations  ; 

ah  c  d'  c  a  //  c  dr  e  a  b  c  d  e  a  br  c  d  e 

abc  df  i  a  //  /  d  e  af  I  c  d  e  a'  I/  c  d  / 

i   f  j  jf  f  jf  f  f  i   f  ir 

a  h  c  d  e  abode  abed  e 

From  these  we  can  read  off  the  answers  to  the  questions  proposed : 
i 1.  We  infer  from  the  presence  of  a  that  either  c  or  d  is  present, 
but  not  both,  or  else  that  />,  c,  and  r/arc  all  wanting, 

2.  There  is  no  independent  relation  between  I,  <:,  and  </,  for  all  con- 
ceivable combinations  of  them  with  //,  /,  d'  are  equally  realised. 

3.  From  the  presence  of  b  it  follows  that  either  a,  <r,  and  d  are  all 
absent,  or  some  one  alone  of  them  is  absent. 

4.  If  a  and  c  are  both  present  or  both  absent,  d  is  impossible. 
Similar  questions  about  e  which  are  not  proposed  could  be  answered 

out  of  the  same  conspectus  without  any  distinct  operation. 

I  borrow  from  Schroder's  treatise  for  purposes  of  comparison  no 
more  than  the  beginning  of  the  solution  by  calculation ;  not  so  much 
to  show  that  if  all  the  intermediate  terms  are  actually  supplied  it  is  by 
no  means  distinguished  by  brevity,  but  chiefly  with  the  general  object 
of  elucidating  the  use  of  the  calculus  by  help  of  an  instance  that 
involves  a  real  problem,  and  is  not  merely  going  back  upon  what  we 
know  to  clothe  il  in  awkward  formulae. 

By  contraposition  of  the  positive  judgments  which  constitute  the 
given  conditions  of  the  possible  combinations,  and  so  reducing  them, 
as  equations,  to  the  form  in  which  one  side  is  zero,  we  obtain 
from  i .  a  c   {c  +/jrf  +  li  d'}  =r  o ; 
from  2,  ad\b cf  +  b' c\  /  =  o ; 

from  3.  a  [t  +  e]  [c(t+  c  /}  +  [/?/+  c' d]  [a' '-f  «V]  =  o. 
As  the  questions  ask  nothing  about  e  and  /  the  first  operation  to 
perform  is  the  elimination,  which  we  dispensed  with,  of  this  pair  of 
1  [Cp.  Boole,  pp.  148  9.] 


CHAPTER  mo        Note  on  the  Logical  Calculus*  221 

opposites.  According  to  the  rule  given  above  its  result  consists  of 
equating  with  o  the  sum  obtained  by  adding  those  components  of  the 
equations  which  are  free  from  e  and  /  to  the  product  of  the  coefficients 
of  e  and  /.  Now  to  begin  with,  the  coefficient  of  e  in  3.=^  (c  d  +  c  d'}% 
and  that  of /in  i.  2.  and  3.  =  a'  c'  +  ad  \_bc'  +  bf '  c]  -f  V  \c  cT  +  c  d\, 
the  product  of  the  two  is  according  to  the  above-mentioned  rales  = 
ah' ' cd,  and  with  the  addition  of  the  terms  free  from  e  and  /,  which 
are  =  cf  c  [b  d  +  b'  d'}  +  a  b  [c  d+  c'  df]  +  a  [c  dr  +  cf  d]  the  entire 
result  of  the  elimination  would  have  to  be  brought  together  into 

a  [cd+bc'd']  +  a'  [cd'  +  c'd+  b' c  d'~\  =  o. 

Now  to  answer  by  this  result  in  the  first  place  the  second  question, 
about  the  relations  between  l>9  c,  and  dt  we  should  have  to  eliminate  a 
and  a;  but  the  requisite  product  of  their  coefficient  is  =  o  because  each 
individual  product  as  it  arises  takes  independently  the  value  o  owing 
to  the  combination  of  contradictory  elements  ;  the  result  is  therefore 
0  =  0  and  we  must  accept  this  as  a  sign  that  there  is  no  independent 
relation  between  these  three  marks.  However,  we  see  at  once  that  if 
we  give  the  symbol  p  to  the  coefficient  of  a  that  of  cf  will  become  pr  or 
not-/;  we  therefore  obtain  from  ap  +  a  /'=  o  the  two  equations 
ap  =  o,  or  No  a  is/,  and  af '/'=  o,  or  No  not-a  is  not-/.  The  first  of 
these  gives  at  once ;  all  a  are  not-/,  or  p' ;  hence  a=c  d'  +  c'd+  br  cf  df  > 
which  formula  answers  the  first  question. 

I  omit  the  continuation  which  would  be  needed  to  answer  the 
third  and  fourth  questions,  and  confine  myself  to  remarking  that  in 
the  whole  of  thfe  problem  no  use  has  been  made  of  the  development 
of  functionss  of  the  importance  of  which  I  expressed  my  doubts 
above ;  the  required  equations  were  obtained  directly  from  the  given 
propositions,  and  the  eliminations  out  of  them  were  conducted  on  a 
method,  the  origin  of  which  we  explained  to  ourselves  by  help  of  syllo-> 
gisms  in  the  second  figure.  Thus  there  is  nothing  to  be  said  against 
the  appropriateness  of  the  present  method ;  but  just  as  little  against  the 
superior  simplicity  and  plainness  of  that  which  we  adopted.  This,  by 
the  way,  had  not  to  wait  to  be  discovered  by  Jevons,  for  it  was  already 
forthcoming  in  the  doctrine  of  classification,  which  long  since  required 
in  the  first  place  the  tabulation  of  all  the  marks  in  their  combinations, 
and  then  the  cancelling  of  all  combinations  that  become  inadmissible 
on  taking  account  of  the  reciprocal  determinations  of  the  marks.  I 
cannot  therefore  convince  myself  of  the  advantages  to  be  derived 
from  the  attempt  to  s}rstematise  in  a  fixed  logical  calculus  all  the  means 
of  vivid  and  abbreviated  presentation  to  which  every  one  has  spon- 
taneous recourse  in  given  cases,  applying  them  with  variations 


222  Note  on  the  Logical  Calculus.  CBOOKII. 

adapted  to  the  proposed  problem.  It  is  Inevitable  that  a  symbolic 
method  intended  to  make  uniform  provision  for  every  case  should 
purchase  its  suitability  for  the  solution  of  one  problem  at  the  cost  of 
a  useless  prolixity  in  its  treatment  of  others  and  of  manifold  discords 
with  the  custom  of  language. 

Even  the  quantification  of  the  predicate,  which  was  the  starting- 
point  of  recent  English  logic,  was  no  new  discovery,  but  the  super- 
fluous inflation  of  a  familiar  idea  to  an  excessive  importance.  That 
the  predicate  of  a  judgment,  except  in  case  of  simply  convertible 
judgments,  has  a  larger  extent  than  the  subject  which  in  part  takes 
its  place  within  this  extent ;  that  therefore  it  is  not  merely  the  predi- 
cate that  determines  the  subject,  but  also  the  subject  that  restricts 
the  predicate  to  such  a  modification  as  is  true  of  the  subject's  self; 
these  were  old  doctrines  of  logic,  and  in  its  rules  of  conversion  it 
went  so  far  as  to  provide  for  their  application.  It  is  true  that  the 
scheme  of  judgments  gave  no  special  expression  to  this  truth,  just  as 
the  ordinary  linguistic  form  of  the  sentence  did  not.  But  what  harm 
was  there  in  that,  when,  the  fact  was  known  ?  Did  the  want  of  such 
an  expression  ever  deceive  a  considerate  thinker  ?  And  was  it  worth 
while,  for  the  sake  of  amending  such  trifles,  to  have  recourse  to  such 
dangerous  contrivances,  as  to  connect  the  natural  expression  of  thought 
with  a  new  symbolism  and  a  new  calculus  ?  There  could  be  no  real 
gain  in  expressing  the  proposition  'All  men  are  mortal'  by  y—vx 
unless  a  means  could  be  discovered  of  defining  this  v ;  as  long  as  it 
remains  an  undefined  coefficient,  it  is  an  ineffectual  indication  of 
what  we  knew  before.  In  the  converse  of  this  judgment  ( Some  mortal 
is  man/  the  old  logic  would  bring  to  light  this  indefinite  Particularity1 
neither  better  nor  worse  than  that  v  would;  if  we  object  to  the  expres- 
sion 'some,'  our  objection  might  be  easily  removed  by  the  consideration 
that  these  indefinite  particular  judgments  are  at  the  same  time  forms  of 
modality,  and  express  the  possibility  of  a  conjunction  of  their  predicate 
with  the  general  notion  which  forms  their  subject,  by  affirming  such  a 
connexion  for  some  but  not  for  all  cases  of  the  notion. 

There  is  a  passage  of  Jevons  ('Principles  of  Science/  London,  1877, 
p.  59)  which  among  others  has  occasioned  these  remarks.  He  forms 
two  premisses;  sodium2  =  sodium  metal,  and  sodium  =  sodium 
capable  of  floating  on  water.  He  draws  the  conclusion  sodium 
metal  =  sodium  capable  of  floating  on  water.  To  this  he  subjoins 
these  remarks.  "  This  is  really  a  syllogism  of  the  mood  Darapti  in  the 

1  ['  Diese  unbestimmte  Parlicularitat.'] 

2  [See  Professor  Lotzc's  Preface  to  the  Logic.  ] 


CHAPTER  in.]        Note  on  the  Logical  Calculus,  223 

third  figure,  except  that  we  obtain  a  conclusion  of  a  more  exact 
character  than  the  old  syllogism  gives.     From  the  premisses  '  Sodium 
is  a  metal f  and  '  Sodium  floats  on  water '  Aristotle  would  have  in- 
ferred that  *  Some  metals  float  on  water.7     But  if  enquiry  were  made 
what  the  €  some  metals '  are,  the  answer  would  certainly  be  '  Sodium1.' 
Hence  Aristotle's  conclusion  simply  leaves  out  some  of  the  informa- 
tion afforded  in  the  premisses;    it  even  leaves  us  open  to  interpret 
the  *  some  metals '  in  a  wider  sense  than  we  are  warranted  in  doing. 
From  these  distinct  defects  of  the  old  syllogism  the  process  of  substi- 
tution is  free  and  the  new  process  only  incurs  the  possible  objection 
of  being  tediously  minute  and  accurate."     Oh  no  !  we  might  admit 
the  &  tediously/  but  otherwise  Aristotle  is  in  the  right.     Jevons'  whole 
procedure  is  simply  a  repetition  or  at  the  outside  an  addition  of  his 
two  premisses ;  thus  it  merely  adheres  to  the  given  facts,  and  such  a 
process  has  never  been  taken  for  a  Syllogism,  which  always  means  a 
movement  of  thought  that  uses  what  is  given  for  the  purpose  of 
advancing  beyond  it.    So  the  combination  of  words  which  he  proposes 
is  not  a  syllogism  at  all,  and  consequently  not  one  in  Darapti.     The 
meaning  of  the  syllogism,  as  Aristotle  framed  it,  would  in  this  case  be 
that  the  occurrence  of  a  floating  metal  Sodium  proves  that  the  property 
of  being  so  light  is  not  incompatible  with  the  character  of  metal  ia 
general.     If  he  expressed  this  by  saying  '  Some  metal  is  capable  of 
floating/  he  intended  of  course  not  to  repeat  the  premisses  which 
were  known  before ;  but  to  enunciate  the  possibility  of  a  general  dis- 
tribution of  this  property  among  metals,  as  a  supposition  whose  cor- 
rectness in  fact  there  is  ground  for  testing  further,  since  it  is  logically 
not  inconceivable.     Even  the  expression  '  Some  metal '  is  at  bottom 
quite  correct,  for  Sodium  certainly  is  some  metal;   the  expression 
does  not  enjoin  us  to  think  of  other  metals  at  the  same  time  with  it; 
it  is  true  that  it  does  not  prohibit  our  doing  so,  but  this  need  not  give 
rise  to  any  error. 

-  How  often  have  modern  enterprises  like  these  proclaimed  the  dawn 
of  a  wholly  new  epoch  in  logic,  and  the  fall  of  the  contemptible 
system  of  antiquity !  I  am  convinced  that  if  the  ancient  logic  were 
to  be  really  forgotten  for  some  generations  and  then  rediscovered  by 
some  fortunate  thinker,  it  would  be  welcomed  as  a  late  discovery,  after 
long  search,  of  the  natural  march  of  thought,  in  the  light  of  which  we 
should  find  intelligible  both  the  singularities  and  the  real  though 
limited  relevancy  of  the  forms  of  logical  calculus  with  which  we  had 
made  shift  so  far. 

1  ['  Metal  which  is  Sodium/  Jevons.] 


CHAPTER    IV. 
The  forms  of  Proof. 

190.  IT  was  our  business  in  writing  of  systematic  logic  to  enumerate 
the  various  forms  of  judgments  and  to  point  out  the  precise  mode  of 
union  which  in  each  of  these  forms  is  conceived  as  subsisting  between 
S  and  P  or  as  to  be  effected  between  them :  it  is  the  business  of 
applied  logic  to  consider  what  contents  S  and  P  can  properly  be 
joined  in  one  of  these  forms  of  union.  Various  problems  which  we 
shall  not  always  hold  apart  fall  within  this  scope.  In  the  first  place 
the  communication  of  the  thoughts  of  others  gives  us  numerous  pro- 
positions of  the  form  S  is  J7,  whose  meaning  and  purport  is  perfectly 
plain,  but  whose  validity  is  questionable :  then  there  arises  for  us  the 
problem  of  a  proof  for  the  given  proposition  T.  In  the  second  place 
our  own  observations  may  lead  us  to  suppose  that  between  two  ideas 
S  and  P  there  subsists  a  relation  which  if  it  were  known  could  be 
expressed  in  a  judgment  of  the  form  S,  is  P:  then  we  are  called  upon 
to  discover  the  yet  unknown  proposition  T  which  would  be  the  precise 
expression  for  this  supposed  relation. 

These  two,  discovery  and  proof,  differ  only  in  their  different  use 
of  the  same  materials.  The  same  combinations  of  thought  by  which 
the  truth  or  probability  of  a  proposition  T  was.  first  discovered  may 
always  be  applied,  when  put  somewhat  differently,  and  sometimes 
even  without  any  such  transformation,  to  prove  the  truth  or  prob- 
ability of  a  given  proposition  T.  Moreover  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the 
reflexion  of  the  discoverer,  if  it  is  not  to  miss  its  aim,  needs  at  every 
step  slight  connecting  links,  resembling  a  proof  in  form  :  and  conversely 
that  a  proof  will  never  reach  its  goal  without  some  inventive  play  of 
thought.  On  the  whole  however  discovery  reaches  farther  than  proof: 
and  so  I  will  separate  the  two  problems,  though  I  shall  not  always 
avoid  the  natural  mixture  of  the  two.  Scientific  investigations  lead  to 
both  in  about  equal  measure ;  the  needs  of  life  more  frequently  lead 
to  discovery. 


CHAPTER  iv.]  Proof  rests  on  Axioms.  225 

I  find  reason  however  again  to  divide  the  first  part  of  the  subject, 
and  to  separate  the  proof  of  universal  propositions  from  the  proof  of 
particular  or  singular  propositions.  It  is  true  that  a  universal  relation 
can  seldom  be  established  between  S  and  P  without  the  employment 
of  knowledge  supplied  by  experience  \  but  as  such  knowledge,  if  it  is 
to  lead  to  universal  conclusions,  must  itself  have  universal  validity, 
we  may  regard  it  as  knowledge  which,  though  originally  derived 
from  our  experiences,  is  yet,  now  that  we  have  full  confidence 
in  its  universality,  to  be  counted  among  the  proper  instruments 
of  thought.  The  proof  of  particular  facts  on  the  other  hand,  of 
historical  events  or  of  the  ordinary  transactions  of  life,  can  never 
follow  from  universal  propositions  alone,  not  even  from  such  uni- 
versal propositions  as  are  themselves  derived  from  experience :  it  pre- 
supposes the  knowledge  of  a  number  of  particular  circumstances, 
occurring  only  here  and  only  here  united  in  this  precise  manner. 
The  preliminary  process  of  getting  at  all  these  conditions,  from  which 
the  conclusion  is  to  be  drawn,  requires  peculiar  instruments  which  we 
shall  consider  presently.  The  solution  of  a  proposed  problem  on  the 
other  hand,  even  when  the  result  is  to  be  not  a  universal  proposition, 
but  the  establishment  of  a  single  fact,  may  be  connected  with  the 
proof  of  universal  propositions :  under  the  conditions  which  here  do 
not  need  to  be  sought  but  are  given,  and  so  far  as  they  are  given, 
the  definite  proposition  T  which  satisfies  them  all  is  always  to  be 
found  by  employing  instruments  of  thought  which  are  of  universal 
application,  and  these  theoretical  results  are  inaccurate  and  need 
correction  in  practice  only  so  far  as  we  have  failed  to  state  all  the 
conditions  which  T  had  to  satisfy. 

200.  Every  proof  is  a  syllogism,  or  a  chain  of  syllogisms,  which 
completes  the  premises  required  for  the  given  proposition  T,  so  that 
they  fit  into  one  another  in  such  a  way  that  T  follows  as  their 
necessary  consequence.  But  the  validity  of  every  conclusion  depends 
upon  the  validity  of  its  premises :  these  again  might  be  established  by 
fresh  proofs,  but  this  procedure  would  go  on  ad  infinitum  without  any 
result  were  there  not  a  number  of  universal  propositions  which  we 
accept  as  immediate  truths,  which  therefore  neither  need  nor  are 
capable  of  proof,  but  are  themselves  the  ultimate  grounds  by  appeal 
to  which  we  may  decide  in  every  case  whether  a  conclusion  is 
correctly  or  incorrectly  drawn  from  its  premises.  I  do  not  intend 
as  yet  to  discuss  the  question  of  the  source  from  which  we  obtain 
these  immediate  truths :  we  are  here  concerned  only  with  the  mark 
which  justifies  us  in  classing  a  proposition  T  among  the  axioms  ^ 

Q 


226  .       The  forms  of  Proof.  \  BOOK  n. 

assent  to  which  we  believe  ourselves  entitled  to  demand  from  every 
sane  person.  Now  it  is  conceivable  that,  just  because  there  is  no 
possible  proof  of  an  axiom,  this  mark  may  in  the  last  resort  be 
nothing  but  the  self-evidence,  the  immediate  clearness  and  certainty 
with  which  the  content  of  a  universal  proposition  thrusts  itself  upon  us 
as  a  necessity  of  thought;  and  in  fact  this  is  what  we  always  come 
back  to  in  the  end. 

Experience  however  abundantly  shows  that  propositions  which  later 
generations  have  proved  to  be  false,  were  as  self-evident  to  earlier 
generations  and  produced  in  them  as  strong  a  conviction  as  any 
propositions  whatsoever:  relations  which  in  the  limited  sphere  to  which 
our  observation  is  confined  are  seen  to  be  permanently  present  or 
constantly  recurring,  without  any  contrary  experience  to  disturb  us, 
very  commonly  assume  the  appearance  of  necessities  of  thought. 
There  is  only  one  way  of  distinguishing  the  spurious  self-evidence  of 
a  prejudice  from  the  genuine  self-evidence  of  a  true  axiom  :  we  must 
try  whether  the  contradictory  of  T  the  proposition  in  question  is  as 
impossible  in  thought  as  T  itself  seems  to  be  necessary.  This  test 
will  often  be  quite  decisive ;  we  shall  often  find  to  our  astonishment 
that  the  attempt  to  join  S  and  jP  in  the  opposite  way  to  that  asserted 
by  the  given  proposition  T  leads  to  no  inner  contradiction  in  our 
thought  at  all.  In  that  case  T  is  no  axiom,  but  either  altogether  an 
error,  or  a  truth  that  holds  true  in  some  cases  only,  or  a  truth  which 
though  universally  true  requires  to  be  proved.  In  the  other  case, 
when  the  contradictory  proposition  non-7"  appears  as  impossible  in 
thought  as  1  appears  necessary,  we  may  with  greater  confidence 
regard  T  as  an  immediate  axiom ;  but  the  test  does  not  even  now 
give  perfect  security,  for  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  inconceivability 
of  non-7'and  the  apparent  necessity  of  T  may  both  alike  rest  upon 
a  spurious  self-evidence.  Should  these  two  simultaneous  errors  be 
made,  logic  furnishes  no  short  way  of  detecting  them :  our  mistake 
could  only  be  gradually  amended  by  our  becoming  aware  of  the 
contradictions  which  experience  offers  to  the  assumed  validity  of  2] 
and  by  a  slow  and  far-reaching  modification  of  our  system  of  thought 
suggested  by  those  contradictions. 

Such  a  double  error  will  seldom  be  found  in  the  case  of  purely 
theoretical  principles,  more  often  in  the  case  of  the  principles  upon 
which  our  moral  judgments  are  based,  and  which  may  be  classed  as 
genuine  or  spurious  axioms,  although  strictly  speaking  they  do  not 
seem  to  be  necessities  of  thought  but  only  unquestionable  truths,  and 
their  opposites  do  not  seem  to  be  unthinkable  but  only  absurd. 


CHAPTER  iv.]         Conclusion  must  be  worth  proving.         227 

That  you  ought  to  hurt  your  enemies  was  for  a  long  time  generally 
accepted  by  the  ancients  as  an  unquestionable  maxim,  and  the 
opposite  of  it  regarded  as  absurd :  such  errors  can  generally  be 
removed  only  by  a  gradual  alteration  in  men's  habitual  feelings. 

201.  Supposing  now  that  T  is  'a  universal  proposition  whose 
validity  is  not  axiomatic,  i.  e.  that  it  is  such  as  to  need  proof,  we 
yet  shall  not  set  about  proving  it  till  we  know  that  jTis  worth  proving. 
In  three  cases  it  will  not  be  worth  proving.  In  the  first  place  it 
will  not  be  worth  proving  if  its  content  is  an  incomplete,  and  there- 
fore an  indefinite  thought.  A  man  of  untrained  intellect,  so  long  as 
he  confines  himself  to  the  objects  which  naturally  come  within  his 
scope,  is  usually  conscientious  in  enumerating  and  examining  all 
the  points  which  are  important  for  the  understanding  of  a  fact :  he 
follows  the  old  rule  which  tells  us  to  ask  c  quis  ?  quid  ?  ubi  ?  quibus 
auxiliis?  cur?  quomodo?  quando?'  and  to  omit  none  of  all  these 
questions.  But  he  is  quite  helpless  when  he  wanders  off  into  general 
considerations  which  belong  to  the  province  of  speculation  :  he  then 
m  usually  does  not  get  beyond  a  clumsy  expression  for  something 
which  he  perhaps  rightly  believes,  demands,  or  assumes,  but  is  unable 
to  connect  with  any  determinate  or  determinable  points.  The  philoso- 
pher on  the  other  hand,  revelling  in  his  abstractions,  does  not  always 
corne  to  meet  him  half-way,  but  often  contents  himself  with  employing 
conceptions  which  when  severed  from  their  proper  application  be- 
come utterly  meaningless:  the  result  is  that  vague  theses  are  no- 
where so  common  as  in  the  attempts  of  a  man  who  has  had  no 
logical  training  to  philosophise  by  the  light  of  nature.  That  God 
and  the  world  are  one  is  a  proposition  that  no  one  can  prove  except 
him  who  propounds  it ;  so  far  as  his  proof  is  correct  at  all  it  is  the 
proof  itself  that  tells  us  what  he  meant  by  the  proposition  :  any  other 
person  than  he  who  propounded  it  will,  if  he  be  wise,  attempt  neither 
to  prove  it  nor  to  refute  it ;  for  that  God  and  the  world  are  in  some 
sense  two  is  asserted  by  the  proposition  itself,  for  otherwise  it  could 
not  have  distinguished  them ;  but  that  they  are  also  one  in  some  one 
of  the  many  senses  of  unity,  may  be  supposed  without  more  ado. 

That  things  are  appearances  is  an  equally  ambiguous  proposition : 
the  things  which  appear  to  our  senses  are  so  of  course,  for  otherwise 
they  could  not  appear  to  us :  but  that  the  things  which  though  them- 
selves inaccessible  to  observation  we  suppose  to  underlie  our  sen- 
suous perception  are  also  appearances  is  an  incomplete  thought  till  we 
determine  what  is  to  appear  and  to  whom  it  is  to  appear.  All  these 
and  other  similar  propositions  are  not  worth  proof  or  refutation,  but  are 

Q  2 


228  The  forms  of  Proof.  c  BOOK  n. 

simply  to  be  returned  as  they  are  to  him  who  brought  them,  just  as  in 
a  court  of  law  we  refuse  to  listen  to  a  man  who  complains  that  he  has 
suffered  wrong  without  saying  what  has  been  done  to  him  and  who 
has  clone  it. 

202.  The  second  case  is  when  though  a  perfectly  clear  nominal 
definition  may  be  given  of  S  the  subject,  or  P  the  predicate  of  the 
proposition  T^  the  definition  contains  a  combination  of  ideas  which 
can  be  shown  to  be  impossible,  or  cannot  be  shown  to  be  real. 
No  one  would  trouble  himself  to  prove  or  to  refute  a  proposition  the 
subject  of  which  is  a  wooden  iron :  no  one  would  seriously  enquire 
whether  this  wooden  iron  will  burn  in  the  fire  like  wood  or  melt  in  it 
like  iron.  There  is  no  such  logical  contradiction  in  the  ideas  of 
ghosts  and  will-o'-the-wisps,  but  we  defer  asking  whether  the  former 
need  sleep,  and  whether  the  latter  are  attracted  by  buried  metal,  till 
their  existence  is  proved.  What  we  here  require  may  be  called  in 
general  \hzjmtification  of  a  conception,  which  must  without  fail  be 
added  to  its  nominal  definition  when  use  is  to  be  made  of  it. 

Tins  may  be  effected  in  various  ways.  If  M  stands  for  something 
which  is  supposed  to  have  external  existence,  the  shortest  way  to 
justify  ./I/is  \&  point  at  once  to  an  instance  of  it  or  to  a  fact  in  which 
its  existence  is  given  and  accessible  to  observation.  If  M  denotes 
a  combination  of  ideas  the  validity  of  which  means  that  it  can  be 
carried  out  and  that  its  result  can  be  imagined  or  realised  in  a  mental 
picture,  this  very  realisation  of  the  content  which  M  demands,  or 
in  other  words  its  construction  will  justify  M  itself:  thus  geometry 
establishes  the  admissibility  of  the  conceptions  it  has  formed  by 
presenting  in  a  visible  form  what  they  till  then  only  contained  as  a 
problem,  thereby  proving  most  conclusively  that  the  problem  was 
soluble.  If  we  can  neither  point  out  any  instance  of  M  nor  carry  out 
its  construction,  we  must  at  least  show  cause  or  give  a  '  deduction ' 
which  explains  how  in  connexion  with  some  demonstrable  reality  or 
in  pursuit  of  some  problem  we  have  been  properly  and  justly  led  to 
form  this  conception.  Such  a  { deduction7  cannot  always  directly 
prove  the  validity  of  M  in  the  shape  in  which  the  conception  is 
presented,  but  it  may  always  show  that  M  is  a  preliminary  designation 
for  some  content  which  we  are  reasonably  and  rightly  looking  for; 
it  remains  for  the  further  enquiry  whose  beginning  is  hereby  justified 
to  determine  whether  M  itself  can  be  justified  as  a  valid  conception, 
or  else  how  its  content  must  be  modified  in  order  to  make  it  valid. 

The  ancients  regarded  the  doubling  of  the  cube  as  a  serious 
problem :  but  though  they  could  not  geometrically  construct  the 


CHAPTER  iv.]  Conclusion  must  be  true  in  fact.  229 

required  line,  whose  cube  should  be  double  of  a  given  cube,  yet  it 
was  all  along  certain  that  the  problem  was  soluble  and  that  the 
required  line  was  a  magnitude  which  could  in  some  way  be  found. 
Fox  it  could  be  shown  that  as  the  side  of  a  cube  increases  its  volume 
must  also  continuously  increase  without  any  alteration  in  its  shape : 
among  this  infinite  series  of  larger  and  larger  cubes  then  must  be 
found  that  particular  one  whfch  is  double  of  a  given  cube,  and  this 
implies  that  its  side  actually  occurs  in  the  series  of  existing  lines. 
We  here  show  cause  for  the  necessary  validity  of  that  which  is  sought 
instead  of  actually  realising  it  in  a  construction. 

Again  it  may  be  doubted  whether  one  and  the  same  conception  of 
length  fits  both  curved  and  straight  lines ;  but  setting  this  doubt  aside 
it  was  not  unreasonable  as  things  then  were  to  hope  to  find  by  a 
simple  geometrical  construction  the  straight  line  which  is  equal  to 
the  circumference  of  a  circle  of  given  radius  ;  for  it  was  certain  that 
the  length  in  question  depends  upon  the  length  of  this  radius  and 
upon  nothing  else.  This  hope  was  only  banished  by  the  completion  of 
the  enquiry,  which  showed  that  the  circumference  cannot  be  expressed 
as  a  determinate  real  and  algebraical  function  of  the  radius.  In  the 
natural  sciences  a  hypothesis  often  assumes  facts  which  we  can  never 
hope  to  establish  by  direct  observation  :  often  indeed  we  must  leave  it 
to  God  and  the  future  to  show  even  the  possibility  and  constructibility 
of  that  which  we  are  for  the  present  absolutely  obliged  to  assume.  The 
only  way  of  justifying  ourselves  in  such  a  case  is  to  show  from  the 
given  facts  the  pressing  need  of  the  idea  which  we  employ,  with  the 
reservation  of  course  that  we  may  at  a  future  time  so  alter  it  as  to 
enable  us  to  construct  it  without  impairing  its  usefulness.  We  shall 
return  to  this  point  on  another  occasion ;  for  the  present  it  is  enough 
to  refer  to  the  instances  above  employed  as  showing  what  kind  of 
justification  is  needed  for  conceptions  if  their  union  in  a  proposition 
is  to  deserve  proof  or  refutation. 

203.  We  will  now  suppose  that  the  conceptions  which  are  joined 
in  the  universal  proposition  T  have  the  requisite  defmiteness  and 
validity:  but  even  so  we  do  not  start  in  search  of  a  proof  that  shall 
exhibit  T  as  the  necessary  consequences  of  premises  that  must  be 
discovered,  until  we  have  got  some  preliminary  warrant  that  the  pro- 
position is  true  as  a  matter  of  fact ;  for  it  would  be  lost  labour  to  try 
to  prove  what  is  not  even  true.  If  T7  is  a  universal  proposition  of 
whose  field  it  is  not  easy  to  take  a  comprehensive  survey,  we  first  try 
whether  T  holds  good  in  some  examples  that  lie  near  at  hand :  a 
single  case  in  which  it  did  not  hold  would  do  away  with  the  universal 


230  The  forms  of  Proof.  {  BOOK  H. 

validity  of  T,  and  the  problem  would  then  be  changed  into  finding 
the  conditions  under  which  T  has  at  least  a  partial  validity;  if  on  the 
other  hand  that  which  T  asserts  is  found  to  hold  good  in  all  the  cases 
of  its  application  which  we  compare,  this  trial,  though  being  necessarily 
incomplete  it  cannot  prove  that  J*is  universally  valids  may  yet  corro- 
borate what  it  alleges  so  strongly  that  it  will  be  worth  while  to  search 
for  a  proof.  This  very  needful  preliminary  procedure,  which  will 
further  on  take  its  place  among  the  forms  of  proof,  is  in  fact  neg- 
lected but  seldom,  and  that  mostly  in  cases  where  the  validity  of  T'cannot 
be  tested  by  mere  reflexion  upon  instances  supplied  by  the  memory, 
but  only  by  observation  or  experiment.  The  courtiers  of  Louis  XIII 
exhausted  themselves  in  ingenious  proofs  of  the  proposition  that  a 
living  fish  thrown  into  a  bowl  full  of  water  makes  it  overflow  while  a 
dead  one  does  not,  until  the  gardener  who  was  called  in  made  the 
experiment  and  showed  the  assertion  to  be  entirely  false;  but  others 
make  the  same  mistake,  and  in  the  less  exact  departments  of  natural 
science  we  frequently  find  subtle  demonstrations  and  explanations  of 
phenomena  whose  actual  occurrence  is  entirely  problematical. 

204.  Supposing  now  that  this  preliminary  question  is  settled,  and 
that  jfis  recognised  as  a  universal  proposition  that  deserves  proof, 
its  truth  or  falsehood  may  be  established  either  in  a  direct  or  in  a 
roundabout  way,  and  this  makes  the  first  division  of  proofs. 

A  proof  is  direct  when  it  shows  immediately  that  the  given  pro- 
position T  is  necessary  or  impossible  ;  it  is  indirect  (or  apagogic) 
when  it  establishes  the  truth  or  the  falsity  of  T  mediately  by  showing 
the  falsity  or  the  truth  of  its  contradictory  non-77.  In  each  case 
there  are  two  directions  which  the  train  of  thought  may  take.  We 
may  call  a  proof  straightforward  or  progressive  when  it  starts  with 
that  which  in  the  nature  of  the  thing  conditions  something  else  and 
makes  that  which  is  conditioned  issue  from  it  as  its  consequence  ;  it  is 
a  backward  or  a  retrogressive  proof  when  it  starts  from  that  which  in 
the  nature  of  the  thing  is  conditioned  in  order  to  arrive  at  knowledge 
of  that  which  conditions  it.  The  first  form  of  proof,  since  it  pro- 
ceeds a  principio  ad principialum^  may  equally  well  be  called  deductive, 
though  the  opposite  name  inductive  will  not  be  found  so  generally 
suitable  for  proofs  of  the  second  form  which  proceed  a  princ ipiato  ad 
principium.  And  finally  there  is  yet  another  distinction  applicable  to 
both  these  lines  of  proof :  you  may  go  forward  (progressively)  either 
from  general  truths  to  J'or  from  jPto  its  proper  consequences,  and 
similarly  you  may  go  backward  (retrogressively)  either  from  T's 
consequences  to  Ty  or  from  T  itself  to  the  truths  upon  which  it  is 


CHAPTER  IV.]  First  direct  progressive  Proof.  2  3  I 

founded.  We  cannot  pronounce  upon  the  comparative  value  of  the 
eight  different  forms  thus  obtained  till  we  can  consider  each  in  refer- 
ence to  the  problems  for  which  it  is  usually  employed.  The  following 
survey  may  enable  us  to  do  this. 

205.  The  first  form  of  proof,  which  is  direct  and  progressive., 
proceeds  from  a  universal  truth,  which  is  placed  as  major  premise 
at  the  head  of  the  whole  procedure ;  in  the  minor  premise  (or  in  a 
series  of  epi-syllogisms,  if  the  proof  can  only  be  completed  in  a 
chain  of  reasoning)  it  is  then  shown  in  what  relation  *$  and  P  which 
are  joined  in  the  given  proposition  T  stand  to  that  major  premise ; 
and  lastly  the  conclusion  infers  that  by  reason  of  these  relations  of 
S  and  P  the  proposition  T  which  was  to  be  proved  must  hold  good. 
If  the  problem  be  stated  in  this  general  way  it  seems  as  if  all  the 
three  figures  of  Aristotle  might  be  employed  in  this  form  of  proof ; 
the  fact  is  however  that  the  first  figure  alone  answers  to  the  spirit  of 
it.  I  do  not  reject  the  third  figure  on  the  ground  that  as  usually 
described  it  only  gives  particular  conclusions,  while  we  here  wish  to 
prove  universal  propositions ;  if  we  put  the  particular  conclusion 
*  some  S  are  P '  into  a  modal  form,  '  that  which  is  *S  may  be  P,9  we 
get  a  universal  proposition  which  it  may  be  worth  while  to  prove. 
For  instance  if  we  want  to  produce  an  effect  P,  and  have  nothing  to 
get  it  out  of  except  an  unpromising  material  £,  we  shall  be  glad  to 
see  it  shown  by  a  syllogism  in  Bramantip  that  S  and  P  are  com- 
patible with  one  another  in  the  case  of  a  subject  M,  and  that  there- 
fore S  does  not  always  make  the  desired  effect  P  impossible.  But 
the  third  figure  does  not  exhibit  this  proof  in  the  progressive  form. 
It  only  states  in  the  premises  an  instance  of  the  coexistence  of 
S  and  P,  from  which  we  may  argue  regressively,  ab  esse  ad  posse,  to 
their  compatibility.  The  second  figure  admits  universal  conclusions 
indeed,  but  only  negative  ones ;  these  too  may  be  valuable,  but  they 
cannot  be  obtained  by  this  figure  without  premises  of  opposite 
quality,  and  therefore  fail  to  satisfy  us.  For  a  universal  negative 
proposition  T,  which  simply  denies  a  predicate  P  of  a  subject  S 
because  -S1  and  P  stand  in  opposite  relations  to  a  third  M>  appeals 
to  a  mark  which  shows  that  S  and  P  cannot  be  combined,  but  not  to 
a  reason  which  explains  why  they  cannot :  it  merely  expresses  a  fact 
which  is  indeed  true,  but  remains  unintelligible  till  we  have  learned  in 
an  affirmative  proposition  what  S  really  is,  and  thus  now  can  see  that 
because  it  is  this  it  cannot  be  the  other,  viz.  P.  And  so  the  second 
figure,  since  it  establishes  its  conclusions  by  proofs  which,  though 
appropriate  and  convincing,  give  no  explanation,  is  also  rather  re- 


232  The  forms  of  Proof.  t  BOOK  n. 

gressive  than  progressive  in  character.  And  therefore  under  the 
head  of  direct  progressive  proofs  attention  has  usually  been  directed 
to  the  first  figure,  especially  to  its  affirmative  moods,  and  for  the 
present  purpose  to  Barbara  exclusively:  it  is  only  here  that  we  find 
the  subordination  of  a  given  idea  under  a  general  truth,  which  enables 
us  to  understand  not  only  that  T  holds  good,  but  why  it  holds  good. 

206.  This  opinion  is  as  old  as  Aristotle:  it  is  worth  while  to 
observe  however  that  this  form  of  proof  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  ideal 
in  another  sense  than  this  :  it  cannot  fairly  claim  the  praise  bestowed 
upon  it  unless  we  succeed  in  filling  it  with  the  content  which  its 
articulation  requires,  i.  e.  unless  we  set  down  for  major  premise  a 
general  proposition  under  which  the  special  case  of  the  minor  pre- 
mise demands  to  be  placed  in  virtue  of  its  very  nature,  and  which 
therefore  would  actually  be  the  reason  upon  which  the  validity  of  the 
proposition  to  be  proved  depends  not  merely  for  our  reflexion  but 
in  the  nature  of  things.  But  it  is  clear  that  we  may  use  the  form 
of  this  proof  without  in  the  least  satisfying  this  last  condition. 
Many  instances  occur,  and  that  precisely  in  the  field  of  mathematics 
where  exact  treatment  is  required,  of  propositions  that  admit  of 
various  equally  convincing  proofs  all  couched  in  this  form  of  sub- 
sumption,  none  of  which  therefore  can  claim  exclusively  to  ex- 
press the  proper  connexion  and  development  of  the  thing  itself. 
The  possibility  of  presenting  the  same  idea  in  very  various  forms  . 
without  altering  its  value  enables  us  here  to  subsume  it  under  a  great 
variety  of  universal  major  premises,  and  to  proceed  from  any  one  of 
these  arbitrarily  chosen  starting-points  to  the  same  assertion  T.  I  am 
anxious  not  to  be  misunderstood  here  and  will  therefore  go  into  detail, 

I  will  in  the  first  place  allow  that  we  often  find  in  mathematics 
a  proposition  T.  which  is  so  evidently  only  an  application  of  a  definite 
major  premise  M  that  its  deduction  from  this  major  alone  seems 
natural,  from  any  other  artificial.  I  will  remark  in  the  second  place 
that  when  T  may  be  deduced  with  equal  ease  from  a  variety  of  majors 
M  N  O,  I  do  not  find  in  this  alone  any  reason  for  saying  that  these 
various  proofs  are  foreign  to  the  natural  sequence ;  for  it  may  be 
(though  I  do  not  propound  this  as  the  true  theory  but  only  suggest 
it  as  a  possible  view)  that  the  whole  of  our  knowledge  (e.g.  of 
geometry)  rests  in  fact  upon  a  number  of  original  and  equally  self- 
evident  perceptions,  none  of  which  can  be  deduced  from  any  other, 
but  which,  like  the  several  components  of  one  complete  thought,  are 
each  and  all  -valid  at  once  and  connected  in  definite  ways  with  one 
another.  We  could  then  understand  how  in  virtue  of  this  connexion 


CHAPTER  iv.]  Second  direct  progressive  Proof*  233 

the  same  proposition  admits  of  a  variety  of  equally  convincing  proofs, 
according  as  we  start  from  one  or  the  other  of  those  Inseparably 
united  perceptions  :  no  one  of  these  proofs  will  exclusively  exhibit 
the  nature  of  the  thing,  but  yet  each  may  actually  exhibit  it  in 
the  form  in  which  it  is  seen  from  that  particular  point  of  view;  the 
possibility  of  a  variety  of  proofs  rests  in  this  case  upon  the  organisa- 
tion of  the  content  itself,  which  makes  a  harmoniously  articulated 
whole  not  on  one  line  only  but  on  several  lines  at  once.  But  I 
must  nevertheless  add  in  the  third  place  that  there  remain  many 
propositions  T,  whose  proof  (I  mean  in  this  form  of  subsumption) 
can  only  be  effected  by  devices,  which  can  be  justified  after  they 
have  been  applied,  but  to  the  application  of  which  we  cannot  find 
any  invitation  in  the  thing  in  question.  It  is  to  these  proofs,  of 
which  many  occur  in  pure  mathematics,  and  a  far  greater  number  in 
applied  mathematics,  that  the  remark  above  made  is  intended  to 
apply;  though  these  proofs  are  as  conclusive  as  can  be  wished,  it  is 
yet  quite  beyond  our  power  to  take  them  all  in  at  one  view,  especially 
when  they  form  chains  of  many  links ;  and  as  they  scarcely  allow  us 
to  do  more  than  see  the  necessary  consequence  of  coupling  each  link 
to  the  one  which  follows,  while  the  inventive  ingenuity  which  forges 
the  chain  seems  to  be  guided  by  pure  caprice,  we  cannot  honestly 
say  that  they  show  why  the  conclusion  T  is  true ;  they  only  constrain 
us  to  admit  that  it  is  true.  I  have  introduced  this  point  because  of 
its  practical  importance.  Our  ideal  of  knowledge  and  demonstration 
no  doubt  is  that  we  should  deduce  each  given  proposition  T  from 
the  determining  grounds  by  which  it  is  in  fact  determined  in  such  a  way 
as  to  explain  it,  and  not  simply  assure  ourselves  of  its  certainty  by  a 
logical  device ;  and  if  this  problem  is  to  be  solved,  it  can  only  be  by 
a  direct  progressive  proof  of  this  form.  Bat  it  is  soluble  only  within 
narrow  limits,  and  where  it  is  not  soluble,  where  therefore  we  must 
content  ourselves  with  the  mere  certainty  of  T,  this  form  of  proof 
by  subsumption  has  not  the  least  advantage  over  other  forms.  It  is 
mere  pedantry  on  the  part  of  the  logician  to  wish  in  spite  of  this  to 
enforce  it  and  when  a*  proposition  can  be  conclusively  proved  in  two 
words  by  an  indirect  method  to  look  about  for  a  direct  deduction, 
which  can  only  be  effected  by  a  chain  of  arbitrarily  selected  links, 
which  makes  it  a  longer  business  to  get  to  that  certainty,  and  which 
does  not  in  the  least  help  us  to  see  the  reason  why  it  is  so. 

207.  A  second  directly  progressive  method  of  proof  is  to  start  from 
the  given  proposition  T,  assuming  it  to  be  valid,  and  proceed  to 
develop  its  necessary  consequences.  If  among  these  consequences 


2  34  The  forms  of  Proof.  r.  BOOK  n. 

we  find  even  one  which  contradicts  either  established  facts  or  recognised 
general  truths,  T  does  not  hold  good  as  a  universal  proposition,  and 
the  proof  becomes  a  mode  of  refuting  a  given  proposition ;  it  then 
Includes,  as  may  easily  be  seen,  that  preliminary  procedure  above 
mentioned,  by  which  we  assure  ourselves  before  entering  upon  the 
actual  proof  that  among  the  given  cases  there  is  no  contradictory 
instance  against  the  validity  of  the  proposition  to  be  proved.  If  the 
development  of  the  consequences  of  T  however  far  it  be  carried  dis- 
closes nothing  inconsistent  with  known  facts  or  truths,  we  have  not 
even  yet  got  jcnough  to  establish  the  truth  of  T,  for  the  next  step  in 
that  development  beyond  the  point  at  which  we  have  stopped,  might 
reveal  the  existence  of  a  contradiction  hitherto  concealed,  but  at  any 
rate  this  procedure  suffices  in  the  field  of  science  to  recommend  a 
hypothesis,  which  is  then  reserved  for  further  examination.  But  the 
true  province  of  this  method  lies  in  practical  life  :  it  is  the  method  we 
employ  to  recommend  proposals,  arrangements  that  are  to  be 
adjusted,  resolutions  that  are  to  be  adopted.  And  here  the  in- 
completeness of  the  development  of  the  consequences  is  no  obstacle ; 
In  all  human  affairs  it  is  enough  to  ascertain  what  effects  will  follow 
from  the  application  of  a  proposed  measure  within  such  a  limited  time 
and  In  such  a  limited  field  as  we  can  readily  survey  :  he  who  wishes 
to  take  count  of  all  the  subsidiary  effects  which  a  microscopical 
examination  might  disclose,  all  the  consequences  centuries  hence  of 
what  we  do  to-day,  is  a  supercilious  pedant ;  fresh  measures  will  be 
taken  to  avoid  minor  disadvantages,  and  the  remote  future  must  take 
care  of  itself. 

208-  A  third  form,  the  first  directly  regressive  form  of  proof, 
proceeds  from  the  assumed  validity  of  T  and  works  back  to  the 
conditions  under  which  this  validity  is  possible.  The  difference 
between  this  form  and  that  just  discussed  is  not  considerable,  but 
there  is  a  difference :  It  is  not  considerable  because  the  conditions 
requisite  for  the  validity  of  T  can  only  be  found  by  taking  T  as 
their  basis  and  deducing  them  as  consequences  from  it,  a  procedure 
which  coincides  with  our  previous  direct  progressive  method:  but  we 
see  that  there  is  a  difference  when  we  consider  the  nature  of  that 
which  is  thus  deduced.  We  may  take  as  an  instance  of  both  forms 
at  once  the  ordinary  way  of  solving  a  problem  in  mathematics ; 
for  every  such  solution  is  at  the  same  time  a  proof  of  the  solubility  of 
the  problem,  i.e.  of  the  validity  of  the  combination  of  ideas  contained 
by  the  proposed  problem  T.  If  we  assume  that  T  is  true  and  de- 
velop the  consequences  which  flow  from  it,  these  consequences  may 


CHAPTER  iv.]          First  direct  regressive  Proof.  235 

be  of  various  kinds ;  some  of  them  will  be  particular  circumstances 
which  agree  or  disagree  with  given  facts,  others  will  be  general 
relations'  between  various  objects  which  are  either  consistent  or  in- 
consistent with  truths  otherwise  established.  If  we  only  come  upon 
particular  consequences  which  disagree  with  given  facts  or  secondary 
conditions,  we  may  with  certainty  infer  that  .7*  does  not  hold,  though 
we  do  not  see  the  reason  why  it  does  not;  if  TMs  a  practical  pro- 
posal, it  may  be  that  it  is  quite  acceptable  in  itself  and  that  it  is  only 
its  execution  that  encounters  .some  obstacle ;  and  then  we  should 
have  a  case  of  the  second  form  of  proof:  if  on  the  other  hand  we 
come  upon  absurd  general  propositions  which  must  be  true  if  Tis  to 
be  true,  then  besides  the  certainty  that  T  is  impossible  we  get  also 
a  strong  hint  as  to  the  reason  why  it  is  impossible ;  that  reason  must 
lie  in  the  general  truths  which  conflict  with  the  absurd  conditions 
we  deduced,  and  herein  we  find  what  this  third  form  of  proof  does 
for  us.  It.  not  only  clears  the  ground  for  the  subsequent  discovery 
of  a  direct  and  progressive  proof  of  the  contrary  proposition,  but 
gives  us  a  remarkably  conclusive  and  palpable  negation  of  a  given 
proposition  T  in  the  disclosure  of  all  the  absurd  assumptions  that 
would  be  necessary  if  it  were  true ;  and  on  this  account  this  regres- 
sive proof  is  often  preferable  to  a  progressive  one. 

It  cannot  establish  anything  but  the  falsity  of  T,  and  so  remains  a 
form  of  refutation.  If  in  working  backwards  from  T  we  come  upon 
none  but  admissible  conditions,  we  cannot  infer  that  T  is  true  except 
in  mathematics;  for  only  in  mathematics  is  it  possible  to  develop 
from  a  proposed  problem  all  the  conditions  necessary  to  its  solution  ; 
in  other  cases  we  can  never  be  certain  that  we  have  really  deduced 
from  T7  everything  without  exception  that  is  implied  as  a  condition 
necessary  to  its  truth  ;  the  next  step  we  took  might  bring  to  light  an 
absurdity  that  we  should  have  to  assume.  Affirmatively  then  this 
method  is  in  matters  of  theory  only  able  to  establish  the  probability  of 
jP;  in  practice  however  we  use  it  to  recommend  a  proposal  just  as 
much  as  the  foregoing  progressive  method.  For  when  we  want  to 
secure  the  acceptance  of  a  proposal  we  not  only  point  out  the  con- 
sequences to  be  expected,  but  also  show  that  the  conditions  of  its 
execution  are  not  incompatible  either  with  the  general  requirements 
of  justice  and  morality,  or  with  the  means  which  are  actually  at  our 
command.  A  political  measure  always  needs  to  be  justified  in  these 
two  ways, — after  the  former  method  by  its  useful  consequences,  after 
this  method  by  the  admissibility,  in  the  view  of  justice  and  morality, 
•of  all  that  it  implies :  and  in  our  daily  life  we  must  take  count  not 


2  36  The  forms  of  Proof.  [BOOK  n. 

only  of  the  advantage  to  be  expected  from  a  provision,  but  also  of 
the  price  we  must  pay  for  it. 

209.  A  fourth  method,  the  second  direci  regressive  method,  starts 
from  given  propositions  and  proceeds  to  prove  from  them  the  validity 
of  T  as  the  condition  of  which  they  are  the  result     This  is  a  line  of 
thought  which  we  are  very  constantly  impelled  to  follow:    for  the 
greater  part  of  our  knowledge  of  general  laws  is  won  in  this  way  by 
reasoning  back  from  given  facts  to  that  which  must  be  assumed  as 
the  condition  of  their  possibility.     It  is  easy  to  see  however  that  its 
most  important  applications  belong  to  the  method  of  discovery  which 
tries  to  elicit  from  that  which  is  given  a  T  which  is  as  yet  unknown. 
When  the  general  proposition  T  is  given  and  we  are  looking  about 
for  the  several  propositions  which  may  serve  to  confirm  it,  the  proper 
method  is  always  to  begin  with  the  progressive  development  of  that 
which  as  consequence  of  T  must  be  true  if  T  be  true :  only  when 
we  have  made  a  comprehensive  survey  of  these  consequences  do  we 
proceed  to  compare  the  result  obtained  with  experience  or  with  other 
truths,  in  order  to  reason  regressivcly  from  the  truth  of  this  result  to 
the  truth  of  T. 

I  will  therefore  postpone  the  consideration  of  much  that  might  be 
introduced  here,  and  will  only  mention  one  species  of  this  method, 
viz.  that  which  infers  the  universal  truth  of  T  from  its  truth  in  par- 
ticular instances,-  --complete  indue  linn  or  the  collective  proof.  We  are 
often  compelled  to  employ  it :  it  is  not  always  possible  to  prove  at 
one  stroke  that  a  proposition  T  holds  good  for  all  quantities,  integral 
and  fractional,  positive  and  negative,  rational  and  irrational,  real  and 
imaginary  magnitudes  ;  but  each  of  these  several  kinds  of  quantities 
may  offer  some  special  point  of  attachment  for  a  proof  that  jTis  true 
of  it ;  if  then  we  are  sure  that  we  have  included  all  possible  cases  of 
1 \  that  is  in  this  case  if  we  are  sure  that  there  is  no  conceivable  kiad 
of  quantity  besides  those  named,  then  we  know  that  .T'is  true  of  all 
quantities  whatsoever.  The  general  conception  of  quantity  will  then 
no  doubt  contain  some  reason  for  this  universal  validity;  nevertheless 
we  cannot  always  point  out  this  reason,  or  at  least  we  cannot  always 
make  it  quite  clear  and  self-evident;  and  then  we  must  have  recourse 
to  the  collective  proof, 

210.  The  necessity  of  including  without  any  omission  all  the  kinds 
of  cases  to  which  T  can  apply  if  T  is  to  be  proved  universally  true 
leads  here  to  an  interesting  special  form  of  this  proof.     Mere  com- 
pleteness of  course  can  always  be  secured  by  dividing  all  the  cases 
into  say  Q  and  non~(?,  the  non-Q  again  into  R  and  non-jft?,  and  so 


CHAPTER iv.]          .  Second  direct  regressive  Proof.  237 

on  as  far  as  we  like,  stopping  say  at  U  and  non- 17:  but  this  is  seldom 
of  any  use ;  for  even  if  we  easily  find  separate  proofs  for  the  positive 
kinds  of  cases  Q  R  U,  it  is  very  difficult  to  find  one  for  the  ne- 
gative remainder  non-Z7  which  embraces  a  miscellaneous  crowd  of 
different  cases.  We  are  constrained  therefore  to  take  a  case  Qy  for 
which  we  happen  to  be  already  able  to  prove  that  T  is  true,  and  try 
to  derive  the  other  cases  R  17 . .,  etc.  from  Q  in  such  a  way  that  it  may 
be  evident  that  the  changes  by  which  Q  passes  into  R,  and  R  into 
Z7,  either  do  not  affect  the  conditions  which  made  T  true  in  the  case 
of  Q,  or  else  constantly  reproduce  them.  This  is  the  method, 
familiar  to  mathematicians,  first  formulated  by  Jacob  Bernoulli^  of  pro- 
ceeding from  nto  n  +  i, — chiefly  applicable  when  the  several  cases  in 
all  of  which  TIB  to  be  true  form  of  themselves  a  series  in  which  each 
successive  (n  4-  i)th  member  is  formed  in  the  same  precisely  de- 
finable way  out  of  the  preceding  w^1  member.  If  then  it  follows 
from  the  way  in  which  the  member  n  + 1  is  formed  from  the  mem- 
ber n  that  uTwhen.  true  of  the  latter  must  be  true  of  the  former  also, 
it  follows  for  the  same  reason  that  it  must  be  true  of  the  member 
n  -f-  2,  and  so  on  for  every  member  of  the  series.  For  instance  in 
teaching  the  elements  of  algebra  this  method  is  usually  employed  to 
prove  the  binomial  theorem  for  integral  exponents  in  a  palpable  way 
by  repeatedly  multiplying  the  binomial  into  itself. 

The  general  idea  of  this  proof  however  is  by  no  means  confined  to 
mathematics,  but  is  very  often  applied  in  common  life,  sometimes 
under  the  not  quite  appropriate  name  of  a  proof  by  analogy.  In 
support  of  a  plan  or  a  statement  we  first  mention  an  instance  in 
which  the  plan  is  evidently  advantageous,  the  statement  obviously 
true ;  then  we  show  that  the  other  conceivable  cases  are  in  reality 
distinguished  from  this  case  by  no  feature  that  could  possibly  make 
a  change  in  this  respect;  and  thence  we  conclude  that  T  holds  good 
universally.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  a  careless  or  sophistical  use  of 
this  method  may  lead  to  error.  Between  two  very  different  cases 
A  and  Z  we  insert  a  great  number  of  intermediate  cases,  each 
separated  from  the  next  by  an  inconsiderable  difference  d.  Then 
instead  of  showing  that  if  T  is  true  of  A  it  must  also  be  true  of 
A  4-  d)  which  is  B>  we  assume  that  it  is  so  because  d  is  so  trifling  ; 
we  reason  similarly  from  B  to  C,  and  finally  transfer  the  validity  of 
T  from  A  for  which  it  really  held  good  to  a  Z  which  by  the  accumu- 
lation of  the  many  disregarded  differences  d  has  become  entirely 
unlike  A  and  does  not  in  the  least  belong  to  the  field  to  which  T 
actually  applies. 


2  38  The  forms  of  Proof.  [BOOK  n. 

211.  The  indirect  methods  of  proof  may  be  treated  more  briefly. 
They  bear  formally  the  same  relation  to  non-J  that  the  direct 
methods  bear  to  T,  and  the  only  circumstance  that  makes  them  in 
some  degree  peculiar  is  that  we  wish  to  arrive  by  them  not  at  non-77 
but  at  T:  they  are  therefore  not  affirmative  but  negative  proofs  in 
respect  of  non-J7.  The  fifth  method  of  proof,  the  first  indirect  pro- 
gressive method,  would  have  to  show  that  non-J7  is  false  on  general 
grounds,  and  this  may  be  done  by  syllogisms  in  the  first  and  second 
figures  with  a  universal  negative  premise.  But  we  shall  seldom  find 
an  opportunity  of  applying  this  form  of  proof :  if  there  be  a  direct 
proof  for  T  we  shall  prefer  it ;  if  there  be  none,  a  universal  refu- 
tation of  non-J7  is  usually  no  easier. 

The  only  form  of  this  method  therefore  which  is  practically  impor- 
tant is  the  secondary  form,  which  in  the  place  of  non-77,  the  con- 
tradictory of  T,  substitutes  the  complete  sum  of  all  its  contraries. 
As  these  contraries  are  all  quite  definite  positive  statements,  there  is 
more  hope  of  being  able  to  disprove  each  upon  general  grounds,  and 
therefore  by  a  progressive  method.  The  proof  that  non-77  is 
universally  false  which  is  formed  by  the  union  of  these  several  ne- 
gative proofs  is  then  evidently  a  regressive  argument  corresponding 
to  the  positive  collective  proof.  When  J'and  all  the  contraries  of 
jTare  conceived  as  together  forming  the  sum  of  all  possible  relations 
which  can  subsist  between  -Saml./',  the  subject  and  predicate  of  2] 
the  form  of  proof  of  which  we  are  speaking  becomes  that  which  is 
known  under  the  name  of  proof  ly  exclusion :  the  truth  of  T  then 
follows  from  the  falsity  of  all  the  other  members  of  this  complete 
disjunction.  One  of  the  most  important  applications  of  this  form  is 
the  special  case  of  a  tripartite  disjunction,  in  which  T'has  two  con- 
traries, i.e.  in  which  non-  T  divides  into  two  contradictories:  then  we 
get  the  proof  by  the  method  of  limits.  We  are  familiar  with  this  proof 
and  its  very  great  importance  in  mathematics,  where  it  belongs  equally 
to  inventive  and  demonstrative  reasoning :  every  magnitude  a  is  either 
equal  to  or  greater  or  less  than  another  magnitude  d  with  which  it 
may  be  compared:  if  it  can  be  shown  that  it  is  neither  greater  nor 
less  than  <7,  the  proposition  a  =  d  is  proved.  In  practice  this  train  of 
reason  generally  takes  another  line :  for  the  above  statement  pre- 
supposes that  our  attention  has  already  been  directed  to  the  definite 
magnitude  d  which  is  proved  in  the  end  to  be  equal  to  a.  As  a  rule 
this  is  not  the  case,  but  we  only  know  that  a  is  less  than  a  second 
magnitude  I  and  greater  than  a  third  c :  if  then  we  can  succeed  in 
showing  that  the  same  relation  constantly  holds  as  we  dimmish  the 


CHAPTER  iv.]  Indirect  progressive  Proofs.  239 

value  of  b  to  0  and  raise  the  value  of  c  to  y,  the  value  of  a  must 
lie  between  two  limits  $  and  y  which  are  constantly  approaching 
each  other,  and  it  will  be  possible  to  calculate  this  value  with  an 
approximation  to  the  truth  which  may  be  carried  as  far  as  we  please. 
The  best  known  and  most  elementary  example  is  the  determination 
of  the  length  of  the  circumference  of  a  circle  by  enclosing  it  between 
a  larger  circumscribed  and  a  smaller  inscribed  polygon,  and  diminish- 
ing the  former  and  increasing  the  latter  without  limit  by  continually 
adding  to  the  number  of  their  sides.  Such  forms  of  proof  deserve 
our  attention ;  they  are  the  potent  instruments  by  which  we  actually 
enlarge  our  knowledge;  the  development  and  application  of  this 
method  by  Archimedes  is  a  greater  advance  in  applied  logic  than  any 
that  ever  proceeded  from  the  merely  syllogistic  art  of  Aristotle. 

212.  A  sixth  method,  the  second  indirect  progressive  method,  would 
begin  by  assuming  non-77,  and  proceed  to  develop  its  necessary  con- 
sequences, and  then  from  their  falsity  infer  the  falsity  of  non-77,  the 
last  step  of  course  being  regressive.  I  will  here  refer  the  reader 
back  to  the  second  direct  progressive  proof,  and  only  add  with 
reference  to  this  indirect  method  that  it  does  not  matter  how  many 
true  propositions  may  be  deduced  from  non- T\  for  it  is  quite  possi- 
ble for  a  number  of  true  inferences  to  flow  even  from  a  false  proposi- 
tion with  respect  to  points  whose  mutual  relations  are  not  affected  by 
the  error  :  but  a  single  false  proposition  which  follows  as  a  necessary 
consequence  from  non-77  does  away  with  its  universal  validity.  If 
this  consequence  merely  conflicts  with  given  facts  there  is  properly  no 
reason  for  calling  this  proof  a  deductio  ad  absurdum,  though  the  name 
is  sometimes  given  to  all  applications  of  this  method :  all  that  has 
been  done  is  to  prove  that  an  idea  which  in  itself  is  not  unthinkable 
nor  absurd  is  as  a  matter  of  fact  untrue.  But  again  absurd  or  non- 
sensical is  strictly  speaking  not  that  which  is  known  to  be  impossible 
in  thought,  but  that  which  conflicts  with  all  probable  suppositions, 
with  our  general  feeling  as  to  what  is  true,  and  a  number  of  truths 
involved  in  that  feeling,  provable  perhaps  but  not  yet  actually  proved. 
That  2  =  3  is  more  than  absurd,  it  is  impossible ;  but  that  the  whole 
world  is  a  thoughtless  jest,  that  parents  should  obey  their  children., 
that  we  should  reward  criminals  and  be  tender  to  sin,  are  absurd 
assertions.  I  would  therefore  apply  the  name  deductio  ad  abmrdum 
only  to  the  indirect  progressive  proof  which  develops  from  non-Z 
consequences  which  are  not  impossible  in  thought,  but  which  are 
inconsistent  with  a  host  of  convictions  accepted  as  truths-  and  suffi- 
ciently established.  This  kind  of  proof  is  very  constantly  employed 


240  The  forms  of  Proof .  .        [BOOKII. 

In  daily  life,  especially  whenever  non-77  states  a  thought,  which  is 
perhaps  in  itself  correct,  in  too  general  language,  i.e.  when  it  proceeds 
from  too  wide  a  definition  of  the  subject  S  to  which  a  predicate  P  is 
to  be  attached,  or  from  too  wide  a  definition  of  this  P.  It  is  in  this 
way  that  we  prove  the  unreasonableness  and  foolishness  of  a  pro- 
posed law,  whether  it  gives  or  takes  away  rights  and  duties,  by  showing 
what  further  intolerable  and  monstrous  consequences  would  follow 
if  the  proposal  were  carried  out  universally.  Usually  however  the 
dcductio  ad  absurdum  is  made  to  include  also  that  form  of  indirect 
proof  which  deduces  impossible  consequences  from  an  assumed  pro- 
position and  thereby  refutes  it. 

A  particular  case  of  this  is  when  the  development  leads  to  a  con- 
sequence which  at  once  does  away  with  the  proposition  from  which 
we  started,  so  that  the  inner  contradiction  which  lay  in  the  assump- 
tion of  its  truth  of  itself  forces  us  to  infer  that  it  is  false.  As  a  simple 
instance  we  may  take  the  indirect  proof  of  the  proposition  7"  that  on 
a  straight  line  a  b  in  the  same  plane  and  at  the  same  point  c  only  one 
perpendicular  c  d  can  be  made  to  fall.  Non-7Tthen  would  assert  that 
several  perpendiculars  were  possible  at  the  point  c  under  the  same 
conditions.  Now  assuming  that  this  is  correct,  assuming  further 
that  c  d  is  the  first  perpendicular,  i.e.  that  it  makes  with  ab  two 
adjacent  equal  angles  a,  any  second  perpendicular  cc  must,  in  order 
to  be  distinguished  from  c  d,  make  with  it  at  the  point  c  some  angle  8, 
while  at  the  same  time  in  order  to  be  perpendicular  to  a  b  it  must 
make  with  it  equal  adjacent  angles.  A.  look  at  the  figure  then  is 
enough  to  show  that  the  two  angles  a  -f  8  and  a  —  d  must  be  equal, 
and  each  equal  to  a  right  angle :  but  if  a  +  #  be  a  right  angle,  a, 
being  a  part  of  this  right  angle,  is  not  itself  a  right  angle,  which 
contradicts  the  original,  supposition  that  «  is  a  right  angle.  The 
equation  «  -f  <J  =  «  —  8  can  only  hold  good  when  5  =  o,  i.e.  when 
cf  and  £v/ coincide.  The  proposition  T  therefore  holds  good:  at 
the  same  point  in  a  straight  line  there  can  be  only  one  perpendicular 
In  the  same  plane* 

We  arc  constantly  led  to  proofs  of  this  kind  when  we  have  to  clo 
with  the  simplest  fundamental  perceptions  or  propositions  concerning 
a  coherent  field  of  thought :  the  impossibility  of  apprehending  the 
relation  of  S  to  P  otherwise  than  as  it  is  expressed  in  T,  i.e.  the 
fruitlesaness  of  the  attempt  to  affirm  non-77,  will  always  betray  itself 
by  the  fact  that  the  consequences  which  follow  from  it  destroy  or 
alter  the  subject  *$'  or  the  predicate  P9  which  were  both  assumed  to 
be  valid  for  non-7'in  the  same  sense  in  which  they  were  valid  for  T, 


CHAPTER  iv.]  Indirect  regressive  Proofs.  241 

213.  The  indirect  proof,  like  the  direct,  admits  of  two  regressive 
forms  :  these  two,  the  seventh  and  the  eighth  in  our  survey,  have  but  little 
to  distinguish  them ;  they  bear  just  the  same  relation  to  the  falsity  of 
non- T  that  the  two  direct  regressive  proofs  bear  to  the  truth  of  T. 

The  former  (the  seventh)  method  would  work  back  from  non- 7* 
to  the  conditions  necessary  to  its  truth,  and  then  reason  back  again 
from  the  falsity  or  inconceivability  of  these  principles  to  that  of 
non-77.  In  its  application  this  method  differs  but  little  from  the  cor- 
responding progressive  method;  for  the  principles  which  are  ne- 
cessary to  the  truth  of  non- 17  cart  only  be  found  by  taking  non- T 
as  their  basis  and  developing  them  from  it  as  its  consequences,  i.e. 
progressively.  The  latter  (the  eighth)  method  would  start  from  given 
facts  or  principles  and  proceed  to  show  that  they  cannot  be  founded 
upon  non- T7  as  their  basis,  but  rather  expressly  require  the  falsity  of 
non- T.  This  also  we  shall  find  can  only  be  carried  out  by  either 
developing  non-75  progressively  into  its  consequences,  and  ascer- 
taining that  if  they  held  good  they  would  make  the  given  facts  im- 
possible, or  by  taking  these  given  facts  for  basis  and  deducing  from 
them,  progressively  as  before,  their  necessary  presuppositions :  but 
this  will  very  seldom  be  of  much  use,  for  in  that  case  it  will 
usually  be  easier  to  establish  directly  that  jTas  such  a  presupposition 
must  be  true,  than  indirectly  to  establish  that  non-  jT  cannot  be  true. 

I  will  conclude  this  survey  with  the  general  remark  that  I  believe 
that  I  have  correctly  distinguished  in  my  classification  the  various 
aims  of  demonstrative  reasoning,  but  that  not  every  one  of  these 
aims  has  corresponding  to  it  an  equally  important  and  equally  pe- 
culiar form  of  proof,  clearly  distinguishable  from  all  the  other  forms ; 
it  was  enough  therefore  to  examine  in  detail  only  those  which  have 
in  practice  shown  themselves  to  be  methods  that  are  frequently 
applicable. 

214.  The  reader  will  be  surprised  at  the  absence  from  my  list  of 
the  proof  by  analogy ;  I  do  not  believe  in  its  existence.  In  all  cases 
where  we  believe  we  can  prove  ly  analogy,  the  analogy  in  fact  is 
distinctly  not  the  ground  of  the  conclusiveness  of  the  proof;  it  is  only 
the  inventive  play  of  thought  by  which  we  arrive  at  the  discovery  of  a 
sufficient  ground  of  proof :  it  is  upon  this  ground,  by  means  always  of 
a  subsumption  of  the  individual  under  a  universal,  that  we  establish 
the  necessity  of  the  proposition  to  be  proved.  Although  it  will  take  a 
considerable  space,  I  think  I  must  consider  this  point  in  detail. 

It  may  be  regarded  as  a  fundamental  principle  of  analogy  in  the 
strict  sense,  holding  good  in  all  cases  without  exception,  that  of  like 

K 


242  The  forms  of  Proof  .  CBOOKII. 

things  under  like  conditions  like  assertions  are  true, — a  statement 
which  the  mathematician  further  expresses  In  a  number  of  special 
ways  adapted  to  his  various  problems.  It  is  easy  to  reduce  this 
principle  to  the  principle  of  subsumption  :  if  P  is  true  of  S 
under  a  condition  X,  S  and  X  may  be  comprehended  in  a  general 
conception  M,  of  which  as  such  P  is  true ;  under  the  same  M  we 
may  subsume  any  other  S  which  is  like  the  first  S  and  subject  to  a 
like  condition  X ;  therefore  the  same  predicate  belongs  to  this  S  as 
to  the  first.  This  transformation,  which  may  here  seem  arbitrary 
and  superfluous,  cannot  be  dispensed  with  in  the  case  of  the  second 
principle,— of  unlike  things  under  like  conditions  unlike  assertions 
are  true.  We  may  be  inclined  to  regard  this  also  as  unconditionally 
true,  but  difficulties  thicken  upon  us  when  we  try  to  apply  it.  Sup- 
pose that  unequal  magnitudes  a  and  I  are  divided  by  the  same  third 
magnitude  c\  in  this  case  the  principle  will  hold  good;  the  quo- 
tients will  be  unequal.  But  take  a  second  case :  divide  each  of  the 
unlike  magnitudes  by  itself,  and  the  principle  seems  to  fail;  the 
quotient  in  both  cases  is  i.  Of  course  it  will  at  once  be  urged  that 
the  condition  A",  to  which  the  unlike  elements  a  and  I  are  subjected, 
is  just  not  alike  for  both ;  for  when  we  divide  each  magnitude  "by 
itself^  we  introduce  the  unlikcncss  again  into  the  meaning  of  the 
condition  which  was  to  have  been  alike  for  both.  But  this  ex- 
planation will  not  cover  the  following  third  case;  multiply  both 
by  o,  and  the  product  in  both  cases  alike  is  o.  It  cannot  be  denied 
that  the  operation  of  taking  a  magnitude  no  times  has  but  one  mean- 
ing, and  docs  not  as  in  the  former  case  depend  upon  the  value  of  the 
magnitude  to  which  it  is  applied :  on  the  other  hand  it  may  be  re- 
marked with  justice  that  in  this  case  the  meaning  of  the  like  con- 
dition or  like  operation  X  is  precisely  of  such  a  peculiar  kind  as  to 
annul  the  unlikeness  of  the  magnitudes  to  which  it  is  applied.  Take 
a  fourth  case ;  if  we  square  the  unlike  magnitudes  a  and  b,  the  mean- 
ing of  the  condition  to  which  we  subject  them  is  again  dependent 
upon  the  magnitudes  themselves  as  in  the  second  case,  only  with  the 
opposite  result ;  the  squares  a*  and  &  are  unlike.  Fifthly  and  lastly 
the  results  are  once  more  like  and  both  equal  to  i  if  we  raise  a  and  b 
to  the  o^1  power.  In  this  case  the  condition  to  which  we  have 
subjected  the  unequal  magnitudes  a  and  I  seems  to  be  independent 
of  their  value ;  but  in  fact  the  raising  to  the  otl1  power  is  a  quite  in- 
conceivable operation ;  we  must  remember  that  in  general  am~n  is 

am 

merely  another  expression  for  ••'--,  and  that  accordingly  a1""1,  which  is 


CHAPTER  IV.]  'A  HCtlogy*  243 

equal  to  0°,  is  identical  with  -,  and  therefore  this  fifth  case  is  identical 

a 

with  the  second.  If  we  wish  to  avoid  all  these  ambiguities  the  only 
way  is  to  say  that  of  unlike  things  under  like  conditions  unlike  asser- 
tions are  true  when  the  condition  is  of  such  a  nature  as  not  to  affect 
the  unlikeness  of  the  unlike  things  :  but  that  like  assertions  are  true 
of  them  when  the  condition  is  such  as  to  annul  their  unlikeness, 
But  these  two  propositions  are  mere  barren  tautologies  :  they  do  not 
enable  us  to  decide  even  so  much  as  whether  the  assertions  to  be 
made  will  be  like  or  unlike  without  a  previous  analysis  of  each  case  to 
teach  us  what  is  the  general  rule  MP  under  which  a  and  b  are 
really  to  be  subsumed  here,  and  what  are  the  definite  predicates  P1 
and  P'2  which  attach  to  them  in  virtue  of  the  special  sense  in  which 
they,  as  unlike  kinds  of  M,  partake  of  this  universal  P.  When  we 
have  found  these  predicates  P^  and  Pz  we  see  whether  they  are  like 
or  unlike ;  it  is  not  by  analogy  therefore,  but  entirely  by  subsumption 
that  the  conclusion  is  arrived  at 

215.  To  the  third  principle,  that  of  like  things  under  unlike  con- 
ditions unlike  assertions  are  true,  a  higher  value  may  be  assigned ;  it 
would  in  fact  be  inconsistent  with  the  law  of  identity  if  an  identical 
subject  under  really  different  conditions  showed  no  trace  of  the  in- 
fluence of  this  difference,  and  I  shall  have  occasion  some  way  further 
on  to  make  use  of  this  proposition  as  a  not  unfruitful  maxim  in  the 
treatment  of  philosophical  problems.  But  for  the  present  what 
strikes  us  is  the  number  of  apparent  exceptions.  How  could  the 
engineer  solve  the  problem  of  constructing  a  machine  which  under 
changing  conditions  regulates  itself  and  maintains  &  uniform  motion, 
if  the  same  subject  or  material  substratum  under  different  conditions 
absolutely  must  exhibit  different  effects  ?  A  closer  examination  re- 
moves this  objection ;  it  teaches  us  that  in  the  cases  here  concerned 
either  the  unlike  conditions  are  not  simple  but  go  in  pairs,  or  that  the 
like  subject  is  not  simple,  but  a  whole  of  various  parts.  But  two 
pairs  of  conditions  may  with  regard  to  a  definite  effect  be  equivalent, 
because  the  unlikenesses  of  the  several  members,  in  virtue  of  the 
definite  relation  which  subsists  between  them,  annul  one  another  till 
the  remainders  are  like ;  on  the  other  hand  various  unlike  conditions 
may  so  work  upon  the  various  parts  of  a  whole  that  the  several 
effects  in  each  case  modify  one  another  till  the  resulting  state  of  the 
whole  is  like.  A  simple  body  which  is  out  of  all  relation  to  others 
can  never  receive  under  the  impulse  of  a  force  a  the  same  motion 
that  it  receives  under  the  impulse  of  an  unlike  force  b.  But  under 

K.  2 


2  44  The  forms  of  Proof,  i  BOOK  n, 

the  simultaneous  influence  of  a  and  b  it  may  be  moved  at  the  same 
speed  and  in  the  same  direction  as  under  the  combined  influence  of 
c  and  d :  if  these  four  forces  operate  in  the  same  straight  line,  the 
equality  of  their  algebraical  sum,  i.e.  the  condition  that  a  ±  b  =  c  +  d, 
is  enough  to  give  a  like  motion  to  the  body ;  or  in  more  general 
language,  every  motion  m  may  be  conceived  as  the  resultant  of  a 
countless  number  of  different  pairs  of  components. 

Now  this  result  may  be  exhibited  in  various  ways.  If  we  regard 
the  sums  a  ±  I  and  c  +  d  as  the  conditions  to  which  the  body  is 
subjected,  then  the  conditions  themselves  are  like  one  another,  and 
the  case  conies  under  the  principle  that  of  like  things  under  like  cir- 
cumstances like  assertions  are  true :  but  if  we  leave  the  several  forces 
separate,  the  case  seems  to  make  an  exception  to  the  third  principle. 
Nevertheless  I  should  like  to  maintain  that  this  third  principle  is 
universally  true ;  for  its  true  meaning  plainly  is  that  the  sum  of  all 
the  effects  experienced  by  the  same  subject  or  substratum  under 
different  conditions  will  always  be  different,  And  so  even  if  two 
pairs  of  conditions  are  equivalent  in  respect  of  one  kind  of  effect 
which  they  produce  on  the  same  subject,  it  does  not  follow  that  they 
are  also  equivalent  in  respect  of  all  their  effects,  and  it  is  not  proper 
to  attend  to  the  former  only  and  neglect  that  part  of  their  effect 
which  is  unlike.  If  a  and  I  work  upon  a  body  in  opposite  directions, 
and  c  and  d  also  in  opposite  directions,  and  if  their  sums  or  differences 
a  +  b  and  c  +  d  are  like,  the  body  certainly  experiences  the  like 
motion  m>  and  remains  at  rest  if  a  =  I  and  c  =  d;  but  it  obviously 
experiences  very  different  pressures  according  as  it  is  two  large  or 
two  small  forces  jthat  hold  it  in  equilibrium.  Though  a  self-com- 
pensating machine  continues  to  act  alike  under  constant  and  under 
varying  conditions,  yet  the  position  of  its  parts  changes  as  the  con- 
ditions change,  and  it  wears  out  foster  when  it  is  obliged  to  exert  its 
compensating  powers  than  when  it  leaves  them  unused,  the  con- 
ditions remaining  uniform.  If  fall  sunlight  foils  upon  one  scale  of  a 
balance  suspended  in  a  vacuuma  while  the  other  is  in  shadow,  the 
equilibrium  is  not  disturbed,  but  the  first  scale  is  wanned  and  ex- 
panded more  than  the  other.  Lastly  if  we  multiply  a  first  by  a  If  and 
then  by  I  a^  these  conditions  are  certainly  quite  equivalent  in  respect 
of  the  magnitude  of  the  resulting  product,  but  not  in  respect  of  its 
structure,  and  a  a  I  is  in  any  case  a  different  combination  from  a  "b  a. 
It  would  be  easy  to  acid  to  these  examples,  already  sufficiently 
various,  and  thus  to  confirm  the  universal  truth  of  the  third  principle ; 
but  after  all  it  is  but  of  very  little  use  for  a  proof  by  analogy ;  it  never 


CHAPTER  IV.]  Analogy.  245 


to  establish  what  all  analogy  aims  at,  viz.  that  in  a  second 
case  the  same  thing  happens  as  in  a  first,  but  only  brings  us  to  the 
negative  conclusion,  that  any  difference  of  the  conditions  in  the  same 
subject  makes  the  likeness  of  the  total  effect  impossible  ;  what  is  still 
like  in  this  effect,  and  what  unlike,  we  can  never  tell  without  an 
enquiry  of  another  kind. 

The  fourth  principle  needs  but  the  barest  mention  ;  that  of  unlike 
things  under  unlike  conditions  unlike  assertions  are  true  is,  after  all 
that  has  just  been  said,  so  evidently  unfounded  or  ambiguous,  that  no 
useful  application  of  such  a  statement  is  conceivable. 

I  will  only  add  in  conclusion  that  the  trains  of  thought  to  which 
the  title  of  proofs  by  analogy  is  supposed  to  be  appropriate  do  not 
even  proceed  directly  from  these  principles,  though  they  must  be 
traced  back  to  them.  The  presupposition  on  which  they  rest  is 
rather  that  of  similar  things  under  similar  circumstances  similar  asser- 
tions are  true.  Now  similarity1  is  always  a  mixture  of  identity2  in  one 
respect  and  difference  in  another;  if  therefore  it  is  difficult  to  base 
any  valid  inference  upon  the  foregoing  propositions  which  separate 
the  mingled  elements,  it  is  still  less  possible  to  do  so  when  the  two 
are  indiscriminately  fused  together  in  the  resemblances  to  which 
appeal  is  made.  I  think  therefore  that  I  have  sufficiently  shown  that 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  proof  by  analogy;  though  I  do  not  by 
this  intend  to  deny  that  the  observation  of  even  remote  resemblances 
is  of  great  assistance  to  the  discoverer  both  in  detecting  new  truths 
and  in  finding  grounds  for  proving  given  truths  ;  for,  to  sum  up  my 
meaning  briefly,  there  is  no  need  to  impugn  the  abstract  validity  of 
these  three  principles,  but  only  their  fruitfulness  for  demonstration. 
We  cannot  on  the  ground  of  the  unanalysed  similarity  of  two  subjects 
transfer  the  predicate  of  one  to  the  other,  but  only  on  the  ground  of 
their  demonstrated  likeness,  likeness  at  least  in  respect  of  the  con- 
ditions upon  which  the  predicate  in  question  everywhere  depends; 
and  this  always  brings  us  back  to  setting  down  a  universal  pro- 
position M  P  and  subsuming  both  subjects  under  the  determining. 
conception  M. 

216.  We  have  still  to  consider  those  mathematical  arguments  which 
are  commonly  called  proofs  by  strict  analogy.  As  the  name  analogy 

1  [<  Aelmlichkeit'] 

2  ['  Gleichheit.'     It  is  impossible  to  adhere  to  a  single  rendering  for  «  gleich.' 
Thus  'unlike*  applied  to  magnitudes  as  on  p.  242  might  mean  heterogeneous; 
'ungleich'  is   therefore  rendered  there  by  'unequal;'    but  in  the  rest   of  this 
passage  by  *  unlike.*    Cp.  Metaphysic,  p.  47,  note.] 


246  The  forms  of  Proof .  CBOOKII. 

originally  meant  proportion,  every  procedure  that  leads  back  to  pro- 
portion has  a  reasonable  claim  to  the  title ;  the  effect  of  common 
usage  however  is  such  that  when  we  hear  of  an  inference  by  analogy 
we  expect  an  argument  which  reasons  directly  from  similars  to 
similars,  without  needing  to  take  a  circuitous  route  through  a  higher 
universal.  But  the  methods  employed  by  mathematicians  cannot  be 
thus  opposed  to  proof  by  subsumption.  A  proportion  between  four 
determinate  magnitudes,  a :  b  =  c  :  d,  is  merely  the  expression  of  a 
fact ;  it  only  becomes  a  source  of  fresh  inferences  when  the  last  two 
members  are  left  indeterminate  ;  but  in  this  form,  a  :  b  =  m  :  n,  it  is 
the  expression  of  a  universal  law ;  it  asserts  that  the  magnitudes 
yielded  by  the  problem  now  before  us  at  the  moment  are  connected 
together  in  pairs  in  such  a  way  that  in  every  pair  one  member  is  to 
the  other  as  a  :  1.  If  we  give  any  definite  value  to  m  and  n  we  get  a 
syllogism  in  Darii, — -all  the  pairs  of  magnitudes  which  the  problem 
yields  (J./)  have  the  ratio  P,  viz.  the  ratio  a :  If ;  but  m  and  n  (the  S 
or  subject  of  the  minor  premise)  are  such  a  pair;  therefore  m  and  n 
are  to  one  another  in  the  ratio  a\b.  No  doubt  this  reduction  to  the 
first  figure  is  very  tedious  ;  but  we  deceive  ourselves  if  we  fancy, 
because  of  the  shortness  of  the  formulated  expression  which  the 
nature  of  the  subject-matter  makes  possible  in  mathematics,  that  the 
train  of  thought  also  in  a  simple  proportion  is  something  shorter  than 
that  here  stated.  Even  the  simplest  example  of  the  rule  of  three  is 
worked  in  this  way.  We  say,  if  i  pound  costs  two  thalers,  10  pounds 
cost  10  x  2  thalers:  here  we  assume,  what  seems  to  us  self-evident, 
that  the  ratio  between  the  quantity  of  the  article  and  the  price  is 
always  the  same ;  accordingly  we  take  the  ratio  of  the  one  pound 
to  its  price  as  a  general  rule  and  bring  the  ratio  of  the  10  pounds 
to  its  price  under  it  as  a  particular  case  of  the  rule :  but  the  dealer 
perhaps  sells  the  10  pounds  for  18  thalers  and  thereby  shows  that 
what  we  assumed  is  not  sclf-evidently  true  in  all  cases,  but  that  we 
really  had  to  make  the  assumption  for  the  purposes  of  our  calcula- 
'•  lion  :  further  it  is  evident  that  we  tacitly  conceive  m  and  n  as  stand- 
ing for  quantities  of  the  same  article  and  of  the  same  unit  of  currency 
as  a  and  #,  and  so  in  this  respect  also  take  the  first  case  as  the 
general  rule  and  subsume  the  second  case  under  it.  Every  general 
equation  which  exhibits  one  and  the  same  content  under  two  different 
forms  is  equally  a  general  rul^  which  holds  good  only  for  that  kind 
of  magnitudes  which,  by  a  convention  which  Ends  no  expression  in 
the  formula  itself,  we  intend  to  denote  by  these  particular  letters,  and 
for  which  we  originally  showed  the  equation  to  be  valid.  It  is  not 


CHAPTER  IV.]  Analogy. 

allowable  therefore  to  substitute  for  the  magnitudes  m  and  n  which 
occur  in  an  equation  any  other  chance  magnitudes  \i  and  if,  and  to 
regard  the  equation  as  still  valid  :  '  we  must  know  beforehand  that 
ft  and  v  can  be  subsumed  under  the  species  m  and  n  of  which  the 
equation  has  been  proved  to  be  true.  Suppose  we  have  proved  by 
actual  multiplication  and  by  the  argument  from  n  to  n  +  i  that 

mx       m(m  —  i)    0 


that  does  not  give  us  the  right  to  infer  also  that 

i  i(--i) 


—  T  4-  4- 

-  i   -J-  *T 


i  .  m        m  1.2 

for  in  the  first  formula  m  stood  only  for  the  class  of  positive  whole 
numbers,  for  which  alone  the  proof  by  multiplication  was  feasible, 
and  a  fraction  cannot  be  subsumed  under  it.  If  on  the  other  hand 
we  had  found  means  to  prove  in  the  first  instance  that  the  binomial 

m 
theorem  in  the  first  case  holds  true  for  the  fractional  exponents  —  3 

whatever  positive  value  may  be  assigned  to  m  and  n,  we  might  have 
deduced  the  first  formula  directly  from  this,  since  every  whole  number 
m  may  be  expressed  in  the  form  of  an  improper  fraction. 

217.  In  conclusion  I  should  like  once  more  to  connect  what 
I  have  said  with  the  dictum  de  omni  el  nullo  or  the  law  of  disjunction. 
If  S1  and  S2  are  two  species  of  the  genus  M  or  two  particular  cases 
of  the  universal  M,  and  if  P  may  be  predicated  universally  of  M,  we 
know  that  P  may  be  predicated  of  S1  and  S2  not  in  this  universal 
form  but  in  the  modified  forms  P1  and  P2.  Now  in  a  special  case  it 
may  happen  from  the  way  in  which  the  various  predicates  P  Q  R  are 
connected  in  Mt  that  the  various  groups  of  characteristics  p1  ql  rl, 
pi  ^  ri^  ps  g$  rs  which  they  form  jn  the  several  subjects  sl  s*  ss  must  be 
identical  with  one  another;  they  then  make  so  to  say  a  secondary 
predicate  IT,  which  may  be  ascribed  to  M  itself,  and  which  equally 
attaches  without  modification  to  every  species  of  M.  Thus  the  con- 
ception of  the  triangle  M  requires  three  angles  pq  r^  but  the  various 
values  of  these  angles  in  the  various  kinds  of  triangles  always  make 
up  the  same  sum  II  =  2  right  angles  ;  this  identical  characteristic  IT 
therefore  attaches  to  all  triangles  and  we  may  at  once  ascribe  it  to 
any  single  triangle  when  we  have  simply  subsumed  it  under  its  genus. 
But  apart  from  such  special  cases  the  p*  or  q~  that  will  be  proper  to 
an  s*  remains  indefinite,  with  the  single  limitation  that  it  must  be  a 
kind  of  <3,  and  that  it  must  always  be  present,  even  though  its  value 


248  The  forms  of  Proof .  t  BOOK  IL 

diminish  to  nought,  in  which  case  this  nought  must  be  capable  of 

explanation.     If  this  f  is  to  be  determined,  there  must  be  a  rule 

according  to  which  the  specific  peculiarity  of  S1  (which  makes  it 

not  only  a  kind  of  M  but  this  particular  kind)  helps  to  determine  the 

modifications  of  the  general  characteristics  of  M> — in  this  case  the 

modification  of  Q\    an  1  we  mast  assume  that  the  peculiar  nature 

of  S2  will  follow  the  sa?ne  rule  in  determining  q*,  the  modification  of 

the  general  characteristic  Q  which  is  appropriate  to  it.     If  we  know 

this  rule  we  can  determine  (f,  and  this  is  precisely  the  case  which  is 

called  inference  by  strict  analogy,  though  as  we  have  seen  this  rests 

upon  nothing  but  the  subsumption  of  a  case  under  the  like  universal 

rule.     But  when  tins  rule  is  not  known,  we   still   feel   inclined  to 

find  out  qr  by  considering  the  resemblances  and  differences  in  the 

relation  of  S[  and  *S'2  to  each  other  and  to  11  f,  and  the  procedure 

based  upon  this  we  usually  call  inference  by  analogy ;   but  it  only 

enables  us  to  gwss  the  right  result,  never  to  prove  it.     It  was  known 

by  the  forty-seventh  proposition  that  for   right-angled  triangles  the 

square  on  the  hypotenuse  //  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  the 

sides  a  and  b  which  enclose  the  right  angle.     As  this  relation  can 

depend  upon  nothing    but  the  general   properties  of  the  triangle, 

the  right  angle,  and  the  length  of  the  sides,  it  is  a  quite  justifiable 

Impulse  which   bids   us   seek   an  analogous  proposition  about  the 

square  of  the  subtending  side  for  other  values  of  the  subtended  angle. 

If  we  simply  put  the  formula  in  the  general  form  //  =  a*  +  $2  there 

Is  no  longer  any  mention  of  the  right  angle  ;  but  the  formula  we  are 

seeking  must   mention  the   subtended,  angle,  for  it  is  evident  at  a 

glance  that,  a  and  I  remaining  the  same,  /;  gets  longer  as  the  angle 

increases  and  shorter  as  it  diminishes.     Accordingly  to   make  the 

Pythagorean  formula  complete  we  must  acid  another  term  which  will 

become  nought  when  the  included  angle  </>  =  90°:  and  as  we  cannot 

measure  h  by  the  angle  itself,  but  only  by  a  length  dependent  upon  it, 

or  by  a  numerical  coefficient  dependent  upon  it  that  determines  another 

length,  we  may  set  down  tentatively  h"  =  a?  -j-  IP  Hh  M  cos  <p.     The 

alternative  sign  4;  is  seen  at  once  to  be  needless  when  we  reflect  that 

when  <l>  increases  beyond  90°  //  still  increases  but  the  cosine  becomes 

negative ;  we  only  need  the  minus  sign  therefore  in  the  formula.    In 

order  to  find  m  which  is   as  yet  indeterminate  we  turn  to  the  two 

limiting  values  of  $,  </>  =  o  and  </>  =  TT.   In  the  latter  case  7/2  becomes 

equal  to  (a  -f  ^)2  and  cos  </>  =  —  i  ;  in  the  former  case  h*  =  (0  —  &)'2 

and  cose/)  =  -h  i ;  both  cases  alike  give  us  JP  =  az  +  Z>z—2at>  cos  <f>. 

Now  this  formula  is  in  fact  correct  for  all  values  of  c/>,  but  it  is  as  yet 


CHAPTER  IV.]  Hdogy*  2  49 

by  no  means  proved  j  it  covers  with  certainty  only  the  three  special 
values  of  $,  viz.  (j>  ==  o,  $  =  TT,  $  =  -,  from  which  it  was  obtained : 

it  would  be  easy  to  find  another  formula,  e.  g. 

W  =  a*  +  b2  —  2  ab  cos  $  .  cos  2  (TT  —  0), 

which  would  also  cover  them ;  which  of  the  two  is  also  satisfied  by 
all  the  intermediate  values  of  <p  remains  unsettled,  till  by  an  easy 
geometrical  construction,  with  the  help  of  the  forty-seventh  proposi- 
tion, we  decide  that  the  formula  we  first  took  is  universally  true. 
I  have  dwelt  upon  this  simple  example  in  order  to  show  how  many 
subsidiary  considerations  are  necessary  before  our  efforts  to  discover 
new  truths  by  the  analogy  of  given  truths  can  even  be  put  into  a  path 
which  promises  success. 


CHAPTER    V. 

The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof  » 

218.  IN  any  demonstration  of  a  given  proposition  T  the  most 
important  thing  is  to  find  the  major  premise  G,  from  which  by 
appropriate  subsumption  T  is  to  follow  as  necessary  consequence. 
This  problem,  obviously  a  problem  for  the  discoverer,  does  not  admit 
of  any  logical  rule  by  which  the  solution  could  always  be  found  with 
certainty,  without  counting  upon  the  free  co-operation  of  the  sagacity 
of  the  individual  enquirer,  We  must  suppose  that  previous  reflexion 
has  already  supplied  a  number  of  general  truths,  which  are  related  to 
the  content  of  the  given  7Tin  such  a  manner  as  to  be  serviceable  for 
the  purpose  in  hand,  and  which,  recalled  to  consciousness  by  the 
similarity  of  the  matter  in  question,  suggest  themselves  to  the  seeker 
as  grounds  for  explaining  the  given  proposition.  But  over  and  above 
this  he  must  have  the  keenness  of  mental  vision  which  detects  among 
these  truths  the  appropriate  ground  of  proof,  and  sees  the  changes 
which  perhaps  are  necessary  to  the  subsumption  of  the  given  proposi- 
tion under  it,  and  this  we  must  allow  is  to  a  large  extent  matter 
of  native  talent  and  not  even  independent  of  the  moods  of  the 
moment.  The  logical  relation  however  which  subsists  between  the 
parts  of  a  true  and  therefore  demonstrable  proposition  must  be  able 
to  give  us  at  any  rate  such  a  clue  as  may  save  us  from  groping  entirely 
in  the  dark  and  to  some  extent  put  us  into  the  way  of  finding, 
after  further  search  of  course,  the  ground  of  proof.  This  clue  lies 
in  nothing  else  than  the  fact  which  we  remarked  some  time  ago  that 
every  true  universal  proposition  7\  when  we  supplement  and  complete 
its  subject  and  its  predicate  by  all  the  subsidiary  characteristics  which 
are  hinted  at  or  implied  though  not  expressed,  must  become  an 
identical  proposition.  If  then  for  the  conception  S,  which  occurs  as 
subject  in  the  proposition  '1\  we  substitute  this  completed  sum  of  the 
several  ideas  which  it  contains  in  the  forms  of  combination  proper  to 
them,  this  must  include  the  ground  which  justifies  the  predicate ; 
on  the  other  hand  if  we  substitute  for  P  in  its  completeness  the  sum 


The  problem  may  give  a  clue.  251 

of  the  several  ideas  included  in  it,  this  must  include  all  the  require- 
ments which  the  subject  must  satisfy  in  order  that  the  proposition 
T  may  be  true.  I  will  attempt  to  illustrate  by  a  few  examples  the 
use  of  this  clue,  and  as  discovery  and  proof  here  in  fact  follow  the 
same  road,  I  shall  treat  some  of  these  examples  as  proofs  of  the  given 
proposition  T  and  others  as  instances  of  its  discovery,  i.  e.  of  the 
solution  of  the  question  what  relation  expressible  in  a  proposition  T 
must  subsist  between  *S  and  P. 

219.  Suppose  first  that  we  have  to  prove  the  given  proposition  T9 
that  the  angle  in  a  semicircle  is  a  right  angle.  By  analysis  of  the 
subject  we  find  that  by  the  angle  in  question  we  have  to  understand 
one  whose  enclosing  lines  start  from  the  extremities  a  and  I)  of 
a  straight  line  a  b  and  intersect  each  other  at  a  point  in  the  circum- 
ference of  a  circle  described  about  a  b  as  diameter.  Now  if  the 
second  part  of  this  definition,  which  determines  the  position  of  the 
point  of  intersection  e,  is  to  be  satisfied,  the  distance  of  e  from  c  the 
point  which  bisects  the  straight  line  ab  must  be  equal  to  half  this 
line,  i.e.  to  ac  or  cb.  This  requirement  which  follows  from  the 
definition  of  the  subject  suggests  at  once  the  one  slight  subsidiary 
construction  that  we  need :  we  must  draw  this  line  e  c,  in  order  to 
bring  before  our  eyes  the  relations  upon  which  depends  the  necessity 
of  the  given  proposition  T.  When  we  have  drawn  ec  the  triangle 
a  e  b  which  we  already  had  is  divided  into  two  isosceles  triangles  a  e  c 
and  e  c  b,  while  the  angle  at  e  is  divided  into  two  angles  a  and  ft  : 
from  the  fact  that  both  triangles  are  isosceles  this  follows,  and  so 
far  this  alone,  viz.  that  the  angle  e  a  c  —  a  and  that  the  angle  e  b  c  =  /3; 
but  from  the  way  in  which  these  two  triangles  make  up  the  triangle 
a  e  b}  ec  being  common  to  both,  and  a  c  and  c  b  falling  in  the  same 
straight  line,  it  follows  further  that  the  four  angles  a,  a,  /3,  /3,  are 
together  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  angles  of  the  triangle  a  e  b.  We 
have  then  2  '(a  +  fi)  =  two  right  angles,  and  as  a  +  fi  is  the  required 
angle  in  a  semicircle,  we  have  found  that  it  is  equal  to  a  right  angle. 

It  is  not  always  that  we  can  get  what  we  want  by  such  an  easy 
analysis  as  in  this  very  simple  case  :  let  us  therefore  take  another  case 
to  illustrate  an  artifice  that  is  very  frequently  applicable.  We  may 
perhaps  already  have  got  a  proposition  T  which  teaches  us  what  is 
true  of  a. subject  which  is  not  equal  to  *S*  the  subject  of  the  given  pro- 
position, but  diverges  from  it  by  a  difference  that  can  be  stated  ; 
supposing  then  that  by  removing  this  difference  we  cause  this  subject 
to  pass  into  the  given  subject  S,  and  are  able  to  show  how  the  relation 
expressed  by  T  is  altered  by  this  operation,  we  shall  prove  the  given 


252  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof . 

proposition  T  if  it  is  true,  or  find  the  true  proposition  T  if  the  given 
proposition  is  false,  or  if  none  were  given  at  all. 

Suppose  the  question  to  be  what  is  the  sum  of  the  angles  of 
a  triangle.  Assuming  that  the  propositions  concerning  parallel  lines 
and  their  intersection  by  a  straight  line  have  been  established  without 
taking  triangles  into  consideration,  we  take  two  straight  lines  a  d  and 
Ic  parallel  to  one  another,  and  intersected  by  a  third  straight  line  ab 
in  the  points  a  and  £.  These  three  lines  thus  form  no  triangle,  but 
an  unclosed  space;  but  we  know  S  the  sum  of  the  two  angles  dab 
and  a  b  c,  and  know  that  it  is  equal  to  two  right  angles.  If  we  now 
make  the  line  a  d  turn  about  the  point  a  so  as  to  incline  towards  b  c, 
there  is  formed  between  its  new  position  and  its  old  one  an  angle  $, 
which  is  taken  away  from  S  the  sum  of  the  interior  angles ;  but  at 
the  same  time  there  is  formed  between  be  and  the  line  which  has 
been  deflected  to  meet  it  a  new  angle,  the  third  angle  which  together 
with  the  remainder  of  S  the  sum  of  the  original  angles  makes  up  the 
three  angles  of  the  triangle  now  formed,  and  which  by  the  propositions 
about  parallels  is  equal  to  the  angle  (/>  which  was  excluded  from  Sa 
Thus  therefore  in  the  passage  to  a  triangle  from  what  is  not  a  triangle 
the  sum  of  the  angles  contained  by  the  three  lines  loses  c/>  and  gains  $ ; 
It  is  therefore  equal  to  two  right  angles  in  the  triangle  as  before. 

220.  Suppose  we  want  to  prove  or  to  find  the  conditions  of  equili- 
brium for  a  perfectly  free  and  absolutely  rigid  body,  operated  upon 
at  various  points  by  various  forces  in  various  directions.  In  the  con- 
ception of  a  body  here  employed  perfect  freedom  needs  no  further 
analysis  ;  as  absence  of  every  conditioning  relation  to  others  it  is 
quite  clear  as  it  stands;  only  if  the  relations  were  present  should  we 
have  further  to  determine  their  import :  the  absolute  rigidity  of  a  body 
means  that  the  distance  between  any  two  points  in  it  is  unalterable. 

Now  if  no  force  were  ucling  upon  this  body,  we  should  be  able  to 
say  of  it  that  it  either  was  at  rest,  or  was  continuing  an  original  motion 
at  a  constant  speed  c :  we  should  therefore  only  have  to  set  down 
c  =  o  in  order  to  express  the  conditions  of  the  equilibrium  intended, 
the  equilibrium  of  rest.  But  in  order  to  decide  how  the  body  main- 
tains equilibrium  when  forces  are  acting  upon  it  we  must  adopt  the 
same  method  as  in  the  preceding  case  and  first  see  how  it  would  move 
if  it  did  move,  and  then  negate  all  the  conditions  which  would  be  in- 
separably bound  up  with  this  motion.  This  is  not  merely  a  useful 
contrivance  without  any  logical  basis ;  for  the  equilibrium  we  are  now 
seeking  must  be  conceived  not  as  mere  rest  but  as  the  negation  of 
the  movements  which  tend  to  disturb  it.  Now  as  the  only  kinds 


CHAPTER  v.]          Illustrations  front  Mechanics.  253 

of  motion  are  motion  from  place  to  place,  rotatory  motion,  and  thirdly 
the  combinations  of  these  two,  all  we  have  to  do  in  order  to  determine 
the  equilibrium  of  the  body  is  to  consider  the  conditions  of  the  two 
first-named  kinds  of  motion ;  negate  them  and  the  possibility  of  the 
third  kind  is  gone. 

221.  If  we  first  consider  only  movement  from  place  to  place  or 
movement  of  translation,  expressly  excluding  all  rotation,  it  follows 
from  the  definition  of  rigidity  that  all  the  parts  of  the  rigid  body  must 
move  onward  in  rectilinear  and  parallel  paths  and  therefore  with  the 
same  velocity.     In  whatever  way  a-  force  acts  therefore,  if  it  has  given 
to  a,  one  part  of  the  body^a  velocity  c9  it  must  always,  provided  the 
movement  be  one  of  translation  and  not  of  rotation,  have  given  the 
same  velocity  to  d,  any  other  part  of  the  body.     Hence  we  are  able,  to 
our  great  convenience,  in  estimating  the  movement  of  translation 
which  finally  results  from  all  the  forces  acting  upon  a  rigid  body  to 
neglect  the  fact  that  they  act  upon  different  points :  we  may  treat 
them  all  as  acting,  in  lines  parallel  to  their  given  directions,  at  an  ar- 
bitrary point  in  space,  at  which  we  suppose  the  mass  of  the  body  to 
be  concentrated,  and  then  by  the  known  rules  for  the  composition  of 
forces  determine  the  resulting  movement  J?  which  they  would  impart 
to  this  point;  the  magnitude  and  direction  of  this  resultant  R  are  then 
identical  with  the  magnitude  and  direction  of  the  motion  which  the 
body  receives  under  the  united  influence  of  these  forces,  and  it  re- 
mains at  rest  when  R  =  o.     If  we  express  this  by  saying  that  the 
body  rests  when  the  effects  of  all  the  impulses  to  motion  which  are 
brought  to  bear  upon  it  annihilate  one  another,  the  proposition  is  an 
Identical  proposition  for  which  no  reason  need  be  sought :  our  ex- 
planation however  further   states   the   condition   under  which  that 
annihilation  takes  place,  viz.  the  very  same  condition  as  that  under 
which  it  will  take  place  when  all  the  forces  are  acting  upon  the  same 
point. 

222.  In  mechanics  however  it  is  usual  not  to  state  this  condition 
under  this  form  R  =  o,  but  to  break  it  up,  for  convenience  in  apply- 
ing it  to  calculations,  into  three  equations,  which  I  proceed  to  mention, 
since  the  feasibility  of  a  logical  precept  is  certainly  one  of  the  ques- 
tions which  applied  logic  ought  to  consider.     If  the  number  n  of  the 
forces  acting  upon  the  body  be  considerable,  it  becomes  laborious  to 
find  the  last  resultant  R  by  first  of  all  getting  a  first  resultant  out  of 
two  of  these  forces,  and  then  a  second  out  of  this  and  a  third  force, 
and  so  on  till  the  last  force  is  compounded  with  the  last  preceding 
resultant.     Moreover  the  angles  which  the  direction  of  each  force 


254  T/ie  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof, 

makes  with  that  of  any  other,  and  which  would  have  to  be  considered 
in  this  calculation,  are  seldom  included  among  the  data  originally 
given;  but  where  these  data  have  to  be  first  determined  by  the 
examination  of  a  given  state  of  things,  it  will  be  preferable  here  as 
elsewhere  to  characterise  the  directions  of  all  the  forces  by  their 
relations  to  a  single  common  standard,  instead  of  measuring  the 
divergence  between  every  two.  The  usual  proceeding  then  is  to  lay 
down  three  axes  X  TZ,  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  and  then  to 
determine  the  direction  of  each  force  P  by  the  three  angles  a  /3  y  which 
It  makes  with  these  axes  or  with  lines  parallel  to  them,  at  the  same  time 
conceiving  each  force  as  resolved  into  thsee  components  parallel  to 
these  axes,  which  forces  will  according  to  a  familiar  proposition  be 
P  cos  a,  P  cos  ft,  and  P  cos  y.  The  three  sums  then  made  by  adding 
together  all  the  components  of  like  direction,  i,  e.  the  sums  2  P  cos  a, 
2JP  cos  /S,  SP  cos  y,  will  be  the  resulting  forces  which  tend  to  move  the 
body  in  directions  parallel  to  the  axes  *Y  JTand  Z  respectively :  if  each 
of  these  sums  as  they  stand  be  equal  to  nothing,  the  body  does  not  move 
from  its  place  in  any  of  these  three  directions,  and  therefore  does  not 
move  at  all,  for  any  movement  in  an  intermediate  direction  would  in- 
clude a  simultaneous  change  of  place  in  the  direction  of  two  of  these 
axes  at  least,  and  this  has  just  been  denied.  So  instead  of  R  =  o 
•we  have  these  three  equations,  ^  P .  cos  a  =  o,  ^P .  cos  /3  =  o,  and 
2  P  .  cos  y  =  o3  to  express  the  condition  which  annihilates  all  move- 
ment of  translation. 

223.  We  have  still  to  look  for  the  other  conditions  which  make  the 
rotation  of  the  hotly  impossible.  Suppose  now  that  a  straight  line 
rotates  about  one  of  its  [.joints ;  then  with  the  exception  of  this  one 
point  which  we  regard  as  fixed  (thus  making  it  impossible  for  the 
whole  line  to  have  any  movement  of  translation)  all  the  other  points 
of  the  line  alter  their  co-ordinates.  The  line  therefore  cannot  rotate 
if  two  of  its  points  have  unalterable  co-ordinates.  But  though  the 
line  be  fixed  along  its  whole  length,  a  plane  which  contains  it  may 
rotate  about  it :  then  all  the  points  in  the  plane  which  lie  outside  this 
axis  alter  their  co-onlinalcs :  the  rotation  of  the  plane  therefore  be- 
comes impossible  if  any  point  in  it  outside  the  axis  be  fixed,  or  in 
general  if  the  three  angular  points  of  a  triangle  drawn  anywhere  in  the 
plane  be  fixed,  The  same  condition  is  obviously  sufficient  to  make 
rotation  impossible  for  a  rigid  body,  every  point  of  which  is  at  an  un- 
alterable distance  from  every  point  in  a  fixed  plane  taken  at  will  in  it. 
The  condition  which  prevents  rotation  therefore  might  be  expressed  by 
saying  that  the  three  angular  points  of  a  triangle  drawn  anywhere  within 


CHAPTER  v.]          Illustrations  from  Mechanics.  255 

the  body  do  not  alter  their  co-ordinates.  But  the  proof  that  this  con- 
dition was  fulfilled  would  not  be  at  all  a  convenient  one :  in  order  to 
prove  it  by  applying  the  previous  three  equations  to  each  of  these 
three  points  we  must  be  able  to  prove  what  is  the  resultant  effect  at 
each  of  them  of  all  the  forces  acting  not  at  this  point  but  at  other 
points :  but  this,  as  will  easily  be  seen,  is  the  very  thing  that  we  are 
still  trying  to  ascertain.  We  must  take  another  course  therefore,  and, 
since  the  position  of  the  triangle  just  mentioned  is  perfectly  arbitrary, 
the  course  which  most  naturally  suggests  itself  is  to  dispose  its  three 
angular  points  in  the  three  axes  X  Y  Z>  by  reference  to  which  we  have 
already  determined  the  directions  of  all  the  forces  in  operation  :  but  the 
position  in  each  axis  of  the  angular  point  which  we  place  in  it  is  also 
perfectly  arbitrary  :  we  may  therefore  regard  every  point  in  each  axis 
as  a  point  whose  position  is  unalterable,  i.  e.  we  may  regard  the  three 
axes  themselves  as  three  fixed  lines,  in  relation  to  which,  if  rotation  is  to 
be  excluded,  no  point  of  the  body  can  change  its  position  and  distance. 
If  finally  we  consider  the  three  axes  as  three  dimensions  which  lie 
within  the  body  itself,  or  as  identical  in  position  with  three  series  of 
points  in  the  body  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  it  follows  from  the 
definition  of  rigidity  that  the  fixity  in  space  of  these  series  of  points  is 
all  that  is  required  to  make  any  change  of  place  impossible  to  the 
remaining  points  of  the  body.  The  problem  therefore  reduces  itself 
to  showing  that  all  the  forces  in  operation  are  unable  to  impart  a 
rotatory  movement  in  any  direction  to  any  of  these  three  series  of 
points,  or  to  any  of  the  three  axes  X  Y Z  now  conceived  as  capable 
of  moving  out  of  their  previous  direction. 

224.  This  last  way  of  treating  the  matter  however  would  not  serve 
as  a  convenient  basis  for  calculation  except  when  the  directions  of  all 
the  forces  concerned  passed  through  the  three  axes.  This  will  not 
generally  be  the  case:  in  order  to  take  into  account  those  forces 
which  when  produced  go  past  those  series  of  points  without  cutting 
them,  we  must  substitute  for  the  three  lines  three  planes  intersecting 
each  other  at  right  angles,  each  of  which  will  therefore  include  two 
of  these  axes :  the  direction  of  each  force  produced  if  necessary  must 
cut  one  of  these  planes.  The  problem  now  is  to  show  that  all  the 
forces  in  conjunction  are  unable  to  cause  either  the  planes  X  Y 
and  X  Z  to  rotate  about  X,  or  the  planes  Y  Z  and  Y  X  to  rotate 
about  J",  or  the  planes  Z  JTand  Z  X  to  rotate  about  Z.  Let  us  con- 
sider the  conditions  of  rotation  about  Z.  Any  force  P  acting  in  any 
direction  upon  a  point  of  the  body  whose  co-ordinates  are  x  y  z}  and 
making  with  the  three  axes  the  angles  a  ft  y,  can  as  before  be 


256  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof „        L  BOOK  IL 

decomposed  into  three  forces  P  cos  a,  P  cos  ft,  P  cos  y,  parallel* to 
the  three  axes.  The  last  of  the  three  we  need  not  consider  here ;  it 
could  only  cause  a  movement  of  translation  in  the  direction  of  the 
axis  Z,  which  is  already  excluded  by  the  equations  of  §'222,  or  a 
rotation  of  the  plane  X  Y  about  X  or  J7",  which  also  need  not  be  con- 
sidered at  present.  Of  the  two  other  forces  P  cos  a  is  perpendicular 
to  the  plane  ZJ^and  P  cos  ft  to  the  plane  ZX;  the  two  tend,  as  is 
shown  by  an  easy  construction,  to  cause  the  planes  Z  X  and  ZY^  and 
so  the  body  in  which  these  two  planes  are  immoveably  united,  to 
rotate  in  opposite  directions :  the  direction  of  the  rotation  which 
actually  results  would  therefore  depend  upon  the  difference  between 
the  two  forces.  Not  simply  upon  their  difference  however,  for  a  pro- 
position which  at  present  we  will  only  allude  to,  teaches  us  that  the 
rotatory  effect  of  a  force  which  is  perpendicular  to  a  line  is  to  be 
measured  by  the  product  of  its  intensity  into  the  distance  of  its  point 
of  application  from  the  axis  of  rotation.  For  the  force  P  cos  a  this 
distance  isjr,  and  for  the  force  P  cos  ft  it  is  x:  the  difference  of  the 
products  j-'  P  cos  a  and  a*  P  cos  ft,  or  the  difference  between  the  two 
iKomcnla,  must  be  equal  to  nought  if  P  is  to  cause  no  rotation  about 
the  axis  Z.  We  must  repeat  the  same  considerations  with  regard  to 
all  the  forces  concerned,  and  we  finally  get,  as  the  condition  which 
prevents  all  rotation  about  the  axis  Z,  the  equation 
IS  (j.'  P  cos  a  —  x  P  cos  ft)  =  o. 

The  other  equations  which  make  rotation  about  the  axes  X  and  Y 
impossible,  will  obviously,  as  the  three  directions  are  perfectly  homo- 
geneous, be  of  the  same  form  ;  and,  since  even  artificial  aids  to 
memory  are  not  beyond  the  province  of  applied  logic,  I  will  remark 
that  the  equation  for  non-rotation  about  an  axis  never  contains  the 
elements  which  refer  to  this  axis,  but  consists  of  the  sum  of  the  dif- 
ferences of  two  products,  each  of  which  unites  a  component  force  in 
the  direction  of  the  second  axis  with  that  co-ordinate  of  its  point 
of  application  which  is  parallel  to  the  third  axis.  The  formula 
S  (z  Pcos  fi—jtPcos  y)  =  o  annihilates  rotation  about  X  ;  the  third 
formula  2  (jt*  Pcos  y  —  z  P  cos  a)  =  o  annihilates  rotation  about  the 
axis  I7. 

225.  The  proposition  about  the  equilibrium  of  rotatory  forces 
which  we  made  use  of  in  the  preceding  discussion  is  easily  arrived  at 
in  the  domain  of  statics  by  a  slight  device  which  reduces  the  question 
to  the  composition  of  motions.  If  I  now  select  another  mode  of 
proof,  I  do  so  of  course  with  no  idea  of  improving  the  science  of 
statics ;  1  only  adopt  a  treatment  which  is  as  far  as  possible  independent 


CHAPTER  v.]          Illustrations  from  Mechanics.  257 

of  all  merely  happy  contrivances,  in  order  to  illustrate  the  way  in 
which  the  grounds  of  proof  are  brought  to  light  by  the  analysis  of  the 
problem  itself.  If  the  rigid  line  ab,  whose  length  we  will  call  n9 
rotates  about  its  fixed  extremity  a,  this  implies  that  all  its  points 
describes  a  segment  of  a  circle  p  co  with  the  same  angle  o>  and  with  a 
radius  p,  which  for  each  point  is  equal  to  its  distance  from  the  point  a. 
If  now  a  force  W  acts  upon  the  point  b}  and  causes  b,  in  whatever 
way,  in  the  time  /  to  pass  through  the  segment  n  o>,  it  must  likewise 
have  compelled  any  other  point  in  the  line  at  the  distance  j»  to  describe 
in  the  same  time  /  the  segment  p  o> :  and  conversely,  any  force  which 
applied  at  the  point  p  has  caused  this  point  to  move  through  the  small 
segment  p  co,  has  necessarily  compelled  all  the  other  points  in  the  line 
to  describe  segments  corresponding  to  their  distance  from  a.  We  now 
ask  what  must  be  the  nature  of  the  two  forces  P  and  Q  in  order  that 
when  they  are  brought  to  bear  at  the  points/  and  q  respectively  they 
may  produce  precisely  equal  results,  and  accordingly  when  acting  in 
opposite  directions  upon  the  line  ab  may  prevent  each  other  from  making 
it  rotate.  Now  the  conception  of  rigidity,  i.  e.  the  conception  of  the 
simple  immobility  of  a,  is  too  far  removed  from  conceptions  of  move- 
ments to  tell  us  how  the  latter  would  be  affected  by  the  former :  we 
should  have  first  to  conceive  rigidity  itself  as  the  result  of  movements, 
in  order  to  make  it  homogeneous  with  the  other  movements  upon 
which  it  is  to  exercise  a  restraining  influence.  Further  it  is  impossible 
to  compare  P  and  Q  so  long  as  they  act  under  different  circumstances 
whose  modifying  power  is  yet  unknown :  we  can  only  estimate  them 
by  velocities  $  and  ty  which  they  would  impart  under  perfectly  similar 
conditions  to  a  perfectly  similar  moveable  object :  and  lastly  though 
P  and  Q  may  be  applied  at  the  single  points  p  and  q,  they  cannot 
operate  upon  them  alone  ;  in  order  to  set  up  or  to  hinder  a  rotation,  the 
effect  of  each  must  spend  itself  over  all  the  points  in  the  line  a  b>  and 
we  must  know  the  mode  of  this  distribution  before  we  can  understand 
how  the  effect  of  the  one  can  annihilate  the  simultaneous  effect  of  the 
other  at  every  point  in  the  line. 

226.  These  requirements  we  may  satisfy  in  the  following  way. 
Suppose  that  a  b,  which  is  equal  to  n,  is  first  of  all  a  perfectly  free 
rigid  line,  consisting  of  an  infinite  number  n  of  homogeneous  points 
which  are  compelled  (how  does  not  concern  us)  to  maintain  un- 
changeable distances  from  each  other.  Suppose  that  a  number  n  of 
equal  and  parallel  forces  operate  perpendicularly  upon  this  line  so  as 
to  give  to  each  element  of  it  the  velocity  o> ;  then  the  total  force  W3 
equal  to  n  co3  will  urge  the  whole  line  forward,  all  the  points  moving 

s 


258  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof »         [BOOKII. 

in  parallel  directions.  This  movement  of  translation  passes  into  "a 
rotatory  movement  when  we  give  to  the  various  points  of  the  line 
various  counter-velocities,  which  must  be  conceived  as  at  right  angles 
to  a  b  not  only  at  the  beginning  of  the  rotation  but  at  every  subse- 
quent moment.  To  the  extremity  a  we  assign  a  counter-velocity  —  &> 
by  which  it  becomes  the  fixed  point  which  our  problem  requires ;  to 
the  point  b  we  give  a  counter- velocity  which  =o,  so  that  it  maintains 
undiminished  the  velocity  a>  imparted  to  it  by  W\  the  intermediate 
points  must  meet  so  much  resistance-  as  will  leave  to  each  point  /), 
whose  distance  from  the  fixed  point  is  />,  a  residual  velocity  whose 

amount  is  already  known,  viz.  the  arc  -.to,  whose  length  is  to  &>,  the 
path  of  the  free  end,  as  />  is  to  ;/ :  the  sum  of  the  velocities  of  all 
the  points  />,  from  p  =  o  to  p  =  ;/,  must  be  equal  to  —  .  Now  a 

2 

force  P}  which  would  give  to  a  free  clement  the  velocity  c/>,  would  give 
to  an  element/  in  our  rigid  line  the  velocity  —•</>,  if/  were  subject  to 

the  above-mentioned  resistance  but  able  to  move  by  itself;  but  as  it 
cannot  move  by  itself,  the  impulse  imparted  to  it  must  distribute  itself 
over  the  whole  line.  However  this  distribution  may  be  effected,  we 
already  know  the  result ;  it  can  produce  nothing  but  a  rotation  of 
the  whole  line,  in  which  every  point  p  receives  a  velocity  propor- 
tionate to  its  distance  from  the  fixed  point  and  the  sum  of  all  the 

velocities   is         .      Every   point  p  therefore    receives    the   velocity 

L'A  L»  I*.  I  Precisely  similar  statements  may  be  made  about  a  second 
u  LW  wj 

force  (?,  which  would  give  to  a  free  element  the  velocity  \J>,  but  to  an 
element  q  of  the  line  which  is  fixed  at  one  end  would  give  the  velocity 

--\\f ;  when  applied  at  q  it  would  give  to  any  other  element  p  of  the 

line  the  velocity     •    /..'..  I      Now  if  these  two  forces  operating  at 
n    \ji    nj 

p  and  q  or  the  two  velocities  produced  by  them  are  to  be  such  that 
when  acting  in  the  same  direction  either  would  annihilate  one  and 
the  same  third  movement  of  the  line,  or  that  when  acting  in  opposite 
directions  they  would  counterbalance  each  other,  then  for  any  point 
/;  the  two  expressions  which  we  have  just  found  for  their  effects  must 
be  equal  to  one  another,  and  so  there  fore /$  =  q\\r,  and  <$>:  \\r  =$:p. 
In  other  words  the  length  of  leverage  must  vary  inversely  as  the 
strength  of  the  force. 


CHAPTER  V.]  Illustrations /TOM  Mechanics.  259 

227.  The  following  would  be  a  very  plausible,  and  yet  an  in- 
admissible way  of  deducing  the  same  proposition.  Suppose  that  at 
the  same  point  m  of  a  lever  playing  in  a  vertical  plane  two  equal 
forces  P  and  Q  are  acting  in  opposite  directions ;  it  is  self-evident 
that  under  these  conditions  equilibrium  will  be  the  result.  Now 
if,  as  is  commonly  done,  we  imagine  Q  to  be  a  weight,  suspended 
by  a  hook  or  cord  at  m,  and  P  as  a  strain  exerted  from  above,  we 
tacitly  assume  that  it  is  indifferent  whether  of  the  infinite  number  of 
infinitely  thin  perpendicular  strips  into  which  Q  may  be  decomposed 
in  thought  each  severally  grapples  the  point  of  the  lever  which  it 
would  touch  if  produced,  or  whether  all  these  several  forces  operate 
upon  the  lever  only  through  a  single  representative  which  unites 
them  all,  viz.  the  cord.  Once  assume  this,  and  it  must  also  be 
indifferent  whether  we  conceive  Q  as  one  body,  or  as  divided  per- 
pendicularly by  a  geometrical  plane  into  two  halves  which  touch 
one  another  at  the  surface  of  section,,  and  each  of  which  is  attached 
to  the  lever  by  a  separate  cord  which  unites  all  its  forces  in  one 
resultant.  If  then  ?n  was  the  distance  from  the  fulcrum  of  the 
original  point  of  attachment,  m  —  x  and  m  -f  x  are  the  correspond- 
ing distances  of  the  new  points  of  attachment  of  these  two  cords.  In 
other  words  equilibrium  is  preserved  when  two  forces  each  of  which 

is  equal  to  -,  and  whose  sum  ==  P,  are  applied  at  equal  distances 

2 

right  and  left  from  the  attachment  of  the  opposite  force  P :  for  the 
cords  themselves,  or  their  tensions,  are  now  the  forces  which  are 
directly  applied.  Now  so  long  as  these  tensions  are  the  resultants 

of  the  forces  of  gravity  united  in  the  two  bodies  -,  it  is  evident  that 
it  is  quite  indifferent  how  these  bodies  ~  are  shaped  in  other  respects, 

2 

indifferent  therefore  whether  they  still  touch  one  another  as  before, 
or  whether  by  increase  of  their  length  and  diminution  of  their  thick- 
ness they  become  two  separate  bodies  with  a  space  between  them. 
If  we  follow  out  this  line  of  thought  we  see  that  it  is  quite  possible 

to  carry  the  displacement  of  one  ~  to  the  left  and  of  the  other  to  the 
right  by  equal  distances  x  as  far  as  we  please,  till  at  last  x  becomes 
equal  to  m  :  when  that  is  done  one  -,  say  the  one  that  was  displaced 
to  the  left,  has  reached  the  fulcrum  a,  and  no  longer  produces  any 
effect  upon  the  lever :  the  other  -  has  arrived  at  the  distance  2  m 

s  2 


260  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof , 

from  the  fulcrum,  and  the  equilibrium  is  still  preserved  under  the' 
condition  that  P,  which  =  (?3  operates  at  the  distance  m  from  the 

fulcrum,  while  —  -:  operates  at  the  distance  2  m. 

But  though  this  exposition  brings  the  matter  before  us  very  plainly, 
it  is  nevertheless  absolutely  inconclusive.      So  long  as  x  was  less 

than  m}  the  -  that  was  moved  away  to  the  left  had  still  a  recognisable 

and  intelligible  influence  upon  the  equilibrium  of  the  lever  ;  we  could 
still  see  plainly  that  it  together  with  the  other  half  that  was  moving 
away  in  the  opposite  direction  made  up  the  force  that  was  sufficient 
to  counteract  P  :  but  so  soon  as  x  becomes  equal  to  ??it  and  the 

effect  of  this  -  altogether  ceases,  there  Is  a  break  in  the  thought :  for 

one  of  the  points  of  relation  has  vanished,  and  our  whole  reasoning 
was  founded  upon  its  relation  to  the  other.  For  when  we  first 
applied  ()  at  the  point  m  itself,  and  then  disposed  the  two  halves  of  Q 
symmetrically  on  either  side  of  m.  what  we  inferred  held  good  in  the 
first  instance  for  the  free  line  a  I,  which  was  supported  at  m  by  the 
force  P  :  the  fixing  of  the  end  a  was  not  contemplated  at  all : 
though  of  course  the  same  inferences  held  good  also  for  the  case 
when  a  was  fixed.,  so  long  as  if;  could  be  proved  that,  irrespective  of 
this,  equilibrium  was  maintained  by  the  way  in  which  the  weights 
were  distributed  ;  for  if  equilibrium  was  maintained  thus  it  could  not 
be  disturbed  by  the  fact  that  a  was  over  and  above  this  regarded  as 
fixed.  But  so  soon  as  the  influence  of  one  half  of  Q  vanishes,  we 
no  longer  have  equilibrium  on  the  same  grounds  as  before,  and 
it  is  by  no  means  self-evident  that  the  vanished  condition  is  exactly 
replaced  by  the  fixing  of  the  end  a.  We  should  in  fact  need  for 
this  special  case  to  find  a  subsidiary  proof  which  should  show 
that  (i  being  fixed  the  effect  of  the  half  of  Q  was  all  along  getting 
less  and  less  as  it  approached  <z,  and  that  equilibrium  was  never- 
theless maintained ;  therefore  it  would  continue  to  be  preserved 
when  the  influence  of  this  weight  was  reduced  to  nothing,  while 
the  other  was  removed  to  a  corresponding  distance.  But  if  we 
examine  it,  we  see  that  this  subsidiary  proof  would  in  reality  be 
the  proof  of  the  main  question,  i.  e.  it  would  be  the  proof  of 
nothing  less  than  the  proposition  that  the  power  of  equal  forces 
to  move  a  lever  varies  as  their  length  of  leverage.  This  mode 
of  statement  therefore,  however  plainly  it  brought  the  proposition 
in  question  before  us,  did  not  in  the  least  prove  it,  but  only 


CHAPTER  v.]          Illustrations  from  Mechanics*  261 

assumed  it  in  a  circle  which  it  is  easier  to  recognise  than  to  state 
briefly. 

228.  Complicated  mechanical  problems  cannot  always  be  solved 
by  directly  compounding  all  the  forces  in  operation  so  as  to  arrive 
at  their  final  resultant ;  we  often  have  to  state  certain  universal  con- 
ditions which  it  must  satisfy,  or  certain  limits  within  which  it  must 
keep  :  with  these  assumptions  then  the  several  data  of  the  given  case 
supply  means  for  the  complete  determination  of  the  result.  These 
methods,  among  which  we  need  only  mention  the  application  of 
d'Alembert's  principle,  are  quite  invaluable  and  cannot  be  dis- 
pensed with :  but  as  they  do  not  clearly  show  the  history  of  the 
result  which  we  calculate  by  them,  we  still  feel  a  wish  to  employ 
direct  constructions  so  far  as  possible.  I  will  mention  in  connexion 
with  the  preceding  problem  of  the  equilibrium  of  rotatory  forces  that 
of  the  motion  which  they  generate  when  they  are  not  counteracted. 
The  rule  for  calculating  it  is  reduced  to  these  two  very  simple  pro- 
positions: (i)  if  a  force  acts  upon  a  body  that  is  able  to  move  freely, 
its  centre  of  gravity  takes  the  same  rectilineal  motion  which  the  whole 
mass  of  the  body  would  take  if  it  were  concentrated  at  the  centre  of 
gravity  and  there  acted  upon  by  the  force :  (2)  at  the  same  time  the 
body  takes  the  same  rotatory  motion  which  it  would  receive  from  the 
•same  force  if  its  centre  of  gravity  were  fixed.  Now  in  this  very  neat 
division  of  the  result  there  lies  a  paradox.  For  if  the  direction  of  the 
force  passes  through  the  centre  of  gravity,  there  arises  according  to 
the  second  proposition  no  rotation,  but  only  a  rectilineal  movement 
of  translation,  and  yet  we  should  suppose  that  in  this  case  the  force 
was  acting  upon  the  body  under  the  most  favourable  conditions :  but 
if  the  direction  does  not  pass  through  the  centre  of  gravity,  in  which 
case  the  force  would  seem  to  act  under  less  favourable  conditions, 
there  follows  not  only  the  entire  previous  result  but  also  a  rotation, 
which  strikes  us  as  an  addition  without  any  obvious  reason.  If  the 
compound  velocities  of  the  various  parts  of  a  body  which  is  at  once 
moving  onwards  and  rotating  be  decomposed  into  velocities  in  the 
direction  of  its  rectilineal  course  and  velocities  in  the  directions 
perpendicular  to  this  and  to  the  axis  of  rotation,  the  sum  of  all 
the  former  components,  each  multiplied  into  its  differential-mass, 
is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  whole  mass  multiplied  into  its  recti- 
lineal velocity;  and  we  easily  convince  ourselves  that  when  the  body 
is  at  once  rotating  and  advancing,  though  the  several  elements  have 
various  velocities  in  the  direction  of  its  course,  yet  the  sum  of  all 
these  velocities  is  neither  increased  nor  diminished,  but  only  other- 


262  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof .         [BOOKII. 

wise  distributed  than  it  would  be  in  the  same  mass  advancing  without 
rotating.  But  the  other  components  remain,  and  though  they  have 
opposite  signs  for  the  two  halves  of  the  rotating  body,  yet  they  do 
not  on  that  account  annihilate  each  other  :  they  are  motions  which 
actually  occur,  and  we  are  forced  to  ask  where  they  come  from. 

229.  It  is  sufficient  to  answer  this  question  in  the  simplest  con- 
ceivable case.  Let  a  and  I  be  two  equal  masses,  which  we  conceive 
to  be  concentrated  at  their  centres  of  gravity :  suppose  that  they  act 
upon  each  other  so  as  t->  remain  always  at  the  same  distance  a  b 
from  one  another  :  we  may  say  then  that  a  and  b  are  united  by  a 
rigid  unchangeable  line  a  b  which  has  no  mass.  In  order  to  simplify 
the  figure  to  be  drawn,  conceive  ab  to  be  so  fitted  into  the  angle  of  two 
rectilineal  axes,  which  intersect  at  0  that  a  lies  upon  the  axis  X  and  b 
upon  the  axis  Y\  at  starting  then  we  have  for  the  mass  ax  =  o  a  and 
;'  =  o,  and  for  I  x  =  o  and  y  =  0 1,  while  for  the  centre  of  gravity  of 
the  system  a  4-  b,  which  lies  in  the  centre  of  the  line  a  b,  we  have 

Oa       ,          Oh      ,_„       ...  , 

x  =         and  y  •=.  --.     \ve  will  now  suppose  that  a  certain  velocity 

is  imparted  to  the  mass  a  in  the  direction  of  the  axis  Ar,  and  that  a  a 
is  the  path  which  it  would  traverse  in  an  indivisible  moment  of 
time  under  this  impulse  if  il  were  free.  As  no  force  is  acting  directly 
upon  the  mass  £,  it  would  then  remain  at  rest,  and  the  line  ab  which 
expresses  its  distance  from  a  which  has  moved  away  would  be  longer 
than  the  original  line  a  b.  But  the  forces  in  operation  between  a  and 
It  which  according  to  our  assumption  maintain  the  distance  a  b  un- 
altered, oppose  themselves  at  every  moment  to  the  beginning  of  this 
elongation  the  measure  of  which  would  be  a  b  ~~  ab,  and  prevent 
it,  by  making'  the  two  bodies  approach  one  another  in  the  direction 
of  the  line  at  the  extremities  of  which  they  would  be  found  if  the 
elongation  actually  took  place.  Since  neither  of  the  two  masses  can 
one-sidedly  compel  the  other  to  follow  it,  but  both  masses,  being 
assumed  to  be  equal,  must  by  the  principle  of  the  equality  of  action 
and  reaction  displace  each  other  to  the  same  extent,  we  shall  find 
their  new  positions  a}  and  ft  by  cutting  off  from  the  line  a  b  the 

length  a  a1  equal  to   -'     ^  ••-,  and  from  the  line  la  the  length  I  ft 

also  equal  to  .     If  from  a1  we  let  fall  an  ordinate,  which  we 

will  call  $',  upon  the  axis  A",  and  from  ft  let  fall  a  perpendicular,  which 
we  will  call  dx>  upon  the  axis  F,  we  have  two  equal  and  similar  triangles, 
and  thus  we  get  for  a1  and  p,  the  two  extremities  of  the  now  displaced 


CHAPTER v.i         Ilhtstratiotis  from  Mechanics.  263 

line  al>,  the  ordinates  dy  and  Ob  —  dy  respectively;  and  therefore 
for  the  centre  of  gravity,  which  is  still  the  centre  of  this  line,  we  have 

Ob 

y  —  —  .    but  this  was  also  the  ordinate  of  the  centre  of  gravity 

before  any  velocity  was  imparted  to  it :  the  centre  of  gravity  therefore 
has  received  an  impulse  to  move  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  axis  of 
X,  i.e.  in  the  same  direction  in  which  a  would  have  been  impelled 
to  move  if  the  force  had  been  brought  to  bear  directly  upon  it.  At 
the  same  time  we  have  for  the  extremities  a2  and  /3  the  abscissae 
Oa  +  aa  —  dx  and  dx  respectively,  and  thus  for  the  new  position 

of  the  centre  of  gravity  we  have  the  abscissa — .;   therefore, 

since  the  abscissa  of  its  original  position  was    — ,  it  has  received 

half  of  the  velocity  a  a  which  the  force  applied  to  a  tended  to  im- 
part to  a,  and  this  is  precisely  the  velocity  which  the  same  force 
would  have  imparted  to  the  whole  mass  of  .the  system  (which  is 
a  +  b  or  2  a)  if  that  mass  had  been  .concentrated  at  the  centre  of 
gravity  and  the  force  applied  to  it  there. 

These  considerations  apply  to  the  first  instant  of  the  whole  motion, 
in  which  (as  is  usually  assumed)  the  force  applied  to  a,  working  in- 
stantaneously, gave  it  a  certain  velocity  without  any  lapse  of  time,  and 
in  which  the  corrective  reaction  of  the  forces  at  work  between  a  and 
b  also  took  place  without  lapse  of  time.  Since  from  this  instant  no 
external  force  any  longer  operates,  all  the  motions  produced  will 
simply  continue  according  to  the  law  of  persistence,  only  the  internal 
forces  that  act  between  a  and  b  have  to  be  continually  at  work  in 
order  to  prevent  a  and  I  from  flying  off  at  a  tangent,  and  to  maintain 
them  at  a  constant  distance  from  their  centre  of  gravity ;  they  thus 
generate  a  rotation  which  is  circular  in  relation  to  this  point,  and 
since  they  are  continually  diverting  the  two  masses  from  their 
momentary  direction  into  another  without  any  breach  of  continuity, 
the  rotation  takes  place  uniformly  in  a  circle  and  with  the  same  con- 
stant velocity  with  which  both  masses  were  impelled  in  a  straight  line 
at  the  first  moment. 

Lastly  if  we  move  back  a1  j3,  keeping  it  parallel  with  itself,  till  its 
centre  of  gravity  coincides  with  that  of  a  b,  the  two  lines  will  make 
with  one  another  at  the  centre  of  gravity  an  angle  <£»  equal  to  that 
which  a  b  would  make  with  a  b  at  the  point  b  if  b  were  a  fixed  centre 
of  rotation  and  the  external  force  had  only  had  to  move  the  mass  a 
under  the  condition  that  it  should  always  be  at  the  same  distance 


264  T/ie  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof « 

a  b  from  b.  The  length  of  the  curve  which  a  would  then  have  de- 
scribed would  have  been  ab.<\>\  the  length  of  the  curve  actually 
described  by  a  in  rotating  about  the  centre  of  gravity  which  we  regard 

as  fixed  is  ~'-?;   and  this  is  precisely  the  velocity  which  the  force 

2 

must  impart  when  it  has  at  the  same  time  to  move  the  mass  b  in  the 
contrary  direction.  From  this  we  see  that  a  momentary  external 
force,  whether  its  direction  pass  through  the  centre  of  gravity  or  not, 
always  produces  in  the  body  the  same  sum  of  movements  of  trans- 
lation :  the  rotation  which  is  added  in  the  second  case  is  due  to  the 
internal  forces  which  act  between  the  parts  of  the  system  moved. 
But  these  forces  are  by  no  means  inoperative  even  in  the  first  case 
where  no  rotation  occurs  :  but  in  the  first  case  their  only  effect  is  to 
cause  the  several  parts  of  the  mass,  which  are  arranged  in  a  straight 
line  at  right  angles  to  the  direction  of  the  motion  imparted,  to  main- 
tain this  order  during  the  onward  movement,  an  effect  which  reveals 
itself  in  no  relative  movement  of  the  parts  about  their  advancing 
centre  of  gravity  so  long  as  we  proceed  upon  the  assumption  that 
the  body  is  absolutely  rigid;  but  it  would  at  once  announce  itself  in 
such  movements  if  we  conceived  say  three  equal  masses  ale  united 
to  one  another  by  ^liable,  cords  and  then  imagined  an  impulse  to  be 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  whole  system  which 
lies  in  b. 

230.  In  the  analysis  which  is  required  for  the  discovery  of  the 
grounds  of  proof  we  try  not  only  to  bring  out  the  elements  which  are 
essential  to  the  truth  of  the  consequence  to  be  proved,  but  also  to 
eliminate  those  that  are  unessential  for  that  purpose.  For  instance  it 
is  not  uncommon  in  answering  statical  and  mechanical  questions  to 
start  from  die  supposition  of  a  rigid  line  without  mass.  Now  it  may 
he  grunted  that  in  the  conception  of  a  finite  straight  line  the  cha- 
racteristic of  imitrness  implies  the  constant  contact  of  each  point 
with  two  neighbouring  points,  and  the  straightncss  implies  that  the 
line  is  rigid  and  cannot  bend :  only  as  a  mere  geometrical  line  it  is 
not  an  object  that  could  be  set  in  motion  by  forces  at  all ;  the  capacity 
of  being  affected  by  forces  belongs  to  the  lineally  arranged  mass  only, 
and  it  is  only  the  forties  exerted  upon  one  another  by  the  minute 
components  of  the  mass  that  actually  give  to  this  material  line  the 
rigidity  and  unalterable  length  which  is  merely  demanded  in  the 
geometrical  conception. 

A  line  Without  mttss  therefore  is  not  a  happy  expression,  and  does 
not  iu  fact  convey  that  which  we  really  mean  and  upon  which  we 


CHAPTER v.]          Illuslraliofis  from  Mechanics.  265 

build  in  carrying  out  such  enquiries.  A  line  must  undoubtedly  have 
mass  if  forces  are  to  cause  it  to  rotate  about  its  extremity,  but  with 
a  view  to  the  laws  which  regulate  the  effect  of  these  forces  it  is  only 
necessary  that  the  mass  be  the  same  at  any  cross-section  of  this 
material  line ;  any  irregularity  in  its  distribution  would  constitute  a 
special  case,  in  determining  which  we  should  have  to  apply  with 
reference  to  these  special  data  the  laws  of  that  simplest  case  when 
we  have  the  problem  in  its  purest  form  ;  on  the  other  hand  it  is 
perfectly  indifferent  for  these  laws  how  great  this  mass  is ;  the  pro- 
portions between  the  forces  and  the  leverages  necessary  for  equilibrium 
are  precisely  the  same  whether  the  lever  be  thick  or  thin,  whether  its 
specific  gravity  be  greater  or  less.  When  we  speak  of  a  line  without 
mass  therefore  we  do  not  strictly  speaking  set  down  its  mass  as 
nothing  but  rather  as  a  unit,  and  further  as  a  unit  to  which  any  value 
great  or  small  may  be  given,  and  which  disappears  from  our  further 
calculations  just  because  as  an  equal  factor  of  all  the  terms  that  stand 
in  proportion  to  one  another  it  does  not  in  the  least  contribute  to 
determine  or  to  alter  the  relation  which  subsists  between  them.  This 
was  the  thought  upon  which  the  foregoing  exposition  rested.  The 
line  a  b  was  conceived  as  a  line  of  mass,  and  every  one  of  its  points 
as  a  differential  of  the  mass :  it  was  only  this  that  made  it  possible  to 
speak  at  all  of  a  force  W  acting  upon  a  b,  and  to  set  down  this  force 
JFas  equal  to  no),  equal  to  a  sum  of  individual  forces  each  of  which 
was  such  as  to  give  the  velocity  60  to  the  differential  of  the  mass. 
But  we  should  have  gained  nothing  by  constantly  taking  count  of 
the  mass  in  our  calculation  ;  only  the  value  of  o>  would  have  come 
out  differently  according  as  the  mass  of  the  line  or  of  every  one  of 
the  n  parts  of  it  which  we  distinguished  was  conceived  as  greater  or 
smaller;  the  relations  between  P  and  Q  would  have  undergone  no 
change  so  long  as  both  were  always  related  to  the  same  mass.  The 
division  of  the  labour  of  proof  therefore  which  is  here  introduced 
does  not  consist  in  first  putting  mass  altogether  out  of  sight  and 
proving  the  law  in  question  for  the  line  without  mass,  and  then  en- 
quiring in  the  second  place  what  becomes  of  this  law  when  mass  is 
given  to  the  line  ;  on  the  contrary  we  took  count  of  this  mass  at  the 
first  step,  but  found  that  its  magnitude  has  no  influence  upon  the 
general  form  of  the  law :  upon  this  ground  then  we  may  proceed 
in  a  second  enquiry  to  ask  how  differences  in  the  magnitude  and 
distribution  of  the  mass  affect  the  absolute  values  of  the  magnitudes 
which  are  to  be  determined  by  the  law.  As  soon  as  we  take 
this  line  without  mass  literally  and  think  of  its  being  moved,  we 


266  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof .        [BOOK  IT. 

become  Involved  in  absurdities  through  which  we  can  never  fairly 
make  our  way,  since  the  combination  of  ideas  upon  which  they  rest 
is  in  itself  an  impossible  one.  What  is  supposed  to  happen  when 
one  extremity  b  of  such  a  line  receives  a  velocity  c  ?  It  cannot 
separate  Itself  from  the  rest  of  the  line,  for  then  it  would  not  be 
the  line,  but  only  the  free  point  I  that  was  moved :  but  as  the  line 
has  received  no  motion  how  can  it  follow  the  point  ?  It  may  per- 
haps be  supposed  that  this  line  would  rotate :  then  the  point  b  would 
have  to  communicate  its  velocity  to  the  other  points,  and  that  in 
degrees,  more  to  the  nearer  and  less  to  the  remoter  points  ;  but  we 
cannot  see  how  this  is  to  be  measured,  for  all  the  forces  are  absent 
here  which  operating  between  the  minute  parts  of  a  mass  might 
cause  the  impulse  received  by  one  part  to  extend  itself  to  the  rest  of 
the  series,  so  that  every  member  of  it  might  at  every  moment  receive 
a  definite  proportion  of  the  impulse.  Finally  as  there  is  here  no 
reason  for  such  an  apportionment  of  the  effect  we  might  instead  of 
this  conic  to  regard  the  whole  line  a  b  as  a  unity  so  closely  bound 
together  that  every  part  of  it,  separable  only  to  our  thought  or  sense, 
immediately  assumes  the  same  stales  that  are  set  up  in  any  other 
part;  setting  aside  the  question  whether  every  part  of  the  line  would 

then  receive  the  whole  velocity  c  or  only  -,  the  result  would  at  all 

events  be  that  the  line  a  6  remains  at  rest  when  b  receives  the  velocity 
c  and  the  other  extremity  a  receives  an  equal  velocity  —  c.  All  these 
absurdities  are  avoided  by  the  admission  that  only  a  line  that  has 
mass  can  be  moved,  not  a  line  that  has  no  mass. 

231.  In  the  subsidiary  processes  also,  the  substitutions  and  trans- 
formations by  which  we  endeavour  to  make  the  given  circumstances 
accessible  to  our  judgment,  we  have  to  avoid  suppositions  to  which, 
however  much  they  may  help  the  imagination,  no  real  meaning  can  be 
given.  To  illustrate  this  I  will  mention  a  proof  which  is  often  employed 
to  demonstrate  the  fmnilklognim  of  forces.  The  body  is  supposed  to 
move  in  a  plane  from  a  to  c,  and  at  the  same  time  this  plane  is 
supposed  to  move  from  a  to  b ;  and  in  this  way  it  is  fancied  that  the 
course  of  the  body  from  a  to  the  end  of  the  diagonal  of  the  parallelo- 
gram abed  has  been  ascertained.  This  involves  two  assumptions 
which  are  not  expressed  but  to  which  expression  must  be  given; 
they  are  first  the  assumption  that  the  motion  of  the  plane  will  not 
interfere  witli  the  motion  of  the  point  in  the  line  ac,  and  secondly  that 
the  moving  plane  will  carry  with  it  the  whole  line  a  c  together  with 
the  body.  Now  an  empty  surface  in  motion  is  sufficiently  far  re- 


CHAPTER  v.]         Illustrations  from  Mechanics.  267 

moved  from  anything  that  can  actually  occur,  but  it  is  still  harder  to 
understand  how  a  body  can  stick  to  it  while  it  moves.  And  yet  it  is 
very  necessary  that  it  should  so  stick :  for  if  the  body  be  upon  a  very 
smooth  table  and  we  give  it  a  push  towards  a  <:,  giving  the  table  at 
the  same  time  a  push  towards  a  b,  the  body  will  not  go  with  the  table 
but  will  part  company  while  the  table  flies  away  from  under  it.  But  if 
we  supply  this  necessary  condition,  i.e.  if  we  say  that  the  body  continues 
to  move  undisturbed  towards  c,  while  a  c  at  the  same  time  is  com- 
pelled to  move  towards  b  and  to  take  the  body  with  it,  the  whole 
proposition  becomes  an  empty  tautology,  and  that  which  is  assumed 
is  precisely  that  which  was  to  be  proved.  It  must  rank  then  only  as 
one  of  the  means  which  may  be  employed  to  give  us  a  picture  of  an 
already  demonstrated  truth. 

232.  Among  the  numerous  other  proofs  of  the  same  proposition 
several  proceed  from  a  common  starting-point  which  is  of  interest  for 
the  logician.  They  begin  with  a  statement  of  the  special  case  in 
which  two  equal  forces  a  and  b  impel  the  body  in  two  directions,  and 
it  is  regarded  as  self-evident  -that  the  direction  of  the  resulting  motion 
will  bisect  the  angle  between  these  two  directions.  But  this  assump- 
tion includes  the  further  assumption  that  if  the  forces  be  unequal  the 
resultant  will  divide  the  angle  into  two  unequal  parts,  and  since  it  is 
impossible  that  the  kind  of  this  inequality  should  be  independent  of  the 
relation  between  the  magnitudes  of  the  forces,  seeing  that  the  fact  of 
the  inequality  depends  upon  it,  this  assumption  rests  on  a  more 
general  assumption,  viz.  that  if  two  conditions  a  and  b  tend  to  give 
each  a  different  form  to  a  result  c,  the  recognisable  influence  of  the 
two  in  the  actual  form  of  the  result  will  be  proportional  to  their 
magnitudes;  if  then  a  and  b  are  equal,  c  will  be  as  far  removed 
from  the  result  which  would  have  followed  from  a  alone  as  from  that 
which  b  alone  would  produce.  Now  I  cannot  see  why  we  should 
appeal  to  this  proposition  once  only  when  we  are  introducing  the 
proof,  and  then  conduct  the  proof  itself  by  other  complicated  con- 
siderations :  whatever  be  the  forces  a  and  b  and  the  degree  of  their 
inequality,  we  may  say  universally  that  the  extent  to  which  the  moved 
point  is  deflected  by  the  force  a  from  the  path  of  the  force  b,  and  by 
b  from  the  path  of  a,  must  vary  directly  as  the  diverting  forces.  In 
order  to  turn  this  logical  proposition  to  mathematical  use  we  should 
need  first  to  determine  how  the  two  deflections  are  to  be  measured. 
The  nature  of  the  question  does  not  invite  us  to  apply  the  ordinary- 
method  and  to  let  fall  perpendiculars  from  the  direction  of  the  several 
paths  upon  the  resultant  or  from  the  latter  upon  the  former :  all  three 


268  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof . 

paths  are  considered  not  as  empty  directions  In  space,  but  only  as 
loci  which  would  include  the  successive  situations  of  the  moved  point. 
The  following  treatment  is  the  only  one  suggested  by  this  last  remark. 
Let  a  and  /3  be  the  two  points  in  the  paths  of  #  and  b  respectively  which 
the  moved  body  would  have  reached  in  the  same  time  /  if  it  had 
followed  the  force  a  only  or  b  only,  and  let  p  be  the  point  in  the  result- 
ant at  which  the  body  arrives  in  the  same  time  /  under  the  combined 
influence  of  a  and  b :  then  p  a  represents  the  deflection  from  the  path 
a  effected  by  the  force  b,  and  pft  the  deflection  from  the  path  I  by  the 
force  a,  and  p  a  :  p  / "J  =  b  :  a.  Since  we  can  only  estimate  the  magni- 
tude of  the  forces  a  and  b  by  the  space  which  they  cause  to  be 
traversed  in  the  unit  of  time,  the  ratio  a  :  b  is  also  for  the  unit  of  time 
the  ratio  of  the*  spaces  traversed  in  the  direction  of  a  and  b  re- 
spectively ;  but  it  must  also  have  this  meaning  for  any  time  /  and  for 
any  part  of/;  for  since  a  and  b  arc  regarded  as  forces  that  operate 
for  a  moment  only,  the  movement  in  the  direction  of  the  resultant 
must  lake  place  with  constant  velocity  and  in  a  straight  line:  the 
length  which  is  traversed  in  the  direction  of  the  resultant  therefore 
will  always  be  proportional  to  the  space  traversed  in  the  directions  of 
a  and  b  within  an  equal  time  /,  and  the  lines  pa  and  p  ft  which  repre- 
sent the  deflections  will  form  the  third  sides  of  triangles  whose  two 
other  sides  increase  in  the  same  constant  ratio. 

233.  .But  tins  proportion  tells  us  nothing-  about  the  absolute  magni- 
tude of  pa  and  p  ft -,  they  satisfy  the  proportion  so  long  as  they  are 
m  b  and  m  a ;  the  value  of  this  ///  would  still  have  to  be  ascertained. 
Now  there  is  nothing  in  nil  the  data  of  the  problem  that  can  help  us 
to  determine  this  :  none  of  them  could  have  any  influence  upon  it 
except  the  magnitude  of  a  and  b,  including  the  ratio  of  a  to  6,  and 
the  size  of  the  included  angle;  but  the  suppositions  already  made 
seem  to  have  taken  full  count  of  the  influence  of  these  elements;  and 
it  is  quite  impossible  that  anything  outside  the  data  of  the  problem 
can  contain  the  grounds  of  something  that  is  to  flow  directly  from 
the  problem  itself.  Ixi  cases  of  this  kind  the  logical  course  must 
always  be  to  search  for  the  most  l>rob able  supposition  that  satisfies  the 
requirements.  The  meaning  to  be  attached  to  this  expression  would 
be  very  hard  to  define  in  general  language ;  and  my  sole  purpose  in. 
treating  this  problem  is  to  make  up  by  an  illustration  for  the  want  of 
a  precise  determination  of  the  general  conception.  The  most  prob- 
able supposition  will  set  down  that  which  in  virtue  of  its  nature  or 
magnitude  is  the  minimum  that  makes  possible  the  relation  which  we 
know  must  subsist,  and  which,  if  it  were  to  subsist  under  other  con- 


CHAPTER  v.]          Illustralwn^  from  Mechanics.  269 

ditions  or  with  other  subsidiary  characteristics  than  those  we   take, 
would  necessarily  furnish  special  reasons  for  inferring  them,  which 
reasons   are  here   absent.     In   the    case   before  us  the  proportion 
p  a  :  p  /3  =  1)  :  a  must  always  subsist ;  therefore  m  cannot  be  nought ; 
but  in  order  that  it  may  subsist  it  is  enough  to  set  down  m  as  equal 
to  i  ;  and  this  value  of  m  may  be  regarded  as  by  its  nature  the  mini- 
mum that  satisfies  the  requirements;  for  any  greater  or  smaller  value, 
as  m  =  2  or  m  =  J,  may  be  treated  as  m .  i,  i.  e.  as  so  many  repeti- 
tions of  the  unit  with  the  vanishing  of  which  m  itself  vanishes  and 
with  it  the  whole  relation.    Unity  is  the  only  value  of  m  which  affirms 
that  the  required  relation  actually  subsists  in  such  a  way  as  to  enable 
the  other  special  values  of  m  to  be  effectively  introduced  as  further 
specific  characteristics,  in  case  there  be  any  reason  in  the  nature  of 
the  content  under  investigation  for  preferring  one  of  these  values 
rather  than  another.     Where  as  here  there  is  no  such  reason  we  fall 
back  upon  the  supposition  that  m  =  i,  a  supposition  which  in  any  • 
case  is  necessary,  and  therefore  is  the  most  probable  supposition;  for 
under  all  circumstances,  even  if  m  had  some  other  value,  it  would  hold 
good  at  the  same  time  with  that  value  and  "equally  satisfy  the  required 
proportion.     Let  us   then  make  the  assumption  and  construct  the 
figure  accordingly ;  i.  e.  let  us  from  a,  the  extremity  of  the  path  tra- 
versed in  the  time  /  in  the  direction  of  a,  describe  a  circle  with  radius 
equal  to  the  path  traversed  in  the  same  time  towards  b,  and  from  j3 
describe  a  circle  with  radius  equal  to  the  distance  traversed  towards  a; 
then  these  circles  will  cut  one  another  in  the  diagonal  of  the  parallelo- 
gram formed  by  a  and  .1,  and  the  direction  and  length  of  the  resultant 
are  both  determined  at  once. 

234.  But  even  when  analysis  has  failed  to  detect  any  grounds  in 
the  data  of  a  problem  for  any  other  than  this  most  probable  supposi- 
tion, it  is  seldom  possible  to  be  absolutely  certain  that  such  grounds 
are  not  there,  and  might  not  be  revealed  by  a  more  careful  analysis. 
And  so  no  pains  must  be  spared  either  to  confirm  the  supposition 
adopted  by  subsidiary  proofs  upon  a  different  line,  or  to  establish  it 
indirectly,  i.  e.  to  exclude  all  other  suppositions  by  showing  the  contra- 
dictions in  which  they  involve  us.  We  will  take  this  further  step  then. 
It  seems  self-evident  that  the  resultant  of  two  forces  can  never  be 
greater  than  their  sum ;  it  attains  this  maximum  when  they  both  act 
upon  the  body  in  the  same  direction,  and  when  the  included  angle 
therefore  is  nothing.  It  has  been  objected  to  this  proposition  also 
that  it  is  after  all  not  self-evident  that  when  a  second  motion  b  is 
joined  to  a  motion  a  in  the  same  direction  b  is  simply  added  to  a ; 


270  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof  .        IBOOKII. 

for  it  is  conceivable  that  the  nature  of  motion  or  that  of  the  bodies 
subject  to  it  involves  conditions  which  might  even  in  this  case  make 
the  resultant  greater  or  less   than    the   sum  of  the  two.     This  ob- 
jection seems  to  me  unfounded,  especially  as  applied  to  the  case 
before  us.     In  the  first  place  when  two  motions  in  the  same  direction 
are  given  at  the  same  time  to  one  body,  we  may  continue  to  regard 
them  as  two  separate  motions,  but  it  is  only  because  we  choose  so  to 
regard  them.     They  were  two  motions  outside  the  body :  they  may 
have  been  imparted  to  it  for  instance  by  two  other  different  bodies. 
It  may  be  also  that  in  the  physical  act  of  transmission  from  one  body 
to  another  the  motions  may  lose  or  gain  something :  but  we  are  here 
speaking  not  of  the  mode  of  transmission,  but  of  the  velocities,  so  far 
as  they  already  have  been  transmitted  to  the  body  in  question.     In 
this  body,  here  considered   simply  as  something  moveable,  without 
regard   to   all   its    other  peculiar   properties,  the   two  do  'not   need 
to   be    combined   into    one,  but  they  are   absolutely  one  from   the 
beginning,  and  the  resulting  velocity  is  the  sum  of  the  two  as  surely 
as  any  velocity  is  what  it  is.     But  suppose  the  body  already  has  a 
motion  a  when  the  second  //  supervenes ;  this  could  not  make  any 
di (Terence  unless  the  body  violated  the  law  ofpersisten.ee  and  altered 
its  motion  every  instant :  for  if  it  does  not  alter  its  motion,  i.e.  if  at 
the  time  /  it  is  in  precisely  the  same  condition  as  at  the  time  /°,  the 
motion  b  which  supervenes  later  must  combine  with  the  still  subsist- 
ing motion  a  just  as  it  would  have  done  at  the  time  /°  if  both  had 
begun  together.     We  may  regard  it  as   established   then  that   the 
resultant  R  of  the  two  forces  a  and  b  acting  in  the  same  direction 
can  only  be  a  4-  b.     Of  course  this  does  not  directly  help  us  to 
estimate  the  result  of  forces  whose  directions  diverge  and  make  an 
angle  </>„     Meantime  however  it   is  at   all  events  evident  that   the 
resultant  cannot  increase  with  the  divergence ;  for  then  it  would  be 
least  when  the  directions  are  the  same,  whereas  we  have  just  seen  that 
it  is  greatest  then,  and  greatest  when  they  are  opposite,  whereas  it  is 
evident  that  it  is  least  then.    But  it  is  equally  impossible  that  it  can  be 
independent  of  the  magnitude  of  the  angle  c/>;  and  so  it  must  neces- 
sarily diminish  an  </>  increases,  and  we  may  now  say  that  for  forces  of 
any  direction  the  resultant  JR.  is  either  equal  to  or  less  than  a  +  6. 

This  conclusion  again  which  is  still  indefinite  may  be  brought  within 
narrower  limits.  When  various  momentary  forces  to  any  number  we 
please  arc  brought  to  hear  at  the  same  time  upon  a  moveable  point, 
the  total  result  which  actually  arises  can  only  be  one,  and  therefore 
cannot  alter  with  the  various  arbitrarily  chosen  scries  in  which  we  in  our 


CHAPTER v.i          Ilhistrations  from  Mechanics,  271 

minds  first  arrange  the  simultaneous  conditions  by  pairs,  and  then 
again  combine  the  several  results  thus  obtained.  It  must  be  the 
same  in  the  end  therefore  whether  we  first  get  the  resultant  R  out  of 
a  and  b  and  then  try  to  get  a  second  resultant  out  of  R  and  —  a,  or 
whether  we  combine  <z,  <5,  and  —  a  so  that,  a  and  —  a  obviously 
cancelling  each  other,  b  is  left  as  this  second  resultant.  The  con- 
ception of  R  therefore  as  the  resultant  of  a  anfr  b  implies  that  if  we 
again  take  as  components  R  and  a  with  its  original  direction  reversed 
and  calculate  their  resultant  by  the  same  law  by  which  we  get  R 
from  a  and  b,  we  must  come  back  to  £'•;  and  so  R  and  -  b  combined 
will  bring  us  back  to  a.  And  this  consideration  holds  good  uni- 
versally, and  quite  independently  of  the  still  unknown  law  which 
regulates  the  dependence  of  the  magnitude  and  direction  of  the 
resultant  upon  the  magnitude  of  the  component  forces  and  the  included 
angle.  From  this  then  it  follows  that  each  of  the  three  forces  or 
motions  a,  $,  R  is  under  the  circumstances  stated  above  the  resultant 
of  the  other  two,  that  each  is  therefore  less  than  or  at  most  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  other  two ;  whence  it  follows  that  the  three  may  be 
combined  in  a  triangle,  which  contracts  itself  into 'a  straight  line  only 
in  the  limiting  case  where  one  is  equal  to  the  other  two. 

But  as  thus  obtained  this  familiar  proposition  only  expresses  a 
relation nbetwe en  the  lengths  of  a,  6,  and  R ;  we  must  also  make 
out  the  relations  between  the  angles  for  which  this  relation  holds 
between  the  sides.  If  a  and  b>  and  the  included  angle  <p  be 
given,  the  length  of  R,  as  yet  unknown,  is  completely  determined ; 
for  these  given  elements  therefore  there  is  only  one  possible  triangle 
to  be  made  out  of  ab  and  R.  Conversely,  given  a  "triangle  with  ab 
and  R  for  sides,  there  is  but  one  angle  $  which  the  forces  a  and  b  can 
make  so  that  R  shall  be  the  length  of  their  resultant.  Geometrically 
R  in  the  triangle  increases,  if  a  and  d  are  constant,  as  the  opposite 
angle  p  increases;  mechanically,  as  the  resultant  of  a  and  b,  R 
diminishes  as  the  angle  <p  increases ;  between  the  angle  p  in  the 
triangle  therefore  and  (p  the  angle  at  which  the  forces  diverge  from 
one  another  there  must  subsist  some  definite  relation  which  we  want 
to  ascertain.  In  the  triangle  made  up  of  a  b  and  R,  R  has  not  the 
position  which  it  must  assume  when  it  represents  the  resultant ;  in  the 
latter  case  all  three  lines  must  start  from  a  common  vertex  A,  and  it 
may  be  taken  as  self-evident  that  R  must  lie  in  the  angle  between 
a  and  b.  Let  us  suppose  then  that  a  and  b  are  two  forces,  as  yet 
indefinite  in  magnitude,  put  together  so  as  to  make  any  angle  <J> ;  and 
that  R  the  resultant,  also  as  yet  arbitrary  in  length,  divides  this  angle 


272  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof a        [BOOKII. 

into  any  two  parts,  C  being  its  other  extremity.  Now  as  the  mechanical 
relations  of  which  we  are  here  in  search  must  be  independent  of  the 
absolute  position  of  the  lines  in  space,  we  may  first  shift  the  whole 
system  of  the  three  lines  a  b  and  R  so  that  the  vertex  A  falls  upon  C, 
and  then  turn  it,  in  the  plane  in  which  it  lies,  about  C  so  that  the  forces 
a  and  /;,  which  in  their  new  position  may  be  denoted  by  a1  and  I1 
proceed  from  Cin  directions  parallel  but  opposite  to  their  former  direc- 
tions. Then  evidently  the  resultant  R1  of  these  forces  d>  and  b1  must 
be  both  in  position  and  magnitude  identical  with  R,  only  opposite  in 
direction.  Thus  then  the  direction  of  the  resultant  is  determined ;  it 
must  be  the  diagonal  of  a  parallelogram  formed  by  the  intersection  of 
the  forces  a  and  bl  on  the  one  side  and  the  forces  b  and  a1  on  the  other, 
or  by  their  meeting  in  a  common  extremity,  or  by  their  being  produced 
to  such  an  extremity.  But  if  the  lengths  of  a  and  b  are  given,  the  length 
of  R  is  also  determined,  it  must  be  the  third  side  of  a  triangle  whose 
other  sides  are  a  and  <5X,  which  =  l^  or  b  and  a\  which  =  a;  it  is 
therefore  the  diagonal  of  the  parallelogram  formed  by  the  lengths  of 
the  forces  themselves.  The  figure  then  shows  that  the  angle  p 
subtended  by  R  in  either  of  these  triangles  is  the  supplement  of  the 
angle  which  the  forces  make  with  each  other,  i.e.  that  </>  =  TT  —  />*. 

235.  We  may  further  confirm  this  conclusion  indirectly  by  showing 
that  any  other  supposition  as  to  the  relation  between  components  and 
resultant  is  impossible.  Let  us  first  assume  that  a  supposition  which 
we  wish  thus  to  test  agrees  with  the  foregoing  so  far  as  regards  the 
direction  of  7?,  and  only  makes  the  length  of  R  exceed  or  fall  short 
of  the  diagonal  I).  Let  us  suppose  then  that  the  first  resultant  Rl 
obtained  from  a  and  /;  is  greater  than  the  diagonal  Dl  of  the  parallel- 
ogram obtained  from  a  and  h  with  the  included  angle  c/>,  i.e.  that 
Rl  =  p .  /?p  where  p  is  an  improper  fraction.  Now  if  we  combine  this 
I\\  with  the  force  a  turned  in  the  opposite  direction,  the  angle  between 
the  two  being  IT  —  </>  t,  the  new  resultant  7^  deduced  from  them  accord- 
ing to  the  same  supposition  must  be  greater  than  the  diagonal  got 
from  Rl  and  a  with  this  same  angle,  still  greater  therefore  than  the 
other  diagonal  J),,  which  would  be  got  by  combining  Di  which  is  less 
than  Rl  and  a  at  the  same  angle  TT  — </>t.  But  we  know  upon  purely 
geometrical  grounds,  which  are  quite  independent  of  all  mechanical 
assumptions,  that  this  diagonal  J\  is  nothing  else  than  the  given  force 
b  ;  AJa  then  would  be  greater  than  #,  whereas  we  know  for  the  reasons 
lately  stated  that  it  must  be  equal  to  b.  If  now  once  more  we  com- 

*  [See  Preface.] 

f  [IT— </>  obviously  should  be  IT— </>4-  the  angle  between  ^  and  <$.] 


CHAPTER  v.]      .    Illustrations  from  Mechanics*  273 

pound  R2  with  the  given  a  at  the  angle  <£,  the  resultant  JR^  which  would 
be  thus  obtained  must  for  the  same  reasons  be  equal  to  JR1 ;  but  by 
the  present  supposition  it  would  for  the  angle  <j>  be  equal  to  p  times 
the  diagonal  got  from  JRZ  and  a.  at  this  angle ;  as  then  ^2  is  greater 
than  <5,  this  diagonal  also  is  greater  than  the  diagonal  D^  got  from  a 
and  b  at  the  same  angle ;  supposing  it  to  be  equal  to  q  Dl  we  get 
^?s  =  qp.  Dv  I.  e.  J?3  is  q  times  as  great  as  JRl  was.  Thus  the  suppo- 
sition that  the  resultant  is  greater  than  the  diagonal  leads  to  the  absurd 
conclusion  that  it  becomes  greater  and  greater  every  time  that  we 
repeat  this  manoeuvre  in  its  calculation.  The  other  supposition  that 
It  is  smaller  than  the  diagonal,  i.  e.  that  p  and  q  are  vulgar  fractions, 
would  lead  to  an  equally  impossible  diminution.  In  order  to  make 
this  indirect  proof  complete  it  would  be  necessary  to  show  further 
that  the  supposition  of  a  resultant  of  the  same  length  as  the  diagonal 
but  making  different  angles  with  the  given  forces  would  involve  a 
similar  absurdity,  viz.  that  its  course  would  be  more  and  more  de- 
flected the  oftener  its  calculation  was  repeated ;  and  lastly  it  would 
be  indispensable  to  prove  that  there  is  no  combination  of  these  sup- 
positions in  which  the  false  consequences  of  the  one  would  be 
counteracted  by  those  of  the  other.  But  as  the  matter  stands  it  is 
enough  to  state  what  the  requirements  of  logic  would  be ;  we  may 
spare  ourselves  the  trouble  of  carrying  them  out  at  length. 

238.  Operations  of  synthesis  or  combination  may  always  be  carried 
out  to  some  end,  viz.  to  the  result  obtained  in  each  case ;  but  opera-* 
tions  of  analysis  on  the  other  hand  presuppose  an  end  which  we 
desire  to  reach,  though  it  is  yet  uncertain  whether  the  subject  we  are, 
treating  is  produced  by  a  combination  which  makes  this  reverse  process 
of  analysis  possible.  Even  in  pure  mathematics  therefore  the  inverse 
operations  lead  to  difficulties  from  which  the  direct  are  free;  and 
similar  doubts  are  suggested  by  the  common  practice  of  resolving 
given  forces  into  components,  though  if  the  components  were  given, 
no  doubt  would  be  felt  about  combining  them.  As  any  force  may  be 
split  up  into  countless  pairs  of  components,  how,  it  may  be  askeds 
are  we  entitled  to  expect  that  any  division  which  we  arbitrarily  choose 
will  have  a  real  validity  in  the  complex  tissue  of  facts  present  in  the 
problem  before  us  ?  In  general  terms  this  doubt  is  easily  removed, 
For  when  we  are  making  such  a  resolution  in  practice  we  always  put 
one  of  the  components  in  a  direction  in  which  some  resistance  or 
some  counteracting  force  is  foreseen  or  known  to  be  present ;  we  only 
resolve  therefore  for  convenience  in  formulating  our  calculation  ;  what 
we  really  do  is  to  compound ;  if  we  combine  the  given  counterfoils 

T 


274  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof 9 

or  resistances  W  with  the  given  force  F9  the  resultant  thus  got  is 
identical  with  that  which  would  be  obtained  from  the  uncancelled 
remainder  of  the  one  component  of  .Fand  the  whole  of  the  other 
component  which  would  meet  with  no  resistance.  But  a  real  difficulty 
arises  when  the  direction  of  the  resistance  itself  is  not  immediately 
given  and  an  attempt  is  made — in  a  manner  that  seems  to  me  hardly 
convincing— to  arrive  by  an  application  of  the  law  of  resolution  at  the 
principle  itself  which  is  here  to  be  followed.  I  allude  to  the  sup- 
position that  a  plane  resists  in  the  direction  of  its  normal  only  the  im- 
parting to  it  of  a  motion  which  makes  with  it  any  angle  $.  It  is 
quite  easy  to  see  that  this  motion  may  be  decomposed  into  two,  of 
which  one  parallel  with  the  plane  meets  no  resistance  because  it  does 
not  act  upon  the  plane  at  all,  while  the  other  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  is  annihilated  by  the  resistance  of  the  plane,  or  at  any  rate  is 
resisted  by  it.  But  how  little  right  we  have  to  carry  out  this  decom- 
position here  as  one  allowed  by  the  nature  of  the  case  will  appear 
from  the  following  considerations. 

Let  the  moving  body  be  a  perfectly  smooth  ball,  and  let  it  move  at 
an  angle  <//  against  a  perfectly  smooth  plane  E  which  offers  an  abso- 
lute resistance ;  contact  then  will  take  place  only  in  the  geometrical 
point  p,  to  which  we  must  ascribe  the  same  power  of  absolute  resist- 
ance as  to  all  the  other  points  of  JZ,  however  this  may  be  brought 
about.  Now  what  all  these  other  points  of  E  have  to  do  with  the 
result  which  follows,  it  is  impossible  to  imagine ;  we  think  of  them 
indeed  when  we  speak  of  the  plane  E\  but  as  they  are  not  in. contact, 
they  cannot  directly  contribute  anything  to  the  resistance,  and  in  de- 
ducing the  result  we  may  set  them  entirely  aside  without  altering  the 
conditions  on  which  the  result  is  to  depend.  But  if  we  do  this  and 
retain  the  point  p  alone,  the  proposition  about  the  resistance  being  at 
right  angles  becomes  impossible,  because  it  becomes  meaningless;  for 
to  the  point  p  either  no  line  is  normal  or  any  line  drawn  from  it  in 
any  direction  is  normal.  But  another  principle  seems  evidently  to 
apply  here :  surely  p,  if  it  resists,  will  resist  in  the  direction  from 
which  conies  the  motion  to  be  resisted :  there  is  in  the  first  instance 
no  conceivable  reason  for  action  in  any  other  direction.  If  then  in  our 
example/  were  perfectly  fixed,  and  if  at  the  moment  of  contact  the 
line  /  drawn  through  the  point/  parallel  to  the  direction  of  the  motion 
did  not  pass  through  the  centre  of  the  ball,  p  would  entirely  annihilate 
the  motion  of  that  thread  of  the  mass  which  lies  in  this  line  / ;  then 
for  the  rest  of  the  mass  of  the  ball,  whose  motion  would  not  thus  be 
annihilated,  there  would  arise  a  movement  of  rotation,  which  would 


CHAPTER  v.]          Illustrations  from  Mechanics.  275 

cause  it  to  turn  about  the  point/.  The  inference  that  the  resistance 
must  occur  in  the  direction  of  the  motion  cannot  moreover  be  obviated 
by  conceiving  the  moving  body  to  be  prismatic  in  shape,  say  a  cube, 
of  which  one  side  remains  parallel  to  the  plane  E  while  the  direction 
of  its  motion  makes  with  E  the  angle  <£>.  It  is  true  that  in  that  case 
two  planes  are  brought  into  contact;  but  even  now  every  point  of 
that  part  of  E  which  is  in  contact  will  only  be  able  to  resist  the  point 
of  the  cube's  side  which  it  touches  in  accordance  with  the  foregoing 
principle,  i.  e.  in  the  direction  4> ;  before  we  could  say  that  it  would 
not  be  so  we  should  have  to  prove  that  the  presence  of  the  adjacent 
points  q  r  s  of  the  plane  E  helps  to  determine  the  direction  of  the 
resistance  offered  by  the  point  p :  only  this  could  render  possible  in 
fact  that  co-operation  of  the  plane  which  we  have  hitherto  spoken  of, 
though  we  have  not  made  use  of  it  in  deducing  the  result. 

And  now  surely  it  is  clear  that  we  shall  never  succeed  in  proving 
this  so  long  as  we  regard  E  as  a  geometrical  plane  without  physical 
mass  and  yet  with  power  to  offer  resistance.  It  is  not  even  enough 
to  regard  E  as  the  limiting  surface  of  an  inert  mass  ;  we  are  obliged 
to  add  a  physical  hypothesis  about  the  forces  with  which  the  mass 
resists  encroachment  upon  the  space  it  occupies.  We  must  give  the  plane 
E  some  thickness  therefore ;  contact  will  not  take  place  at  one  point 
merely,  but  the  moving  body  will  in  fact  either  penetrate  to  a  certain 
depth  and  then  be  thrust  back  by  the  resistance  of  other  displaced 
points  of  the  mass,  or  without  coming  into  contact  while  it  is  still  at  a 
distance  it  will  be  affected  by  the  repulsive  forces  of  the  masses  united 
in  j£  And  then  we  should  have  to  prove  with  regard  to  these  forces 
of  all  the  points  of  the  mass  that  in  all  the  other  directions  they  anni- 
hilate one  another,  but  in  the  direction  of  the  normal  to  the  limiting 
surface  are  added  to  one  another  and  combine  to  make  the  resistance 
which  annihilates  that  component  of  the  body's  motion  which  lies  in 
this  normal  but  in  the  contrary  direction.  And  indeed  it  is  not  at  all 
surprising  that  we  should  be  obliged  to  come  back  to  an  assumption 
of  this  kind :  motion  altogether  can  only  take  place  in  a  real  thing, 
not  in  a  point  or  a  line ;  still  less  can  we  hope  to  calculate  resistances 
without  taking  count  of  that  which  is  alone  able  to  resist,  viz.  the 
physical  forces  of  actual  bodies ;  surfaces  as  surfaces  and  lines  as 
lines  always  cut  one  another  without  any  resistance  at  all. 

1^3B.  I  will  add  one  more  mathematical  example  to  illustrate  our 
general  directions  about  method.  The  Taylorian  theorem  attempts 

1  §  237,  which  followed  here,  is  suppressed  by  desire  of  the  author  as  "being 
altogether  wrong  ('  wegen  volligen  Irrthums  durch  den  Verfasser  nnterdruckt'). 

T  2 


276  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof . 

to  determine  the  value  F  (x-\-Ji)  which  Fx,  a  function  of  xt  as- 
sumes when  the  variable  quantity  x  increases  from  the  limiting  value 
which  it  had  in  F  x  to  the  new  value  x  +  h.  To  make  the  statement 
as  simple  as  possible  I  will  subject  the  problem  to  certain  limitations : 
il  would  take  us  far  too  long  to  enquire  here  whether  they  are  super- 
fluous  or  not,  I  conceive  Fx  to  be  given  in  the  shape  of  an  analytical 
expression  which  indicates  tTie  mathematical  operations  or  relations 
from  which  for  every  definite  value  of  x  flow  definite  values  of  F  x\ 
I  assume  that  these  values  of  F  x  remain  finite  for  every  value  of  x 
from  o  to  ,v  -J-  //,  and  that  they  increase  continuously  as  x  increases 
continuously  between  these  limits.  In  propounding  the  problem  in 
this  form,  as  one  capable  of  a  universal  solution,  we  directly  assume 
that  the  growth  of  the  function  from  its  value  F  x  to  its  new  value 
F  (x  -f-  ft)  will  follow  precisely  the  same  law  which  the  former  value 
F  x  itself  followed  as  x  grew  from  o  to  its  former  limiting  value  x, 
and  further  that  this  sameness  of  the  generating  law  will  hold  good 
for  each  infinitely  small  increment  dh  by  which  the  function  now  in- 
creases precisely  as  for  each  infinitely  small  d  x  by  which  it  formerly 
increased.  From  this  it  follows  that  it  must  be  possible  to  express 
either  value  of  the  function,  and  in  the  first  instance  to  express  F  x,  as 
the  sum  of  an.  infinite  series,  each  member  of  which  indicates  the 
increase  which  takes  place  as  x  increases  by  the  addition  of  each 
successive  dx.  Now  if  it  were  the  nature  of  Fx  that  for  every 
smallest  increase  of  A.*,  i.  c,  for  every  dx,  it  increased  by  the  same 
constant  quantity  m.d  x,  its  total  value  at  the  end  would  be  the  sum 
of  an  infinite  series  of  similar  members  of  the  form  m  dx:  the  number 
of  these  members  would  be  just  as  infinite  as  the  number  of  dx  into 
which  we  conceive  the  final  value  of  .v  to  be  divided,  or  by  the  accu-, 
mulation  of  which  we  conceive  it  to  be  formed ;  the  sum  of  the  series 
is  the  integral  fmd.v  =  mx.  If  on  the  other  hand  the  increase  of 
F  x  for  every  </.v  depends  upon  the  value  which  the  growing  x  has 
already  attained  at  the  time  when  this  d  x  is  added,  then,  if  the 
formula  we  are  seeking  is  to  hold  good  for  every  finite  x  and  h,  the 
scries  we  now  have  to  take  must  consist  of  nothing  but  similarly  con- 
structed functions  of  ,r,  relative  successively  to  the  continuously 
increasing  values  of  x\  if  we  call  this  function  fx  or  fl  x,  then 
F  x  ^zff^.dx.  Now  there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  repeat 
with  regard  to  fl  x  the  same  considerations  which  we  have  already 
applied  to  Fx\  if  x  in/1  x  now  denotes  a  definite  value  out  of  the 
many  values  which  jc  may  assume,/1  x  may  also  be  conceived  as  the 
sum  of  a  series  whose  infinitely  numerous  and  similarly  constructed 


CHAPTER v.]  The  Taylorian  Theorem*  277 

members  give  the  increments  by  which  as  each  dx  was  added/*1  A: 
grew  to  its  limiting  value  corresponding  to  that  value  of  x ;  and  so 
we  get/1  x  =//"2  x .  dx,  and  generally/™  x  =  //w+1  x .  dx.  How 
to  obtain  from  a  given  function  Fx  these  derivative  functions  of 
various  grades,  fl  x,f*x,fmx,  and  how  to  work  back  from  the 
latter  to  the  former,  we  may  assume  to  be  well  known  to  all  who  are 
acquainted  with  the  infinitesimal  calculus. 

239.  These  preliminary  remarks  really  contain  the  solution  of  the 
problem ;  nevertheless  I  will  proceed  to  trace  it  back  to  the  following 
simple  train  of  thought  which  may  serve  at  the  same  time  to  illustrate 
another  logical  method. 

1.  Evidently  F(x  +  h]  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  its  former  value  Fx 
and  the  positive  or  negative  increment  Rl  which  F  x  has  received  in 
consequence  of  the  growth  of  the  variable  x  from  x  to  x  +  h.     In 
order  to  determine  the  value  of  JR:  we  make  the  simplest  supposition, 
viz,  that  for  each  of  these  increments  dh  whose  aggregate  amounts 
to  /i)  F x  increases  by  the  same  .quantity  m1  dh ;  then  m^fdh  which 
is  equal  to  m^ .  h  is  the  value  of  J?p  or  is  the  total  increase  of  Fvv. 
This  ml  is  not  incalculable.     For  if,  as  we  throughout  assume,  the 
increase  of  F  x  is  to  depend  solely  upon  the  nature  of  this  function, 
its  given  value  F  x  must  have  originated  in  the  same  manner  in 
which  its  further  growth   is  now  to  take   place ;    i.  e.  while  x  was 
passing  through  all  values  from  o  to  x  the  function  then  in  course  of 
formation  must  have  exhibited  for  each  dx  the  same  increase  which 
the  function  thus  formed  now  exhibits  for  each  dh,  for  dx  differs 
from  dh'in  name  only.     Now  Fx  maybe  universally  described  as 
the  sum  of  a  continuous  series,  whose  general  term  is  represented  by 

f1  x  .  dx  and  its  last  term  by  the  same  expression  it  x  stands  for  the 
definite  limiting  value  which  the  variable  x  attains  in  F  x.  For  each 
dx  this  series  increases  \>y  flx.dx\  this  quantity/1;*:  must  be 
constant  and  be  equal  to  ml  if  the  growth  of  F  x  up  to  its  given  limiting 
value  is  assumed  to  have  taken  place  in  the  same  way  as  the  growth 
from  this  point  up  to  F(x  +  h).  For  every  dh  therefore  Fx  in- 
creases by/1  x .  dh,  and  the  sum  or  the  integral  of  these  elementary 
increments,  viz.  h  ./1  x,  is  the  required  value  of  R^.  The  suppo- 
sition here  made  that/1  x  is  constant  and  equal  to  ml  may  not  hold : 
but  as  the  general  formula  must  include  the  cases  in  which  it  does 
hold  good,  this  second  term  which  we  have  found  may  be  accepted 
as  an  abiding  element  of  it. 

2.  Even  if  this  first  supposition  does  not  hold  yet  F(x  +  h]  is 
always  equal  to  Fx  -h  h  ./*  x  +  £.%>  if  we  understand  by  R%  the 


278  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof.         CBOOKII. 

positive   or   negative  supplement   still   necessary   for   the  complete 
measurement  of  the   true  value  of  the   function.     As  this    further 
addition  can  only  be  required  because  F x  does  not  increase  by  the 
same  amount  for  every  d h  or  dxy  L  e.  because  flx  Is  no  constant 
quantity,  but  dependent  upon  the  value  which  the  variable  x  has 
attained  at  each   stage?  it  is  plain   that  /"*  x  in  the    second  term, 
hfl  x  (=  JRL),  of  our  formula  still  denotes  only  the  fixed  particular 
value  which  the  general  function/"1  x,  now  to  be  conceived  as  variable, 
assumes  when  the  variable  ;v  assumes  its  limiting-  value  x  or  when 
the  variable  //.  is  equal  to  o.     We  cannot  therefore  retain  this  second 
term  // ./* '  a*  unless  to  each  of  the  terms/1  x .  dh  of  which  It  is  the 
sum  we  add  the  further  increase  exhibited  by  the  limiting  value  of 
fl  A*  contained  therein  for  each  increment  dh  of  the  variable  h.    For 
this  increase  again  we  make  the  simplest  supposition,  viz.  that  it  is 
die  same  for  each  d  h  and  Is  equal  to  w2  d  h.     This  m^  is  also  capable 
of  determination.     For  once   more    if  our  supposition  is  to  hold 
good  it  must  react  upon   F  x  also  ;    the  same  law  by  which  this 
function  is  now  to    increase   must   have    regulated  its   origin ;    the 
increase  of/1.!*  must  hnvc  been  the  same  for  each  d  x.  and  equal  to 
waf/»u.     Now/1  ,v  in  the  sum  of  a  continuous  series  whose  general 
term   is  f"  A*  .  d  x ;  this  then  is  the  very  increment  by  which  this 
series  or  its  sum/'.v  continuously  increases  each  time  that  ..v  is  in- 
creased by  f/a* ;  our  condition  is  fulfilled  therefore  if  we  put  down 
/*2  wv  as  constant  and  equal  to  /;/„ :  then  the  growth  of  F  x  beyond  its 
given  value  follows  the  same  law  which  regulated  its  formation  up  to 
that  point.     Its  total  increase  therefore  is  the  sum  of  two  series;  the 
first  of  these  consists  entirely  of  similar  terms  flx  .dh,  and  its  sum 
^z  A\ ;  the  second  represented  by  7^  contains  increasing  terms,  the 
first  term  /"^v .  dh  represents  the  first  new  increase  which  Fx  ex- 
hibits when  ihu  former  limiting  value  x  of  the  variable  x  is  increased 
by  the  first  d  h,  or  when  the  variable  //,  growing  from  o,  attains  its 
first  value  d  h  ;  each  successive  (;/  -h  *)t!i  term  *s  formed  by  adding 
the  same  increment  /""  .v .  d  h  to  the  value  of  the  n^1  term  ;  k  ./"2  x .  dh 
therefore  is  the  general  term  of  this  second  series,  and  is  what  \ve 
must  add  as  supplement  to  the  general  term  of  the  first  series.    The 
total  increase  of  FJC  is  therefore  the  sum  of  the  continuous  series 

h* 
(flx  -f  hf*x)dh,   or   //  ,fl  .v  +        •/"'-v;  the  second  term  of  this 

expression  is  the  required  value  of  Rr 

3.  If  a  given  function  F  x  were  of  such  a  nature  that  even  this 
second  supposition  was  not  enough  to  exhaust  its  growth,  we  should 


CHAPTER  v.i      .        The  Taylorian  Theorem,  279 

still  be  always  able  to  retain  the  terms  of  the  formula  already  found 
if  we  added  a  fresh  ^?3  to  supplement  them.  And  to  determine  this 
2?3  we  should  repeat  the  same  process  as  before.  We  could  only 
require  it  because  f2  x  also  is  not  constant,  but  is  dependent  upon 
the  value  which  x  has  attained  at  any  point  and  increases  with  it 
Let  us  assume  that  these  increments  are  at  least  constant  for  each 
dh  and  equal  to  ;#3  dh.  If  then  we  express/2  x  as  the  sum  of  a  con- 
tinuous series  whose  general  term  is  /z  x  .  dx>  we  have  but  to  put 
down  y3  a:  as  constant  and  equal  to  m&  and  we  thereby  make  sure 
that  our  general  condition  is  satisfied  and  that  Fx  has  grown  to  this 
its  given  limiting  value  in  the  same  way  as  it  is  now  to  grow  beyond 
it.  Now  R^  the  third  term  of  our  formula,  was  the  sum  of  a  con- 
tinuous series,  whose  general  term  is  h  .f*x;  dh;  if  then  we  form  a 
second  series  containing  the  additions  by  which  J?2  is  to  be  sup- 
plemented, h  ./3  x  .dh  will  be  the  amount  by  which  each  (n  +  i)tj* 
term  of  this  series  exceeds  the  wth  term;  fh.f^xdh  therefore  or 

h*1 
-  *f*x  is  the  general  term  of  this  series  Ry      We   obtain   the 

second  and  third  increment  of  F  x  therefore  by  summing  the  con- 
tinuous series  whose  general  term  is  now 


and  the  result  is  that 


R 


I  .  2  I  .  2  .  3 

4.  It  would  be  useless  to  carry  this  process  further  ;  it  will  readily 
be  seen  that  if  we  constantly  repeat  the  assumptions  here  made  the 
required  formula  will  assume  the  familiar  shape  of  the  Taylorian 
series,  viz. 


But  this  formula  would  be  of  little  value  if  the  very  assumptions  on 
which  it  rests  could  not  be  shown  to  be  the  only  admissible  assump- 
tions. It  would  be  beyond  all  doubt  logically  correct,  but  only  in  the 
sense  in  which  the  barrenest  of  tautologies  is  correct,  if  it  only  meant 
that  any  quantity  M  might  always  be  expressed  by  a  series  of  quite 
arbitrary  terms  provided  that  we  reserved  the  right  lo  add  a  remain- 
ing term  R  intended  to  make  good  all  the  errors  which  we  had  com- 
mitted by  making  M.  equal  to.  the  series.  The  formula  has  a 


280  The  discovery  of  grounds  of  proof. 

serviceable  meaning  only  when  we  do  not  need  this  compensating 
remainder,  i.  e.  when  we  can  prove  that  the  value  of  F(x  4-  K)  can 
be  completely  expressed  either  by  a  finite  number  of  the  developed 
terms,  or  by  a  series  of  such  terms  which  though  infinite  yet  converges 
so  as  to  admit  of  being  summed.  But  how  do  we  learn  that  this  is  the 
case  ?  From  the  fact  that  for  a  given  function  Fx  one  of  its  deriva- 
tive functions/"11  x  turns  out  upon  actual  calculation  to  be  equal  to  o, 
that  the  series  therefore  breaks  off  before  the  term  which  contains  it, 
we  plainly  can  infer  nothing  but  that  there  is  no  further  increase  tfFx 
that  can  be  got  by  the  further  development  of  the  series  we  have 
taken ;  the  inference  that  no  other  increase  can  occur  at  all  would 
imply  that  we  could  prove  that  this  very  mode  of  calculation  must 
include  all  increase  of  which  Fx  is  by  its  nature  capable.  Now  this 
point  we  think  no  longer  needs  special  demonstration ;  it  is  contained  in 
the  assumption  which  we  made  that  F 'x  does  not  increase  under  any 
other  condition  than  that  of  the  continuous  uniform  increase  of  ~r,  and 
that  its  mathematical  structure  remains  the  same  for  every  one  of  the 
values  of  x  which  have  been  reached.  If  then  a  function  grows  in  such 
a  way  that  for  every  dh  it  exhibits  the  same  constant  increase,  while  at 
the  same  time  every  dh  that  thus  enters  into  it  becomes  the  starting- 
point  of  a  new  constant  increase,  we  get  as  the  expression  of  its  total 
increase  through  "the  interval  h  an  infinite  series,  in  whose  terms  the 

kz         h™ 
one  set  of  factors  L  ? depend  for  their  form  simply  upon 

I. 2     I.  2. ..70  t   J       f.    . 

this  universal  form  of  growth  and  are  therefore  similar  in  form  for  all 
functions.  But  in  order  that  this  series  may  give  the  specific  growth 
of  each  particular  function  in  distinction  from  that  of  any  other,  the 
other  set  of  factors  fl  x>  f*  x>  f*x  are  added  to  these  universal 
factors  in  such  a  way  that  each  of  them  indicates  the  particular  niagni- 
tude3  dependent  in  each  case  upon  the  nature  of  the  given  F  x,  of 
the  first,  second,  third,  or  m^  increase  which  occurs  for  each  dh ;  the 
series,  as  the  complete  expression  for  F(x  4-  A),  closes  when  one  of 
these  factors  vanishes.  The  developed  terms  of  the  series  above 
given  were  therefore  not  arbitrarily  assumed;  what  we  meant  to  do 
•with  them  was  to  measure  F(x  +  h),  not  by  a  standard  foreign  to 
the  nature  of  this  function,  but  by  the  standard  supplied  by  the  func- 
tion itself  and  by  the  nature  of  its  assumed  growth  ;  if  by  this  standard 
the  value  of  F(x  -f  h)  can  be  expressed  in  a  finite  number  of  terms 
or  in  a  number  which  though  infinite  admits  of  being  summed,  there 
can  be  no  increase  derived  from  other  sources  which  would  have  to 
be  added  to  this.  For  however  a  function  may  grow,— provided 


oiAi'TKuv.]  The  Taylorian  Theorem.  281 

only  that  it  is  subject  at  no  stage  of  its  growth  to  the  Introduction  of 
new  conditions  from  without,— the  continued  repetition  of  the  as- 
sumptions above  made  (first  of  a  constant  increase,  then  of  a  con- 
stant positive  or  negative  increase  of  this  increase,  then  of  a  fresh 
constant  positive  or  negative  increase  of  this  second  increase,  and  so 
on)  will  enable  us  to  exhaust  the  total  value  of  the  resulting  growth 
just  as  certainly  as  we  are  enabled  to  express  any  curved  path  by 
properly  chosen  epicycles,  or  any  irrational  number  by  an  infinite 
scries  of  positive  and  negative  powers  often.  Taken  in  this  sense, 
as  a  mere  definition  of  growth,  the  series  remains  logically  valid  even 
when  it  is  rendered  mathematically  useless  by  divergence  for  a  de- 
monstrably  finite  increase  of  the  function.  If  it  were  not  so,  then, 
even  if  it  were  possible  to  restore  convergence  by  transforming  the 
function  without  altering  its  content,  the  result  it  yielded  could  only 
be  regurded  as  correct  in  fact,  supposing  it  could  be  shown  to  be 
correct,— it  could  not  be  regarded  beforehand  as  obviously  and  ne- 
cessarily correct :  such  transformation  only  serves  to  bring  within  the 
limits  of  calcukibility  what  holds  good  as  it  stands. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Fallacies  and  Dilemmas. 

240.  TRUE  conclusions,  as  Aristotle  has  observed,  can  be  correctly 
drawn  from  false  premises.  Every  Laplander  is  a  born  poet.  Homer 
was  a  Laplander,  and  therefore— by  the  first  figure— a  poet.  All 
parasitic  plants  have  red  flowers,  no  rose  has  red  flowers,  therefore — - 
by  the  second  figure — roses  are  not  parasitic  plants.  Metals  do  not 
conduct  electricity,  all  metals  are  non-fusible,  and  hence — according 
to  the  third  figure — non-fusible  substances  exist,  which  are  non- 
conductors of  electricity.  Alter  Laplander  into  Greek,  plants  which 
have  red  flowers  into  plants  which  have  exploding  seed-vessels,  and 
write  glass  for  metal,  and  in  each  example  one  premise  will  be  true, 
while  by  inserting  a  new  middle  term  in  each  case  you  may 
make  both  premises  true,  but  in  every  case  the  conclusion  follows 
with  neither  more  nor  less  validity.  Let  T  be  a  perfectly  true  pro- 
position, S  its  subject,  and  P  its  predicate ;  then  a  middle  term  M 
may  be  chosen  at  random  so  long  as  the  terms  are  arranged  in  both 
premises  on  the  model  of  an  Aristotelian  figure :  if  this  is  clone  the 
conclusion  T  will  always  follow  according  to  the  figure. 

We  shall  see  why  this  is  universally  true,  if  we  take  as  our  middle 
term  an  abstract  symbol  M3  instead  of  a  concrete  term :  thus,  all  M 
are  poets,  Homer  was  an  M;  all  parasitic  plants  are  M,  roses  are 
not  MI  all  M  are  non-conductors,  all  M  are  non- fusible.  What 
these  symbolic  premises  tell  us  is  the  relations  in  which  6"  and 
P  must  stand  to  some  middle  term,  if  their  conjunction  S  P  is  to  be 
valid  in  the  conclusion :  and  conversely  these  premises  tell  us  that 
given  any  middle  term  M  to  which  S  and  P  are  related  as  required, 
then  the  proposition  S  P  must  be  valid.  If  the  M  is  found  and  so 
both  the  required  premises  established,  then  SP  is  valid  not  merely 
in  fact  but  now  also  of  necessity;  on  the  other  hand  if  we  could  show 
that  there  exists  no  M  to  which  51  and  P  can  stand  in  the  requisite 


Petitio  Principii.  283 

relation,  we  shall  know  that  SP  was  impossible,  for  no  experience 
could  give  us  SP  as  a  fact :  but  if  we  have  merely  chosen  a  wrong 
Jfthen  the  case  is  different.  The  premises  we  have  chosen  will  not 
do,  but  that  is  no  reason  why  there  should  not  be  some  other  M,  the 
insertion  of  which  will  render  the  premises  correct  and  so  necessitate 
the  conclusion  SP.  If  again  we  have  correctly  drawn  a  conclusion 
S  P  and  that  conclusion  is  unsound,  there  must  be  something  false 
in  the  premises,  from  which  it  follows.  In  a  word  in  all  cases  where 
T  is  not  given  in  direct  perception,  but  deduced  from  premises,  what 
really  depends  on  the  correctness  of  those  premises  is  not  the  truth 
of  T,  but  only  our  insight  into  that  truth.  Without  correct  premises 
T  cannot  indeed  be  proved^  but  nevertheless  it  can  be  true  and  its 
truth  is  independent  of  any  errors  we  may  commit,  when  reflecting 
about  it,  and  subsists  even  when  conclusively  deduced  from  premises 
materially  false.  This  point  deserves  notice,  for  it  is  a  common 
mistake  in  reasoning  to  take  the  invalidity  of  the  proof  which  is 
offered  for  Tas  a  proof  of  the  falsehood  of  T7  itself,  and  to  confuse 
the  refutation  of  an  argument  with  the  disproof  of  a  fact. 

241.  A  proposition  T  is  valid  if  it  is  rightly  drawn  from  valid 
premises,  but  it  is  not  proved  unless  these  premises  are  valid  in- 
dependently of  itself.     If  T  itself  or   any   proposition  T1,  whose 
validity   presupposes   the   validity   of  T,   appears   disguised   in   the 
premises,  T  is  correctly  deduced,  but  is  not   proved  at  all.     This 
fallacy  is  called  petiiio  principii  or  circulus  in  demonstrando^  and  in  its 
naked  form  seems  easily  avoided.     Yet  it   is  frequently  committed, 
especially  where  the  conclusion  is   reached  by  a  long  chain  of  de- 
duction and  depends  on  the  constructions  of  the  scientific  imagination 
as  well  as  on  the  relations  of  abstract  ideas.     In  such  a  case  we  are 
often  able  to  deduce  T  with  form-al  accuracy  by  first  presupposing 
some  indirect  and  distant  consequence  of  T7,  which  consequence  of  T 
is  then  taken  as  an  independent  truth  from  which  T  follows.     There 
are  no  rules-  which  will  enable  us  to  avoid  this  mistake,  but.it  may  be 
well  to  remember  that  we  are  peculiarly  liable  to  it  when  we  attempt 
to  prove  by  a  direct  and  progressive  argument  propositions  which 
contain  some  final  and  underivative  element  of  our  knowledge.     In 
such  cases,  whether  the  element  be  a  necessity  of  our  thought  or  a 
fact  universally  valid  in  our  perception,  the  apagogic  and  regressive 
methods  alone  are  applicable. 

242.  The  second  kind  of  fallacy  is  called  Hysteron  Proteron.     It  is 
so  like  the  first  (the  argument  in  a  circle)  that  we  often  have  no  reason 
to  distinguish  it  therefrom.     It  consists  in  using  a  proposition,  which- 


2  84  Fallacies  and  Dilemmas.         '       [  BOOK  1 1. 

both  calls  for  and  admits  of  proof,  to  demonstrate  another,  which  not 
only  needs  none,  but  is  itself  actually  the  proper  ground  from  which 
to  prove  the  first  proposition.  We  are  told  for  example  that  God's 
will  is  holy,  that  the  moral  dictates  of  our  conscience  are  the  expres- 
sion of  the  divine  will  within  us,  and  therefore  they  too  are  holy  and 
binding  on  us.  But  we  cannot  help  objecting  that  if  the  holiness  and 
binding  force  of  our  moral  dictates  were  not  felt  by  us  as  an  inde- 
pendent fact  and  irrespectively  of  the  origin  of  those  dictates,  the 
argument  would  fall  to  the  ground.  Upon  other  grounds  no  doubt 
we  might  continue  to  believe  in  a  mere  supreme  being,  but  the  idea 
of  holiness  would  not  and  could  not  suggest  itself  to  us,  and  hence 
the  major  premise  of  the  argument  proposed  could  never  exist.  The 
transition  from  God's  will  to  our  conscience  is  therefore  no  proof; 
but  although  inadmissible  as  a  sequence  of  thought  it  is  perhaps  the 
right  way  of  giving  expression  to  the  truth.  For  in  a  great  many 
cases  that  which  is  in  fact  the  consequence  or  princifriatum  may  be  for 
us  a  means,  and  often  the  only  means,  of  knowing  that  which  in 
itself  is  the  prindpium  or  real  ground  of  the  possibility  of  the  former. 
When  we  have  acquired  knowledge,  by  way  of  induction  especially, 
and  are  exhibiting  the  result  systematically,  it  is  evident  that  we 
always  take  the  universal  statement,  which  we  really  know  only  from 
the  particulars,  and  placing  it  at  the  head  of  them  use  it  to  prove 
those  very  particulars.  Hence  it  is  of  importance  alongside  of  this 
method  to  employ  another  mode  of  exposition  which  shall  set  out 
the  items  of  our  knowledge  in  the  order  in  which  they  can  actually  be 
proved  by  the  help  one  of  another.  We  often  allow  ourselves  to 
commit  a  hysteron  proteron>  when  we  are  trying  to  prove  a  point, 
either  in  the  course  of  conversation,  or  in  the  rapid  reflexion  by  which 
we  seek  to  assure  ourselves  of  the  truth  of  some  proposition  which  we 
desire  to  employ  in  an  enquiry.  The  inference  in  these  cases  is 
ex  concessiS)  from  premises  whose  truth  we  presuppose  but  do  not 
discuss.  In  an  enquiry  the  implication  of  these  premises  with  the 
rest  of  our  knowledge  is  taken  as  a  sufficient  guarantee,  and  in 
conversation  we  may  find  it  easier  to  get  these  premises  admitted 
than  it  would  be  to  gain  acceptance  for  the  truth  from  which  in 
reality  they  follow. 

243.  The  commonest  fallacy  is  ambiguity  of  the  middle  term, 
quaternio  terminorum  or  fdllacia  falsi  medii  more  or  less  disguised. 
The  Greek  sophists  were  the  first  to  remark  the  chain  of  thought 
which  appears  in  the  syllogism  and  to  notice  its  linguistic  expression, 
and  a  great  number  of  these  fallacies  were  at  that  time  exhibited. 


CHAPTER vi]         Ambiguity  of  the  middle  term.  285 

They  are  classified  in  the  Aristotelian  work  on  the  subject,  but  many 
of  them  have  no  value  at  the  present  time,  even  in  the  light  of 
pleasantries.  There  are  yet  some  which  remain  as  abiding  sources  of 
danger,  and  among  these  we  may  signalise  the  double  fallacy  de  dido 
simplidter  ad  dictum  secundum  quid  and  de  dido  secundum  quid  ad 
dictum  simplidter.  Two  general  modes  of  fallacious  thought  are 
developed  by  the  habitual  commission  of  these  fallacies  and  illustrate 
them  on  a  grand  scale.  The  first  is  doctrinairism,  the  second 
narrow-mindedness.  The  doctrinaire  is  an  idealist,  who  refuses  to  see 
that  though  ideas  may  be  right  in  the  abstract,  yet  the  nature  of  the 
circumstances  under  which  and  of  the  objects  to  which  they  are  to  be 
applied  must  limit  not  only  their  practicability  but  even  their  binding 
force.  The  narrow-minded,  on  the  other  hand,  can  recognise  and 
esteem  no  truth  and  no  ideal,  even  the  most  universally  valid,  except 
in  that  special  form  to  which  they  have  become  accustomed  within  a 
limited  circle  of  thought  and  personal  observation.  Life  is  a  school, 
which  corrects  these  habits  of  rnind.  The  parochially-minded  man 
sees  things  persist  in  spite  of  himself  in  taking  shapes,  which  he 
considers  unprecedented,  but  he  finds  the  world  somehow  survives  it 
and  learns  at  last  that  a  system  of  life  may  be  excellent  and  precious, 
but  that  it  is  rash  from  that  to  argue  that  it  is  the  only  proper  mode 
of  orderly  existence.  And  the  enthusiast  for  ideals,  when  he  sees 
the  curtailment  which  every  attempt  at  realisation  inflicts  on  them, 
learns  the  lesson  which  the  disjunctive  theorem  might  have  taught 
him.  Every  universal  P  changes  in  the  act  of  being  applied  from 
something  that  held  simplidter  into  something  that  holds  secundum 
quid, — changes  from  P  to/1/  or/5 :  to  refuse  to  accept  it  in  any  one 
of  these,  which  are  its  only  possible  shapes,  is  to  ask  that  it  be  realised 
under  a  condition  which  even  logic  pronounces  impossible. 

244.  One  of  these  fallacies  consists  in  our  taking  a  P,  which  holds 
good  of  M  in  the  abstract,  and  asserting  it  of  M  under  new  con- 
ditions which  make  it  no  longer  applicable.  The  other  and  opposite 
mistake  transfers  to  M  taken  absolutely  predicates,  which  are  only 
true  of  M  under  certain  conditions.  In  both  we  have  an  ambiguity 
of  the  middle  term,  which  wavers  in  its  meaning  between  the  unlimited 
M  and  the  determinate  conditioned  M\  Examples  present  them- 
selves and  could  be  given  in  great  numbers,  but  there  is  one  worth 
dwelling  on  from  its  own  special  interest.  I  refer  to  the  question  of 
the  morality  of  lying.  On  principle  we  condemn  all  lies,  but  in 
practice  almost  everyone  allows  there  are  exceptions,  a  confession 
which  points  to  some  mistake  in  the  way  in  which  the  principle  is  laid 


og6  Fallacies  and  Dilemmas*  [BOOKII. 

down.     In  fact  the  particular  lies  which,  apart  from  the  influence  of 
education,  we  find  hateful  are  those  whose  object  is  to  make  elites 
chargeable  for  our  faults,  wantonly  to  do  mischief,  or  to  wound  ihc 
self-esteem  of  another  by  entangling  him  in  false  ideas  in  order  to 
exalt  ourselves.     It  is  these  secondary  features  that  rouse  our  indig- 
nation against  an  untruth,  and  it  is  only  these  that  make  us  call  an 
untruth  a  lie.     The  secundum  quid  and  its  influence  on  our  judgment 
is  quite  plain  in  these  cases,  and  on  the  strength  of  them  apart  from 
other  considerations  we  should  be  wrong  to  conclude  that  every 
falsehood,  when  the  intention  is  not  bad,  is  immoral.     Other  con- 
siderations do  however  exist.    We  communicate  with  our  fellows  in 
order  to  waken  in  all  alike  ideas  of  the  same  reality,  and  our  object 
in  doing  this  is  that  when  we  work  together  our  efforts  may  coincide, 
and  when  we  work  apart  we  may  avoid  collisions,  and  in  general 
\ve  desire  to  avoid  undertakings  which  are  not  in  accordance  with  the 
nature  of  things.     But  failure  would  be  certain,  if  everyone  made  it 
the  rule  to  lie ;  everywhere  the  truth  is  one,  but  possible  falsehoods 
are  innumerable.    The  interchange  of  falsehoods  therefore  ensures  no 
meeting-point  for  common  action,  so  that  however  good  our  inten- 
tions we  should  ever  be  missing  the  mark.    False  assertion  is  thus 
contrary  to  the  essence  of  assertion,  to  the  moral  end  which  all  com- 
munication aims  at,  and  therefore  we  set  it  down  broadly  as  a  thing 
in  itself  reprehensible.     The  untruths  of  poetry,  jesting  and  courtesy 
are  exceptions,  they  are  not  real  assertions,  and  on  these  points  we 
make  a  silent  reservation.    Here  comes  in  the  fallacy.    We  think 
that  we  can  now  unconditionally  assert  the  badness  of  falsehood ; 
that  we  have  got  rid  of  the  old  secundum  quid  and  have  got  the 
simplidter.     Unfortunately  the  simplidter  is  ambiguous ;  it  may  mean 
that   false-speaking  is   wrong  in  itself  and  can  be  justified  .  only 
secundum  quid^  i.e.  for  special  reasons  in  particular  cases.     But  it 
may  mean  that  falsehood  is  universally  bad,  so  that  no  special  con- 
siderations  can   ever  justify  it.     These  versions    of  the   simplidter 
practically  collide  in  our  consciences,  and  it  is  that  which  makes  our 
opinions  about  falsehood  so  self-contradictory.     The  logical  premises 
from  which  we  here   started  justify  only  the   first  version.     What 
we   started  from  was  that  universal  false-speaking  would  frustrate 
our  moral  aims  and  therefore  we  said  it  was  bad;   but  where  the 
aim  is  immoral  it  may  be  right  to  frustrate  it,  and  admitting   our 
premise  it  is  therefore  still  possible  that  a  lie  may  be  justified.     To 
prove  the  simplidter  in  the  sense  of  without  exception  other  premises 
would  be  wanted.    It  would  be  the  business  of  ethics  to  discuss  them. 


CHAPTER  vi.]          Illustrations  from  Mechanics,  287 

we  are  here  concerned  with  only  the  logical  side  of  the*  question,  and 
our  object  has  been  to  show  ft&kfalladafalsi  medii  arises  not  only 
through  confusion  of  simpliciter  and  secundum  quid,  but  also  that  the 
simplidier  itself  in  the  example  we  discussed  and  in  many  others 
beside  is  the  seat  of  an  ambiguity.  A  thing  true  simplidter  may  be  true 
ly  itself  alone  and  not  under  all  conditions,  i.  e.  it  may  be  true  only  in 
general,  but  not  always  and  in  all  particular  cases.  But  it  may 
equally  well  be  true  by  itself  in  the  sense  of  being  true  independently 
of  conditions  and  hence  always  and  necessarily  true  in  every  particular 
case ;  universally,  that  is,  not  merely  in  general. 

245.  We  may  consider  here  some  examples,  where  an  universal  pro- 
position is  extended  to  instances  which  can  formally  be  brought  under  it 
as  exceptional  cases,  but  where  the  conditions  which  make  it  applicable 
have  disappeared.  If  the  terms  of  the  proposition  are  variable  quantities, 
and  if  these  are  followed  to  their  limits  at  zero  or  infinity,  we  get  such 
examples.  With  a  lever  the  work  done  remains  the  same,  so  long  as 
the  product  w  I  of  the  weight  w  into  the  arm  /  is  unaltered.  Thus 
the  more  /  is  increased,  the  less  weight  w  is  wanted  to  do  the  same 
work ;  hence,  it  has  been  subtly  argued,  at  an  infinite  distance  from 
the  fulcrum,  a  mass  =  o  would  suffice  to  balance  any  weight  what- 
ever on  the  other  arm  of  the  lever;  and  this  conclusion  has  been 
urged  against  the  validity  of  the  general  formula.  It  is  natural  simply 
to  dismiss  the  idea  by  remarking  that  the  formula  contemplates  cases 
where  real  forces  are  applied  to  the  lever,  and  is  not  true  where  that 
condition  is  wanting.  This  removes  our  doubts  on  the  question  of 
fact,  but  hardly  settles  the  logical  problem.  For  we  do  not  always 
dismiss  these  cases;  we  have  no  hesitation  in  taking  cos  0=1, 
although  the  idea  of  a  cosine  is  in  its  origin  without  meaning  except  for 
a  real  arc  $,  from  the  extremity  of  which  a  perpendicular  may  be  drawn 
to  the  semi-diameter  through  the  initial  point,  and  we  pass  from  this 
case  to  the  limiting  value  <£>  =  o.  Now  since  the  law  of  the  lever  remains 
valid  at  every  stage  of  approximation  to  the  values  /  =  oc  and  w  =  o, 
it  would  be  well  if  it  admitted  of  being  interpreted  for  these  limiting 
cases  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  what  is  the  second  meaning  which  it 
assumes  after  the  first  becomes  inadmissible,  or  failing  this  it  would  be 
desirable  that  the  formula  itself  should  exhibit  its  own  invalidity. 
This  it  would  do  not  merely  by  producing  conclusions,  which  from 
a  point  of  view  external  to  the  formula  we  can  judge  to  be  incredible, 
but  still  more  by  becoming  destructive  of  itself.  The  force  which  a 
wedge  exerts  varies  inversely  with  the  breadth  of  its  back  ;  let  this  sink 
to  nothing  and  we  get  the  same  dilemma :  the  formula  .gives  an  infinite 


288  Fallacies  and  Dilemmas. 


[BOOK  II. 


effect,  while  the  effect  is  in  fact  nothing  at  all.  But  here  we  might 
answer,  though  more  in  jest  than  in  earnest,  that  as  a  matter  of  fact  it 
would  need  an  infinite  force  to  keep  a  geometrical  plane,  such  as  we 
have  now  reduced  our  wedge  to,  from  penetrating  a  block  of  wood : 
and  it  might  be  proved  with  equal  show  of  formal  rectitude  that  this 
would  not  require  the  block  to  be  cleft, 

I  cannot  at  present  as  decisively  settle  the  doubts  which  some  have 
about  the  lever;  though  I  should  deem  it  irrational  to  postpone  any 
consideration  of  the  principle  of  the  lever  till  one  had  solved  the 
problem  which  arises  in  connexion  with  an  arm  of  infinite  length,  for 
surely  it  is  intrinsically  absurd  to  think  of  the  mass  =  o  at  an  infinite 
distance  as  having  any  effect  at  all ;  the  very  idea,  as  it  admits  of  no 
interpretation  in  fact,  must  be  self-contradictory.  And  so  it  is,  for  the 
law  has  no  meaning  except  as  ascribing  to  a  definite  mass  w  at  a 
definite  distance  /  from  the  fulcrum  a  definite  effect,  winch  alters  as  / 
alters.  Now  why  should  a  mass  =  o  produce  an  effect  at  an  infinite 
distance  other  than  it  would  produce  at  any  finite  distance  we  like  to 
take  ?  How  would  the  case  of  a  mass  =  o  acting  at  the  end  of 
a  lever  of  infinite  length  differ  from  that  of  a  mass  =  o  acting  at  any 
other  point  in  the  lever,  or  from  a  third  case,  which  would  properly 
always  coexist  with  the  other  two,  viz.  that  in  which  we  suppose  the 
nothing  to  be  applied  at  all  points  in  the  lever  and— -what  is  more— - 
to  act  in"  any  direction  we  like.  Thus  the  attempt  to  retain  the  law 
of  the  lever  for  wl  =  o .  QC  fails,  not  merely  because  it  gives  incredible 
results,  but  because  the  law  loses  all  its  meaning  inasmuch  as  things 
become  indistinguishable  whose  distinction  is  essential  to  that  mean- 
ing. Other  paths  lead  to  the  same  conclusion,  wl  is  no  constant 
quantity,  so  that  w  should  vary  inversely  as  /,  but  the  effect  varies  for 
every  and  any  /  with  the  variation  of  w,  and  w  is  quite  free  to  vary  as 
it  will,  consequently  the  effect  becomes  =  o,  when  w  sinks  to  o,  no 
matter  what  /  may  be ;  it  follows  that  wl  =  o .  <x  can  only  have  the 
value  o  and  no  other. 

246.  There  is  another  fallacy  which  is  akin  to  that  of  too  wide  or 
too  narrow  definition  and  in  general  arises  from  it.  T  being  the 
point  to  be  proved,  the  mistake  consists  in  proving  too  much  or  too 
little  either  as  to  the  qualities  which  T  includes,  or  the  extent  to 
which  it  is  applicable.  The  conclusion  which  proves  too  much  may 
be  correct  and  may  err  simply  in  going  further  than  was  required, 
For  instance  you  may  prove  correctly  of  all  animals  what  you  wanted 
to  prove  only  of  men,  and  in  such  a  case  the  ground  is  valid  and  has 
simply  been  applied  more  generally  than  was  requisite.  But  in  other 


CHAPTER vi.]  Incomplete  Explan&tion*  289 

cases  a  conclusion  may  be  false  as  well  as  too  wide,  and  here  the 
mistake  lies  in  using-  a  wrong  ground  of  proof,  so  throwing  doubt 
upon  the  narrower  conclusion  instead  of  proving  it.  In  the  argument 
which  proves  too  little,  the  mistake  is  again  of  two  kinds.  In  the  first 
case  the  ground  of  inference  may  be  a  true  and  general  proposition 
quite  wide  enough  to  prove  T,  and  the  mistake  lies  in  taking  this 
ground  in  a  particular  form  which  will  not  do  so ;  it  is  corrected 
simply  by  using  the  ground  of  inference  in  the  general  form  in  which 
it  proves  T.  But  the  second  form  of  the  fallacy  is  more  serious. 
A  special  case  of  T  may  have  been  correctly  proved  from  certain 
premises,  but  those  premises  may  be  quite  inadequate  to  establish 
T  as  an  universal.  To  sum  up,  any  argument  which  does  not  exactly 
tally  with  the  proposition  to  be  proved  must  leave  us  in  doubt  as  to 
its  applicability ;  nihil  probat  qui  nimium  probat  is  as  true  as  nihil 
probat  qui  parum  probat. 

247.  It  would  be  easy  to  supply  illustrations,  but  I  prefer  to  con- 
sider another  fallacy,  that  of  incomplete  explanation.  This  is  often 
to  be  met  with  in  the  speculations  of  amateurs,  but  does  not  generally 
take  the  form  of  demonstration.  It  consists  in  assigning  a  general 
cause  for  some  phenomenon  without  enquiring  if  the  cause  assigned 
will  account  for  the  particular  modifications,  to  which  that  phenomenon 
is  subject.  It  is  perhaps  not  possible  to  deduce  the  law  of  the  per- 
sistence of  motion  from  any  more  universal  principle ;  but  at  any  rate 
the  vulgar  opinion  that  every  motion  ceases  with  the  lapse  of  time  is 
impossible  in  itself,  and  can  be  used  to  prove  the  law  by  a  redudio  ad 
absurdum*  That  diminution  of  motion  arises  from  real  obstacles 
existing  in  time  is  true  and  is  quite  conceivable,  but  it  is  quite  incon- 
ceivable how  mere  time  should  cause  a  diminution.  No  doubt  our 
own  bodily  movements  are  enfeebled  as  exhaustion  increases,  and  this 
might  suggest  to  us  the  idea  that  mere  lapse  of  time  can  destroy  all 
motion;  yet  we  are  undeceived  when  we  reflect  that  if  this  really  happens 
it  must  happen  either  earlier  or  later,  at  some  one  particular  time  or 
another,  but  that  there  exists  no  law  and  no  reason  to  connect  it  with 
any  particular  time.  For  assume  that  each  of  the  absolutely  similar 
moments  d  t  has  the  same  constant  consuming  power,  and  takes  from 
every  unit  of  mass  the  velocity  ^, — no  doubt  one  can  understand 
on  this  assumption,  how  it  is  that  swifter  motions  of  the  same  mass 
persist  longer  than  slower  motions.  But  on  the  other  hand  so  long 
as  q  is  a  finite  quantity  we  can  still  think  of  motions,  whose  velocity 
during  dt  regarded  as  one  period  is  less  than  g,  and  these  movements 
could  on  such  an  assumption  never  take  place  in  reality  at  all.  Or 

u 


2 go  Fallacies  and  Dilemmas.  c BOOK  n. 

shall  we  assume  that  the  consuming  force  of  time  is  proportional  to  the 
velocity  to  be  consumed  ?  Then  the  question  remains  as  to  the  ratio. 
But  I  refrain  from  any  further  hypotheses.  In  the  first  place  since 
time  and  mass  are  utterly  disparate  things  one  sees  at  once  how  hope- 
less it  is  to  try  to  determine  a  unit  of  mass,  for  which  q  would  measure 
the  arresting  power  of  a  timeV /.  In  the  second  place  we  can  equally 
conceive  of  innumerable  different  ratios  as  existing  between  the 
velocity  and  rate  of  retardation,  and  it  is  evident  that  mere  time  can 
of  itself  afford  us  no  reason  for  preferring  one  of  these  ratios  to 
another.  But  apart  from  all  this  there  is  an  objection  which  would 
render  all  such  attempts  idle.  For  supposing  that  a  time  dt  removes 
some  part  of  the  motion,  the  question  remains— whence  comes  the 
residue,  the  motion  which  has  not  been  removed  ?  It  is  clear  that  in 
case  of  this  residue  the  law  of  the  persistency  of  motion  has  been 
presupposed.  If  we  had  not  tacitly  presupposed  the  law  to  be  valid 
for  it,  we  should  have  to  say  that  the  whole  motion  was  arrested  by 
the  first  period  dt.  What  it  conies  to  then  is  this.  Either  motion 
does  not  take  place  at  all  but  vanishes  1  the  moment  it  gives  a  sign  of 
intending  to  endure  through  a  time  di\  or  if  motion  gradually 
diminishes,  the  law  of  persistence  is  the  primary  law,  and  the  diminu- 
tion of  motion  is  secondary,  the  result  of  external  obstacles.  These 
obstacles  we  shall  now  naturally  seek  only  in  what  is  homogeneous 
with  itself,  viz.  in  opposed  tendencies  to  motion. 

I  will  merely  call  the  reader's  attention  to  the  connexion  of  this 
proposition  (that  every  ground  of  explanation  must  establish  not 
merely  Tin  general,  but  also  the  possibility  of  its  modifications)  with 
the  doctrine  of  the  disjunctive  judgment.  It  would  take  us  too  far 
afield  into  mathematics,  if  we  followed  up  this  clue ;  it  is  sufficient 
just  to  notice  that  this  logical  requirement  has  found  a  special  and 
fruitful  expression  of  itself  in  the  principle  of  the  homogeneity  of  the 
functions  to  be  combined  in  an  equation. 

248.  Incomplete  disjunction  is  a  fallacy  which  often  occurs  in  col- 
lective and  indirect  arguments.  In  order  to  prove  T,  these  arguments 
attempt  either  to  show  that  that  holds  in  all  particular  cases  of  J7, 
which  it  is  desired  to  affirm  universally,  or  to  establish  Tas  the  sole 
remaining  possibility  by  first  disproving  all  cases  of  non-77.  Neither 
task  is  very  easy.  In  practical  life  especially  we  often  find  it  very 
difficult  in  laying  down  a  rule  to  examine  beforehand  all  the  possible 
cases  to  which  it  may  be  applied  and  to  see  whether  the  proposed 
regulation  would  always  be  desirable  or  tolerable ;  and  it  is  common 

1  [Compare  Metaph.  §  163.] 


CHAPTER  vi )  Incomplete  Disjunction.  291 

again  to  find  that  after  considering  every  course  which  seems  con- 
ceivable, and  after  concluding  all  but  one  to  be  impossible,  a  momen- 
tary inspiration  will  suggest  some  other  way  out  of  the  difficulty, 
which  we  had  quite  overlooked.  In  theory  the  most  fruitful  source  of 
the  fallacy  is  the  dominant  influence  of  some  one  order  of  ideas. 
Instead  of  setting  out  all  the  possible  alternatives  we  are  led  silently 
to  the  one  which  consorts  best  with  our  own  one-sidedness.  For 
instance  our  sensations  are  subjective  states  excited  in  us ;  it  is  easy 
to  show  this ;  and  further  according  to  a  view  now  widely  accepted 
the  forms  of  space  and  time  in  which  we  arrange  the  manifold  matter 
of  sensation  are  subjective  also,  they  are  modes  in  which  our  minds 
perceive.  From  this  point  we  are  easily  led  on  to  regard  the  idea  of 
unknown  things  and  processes  underlying  phenomena  as  a  creation 
of  our  mind,  which  is  compelled  by  its  constitution  to  adopt  this 
means  of  giving  unity  to  its  singular  perceptions.  The  subjectivity 
of  all  elements  of  knowledge  is  thus  established,  and  finally  we  venture 
on  the  inference  that  therefore  there  is  no  objective  real  world  an- 
swering to  the  world  of  our  ideas.  But  the  inference  is  false :  for 
supposing  that  this  real  world  does  exist,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  things 
would  be  just  the  same  to  us  as  we  find  them.  If  real  elements  exist 
they  can  never  pass  into  us  bodily :  they  can  do  nothing  but  excite 
in  us  sensations  and  ideas,  and  these  though  caused  by  external 
impressions  and  our  reaction  against  them  would  still  be  a  creation  of 
our  subjective  nature.  An  objective  space  may  exist  or  may  not 
exist,  but  at  all  events  the  perception  of  it  must  be  the  product  of  our 
subjective  faculties.  So  too  with  causality:  whether  the  law  has  objective 
validity  or  no,  in  either  case  equally  we  are  forced  to  recognise  it 
only  so  far  as  we  think  it  and  perceive  its  content  to  be  in  harmony 
with  the  laws  of  our  thinking.  Thus  we  see  the  complete  subjectivity 
of  all  the  elements  of  our  knowledge  proves  nothing  whatever  as  to 
the  existence  or  non-existence  of  an  objective  reality.  The  best  pre- 
servative against  this  kind  of  fallacy  is  the  existence  of  hostile  opinion. 
It  is  indispensable,  beside  developing  our  own  doctrine,  to  familiarise 
ourselves  with  ideas  which  proceed  from  points  of  view  opposed  to 
our  own. 

249.  Sophisms  are  distinguished  from  paralogisms.  The  latter  are 
involuntary  mistakes  in  inference,  while  the  former  are  intentionally 
fallacious  arguments,  whose  object  is  to  confuse  or  deceive.  It  is 
thus  obvious  that  in  cases  where  the  intention  is  doubtful  we 
cannot  tell  a  paralogism  from  a  sophism.  Zeno's  arguments  against 
the  reality  of  motion  may  be  taken  as  either,  I  shall  not  here  discuss 

U  2 


292  Fallacies  and  Dilemmas.  [BOOK  n. 

those  real  difficulties  in  the  idea  of  motion  which  they  touch  upon, 
but  will  exhibit  the  arguments  as  examples  of  fallacies  that  are  difficult 
to  classify.  The  first  argument  tries  to  prove  that  an  arrow  in  flight 
is  at  rest.  It  starts  with  the  assumption  that  time  consists  of  indi- 
visible moments,  and  then  infers  that  the  arrow  cannot  move  in  any 
one  of  these  moments.  For  if  it  moves,  it  must  now  be  at  one  place 
and  then  at  another,  but  in  each  indivisible  moment  there  is  no  now 
and  then,  no  before  or  after.  Therefore  the  arrow  is  at  rest  in  each, 
and  if  in  each  then  in  all ;  hence  it  is  always  at  rest.  To  this  we  may 
answer  simply  that  rest  also  is  impossible  unless  a  thing  is  at  one  and 
the  same  place  both  now  and  then,  both  before  and  after;  and  since 
in  an  indivisible  moment  there  is  no  before  or  after  the  arrow  can  no 
more  rest  in  it  than  move.  And  this  conclusion  accords  with  the 
ordinary  theory  of  motion.  So  long  as  dt  is  a  length  of  time  the 
arrow  passes  in  it  through  a  small  space  v.  d /,  but  as  soon  as  ever  dt 
ceases  to  be  a  quantity  and  becomes  a  mere  dividing  point  in  time 
with  its  definite  position  in  the  series  of  time — then  no  doubt  in  d't 
the  arrow  passes  through  no  space  at  all ;  still  it  does  not  rest  in  it, 
but  goes  through  it  with  a  velocity  v.  But  apart  from  this  objection 
what  right  has  Zeno  to  maintain  that  in  each  successive  moment  of  the 
arrow's  flight  it  is  at  rest  in  the  same  place  as  it  was  at  rest  in  before  ? 
There  is  nothing,  I  admit,  in  the  idea  of  a  moment  or  an  arrow  as 
such  from  which  the  idea  of  a  change  of  place  could  follow.  But  it 
surely  is  involved  in  an  arrow's  flight.  No  doubt  there  is  a  difficulty 
as  to  the  nature  of  that  impulse  which  makes  a  body  in  motion  dif- 
ferent1 at  every  moment  from  a  stationary  body,  even  if  the  moment 
be  conceived  as  indivisible.  And  this  is  the  point  against  which  a 
sophism  might  have  been  directed  with  effect.  But,  failing  this  and 
failing  any  proof  that  velocity  could  not  exist,  Zeno  had  no  right  to 
start  with  the  flying  of  an  arrow, — so  assuming  velocity, — and  then  in 
his  proof  to  drop  the  idea  out  of  sight.  All  his  argument  shows,  if 
you  take  it  as  it  stands,  is  that  rest  is  not  motion  and  that  motion  can 
never  be  compounded  out  of  rest.  Had  he  retained  the  idea  of  velocity 
Zeno  could  at  least  have  deduced  such  a  successive  change  of  place 
as  proceeded  by  jumps  from  moment  to  moment ;  the  conception  of 
continuous  motion  he  could  not  get  at  so  long  as  he  held  by  the 
notion  that  time  is  made  up  of  indivisible  moments, 

Another  of  his  arguments  was  that  if  the  snail  has  a  start  the  swift- 
footed  Achilles  can  never  catch  it  up,  inasmuch  as  before  ever  he  can 
overtake  it  he  must  first  reach  the  place  it  has  just  left  before  and  so 
1  [Compare  Metaphysic,  §  171.] 


CHAPTER  vi.]       Zend s  Paradoxes  about  Motion,  293 

on  for  ever.  The  argument  might  be  simplified  by  omitting  the  fact 
of  the  snail's  movement,  which  for  the  particular  paradox  is  super- 
fluous. Did  the  snail  remain  still  Achilles  would  yet  never  reach 
it.  Nothing  which  is  in  motion — this  is  the  real  basis  of  the 
argument— can  ever  come  to  the  end  of  any  given  space  however 
small.  To  do  so  it  must  first  accomplish  half  the  given  distance, 
then  half  the  remainder,  then  half  the  remaining  quarter  and  so 
on  for  ever,  so  as  never  to  reach  the  end  of  the  space.  The  argu- 
ment assumes  that  the  halving  process  can.  go  on  for  ever  ad 
mfoiiium,  and  so  presupposes  that  -the  space  is  infinitely  divisible  or 
already  consists  of  an  infinite  number  of  parts.  It  further  assumes 
that  an  indivisible  moment  of  time  is  required  for  the  transition  from 
one  point  of  space  to  another  ;  and  so  concludes  that  an  infinite 
number  of  moments  must  elapse  before  any  space  whatever  is  got 
over,  since  any  space  contains  an  infinite  number  of  parts.  The  con- 
clusion, if  we  admit  the  premises,  is  so  far  quite  correct ;  but  it  is 
quite  an  arbitrary  assertion  that  this  aggregate  of  infinitely  numerous 
moments  would  form  an  infinite  length  of  time ;  seeing  that  they  are 
indivisible  each  of  them  must  contain  no  sooner  or  later,  unless,  as 
Zeno  does  here,  we  foist  in  between  every  two  moments  a  real  lapse 
of  time  or  represent  these  moments  as  following  each  other  at  definite 
intervals  in  a  sort  of  secondary  time,  which  we  imagine  as  filling  up 
the  background.  -  It  is  not  even  necessary  to  obj  ect  to  Zeno,  what 
Aristotle's  remark  on  the  subject  amounts  to?  that  (according  to  our 
modes  of  expression)  the  integral  of  an  infinite  series  of  quantities  con- 
tinuously passing  into  one  another  may  still  be  a  definite  finite  quantity, 
and  that  therefore  the  aggregate  of  moments  of  time  may  be  a  finite 
length  of  time.  The  indivisible  moments  of  time  are  conceived  by 
Zeno  not  only  as  being  each  for  itself  without  quantity,  but  also  as  so 
detached  from  each  other,  that  there  is  no  question  of  a  transition,  in 
virtue  of  which  they  would  be.come  constituents  of  time  at  all.  The 
sum  of  all  these  nothings  is  therefore  itself  nothing .;  it  is  only  an  un- 
warranted complaisance  on  the  part  of  our  better-instructed  fancy 
which  allows  it  to  be  passed  off  on  us  as  a  quantity  at  all  and  then  as 
an  infinite  quantity.  Achilles  requires  no  doubt  an  infinite  number  of 
moments  of  time  to  get  from  a  to  £,  but  these  do  not  make  up  any 
length  of  time  at  all ;  it  would  be  truer  to  say  that  Achilles  consumes 
no  time  at  all  than  that  he  consumes  an  infinite  time ;  indeed  it 
remains  hard  to  say  what  end  is  served  in  this  connexion  by  the 
consumption  of  indivisible  moments  of  time  or  what  it  means. 

250*  Besides  these  fallacies  the  ancients  have  handed  down  to  us 


2  94  Fallacies  and  Dilemmas.  [  BOOK  n. 

many  interesting  dilemmas,  i.  e.  conjunctions  of  thoughts  from  which 
follow  opposite  conclusions,  equally  necessary  and  equally  impossible. 
One  dilemma  nicknamed  Pseudomenos  dates  from  Epimenides,  who 
being  a  Cretan  himself  asserted  that  every  Cretan  lies  as  soon  as  he 
opens  his  lips.  If  what  he  asserted  was  true,  he  himself  lied,  in  which 
case  what  he  said  must  have  been  false ;  but  if  it  is  false  it  is  still  pos- 
sible that  the  Cretans  do  not  always  lie  but  lie  sometimes,  and  that 
Epimenides  himself  actually  lied  on  this  occasion  in  making  the 
universal  assertion.  In  this  case  there  will  be  no  incongruity  between 
the  fact  asserted  and  the  fact  that  it  is  asserted,  and  a  way  out  of  the 
dilemma  is  left  open  to  us.  Not  so  however  if  we  drop  Epimenides 
and  the  Cretans  and  instead  of  these  two  subjects,  one  of  which  is 
only  contained  in  the  other  but  not  identical  with  it,  put  an  identical 
subject :  '  I  lie  now.5  If  my  assertion  is  true,  i.  e.  if  I  am  lying,  what 
I  assert  is  false,  and  I  am  not  lying.  But  what  I  assert  is  that  my 
assertion  is  untrue  :  if  it  is  false  to  say  that  my  assertion  is  untrue,  my 
assertion  becomes  true  again  and  I  am  lying,  and  the  whole  chain  of 
self-destructive  consequences  begins  afresh.  The  reason  of  them  is 
easily  detected.  Logically  of  course  what  is  asserted  is  true  or  false, 
quite  apart  from  the  fact  of  its  being  asserted ;  it  may  be  asserted  or 
it  may  not :  but  the  only  sort  of  truth  or  untruth  which  the  assertion 
can  have,  is  what  it  acquires  through  the  truth  or  untruth  of  what  is 
asserted,  which  is  independent  of  it.  Thus  we  get  contradictions, 
some  of  which  are  formally  insoluble,  when  what  is  asserted  is  such 
as  to  involve  something  in  regard  to  the  fact  of  its  assertion  which 
makes  the  assertion  impossible  or  untrue.  The  difficulty  vanishes  if 
instead  of  saying :  I  lie,  we  say :  I  lied.  Just  as  little  can  we  say  in 
the  present  tense,  I  am  silent,  though  we  can  quite  well  use  the  future, 
I  will  be  silent,  for  then  our  assertion  refers-  to  another  fact  than  itself, 
to  a  fact  which  is  not  in  conflict  with  it. 

There  are  many  other  instances  of  the  sort,  though  none  so  classical 
as  Pseudomenos.  If  a  person  answers  yes,  when  he  is  asked  if  he 
be  asleep,  he  sets  his  assertion  in  the  same  sort  of  conflict  with  what 
he  asserts ;  so  does  a  person,  who  calls  out  to  an  unwelcome  visitor, 
that  he  is  not  at  home,  Lastly  there  are  other  cases  resembling  these, 
cases  in  which  one  subject  has  in  an  impossible  manner  to  form  both 
terms  at  once  of  a  relation,  which  can  only  exist  between  two  different 
subjects :  Jean  Paul's  dwarf  for  instance,  who  only  reached  up  to  his 
own  knees,  not  to  mention  other  people's;  or  the  inscription  over  the 
elephant's  booth  :  this  is  the  biggest  elephant  in  the  world,  itself  ex- 
cepted  j  or  lastly  we  may  instance  Munchausen's  kind  service  to  him- 


CHAPTER vi]         The  Dilemma  of  Pseudomenos.  295 

self,  when  he  pulled  himself  out  of  the  bog  by  his  own  hair.  Equally 
curious  is  the  old  dilemma  of  the  crocodile :  quoth  the  brute  to  the 
wailing  mother :  I  give  you  back  your  child,  if  you  tell  me  truly 
whether  I  am  going  to  give  it  back  or  no.  It  would  all  be  plain- 
sailing  had  the  mother  only  to  guess,  if  the  crocodile  intends  at  that 
moment  to  give  or  not  give  it  back.  If  she  guesses  right,  there  is 
nothing  to  prevent  the  child  being  restored  according  to  agreement ; 
for  even  were  it  true,  that  the  crocodile  does  not  just  then  intend  to 
restore  it,  still,  if  her  guess  is  that  he  does  not  intend,  he  may  yet 
fulfil  the  contract  by  changing  his  intention  or  giving  it  up  against  his 
will.  But  if  she  guesses  wrong,  she  loses  all  claim  to  have  her  child 
back  again.  For  whatever  may  have  been  the  animal's  real  intention 
— which  she  guessed  wrong — he  need  not  in  his  actions  bind  himself 
by  his  then  intention ;  he  need  only  observe  the  terms  of  the  contract, 
and  this  now  that  she  has  guessed  wrongly  forbids  him  to  return  the 
child.  But  the  question  asked  of  the  mother,  whether  she  is  going  to 
get  her  child  back  or  no,  need  not  refer  to  the  animal's  intentions ; 
we  may  conceive  of  this  future  as  a  predestined  to -come,  so  that  in 
itself  it  is  already  a  settled  matter,  which  of  the  two  possible  events  is 
going  to  occur.  Interpreting  the  question  in  this  way,  we  get  an 
insoluble  perplexity  for  obvious  reasons  ;  for  we  cannot  without  ab- 
surdity make  an  issue,  which  unconditionally  impends,  depend  on  a 
condition,  whose  fulfilment  would  necessarily  be  as  ineffectual  to  bring 
about — as  its  non-fulfilment  to  bar — the  inevitable.  There  is  thus  but 
One  way  out  of  the  dilemma.  If  the  restoration  of  the  child  is  the 
event  which  is  going  to  occur,  and  if  the  mother  guesses  this,  all  will 
end  happily,  yet  not  because  her  assertion  in  any  way  conditioned  the 
happy  result :  her  assertion  in  itself  is  quite  ineffectual ;  it  has  only 
chanced  to  agree  with  the  inevitable  result  and  the  terms  of  the  bargain* 
If  she  had  made  any  other  answer,  that  would  only  have  served  to 
reveal  more  .plainly  the  utter  impotence  of  a  bargain,  which  because 
it  tries  to  condition  the  unconditioned  must  of  necessity  be  violated. 
But  the  old  form  of  the  dilemma  starts  from  yet  another  supposition, 
different  from  both  of  these :  it  supposes  that  it  is  not  determined 
beforehand  which  of  the  two  alternatives  is  going  to  occur,  i.  e.  whether 
the  child  is  going  to  be  given  back  or  not ;  that  is  to  be  settled  by 
what  the  mother  says.  Now  logic  teaches  that  in  any  hypothetical 
judgment  the  validity  of  the  consequent  rests  on  that  of  the  antecedent ; 
but  the  latter  must  be  independently  fixed  and  unambiguous  and  must 
neither  in  its  meaning  nor  its  validity  be  conditioned  by  the  meaning 
and  validity  of  the  consequent.  In  the  case  before  us  this  absolute 


296  Fallacies  and  Dilemmas.  [BOOKII. 

requirement  is  contravened.  For  the  condition  fixed  upon  here  is 
not  an  assertion  made  by  the  mother  but  the  truth  of  her  assertion, 
and  further  not  the  truth  of  an  assertion  which  refers  to  some  third 
fact  independent  of  the  future  result  and  which  could  therefore  be 
true  or  untrue  no  matter  what  this  result  may  be ;  on  the  contrary 
what  she  asserts  is  that  this  result  will  either  occur  or  not  occur, — 
a  result  which  is  connected  with  no  other  conditions  at  all, — and  so 
its  own  truth  depends  on  the  very  thing,  which  should  depend  on  it. 
Consequently  on  this  supposition  as  on  the  former  there  is  only  one 
case  which  logically  admits  of  a  satisfactory  issue ;  the  mother  must 
answer,  you  are  going  to  restore  my  child ;  and  then  its  actual  restor- 
ation at  once  makes  her  answer  true  and  fulfils  the  agreement.  In 
that  case  the  issue  is  a  happy  one,  but  it  was  not  conditioned  by  the 
answer  she  gave.  Suppose  after  all  the  crocodile  does  not  give  back 
the  baby,  the  very  fact  of  his  not  doing  so  makes  her  answer  a  false 
one  and  at  the  same  time  the  animal  becomes  justified  according  to 
the  terms  of  the  agreement  in  not  giving  it  back.  If  however  the 
mother  is  so  unfortunate  as  to  answer :  you  will  not  give  it  back, 
*  then '  the  crocodile  must  say  '  I  cannot  give  it  back ;  the  agreement 
forbids  me  to,  since  if  I  did  your  answer  would  become  a  false  one ; 
no  more  could  I  restore  the  child  even  if  your  answer  could  be  correct, 
seeing  that  by  the  very  fact  of  my  returning  it  it  would  become  false/ 
The  mother  then  objects  :  ( you  must  in  any  case  give  it  me;  on  the 
score  of  the  agreement,  if  my  answer  was  correct ;  but  no  less  if  it 
was  incorrect ;  for  it  would  become  a  correct  answer,  if  you  refused 
to  give  it  back.'  There  is  no  way  out  of  this  dilemma;  as  a  matter 
of  fact  however  both  parties  rest  their  cases  on  unthinkable  grounds ; 
for  the  answer  really  given  can  as  little  be  true  or  untrue  independently 
of  the  actual  result  as  could  the  answer  she  might  have  given,  an 
answer  which  only  differs  from  this  in  being  more  fortunate. 

The  dilemma  of  Protagoras  and  Euathlus  rests  on  a  similar  misuse 
of  hypothetical  conjunctions  of  thoughts.  Euathlus  is  to  pay  for  the 
instruction  he  has  received  as  soon  as  he  wins  his  first  case ;  but  as 
he  engages  in  no  suits,  Protagoras  gets  nothing  and  sues  him  on  that 
account.  Now  whether  Euathlus  wins  or  loses  this  suit,  the  verdict 
must  in  any  case  either  oblige  him  to  do  that  which  the  contract 
releases  him  from  doing  or  release  him  from  doing  that  which  the 
contract  obliges  him  to  do.  Various  solutions  of  the  difficulty  have 
been  attempted  on  the  supposition  that  Euathlus  is  allowed  to  win 
this  his  first  suit  because  he  has  won  no  previous  suit,  and  so  had  not 
yet  become  obliged  to  pay.  It  was  then  open  to  Protagoras  to  in- 


CHAPTER vi.]  Classical  Dilemmas*  297 

stitute  a  fresh  suit,  which  must  have  this  time  led  to  his  pupil  being 
condemned  to  pay.  This  would  be  shifting  an  absurdity  off  logic,  in 
order  to  make  a  present  of  it  to  jurisprudence.  I  will  not  anticipate 
the  decision  of  the  latter,  but  I  suspect  it  would  say  that  in  acting 
as  he  did  Euathlus  had  fraudulently  prevented  a  certain  condition  from 
being  rea!ised3  according  to  which  he  would  have  been  forced  to  fulfil 
an  obligation.  If  therefore  it  could  fix  a  date,  after  which  no  other 
interpretation  could  be  put  on  his  conduct  than  that  it  was  fraudulent, 
then  though  Protagoras  no  doubt  could  not  base  a  suit  on  the  con- 
tract, the  law  might  well  go  behind  it  and  taking  its  stand  on  the 
obligation,  under  which  Euathlus  really  put  himself  by  receiving  the 
instruction,  condemn  him  to  pay,  just  as  if  the  ambiguous  agreement 
had  never  existed* 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Universal  propositions  as  derived  from  perceptions* 

251.  THE  Ideas  which  we  ourselves  have  put  together  are  com- 
pletely open  to  our  inspection  and  we  can  review  their  content  and 
manner  of  conjunction.     And  hence  the  conclusions  we  draw  from 
them  are  necessary  and  the  process  of  conclusion  is  proof  or  demon- 
stration, the  essence  of  which  is  to  descend  from  the  more  to  the  less 
universal  and  starting  from  a  general  truth  to  end  with  a  particular 
application  thereof.     But   the   conjunctions   of  phenomena  in   the 
world  outside  us  do  not  carry  on  their  faces  the  universal  laws  and 
conditions  of  their  connexion.     They  are  individual  experiences  to 
be  severally  expressed  in  particular  propositions,  and  though  each 
embodies  an  universal  principle,  yet  the  path  up  to  that  principle 
must  be  a  matter  of  search,     The  simplest  form  of  this  ascent  in 
thought  is  a  process  with  which  we  have  become  familiar  as  the 
inductive  syllogism,  and  hence  it  is  the  custom  in  our  day  to  collect 
into  one  body  the  numerous  operations  which  assist  us  in  ascending 
to  generals  and  to  call  this  inductive  logic  and  to  set  it  against  the 
deductive  or  demonstrative  logic  along  with  much  disparagement  of 
the  latter.     Such  disparagement  rests  on  a  mistake.     The  inductive 
methods  it  is  certain  are  the  most  effectual  helps  to  the  attainment  of 
new  truth,  but  it  is  no  less  certain  that  they  rest  entirely  on  the  results 
of  deductive  logic.     It  is  the  theory  of  the  validity  of  syllogisms,  the 
convertibility  and  contraposition  of  judgments,  and  of  the  forms  of 
proof,  that  is  the  source  of  each  provision  and  precaution  by  which  so 
far  as  may  be  we  secure  each  step  of  our  paths  as  we  ascend  by  in- 
duction from  given  perceptions  to   the  universal  laws  of  the   real 
world.  • 

252.  The  first  step  of  this  ascent  is  barred  we  are  told  by  an  in- 
superable obstacle.    Experience  we  are  told  cannot  give  us  universal 
cognitions,  and  in  one  sense  no  doubt  this  well-worn  saying  is  true : 
but  if  we  take  it  to  assert  a  difference  in  validity  between  two  sources 


Meaning  of  a  Crucial  Experiment.  299 

of  knowledge,  experience  on  the  one  hand  and  an  a  priori  certitude 
on  the  other,  then  the  saying  is  true  no  longer  and  is  the  opposite  of 
truth.  Every  experience,  whose  contents  in  their  connexion  can  be 
expressed  without  deficit  or  surplusage  in  the  form  £  is  P,  must  ipso 
facto  rank  as  an  universal  judgment,  even  if  this  experience  stands 
absolutely  alone.  The  law  of  identity  guarantees  that  if  the  same  S 
were  once  more  perceived  in  a  second  experience  it  would  be  im- 
possible that  the  same  predicate  P  should  be  absent  or  should  be  re- 
placed by  some  other  predicate  Q.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  no  less 
true  that  experience  does  not  directly  present  us  with  perceptions 
which  fulfil  this  condition.  Our  perceptions  do  not  give  us  a  subject 
S  in  conjunction  with  a  predicate  P  and  nothing  more  or  less  than 
this  subject  and  this  predicate.  The  real  and  true  subject  with  which 
the  phenomenon  we  observe  is  essentially  connected  is  not  S  but  S. 
It  has  elements  s  absolutely  necessary  to  the  production  of  the  phe- 
nomenon and  which  notwithstanding  we  do  not  perceive.  What  we 
do  observe,  S,  is  a  residue  and  what  is  more  an  impure  residue,  for  it 
comes  to  us  inclissolubly  joined  with  elements  cr,  which  have  nothing 
whatever  to  do  with  the  production  of  the  phenomenon.  It  is  the 
same  with  the  predicate.  The  true  predicate  which  attaches  to  S,  the 
true  subject,  is  II  and  it  we  do  not  perceive.  It  has  features  p  which 
are  invisible,  and  the  residue  P  which  we  do  perceive  is  bound  up 
with  other  circumstances  IT,  the  results  of  conditions  which  have  no 
influence  on  the  matter  in  question  though  they  are  operative  at  the 
same  time.  A  complete  expression  of  the  actual  fact  demands  addi- 
tion and  subtraction  and  would  run  thus  S  +  s  —  cri&P  +  p  —  nor 
%  is  FI,  while  our  first  defective  observation  set  down  S  is  P  as  the 
fact.  Only  for  the  complete  proposition  S  is  II  (supposing  this  were 
given  in  a  peculiarly  fortunate  perception)  would  universal  validity  be 
guaranteed  by  the  law  of  identity, — not  for  the  incomplete  proposition 
S  is  P,  which  puts  together  what  is  not  really  thus  connected. 

253.  It  is  important  to  bear  this  in  mind,  for  apart  from  it  we 
cannot  understand  a  right,  which  science  claims  and  which  is  es- 
sential to  her  development.  If  the  question  is  as  to  a  predicate  IT, 
which  we  do  not  yet  know  and  which  we  expect  to  find  in  a  subject 
S,  then  wherever  we  are  sure  that  we  perceive  this  subject  2)  whole 
and  complete,  and  nothing  else  but  2,  we  are  equally  sure  that  a 
single  observation,  which  acquaints  us  with  IT,  has  an  universal  im- 
port and  that  in  every  possible  case,  where  the  same  S  is  repeated, 
the  same  II  must  unalterably  present  itself.  When  the  chemist  is 
instituting  an  experiment,  if  he  only  can  be  sure  that  he  is  dealing 


3<DO       Universal  Inductions  from  Perception.      [BOOK-IT, 

with  one  definite  substance  and  applying  to  it  one  definite  reagent  and 
has  excluded  the  possibility  of  any  foreign  conditions  influencing  the 
result  he  is  going  to  observe,  then  he  never  doubts  that  the  reaction 
observed  in  this  single  experiment  will  exhibit  itself  identically  when- 
ever the  same  circumstances  are  repeated.  He  at  once  assigns  to  a 
single  perception  the  rank  of  an  universal  truth.  When  the  physicist 
undertakes  a  .measurement  he  takes  care  first  of  all  to  eliminate  the 
sources  of  error,  with  which,  as  he  well  knows,  he  is  beset,  but  when 
once  he  has  purified  his  observation  he  never  dreams  of  regarding 
the  fact  that  it  comes  ultimately  from  sensible  experience  as  a  reason 
for  accounting  it  valid  merely  for  this  one  occasion.  It  never  enters 
into  his  head  that  under  similar  conditions  the  same  object  might 
perhaps  on  another  occasion  have  a  different  magnitude.  We  need 
not  enlarge  on  this  head.  Once  suppose  that  a  single  observed  case 
is  valid  only  for  itself  and  not  for  its  repetitions  in  like  cases — that 
the  record  of  an  instrument  is  correct  for  the  one  occasion  in  which 
it  is  noted  and  not  equally  correct  for  a  second  occasion  under 
identical  circumstances — once  suppose  that  with  like  object  and  like 
conditions  a  different  result  may  be  true,  and  there  is  an  end  to  all 
possibility  of  developing  universal  truths  from  experience;  there  is 
an  end  not  merely  to  the  discovery  of  laws  but  to  the  use  of  the 
word  '  law '  with  any  intelligible  meaning.  The  art  of  induction, 
which  is  to  bring  us  to  universal  laws,  rests  wholly  on  the  acumen 
shown  in  developing  pure  and  self-connected  propositions  of  the  form 
2  is  II  out  of  the  impure  and  confused  material  of  our  perceptions, 
which  come  to  us  in  the  form  S  is  P. 

254.  Let  us  try  to  sketch  in  a  connected  series  the  steps  essential 
to  that  development.  The  countless  impressions  which  we  receive  in 
succession  or  together  may  be  taken  as  an  indiscriminate  mass  il. 
How  do  we  come  to  distinguish  in  the  mass  of  them  groups  A,  B 
and  C  and  to  regard  each  group  as  a  self-connected  perception  ?  It 
is  because  the  impressions  we  so  gather  into  one  are  permanently 
conjoined  and  thus  raise  themselves  above  the  level  of  the  shifting 
background,  or  again  because  by  their  simultaneous  appearance  at 
intervals  they  contrast  with  the  uniform  background  formed  by  the 
others.  This  first  step  is  a  necessary  one,  but  there  is  so  far  no  act 
of  thought.  The  mechanical  course  of  our  ideas  is  the  agency  which 
singles  out  these  perceptions  and  first  makes  them  objects  of  our 
involuntary  attention  and  of  our  future  thinking.  And  the  result  thus 
reached  is  proved  by  subsequent  consideration  to  be  wrong  as  often 
as  right.  The  -really  connected  is  too  often  but  incompletely  con- 


CHAPTER  viL]  The  Formation  of  general  conceptions.        301 

joined  and  mixed  with  that  which  in  no  Avay  belongs  to  it.  We  are  im- 
pelled in  like  manner  to  the  second  step  which  consists  In  splitting  up 
the  sum  of  impressions  contained  within  each  of  the  groups  A,  B  and 
C  and  in  taking  one  part  of  each  sum  as  a  subject  and  the  remainder 
as  a  predicate  attaching  itself  to  the  subject.  It  is  our  psychical 
mechanism  which  accomplishes  the  beginning  of  this  step  also. 
Thought  indeed  actively  intervenes  before  long  and  intensifies  this 
mere  conjunction  of  two  ideas — this  mere  adherence  of  one  idea 
to  another — by  transforming  it  into  an  objective  connexion  and  by 
establishing  an  opposition  between  the  subject  and  predicate,  between 
the  former  as  essentially  independent  and  the  latter  as  dependent  and 
simply  attributed.  Still  it  is  the  mechanical  course  of  our  ideas 
which  always  guides  us  in  the  application  of  this  added  principle  of 
thought  and  which  settles  in  each  case  which  group  of  impressions  is 
to  rank  as  subject  and  which  as  predicate. 

Thus  articulated  the  whole  content  of  a  perception  A  or  B  might 
now  be  expressed  in  the  form  of  a  judgment, — but  a  singular  judg- 
ment only.  The  subject  which  we  here  distinguish  as  s1  or  s*  is 
nothing  but  a  perfectly  determinate  group  of  single  impressions,  such 
a  group  being  the  sole  possible  object  of  immediate  perception, 
and  the  thought  that  either  sl  or  s*  may  be  taken  as  the  example  of 
an  universal  conception  S  is  an  added  thought.  It  cannot  originate 
in  an  individual  perception,  but  only  in  the  comparison  of  many 
which  soon  begins.  And  here  again,  when  out  of  the  several  subjects 
sl  s2 . . .  the  smaller  group  of  attributes  common  to  them  all  is  forced 
upon  our  attention,  till  it  emerges  as  a  general  picture,  which  is  now 
denoted  by  the  name  S  and  which  takes  the  place  of  those  several  sub- 
jects in  our  memory, — this  also  is  at  first  the  result  of  the  course  of  our 
ideas  which  is  conditioned  in  a  mechanical  manner  by  universal  laws. 
Here  too  thought  adds  a  new  depth,  it  transforms  the  general  picture, 
which  only  represented  what  was  found  common  to  the  various  indi- 
viduals, into  a  general  conception  which  has  the  force  of  a  law  and  joins 
what  is  essentially  connected  :  but  still  it  is  the  course  of  our  ideas  that 
determines  the  first  applications  of  this  added  thought,  and  settles  for 
us  which  elements  of  the  subjects  we  compare  are  to  be  united  in  the 
general  picture  or  again  in  the  conception  and  which  are  to  remain 
excluded.  The  elements  which  are  felt  to  be  modifications  of  one 
universal  and  are  at  the  same  time  more  lively  as  impressions  are 
accepted,  and  those  which  excite  our  involuntary  attention  less  strongly 
or  reciprocally  destroy  one  another  are  rejected. 

And  the  result  of  this  process  is  on  the  whole  more  often  right  than 


3O2          Universal  Inductions  from  Perception.     [  BOOK  i  r. 

wrong.  This  is  not  the  place  to  pursue  in  greater  detail  the  psycho- 
logical development  of  our  conceptions,  but  there  is  one  point  worth 
mentioning.  In  the  sensible  impressions,  which  are  the  ultimate  com- 
ponents of  every  perception,  it  is  from  the  first  not  the  differences  of 
the  actual  impressions  that  are  of  prominent  importance  so  much  as 
the  differences  in  their  relations  and  in  their  manner  of  union.  The 
mere  child  can  neglect  the  differences  of  colour  and  sees  that  the 
characters  shown  him  in  red  are  the  same  as  those  he  has  learned  in 
black.  His  general  pictures  of  trees  and  animals  are  drawn  as  yet 
but  from  few  examples,  but  they  already  comprehend  the  essential 
traits  with  such  accuracy  that  when  he  afterwards  "perceives  a  new 
and  unusual  shape,  it  readily  takes  its  place  in  the  series.  Errors 
however  do  occur :  how  these  are  corrected  is  what  we  have  now  to 
consider.  We  have  tried  in  the  foregoing  to  make  clear  our  starting- 
point,  which  is  this : — the  inductive  process  deals  with  individual  per- 
ceptions and  its  object  is  to  establish  a  further  connexion  between 
them,  but  these  perceptions  are  more  than  mere  impressions  that  we 
passively  receive.  On  the  contrary  they  have  already  been  so  far 
worked  upon  by  thought  that  not  only  have  their  contents  already 
been  divided  by  us  into  subject  and  predicate,  but  besides  that  we 
have  already  brought  the  subject  under  the  head  of  a  general  con- 
ception S  or  at  least  meet  it  with  a  selection  of  such  conceptions 
under  one  of  which  we  try  to  bring  it, 

255.  Let  us  take  the  last  case  first  Suppose  that  a  singular  sub- 
ject sm}  new  and  not  yet  known,  is  presented  in  a  perception  through 
the  sensible  impressions  pmqmrm,  and  suppose  we  have  a  perfectly 
clear  image  both  of  these  particular  marks  and  also  of  their  conjunc- 
tion. The  image  if  we  do  not  go  beyond  it  does  not  contain  one 
doubtful  element  and  yet  it  does  not  satisfy  us.  We  cannot  rest  until 
we  know  what  the  new  object  may  be  called,  whether  animal  or  plant. 
Our  desire  to  know  this  is  based  on  a  twofold  interest.  Pure  thought 
is  interested  ;  for  it  is  only  by  subordination  under  a  general  con- 
ception that  the  mere  coexistence  of  the  observed  characteristics  is 
transformed  for  thought  into  a  well-grounded  coherence.  But  what 
weighs  much  more  with  us  is  the  practical  wish  to  go  beyond  the 
observed  fact  and  to  justify  ourselves  by  the  general  conception  in 
filling  in  what  we  have  not  observed.  For  the  name  plant  or  animal 
would  be  for  s m  a  barren  title  had  we  not  reserved  the  right  to  found 
upon  it  a  claim  to  a  number  of  properties  as  belonging  to  s  "*,  which  no 
immediate  perception  has  shown  to  belong  to  it.  We  constantly  find 
ourselves  in  this  position  towards  real  objects.  For  every  perception 


CHAPTER  viL]  Their  function  in  extending  experience,      303 

howsoever  accurate,  let  it  even  apprehend  every  single  mark  that  s™ 
now  has,  is  limited  as  to  time.  No  perception  can  tell  us  the  future 
with  the  present ;  it  can  never  say  what  our  object  will  eventually  do 
or  become,  and  can  only  seldom  and  incompletely  show  us  how  it 
will  alter  with  altering  conditions.  This  gap  that  perception  leaves  in 
our  mind  we  fill  up  by  subordinating  the  observed  $w  to  the  con- 
ception of  plant  or  animal.  These  conceptions  have  sprung  from 
countless  observations  and  they  comprehend  the  whole  collection  of 
coexistent  attributes,  which  can  scarcely  ever,  and  the  successive 
attributes  which  can  never  be  exhausted  in  a  single  perception.  But 
it  is  only  by  the  union  of  all  these  that  we  can  adequately  determine 
the  real  nature  of  sn\  while  a  single  perception  of  it  gives  us  only  an 
inexplicable  fragment  of  a  connected  whole. 

This  process  on  its  formal  side  is  an  incomplete  analogy^  and  since 
so  considered  it  argues  ad  sulalternantcm  from  the  observed  sameness 
of  some  attributes  in  S  and  sm  to  the  sameness  of  all,  it  must  be  pro- 
nounced invalid  by  the  canons  of  pure  logic.  None  the  less  our 
whole  daily  life  depends  on  the  application  of  this  incomplete  analogy. 
We  rest  secure  on  it  in  dealing  with  substances  useful  or  deleterious ; 
it  alone  persuades  us  of  the  existence  of  minds  like  our  own  and 
assures  us  that  their  actions  flow  from  inner  motives  such  as  we  feel. 
And  in  fact  our  dependence  on  it  scarcely  needs  to  be  mentioned,  so 
plain  is  it.  The  practical  question  is  as  to  the  means  by  which  the 
bare  probability  of  these  inferences  can  be  made  to  approximate  in 
value  to  certainty.  The  sameness  of  all  the  marks  is  what  logically 
justifies  the  subordination  of/'"'  to  S\  and  the  natural  conclusion  from  . 
this  fact  is  that  the  probability  of  a  subordination  being  correct  rises 
as  the  number  of  identified  marks  is  increased.  But  it  is  evident  at 
once  that  the  value  of  this  conclusion  is  much  lowered  by  the  necessity 
of  taking  into  account  the  difference  in  value  which  exists  among 
these  marks.  And  this  is  not  the  whole  difficulty.  It  is  idle,  it  is  a 
mere  form  to  bid  us  direct  our  attention  to  the  likeness  above  every- 
thing else  of  the  essential  marks,  when  as  yet  we  have  no  means  of  dis- 
tinguishing them  from  the  non-essential.  It  is  experience  and  experience 
alone  which  enables  us  to  distinguish,  and  the  few  general  rules  we 
can  lay  down  are  all  drawn  from  experience.  There  are  attributes, 
which  arise  indifferently  from  the  operation  of  widely- diffused  causes 
on  objects  vastly  heterogeneous,  and  consequently  these  marks  cannot 
serve  as  criteria  because  not  characteristic  of  the  distinctive  content, 
which  any  one  conception  connects,  and  again  the  modifications  of 
these  marks  can  produce  no  essential  difference  in  any  such  content. 


304         Universal  Inductions  from  Perception.     [BOOK  H. 

But  how  should  we  know  this  except  from  experience?  How  but 
from  experience  should  we  know  that  mere  quantitative  differences  in 
the  marks  are  in  the  main  but  of  slight  importance  and  that  diversities 
in  the  forms  of  conjunction  and  in  the  respective  positions  of  those 
points  in  which  relations  centre  are  a  matter  of  far  greater  moment  ? 
There  are  universal  conditions  in  the  world,  which  tend  to  produce 
similar  alterations  in  different  substrata  which  they  encounter,  and 
this  gives  us  a  test  for  the  real  and  exclusive  peculiarity  of  any  kind 
of  things.  For  each  genuinely  peculiar  kind  by  reason  of  the  specific 
mode3  in  which  diverse  centres  of  relation  are  united  in  it,  exhibits 
unexpected  forms  of  reaction  against  the  universal  conditions.  Thus 
specific  reaction  against  non-special  conditions  is  the  sign  of  a  genuine 
kind — but  this  sign  is  the  teaching  of  experience.  And  it  is  experi- 
ence once  more  that  informs  us  that  these  rules  have  their  exceptions 
in  the  case  of  some  object  that  we  perceive.  There  may  be  marks 
that  seem  unessential  and  whose  variations  may  appear  of  no  moment, 
and  yet  there  may  be  in  such  trifles  the  sign  of  a  radical  difference 
pervading  the  whole  nature  of  two  groups  of  attributes  connected 
under  two  different  conceptions. 

In  conclusion  we  must  not  forget  that  in  trying  to  range  new  objects 
of  perception  under  old  universal  conceptions  we  are  not  un- 
frequently  driven  by  utterances  of  the  same  experience  to  quite  an 
opposite  result.  These  universal  conceptions  themselves — animal, 
plant,  body — are  altered,  their  boundaries  are  widened  or  contracted 
as  our  knowledge  of  things  grows.  On  the  one  hand  we  may  find  in 
doubtful  instances,  which  seemed  to  fall  under  one  of  these  concep- 
tions, points  in  which  their  habit  permanently  differs  from  that  of  the 
undoubted  instances ;  or  again  instances  which  seemed  to  be  excluded 
may  be  found  to  exhibit  a  gradual  and  uninterrupted  approach  to 
what  is  the  character  as  a  whole  of  the  known  and  undoubted  species. 
Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  we  trust  not  to  universal  logical  rules  but  to 
-a  knowledge  of  things  for  the  correct  carrying  out  of  the  imperfect 
analogy,  by  which  we  class  a  perceived  object  sw  under  a  general 
conception  &  In  fact  we  must  distinguish  applied  logic  itself  as  a 
theory  of  science  from  its  application  as  a  scientific  activity.  The 
theory  can  do  no  more  than  lay  down  general  points  of  view,  of 
which  we  should  never  have  become  conscious  had  we  not  exercised 
the  activity.  Logic  therefore  cannot  step  forward  and  claim  to  impose 
its  rules  on  the  whole  domain  of  real  thought,  as  if  the  whole  work  of 
the  latter  was  about  to  begin  for  the  first  time  ;  it  is  of  no  use  to  the 
mind?  which  has  as  yet  no  conceptions  at  all,  but  only  to  the  mind, 


CHAPTER vii.]  Essential  Properties.  305 

which  is  already  in  possession  of  a  manifoldly  articulated  wdrld  of 
ideas,  acquired  through  its  own  experience  or  by  tradition.          *5*^ 


much  interest  attaches  for  the  psychologist  to  the  task  of  explaining 
how  all  these  conceptions  have  arisen,  but  this  task  does  not  fall  to 
the  theory  of  science.  Its  role  is  only  to  establish  what  is  true  and 
certain  in  these  ideas  now  we  have  got  them ;  and  in  as  much  as  many 
errors  and  defects  must  still  cling  to  these  rough  and  ready  results  of 
long  intellectual  development,  theory  must  also  point  out  how  these 
shortcomings  may  in  future  be  remedied  and  that  which  is  still  doubtful 
be  brought  near  to  certainty, 

256.  Now  if,  as  we  at  present  assume,  the  individual  perception  is 
so  far  logically  formed,  that  we  at  once  apprehend  the  particular  object 
sm  which  it  portrays  as  an  example  of  a  general  conception  £,  it  will 
engage  our  attention  no  further  provided  that  we  find  in  $m  none  but 
marks  which  belong  to  S3  no  matter  whether  all  or  only  some  of  them. 
We  shall  however  be  led  on  to  take  a  fresh  step,  when  we  find  bound 
up  with  sm  in  the  perception  a  mark  M,  which  does  not  belong  to  the 
group  of  attributes  conjoined  in  *$,  so  far  as  we  know  S.  Experience 
(here,  as  I  said  just  now1,  the  only  authority)  teaches  us  to  discriminate 
three  possible  cases.  In  the  first  place  altering  conditions  or  accidental 
circumstances  may  have  temporarily  invested  the  sm  of  our  perception 
with  a  property,  real  or  merely  apparent,  which  under  other  circum- 
stances it  would  not  display.  Wise  with  the  knowledge  we  have 
already  won  we  quietly  neglect  many  points  of  this  kind :  the  same 
object  wears  different  aspects  according  to  its  position,  attitude,  move- 
ment, distance  or  illumination,  but  we  do  not  allow  such  differences  to 
shake  us  in  our  conviction  of  its  identity  and  its  agreement  with  the 
general  conception  S;  cases  where  there  is  more  room  for  doubt  we 
decide  by  trying  to  make  observations  of  the  same  object  under 
different  conditions ;  it  is  only  an  M  which  adheres  to  it  under  all 
circumstances  that  is  regarded  as  a  permanent  mark  of  its  nature. 
But  we  still  leave  it  unsettled,  whether  this  M  owes  its  presence  to  the 
individual  nature  of  this  subject  sm,  which  after  all  remains  a  particular 
subject,  or  to  the  universal  nature  of  the  general  concept  S,  of  which 
the  observed  s™  is  a  species  or  an  example.  To  decide  between  this 
second  and  third  case  we  resort  to  what  is  called  imperfect  induction  ; 
that  is  we  compare  sm  with  other  examples  s\  s*. .  of  the  same  universal 
$  with  which  we  are  familiar.  In  most  cases  what  leads  us  to  make 
the  induction  is  that  a  number  of  individual  perceptions  slM,  s^M,  s*M 
thrust  themselves  one  after  the  other  on  our  notice,  so  waking  in  us 

1  [Section  255.]  " 

X 


306          Universal  Inductions  from  Perception,     [BOOKII. 

a  suspicion  that  the  ground  of  M  is  universally  to  be  found  in  the 
nature  of  S,  in  various  examples  of  which  we  observe  it.  This  pre- 
sumption is  rebutted,  if  we  find  a  single  subject  ^,  which  has  not  the 
mark  M  when  placed  under  the  same  variety  of  conditions,  under 
which  that  mark  attached  to  the  subjects  of  the  other  perceptions.  On 
the  other  hand  all  instances  of  S  which  have  so  far  been  accessible  to 
our  perception  may  possess  this  predicate  M,  without  our  presumption 
in  favour  of  the  truth  of  the  universal  proposition,  all  S  are  M}  being 
ipso  facto  corroborated.  For  when  we  argue  that  what  is  valid  in  a 
number  of  particular  cases  however  large  is  therefore  valid  universally 
we  always  argue  ad  subaliernantem  and  such  inference  is  to  the  last 
unsound.  Still  placed  as  we  are  we  must  hazard  such  inferences,  for 
even  if  perception  could  embrace  all  existing  examples  of  a. genus, 
those  that  are  yet  to  be  will  always  evade  our  senses.  Here  too  then 
all  we  can  do  is  to  heighten  so  far  as  we  can  the  probability  of  this  im- 
perfect induction.  In  order  to  this  we  shall  find  two  rules  of  kindred 
import  of  great  use.  In  the  first  place  the  individual  subjects  from  the 
observation  of  which  we  start  must  be  very  numerous  ;  the  greater  the 
number  of  such  $  the  more  manifold  must  the  outward  conditions  be 
which  act  upon  them,  and  of  which  we  thus  eliminate  the  force  and 
influence.  Any  M  which  all  these  subjects  retain  in  common  in  spite 
of  such  variety  of  conditions  must  owe  its  presence  to  no  extrinsic 
causes  but  to  the  intrinsic  nature  of  these  subjects.  Secondly  we 
must  so  choose  the  subjects  we  observe  that  their  specific  or  indivi- 
dual differences  shall  be  the  greatest  possible  within  the  limits  of  the 
genus  or  the  species,  the  universal  S\  we  thus  eliminate  the  influence 
which  particular  resemblances  between  the  observed  subjects,  which 
are  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  universal  S,  might  have  in  pro- 
ducing the  common  predicate,  The  M  which  they  all  unite  in  re- 
taining in  spite  of  these  differences  will  have  its  ground  solely  in  the 
character  of  the  genus  itself,  and  the  universal  proposition,  all  S  is  M, 
which  we  wished  to  arrive  at,  will  thus  be  justified. 

257.  Pure  logic  raised  a  distinction  between  analogy  and  induction. 
If  two  subjects  agree  in  respect  of  several  of  their  marks,  we  gather 
that  they  will  agree  in  all.  This  is  reasoning  by  analogy.  We  make 
an  induction  on  the  other  hand,  when  we  argue  that  because  several 
instances  of  a  kind  behave  in  a  certain  way,  therefore  all  instances  of 
the  kind  will  behave  so.  We  have  used  the  words  in  the  same 
meanings  here,  and  it  was  accordingly  an  induction,  by  which  we 
drew  from  the  given  premises  slM,  szM>  . .  the  universal  conclusion 
SM.  But  this  procedure  may  be  regarded  more  simply.  Suppose 


CHAPTER  vii.]    Relation  of *  Analogy  to  Induction.  307 

we  have  made  a  number  of  observations  and  have  found  that  all  their 
individual  subjects  sl,  j2. . .  agree  in  possessing  on  the  one  hand  all 
the  marks  belonging  to  an  S,  on  the  other  hand  the  one  mark  M ; 
we  may  then  conclude  immediately  by  analogy- that  every  subject  sq, 
even  though  we  have  not  observed  it,  will  yet,  provided  only  it  like 
them  possesses  all  the  marks  of  an  S,  possess  also  the  particular  mark 
M.  By  such  an  analogy  is  it  that  we  supply  the  premises  s™M9  snM. . , 
not  given  in  the  perception,  the  subjects  of  which  premises  together 
with  the  subjects  of  the  s*M,  slM .  . . ,  which  we  have  observed,  ex- 
haust the  whole  compass  of  £.  The  business  of  induction  then  con- 
sists in  merely  summing  up  the  single  propositions  thus  either  given 
or  supplied  in  the  universal  proposition:  all  S  are  M.  We  see 
from  this  that  it  is  hardly  worth  while  to  separate  in  such  applications 
of  logic  the  part  played  by  induction  from  the  part  played  by  analogy ; 
nor  is  it  worth  while  to  find  fault  with  the  loose  usage  which  confounds 
the  two  expressions ;  it  is  useless  in  short  to  try  to  refer  to  simple 
types  of  pure  logic  all  the  operations  of  thought,  which  may  be 
broadly  included  under  the  name  of  an  inference.  One  who  has  time 
to  waste  may  perhaps  enquire  whether  a  voyager,  who  has  sailed  all 
round  a  land,  concludes  by  induction,  analogy,  or  subsumption,  that  it 
is  an  island.  What  does  interest  us  here  is  rather  the  question,  how 
we  arrive  at  any  universal  proposition  T  about  triangles.  We  prove 
Tby  constructing  the  triangle  /;  but  this  triangle,  which  we  thus  set 
before  our  eyes,  is  always  a  particular  triangle,  never  more.  It  would 
seem  as  if  T  can  in  the  first  instance  be  true  only  of  it,  and  always 
true  of  it  so  often  as  we  construct  it  in  the  same  way.  Now  we  may 
of  course  change  our  mode  of  drawing  it ;  still  even  if  we  found  the 
proposition  ^corroborated  in  a  thousand  different  triangles  s1,  s*}  s*. . . , 
this  number  would  dwindle  to  nothing,  when  compared  with  the  "in- 
finite number  of  possible  triangles,  which  we  have  no  opportunity  of 
testing. 

It  is  not  therefore  by  any  summing  up  of  particular  perceptions, 
which  we  create  for  ourselves  in  these  constructions,  that  we  reach  the 
conclusion  that  Tis  true  universally  of  all  triangles  whatever.  We  must 
be  justified  in  regarding  each  single  triangle  we  draw  as  a  symbol  for 
all,  so  that  what  holds  of  it  holds  of  all  the  others  which  it  represents. 
And  our  justification  does  not  lie  in  the  peculiar  nature  of  spatial 
perception ;  that  merely  supplies  the  content  of  T;  it  does  lie  in  the 
fact,  that  we  only  pay  attention  in  our  reasonings  to  those  features, 
characteristic  of  the  triangle  drawn,  which  we  have  produced  through 
the  very  process  of  constructing  it,  that  is,  to  its  property  of  being  a 

X  2 


3  oS         Universal  Inductions  from  Perception.     \  BOOK  n. 

plane  figure,  included  by  three  straight  lines.  The  figure  actually 
drawn  can  never  exhibit  this  property  in  the  abstract  and  apart  from 
other  properties.  It  can  only  do  so  by  having  sides  of  definite  length 
and  a  sum  of  angles  distributed  in  a  certain  way.  But  we  do  not  let 
these  special  qualities  have  any  influence  on  our  conclusions ;  suppose 
we  have  unintentionally  constructed  our  triangle  with  right  angles  or 
equal  sides,  we  shall  set  aside  propositions  which  are  valid  because  of 
these  qualities  and  these  alone,  as  having  nothing  to  do  with  the 
subject  of  predication  which  we  had  in  mind.  Psychologically  no 
doubt  it  is  the  unanalysed  impression  of  resemblance,  which  prompts 
us  at  once  to  transfer  to  all  triangles  by  analogy  the  proposition  T 
proved  of  the  particular  triangle  we  have  drawn.  Our  logical  justifi- 
cation for  doing  so  is  twofold :  first  it  lies  in  our  consciousness  that 
all  triangles,  whether  already  constructed  or  no,  may  still  be  classed 
under  the  universal  conception  of  a  triangle,  which  conception  we 
have  symbolised  in  our  construction ;  secondly  in  the  consciousness 
that  in  that  single  symbolic  representation  we  saw  the  proposition  in 
question  flow  solely  from  this  conception  without  any  appeal  being 
made  to  any  other  conditions.- 

258.  In  attaining  to  universal  propositions  of  the  form  all  S  are  M^ 
induction  has  reached  its  first  goal,  and  it  is  possible  to  rest  content 
with  the  result,  especially  when  we  are  dealing  with  a  question  of 
practical  life ;  for  in  such  questions  we  can  go  without  a  reason,  so 
long  as  we  are  certain  that  as  a  matter  of  fact  M  is  really  true  of  all 
instances  of  S,  say  of  all  men ;  we  do  not  care  so  much  to  know 
•why  it  holds  of  them,  and  why  only  of  them  and  not  perhaps  of 
animals  as  well.  The  theoretic  impulse  however  is  not  satisfied 
with  merely  joining  M  to  its  proximate  subject ;  it  would  fain  seek 
out  within  the  limits  of  S  the  narrower  group  of  attributes,  which 
contains  the  ground  of  this  conjunction,  and  which  conditions  the 
same  attribute,  wherever  it  may  occur,  perhaps  even  outside  S.  Then 
the  induction  is  pushed  further ;  we  use  a  series  of  universal  proposi- 
tions of  the  form :  SM9  RM,  TM ...  as  our  new  premises  and  try  to 
deduce  from  them  an  universal  conclusion  of  the  form  all  S  are  M. 
In  this  new  conclusion  we  understand  and  denote  by  S  the  true  subject 
or  the  conception  of  the  genus,  or,  to  put  it  in  another  way,  that- 
complex  of  attributes,  on  which  the  predicate  M  in  all  cases  depends 
and  from  which  it  results.  Thus  in  our  first  induction  we  shall  reach 
the  proposition  SM\  in  all  mammals  an  exchange  of  gas  takes  place 
in  respiration ;  in  a  second  induction,  in  which  S  is  successively  re- 
placed by  birds,  fishes,  and  amphibia,  we  shall  reach  the  conclusion  SJSf, 


CHAPTER vii.j-  Laws  of  N attire  hypothetical  J^t,dgments.    309 

all  animals  require  an  exchange  of  gases.  This  new  conclusion  at 
once  throws  light  on  the  earlier  one,  by  shewing  that  what  we  had 
hitherto  only  observed  as  an  isolated  fact  is  really  necessitated  by  the 
universal  nature  of  animal  life ;  a  third  induction  sets  alongside  of  2J$f 
a  new  premiss  to  the  same  effects,  viz.  all  plants  display  though  in 
another  way  the  phenomenon  of  a  change  of  gas  ;  its  conclusion  S1^/, 
all  organic  beings  whatever  find  themselves  in  like  case,  shows  us  the 
phenomenon  in  question  bound  up  with  a  still  more  universal  subject; 
and  lastly  by  comparing  the  behaviour  of  bodies  which  resemble 
organic  bodies  in  structure  towards  the  surrounding  atmosphere  we 
might  be  led  to  the  thought  that  under  the  conditions  prevalent  on  the 
earth's  surface,  such  an  exchange  of  material  is  absolutely  necessary 
to  the  development  of  those  interdependent  processes  of  change, 
which  make  up  organic  life.  In  all  this  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  the 
further  we  advance  these  inductions,  the  less  do  we  care  to  obtain  as 
our  result  a  categorical  judgment  of  the  form  £  is  P ;  we  are  no  longer 
seeking  the  highest  general  conception,  to  which  a  given  phenomenon 
attaches  as  predicate ;  what  we  are  in  search  of  is  a  hypothetical  judg- 
ment, which  will  acquaint  us  with  the  most  general  condition  C,  upon 
which  the  phenomenon  always  depends  and  of  which  it  is  the  conse- 
quence whenever  it  occurs.  And  this  new  problem  of  discovering  the 
conditions  under  which  the  content  of  a  perception  coheres  is  of  such 
preponderating  importance  in  applications  of  the  inductive  method,  that 
we  shall  henceforth  in  our  investigation  of  that  method  confine  ourselves 
to  the  form,  which  it  assumes  in  order  to  the  solution  of  that  problem. 

259.  Let  C  and  E  respectively  denote  two  groups  of  observed 
events ;  we  will  suppose  that  something  or  other  in  the  way  in  which 
they  appear  has  awakened  in  us  the  presumption — to  be  subsequently 
confirmed  or  corrected — that  the  two  groups  are  really  connected,  and 
that  C  is  or  contains  the  cause  of  £,  and  that  E  is  or  contains  the 
effect  of  C;  lastly,  let  us  bear  in  mind  the  remark  we  made  at  the 
beginning  of  this  chapter  (252),  to  the  effect  that  Cwill  seldom  really 
contain  the  full  cause  of  E  and  nothing  but  it,  E  seldom  contain  the 
whole  effect  of  C  and  nothing  but  it.  We  may  then  indicate  our 
problem  thus :  to  discover  from  the  impure  observations  C  E  the  pure 
case  B  Fl  of  two  terms  belonging  together  of  their  own  nature  and 
related  as  condition  and  conditioned  ;  and  if  we  have  to  define  the 
conception  of  this  pure  case  we  shall  say,  that  in  it  B  is  the  adequate 
ground  of  F9  and  the  ground  of  nothing  else  beside  F,  while  on  the 
other  hand  F  is  the  full  consequence  of  B  without  being  at  the  same 
1  ['  Bedingung  '  and  *  Folge.'] 


3  r  o         Universal  Inductions  from  Perception.     \  BOOK  n. 

time  the  consequence  of  any  other  ground.  In  applying  this  definition 
we  may  abate  somewhat  of  its  rigour  according  to  the  different 
interests  which  from  time  to  time  rule  our  investigations.  For  in- 
stance we  may  be  content  to  know  that  B  as  often  as  it  is  given  pro- 
duces F3  no  matter  whether  it  conditions  anything  else  besides  F,  or 
whether  F  can  be  produced  by  any  other  antecedent  as  well  as  by  B. 
We  shall  only  be  content  with  such  a  result,  however,  where  we  are 
merely  concerned  to  know  the  real  causes  which  produce  the  effect  in 
question.  When  the  question  is  not  as  to  the  real  causes,  but  a 
theoretical  question  as  to  the  ground1,  owing  to  which  these  causes 
condition  that  effect  as  their  necessary  consequence^  we  shall  always  have 
to  determine  B  and  ^with  all  the  precision  aimed  at  in  the  definition  ; 
even  where  F  may  be  due  to  different  but  equivalent  causes  it  is  not 
that  in  which  these  differ  that  is  the  true  ground  of  this  consequence, 
for  each  cause  has  besides  F  other  and  separate  effects ;  only  what  is 
common  to  all  of  them  is  the  true  ground  B,  and  this  B  has  then  no 
other  consequence  than  just  this  F. 

260.  From  a  single  impure  case  CE  the  pure  case  -5 /'can  only 
be  guessed  by  an  accidental  and  happy  inspiration :  it  can  be  demon- 
strated wijth  certainty  only  by  a  comparison  of  several  different  cases. 
If  we  can  observe  a  sufficient  variety  of  cases  we  shall  be  able  to 
detect  elements,  which  do  not  really  belong  to  each  other  and  are 
merely  accessory,  by  the  variety  and  change  of  the  relations  they  bear 
to  one  another.  We  can  then  let  these  unessential  elements  drop 
away  and  retain  in  its  pure  form  the  pure  relation  B  F}  which  they  all 
involve.  These  impure  cases  form  the  raw  material,  on  which  we  go 
to  work,  an.d  are  mainly  supplied  by  observation]  but  the  course  of 
things  if  left  to  itself  presents  us  in  but  few  fields  of  research  with  the 
full  number  of  cases  that  we  should  require  in  order  to  complete  that 
elimination.  It  requires  long  epochs  far  transcending  a  single  indi- 
vidual's range  of  observation  for  many  natural  processes  to  unfold  the 
whole  series  of  aspects  which  one  should  know  in  order  to  grasp  the 
coherence  of  their  conditions.  But  there  are  other  obstacles  to  obser- 
vation besides  length  of  time ;  in  the  case  of  many  actual  products  it 
is  impossible  to  see  how  they  have  become  what  they  are,  because 
they  never  of  themselves  permit  of  being  regressively  analysed  into 
the  conditions  out  of  which  they  arose.  It  is  not  often  that  we  find 
ourselves  so  favorably  situated  as  in  the  case  of  astronomy.  This 
science  has  never  met  with  more  than  accidental  obstacles  in  its 

1  [Cp.  <  Metaphysic,'  sect.  51,  on  the  distinction  between  <  Cause '  and  *  Ground ' 
or  '  Reason.'] 


CHAPTER  vii.]        Observation  and  Experiment.  311 

accumulation  of  numberless  data  in  regard  to  an  interdependent  and 
periodic  play  of  events.  Yet  even  astronomy  requires  in  order  to 
satisfy  all  its  wishes  to  be  supplemented  by  observations  of  the  past, 
and  of  these  it  finds  but  an  inadequate  supply. 

Wherever  we  can  by  our  own  agency  influence  the  object  we  are 
investigating  we  can  remedy  this  want  by  experiment.  We  can  institute 
at  will  a  certain  group  of  conditions  C,  and  so  compel  the  causes 
which  are  really  at  work  to  respond  with  an  effect  JE9  which  would 
otherwise  perhaps  have  never  come  within  the  domain  of  our  senses. 
By  varying  at  will  the  quantity  and  composition  of  that  C  we  can 
bring  about  in  ^a  series  of  changes  in  quantity  and  kind,  which  were 
still  less  likely  to  offer  themselves  unsolicited  to  our  observation. 
Again  we  can  break  up  C  into  its  component  parts,  and  in  each 
experiment  allow  but  one  of  them,  or  a  definitely  assignable  group  of 
several  of  them,  to  take  effect,  at  the  same  time  cutting  off  the  rest 
from  action.  The  constituent  elements  of  the  result  E  admit  of  being 
separated  in  the  same  way,  so  that  we  learn  which  of  them  depends 
on  which  element  of  the  compound  C.  Thus  experiment  is  the 
practical  means  by  which  we  furnish  ourselves  with  observations 
in  such  number  and  involving  such  mutual  differences  and  affinities, 
as  is  requisite  in  order  to  the  elimination  of  what  is  unessential  in 
them  and  the  derivation  from  them  of  a  pure  case  B  F.  Defined  in 
this  way  it  is  clear  that  experiment  only  has  an  advantage  over  obser- 
vation in  so  far  as  it  is  capable  of  supplementing  the  usual  deficiencies 
of  the  latter;  its  function  is  to  furnish  us  with  suitable  and  fruitful 
observations  instead  of  the  unsuitable  and  unfruitful  ones  which  offer 
themselves.  But  it  would  be  perverse  to  ascribe  to  it  any  other  and 
mystical  use  in  addition  to  that ;  we  cannot  set  it  over  against  obser- 
vation as  a  new  method  of  knowledge  ;  it  is  merely  a  way  of  preparing 
and  setting  before  ourselves  phenomena  which  it  is  of  importance  that 
we  should  observe.  And  for  the  same  reason  experiment  must  not  be. 
unqualifiedly  set  above  mere  observation.  In  our  day  it  is  a  prejudice 
of  half-culture  to  suppose  that  anything  that  can  be  observed  in  broad 
daylight,  without  any  preparation,  ready  to  hand  and  in  the  gross, 
remains  as  a  matter  of  course  open  to  question ;  that  alone  is  supposed 
to  be  true  which  can  only  be  perceived  in  microscopic  fashion,  on  a 
minute  scale,  after  all  manner  of  preparation  and  under  conditions 
which  render  it  very  difficult  to  perceive  at  all.  Such  an  assumption 
is  paradoxical,  and  if  elevated  into  a  general  principle  becomes 
absurd.  Still  it  is  a  just  assumption  to  make  in  certain  cases.  In 
particular  we  can  only  ensure  accuracy  in  our  determinations  of 


,„        Un«^lM"^a"- 

3  „„„•  bv  coarse  observation  alone. 

q»n,i.«s  by  such  "^"rSobs'mtion  ota  .cq.ain.s  us 
™  ™"  f  r  teS  "  f"»o»L,  *ch  i,  «,—  «" 

-rsp»  »*        — 


acquaint  us,  not  i  a  ^^^L  are  the  possible  cases  and 

~^^ 

x.  The  case  (+  Ctf).  C«^      y  f          istence>however  uniform, 
and  ccmtmuallj'  together;  ^Htorme   ^  ^  ^^  M  to  con. 

does  not  warrant  .our  concluding  tha   t    j  ^  beWeen 

dition  each  other,  though  ^^^  elements  are  always 
them.  Iron  and  silver  and  d  •  ^^  ^  follow  from  this  that 
present  in  the  world  "^^J,  existing,  or  that  all  of  them 
•one  of  them  is  the  condmon  of  "T^  At  best  the  philosopher, 
collectively  are  joint  effects  of  a  smgle  caus  ^  .^  ^  may 

for  certain  speculatwe  reasons  ^ch  W  ,  of  elements  coexistmg 
question  the  posaibdrty  of  there,7<°ngea^olher;  But  the  primary  use  of 
yet  unconditioned  in  any  way  bj  '^^sd^c  understanding 
Induction  is  to  understand  nature  -nd  the  ^  ^^  ^ 

refuses  to  accept  mere  ^^  ^L,  one  of  these  elements 
nexion.  We  find,  moreover  ;'  ^^lformly  combined.  For 
various  properties  or  modes  o  acUo,  ^  ^  ^ 

example,  all  have  in  <^m°Vfl'S0  J  the  rest.  This  case  is 
particular  has  as  well  its  speaal  *&*"££&  the  same  subject,  with 
Lt  the  same  as  the  last;  ^^^  This  oneness  of  the 
different  properties  ««W  «£-^  ^^  found  in  it  have 
thing  forbids  us  to  -"PP0"*^^  is  thus  awakened  in  us  the 
no  reference  to  one  anothei,  and  there  is  perties  by  the 


- 

,»„„  between  them  »d.ttoi  t_  no,  „„. 


CHAPTER  vii.}  Examples  of  Induction.  313 

mere  coincidence  that  brings  them  together  without  there  really  being 
any  reciprocal  connexion  between  them,  each  resulting  from  a  separate 
condition.  This  is  what  we  shall  conclude  with  regard  to  the  many 
mischances  which  befall  us  on  Friday,  and  with  regard  to  countless 
other  superstitions  of  the  sort.  But  we  do  not  acquiesce  in  such  a 
conclusion,  if  we  can  conceive  of  any  real  connexion  between  the  C 
and  E  thus  found  together,  and  if  there  is  any  hope  of  finding  out 
their  connexion.  We  never  think  of  acquiescing  in  it  unless  we 
shortly  afterwards  learn  from  further  observations  that  their  association 
is  quite  exceptional  and  abnormal.  In  itself  the  hypothesis  of  mere 
coincidence  is  the  least  probable  of  any;  whenever  phenomena  occur 
frequently  and  repeatedly  together  there  is  probably  a  causal  relation ; 
it  only  remains  difficult  to  decide  whether  one  of  the  two  C  and  E  is 
cause  or  effect  of  the  other,  or  whether  both  are  not  mere  co-effects  of 
a  third  cause  Z.  This  doubt  remains  even  when  C  and  E  appear 
not  simultaneously,  but  after  one  another  in  a  definite  sequence  in  all 
cases  of  repetition.  In  that  case  C  may  no  doubt  be  the  cause  of  _£*, 
but  both  may  also  be  joint  effects  of  a  third  Z,  which  is  not  uniform, 
but  undergoes  changes,  which  succeed  one  another  in  a  definite  order, 
Day  and  night  always  follow  on  each  other  in  this  way,  yet  they  do 
not  produce  one  another,  but  are  successive  joint  effects  of  the  earth's 
revolution  on  its  axis.  Lastly,  it  may  happen  that  E  has  always 
remained  unnoticed,  and  only  meets  our  observation  when  C  occurs ; 
thus  the  heart  always  beats  in  a  living  person,  but  a  healthy  man 
hardly  ever  feels  it,  unless  a  special  excitement  C  supervenes ;  then  C 
is  not  indeed  the  cause  of  E,  but  the  condition  of  its  meeting  our 
observation. 

3.  The  case  (•— C  + J^).  Doubts  are  left  unsolved  by  the  last  case, 
which  can  only  be  settled  by  further  observations  which  present  them- 
selves or  are  procured  by  experiment.  We  may  find  that  E  also 
occure  without  C,  or  that  C  may  be  experimentally  suspended,  with- 
out at  the  same  time  suspending  E.  In  such  a  case  we  cannot  of 
course  conclude  that  C  is  not  the  cause  of  E,  though  we  may  conclude 
that  it  is  not  its  sustaining  cause.  The  former  conclusion  would  be  a 
hasty  one ;  we  should  appeal  in  justification  of  it  to  the  principle : 
Cessante  causa  cessat  eff edits,  but  the  only  clear  meaning  which  can  be 
given  to  this  principle  is  that  with  the  cessation  of  a  cause  will  cease 
those  effects  which  the  cause  would  have  continued  to  produce  had  it 
continued  to  exist.  That  effects  once  generated  are  not  all  alike  in 
this  respect  is  shown  by  the  simplest  examples ;  a  movement  continues 
after  the  shock  has  ended,  which  produced  it;  the  boiling  of  water 


3 1 4         Universal  Inductions  from  Percepticn.     c  BOOK  n. 

ceases  when  the  supply  of  heat  abates,  which  produced  it  and  is 
required  as  its  constant  sustaining  cause.  A.  child  does  not  die  with 
the  death  of  its  parents,  the  sole  causes  of  which  its  existence  could  be 
the  effect ;  but  the  equilibrium  of  a  supported  weight  is  lost  when  the 
supports  are  withdrawn.  We  need  not  at  present  analyse  these  cases 
any  further;  we  can  refer  them  all  to  an  universal  law  of  persistency1, 
which  in  reference  to  our  present  problem  we  thus  express  :  every 
reality,  which  has  once  been  produced,  of  whatever  kind  it  may  be, 
continues  to  last,  unless  counteracting  causes  annul  it.  The  effects 
which  a  cause  produces  do  not  therefore  stand  in  need  of  a  cause  to 
sustain  them  so  long  as  they  consist  in  states  of  a  subject  which  are 
In  equipoise  not  only  with  the  permanent  nature  of  that  subject,  but 
with  the  external  conditions  under  which  it  exists.  They  do  require 
such  a  sustaining  cause  however,  if  there  prove  to  be  either  in  that 
nature,  or  in  those  conditions,  forces  which  by  their  influence  tend  to 
transform  it.  If  therefore  E  lasts  on  after  C  has  ceased  to  be,  three 
cases  are  possible :  either  there  is  no  causal  interdependence  between 
the  two  at  all,  or  else  C  is  indeed  the  cause  which  produced  though 
not  the  cause  which  sustains  the  effect  E,  and  in  this  case  again  C  is 
either  a  productive  cause  alongside  of  other  productive  causes,  or  it 
may  be  the  sole  cause  capable  of  producing  C. 

4.  The  case  (  +  C—1?).  C  may  be  observed  to  occur  without 
being  followed  by  E>  but  there  is  of  course  nothing  in  that  to  attract 
our  notice,  unless  it  conflicts  with  our  usual  experience,  i.  e.  unless  C 
and  E  have  been  observed,  as  a  rule,  to  occur  in  conjunction  with  each 
other.  In  such  a  case  it  may  be  that  C  is  not  the  cause  of  E,  and 
we  then,  by  drawing  this  new  conclusion,  correct  the  earlier  one,  which 
we  had  formed  from  our  observations  to  the  contrary.  The  con- 
nexion of  causes  and  effects  in  reality  however  is  not  the  same  as  that 
between  ground  and  consequent  in  the  field  of  abstract  thought. 
There  every  ground,  which  holds  at  all,  bring  about  its  consequence 
not  partially  but  wholly,  and  also  in  such  a  way  that  the  whole  of  it 
can  be  perceived  in  the  result.  Two  grounds  may  be  operative  at 
once,  e.  g.  a  quantity  g  may  have  as  its  conditions  two  equations 
determining  its  relation  to  x  and  must  satisfy  both.  The  influence 
of  the  second  equation  will  then  always  show  itself  in  this  way,  that  of 
the  many  values  of  ^,  which  the  first  alone  left  possible,  it  will  leave 
over  but  a  single  one.  or  a  definite  number  of  these  conjoined  in  a 
regular  manner.  A  change  E  on  the  other  hand,  which  must  follow 
in  reality  from  the  cause  C3  can  always  be  set  aside  by  a  counter- 
1  [Cp.  '--Metaphysic/  sect.  162.] 


CHAPTER  vii.j  Cause  and 'Ground.  315 

cause  Z  so  that  it  is  lost  to  perception*  We  cannot  say  that  Z  anni- 
hilates the  capacity  which  C  has  of  producing  an  effect,  for  C  can 
only  be  restrained  from  producing  its  effect  E9  so  far  as  it  reacts  itself 
on  the  restraining  Z\  in  this  Z  it  always  brings  about  another  effect 
E1,  instead  of  E,  which  we  expected,  or  it  assumes  itself,  under  the 
joint  influence  of  Z  and  of  its  own  tendency  to  produce  an  effect,  a 
state  E1,  which  it  would  not  otherwise  assume.  But  this  El  is  very 
often  of  such  a  nature  as  wholly  to  withdraw  itself  from  direct  ob- 
servation ;  in  that  case  E  seems  to  be  altogether  absent,  while  C  is 
present ;  as  a  matter  of  fact  E  has  only  changed  its  form.  This  is 
invariably  the  case  when  moving  forces  meet  with  a  fixed  obstacle; 
they  then  seem  to  have  no  effect,  whereas  they  really  exert  a  strong 
pressure  on  the  resisting  body.  If  then  we  find  that  E  fails  to  follow 
on  C3  it  may  be  of  course  that  there  is  a  want  of  any  causal  con- 
nexion between  the  two  at  all,  and  in  that  case  we  must  put  a 
different  interpretation  on  the  sequences  of  C  and  E,  which  we  have 
observed.  But  C  may  also  be  one  or  even  the  sole  cause  producing 
E  and  yet  be  prevented  from  bringing  about  E  by  a  counter  force  Z, 
This  shows  how  much  need  there  is  of  being  circumspect,-  of  looking 
round  in  every  case  of  the  sort  to  see,  whether  in  place  of  E  we  can- 
not discover  an  effect  E1,  which  but  for  the  obstacle  it  reveals  would 
be  absent.  Lastly,  when  we  institute  C  experimentally,  and  do  not 
find  that  E  ensues,  and  at  the  same  time  can  find  no  trace  of  a  E1 
taking  its  place,  we  are  justified  in  concluding  that  C  is  not  a  cause 
capable  of  producing  E  at  all. 

5.  The  case  (-C—E).  So  far  as  mere  observation  goes  the 
simultaneous  absence  of  C  and  E  will  seldom  strike  us  as  noticeable, 
and  when  it  does  it  will  be  because  it  conflicts  with  what  we  re- 
member experiencing  in  the  past.  If  however  C  has  been  constantly 
present  and  we  find  that  when  it  ceases  to  appear  E  vanishes  as  well, 
the  most  natural  thing  to  suppose  is  of  course  that  C  is  at  least  the 
condition  which  sustains  if  not  the  condition  which  produces  E,  or 
may  be  that  C  and  E  are  both  joint  effects  of  a  third  cause  Zs  and 
they  both  vanish  because  it  has  ceased.  If  E  ceases  to  appear  when 
we  suspend  C  experimentally,  the  former  alone  of  the  two  alternatives 
seems  possible;  still  it  may  be  otherwise.  When  we  talk  of  a  cause 
which  has  been  active  hitherto  being  suspended  we  may  mean  some- 
thing more  than  that  it  just  ceases.  To  effect  such  suspension  we 
often  have  to  take  positive  precautionary  measures,  and  the  new 
influence  thus  brought  into  operation  may,  while  suspending  C,  at  the 
same  time  create  new  conditions  paralysing  the  further,  action  of 


3 1 6         Universal  Inductions  from  Perception.     [BOOK  n. 

causes,  to  which  though  quite  distinct  perhaps  from  C,  the  presence 
of  E  was  all  along  really  due.  Such  new  conditions  would  result  in 
the  suspension  of  E  as  well.  There  was  a  prolonged  controversy 
between  those  who  maintained  that  infusoria  are  generated  from  an 
infusion  of  organic  matter  without  germs  of  their  own  kind  being 
present  beforehand,  and  those  who  contended  that  their  generation 
was  conditional  on  the  presence  of  spores  or  seeds  adhering  to  the 
organic  substance  itself,  or  conveyed  by  the  atmosphere,  or  contained 
in  the  water.  The  only  way  to  settle  the  dispute  was  to  show  that 
the  generation  E  of  infusoria  ceases  when  all  access  C  of  spores  or 
seeds  capable  of  producing  life  is  cut  off.  They  cut  it  off  by  boiling 
the  water  along  with  the  organic  substances  and  introducing  air 
through  red-hot  tubes.  The  use  of  such  means  no  doubt  ensured  the 
absence  of  living  germs  from  all  the  three  bodies  concerned  in  the 
result;  at  the  same  time  they  were  so  violent  that  in  excluding  the 
germs  they  might  also  have  rendered  inoperative  the  causes  which  the 
counter  theory  assumed,  viz.  the  inherent  capacity  of  organic  matter 
of  developing  into  living  organisms.  The  experiment  therefore  re- 
quired to  be  modified  in  such  a  way  as  to  eliminate  the  doubt. 

6.  The  case  ( ~j-  E+  C).  In  none  of  our  conclusions  thus  far  have 
we  established  more  than  that  C  is  a  cause  of  E->  that  it  is  the  sole 
cause,  so  that  the  converse  of  the  proposition  is  true,  and  every  E  is 
the  effect  of  a  C,  could  only  be  ascertained  by  some  method  of  ex- 
clusion, by  which  we  could  make  sure  that  no  other  conceivable 
causes  have  the  effect  E.  This  exclusion  is  never  possible  with 
regard  to  the  countless  proximate  causes,  which  are  to  be  found  at 
work  in  nature.  We  could  not  think  of  it  till  the  elaboration  of  our 
perceptions  was  so  much  advanced  as  to  have  revealed  to  us  a  number 
of  universally  operative  forces,  which  could  be  exhausted  in  a  complete 
disjunction,  to  some  modification  of  which  forces  every  result  whatever 
would  be  wholly  due.  Nevertheless  inductive  science  frequently 
arrives  at  such  convertible  propositions ;  when  in  several  cases  it  has 
found  C  to  be  the  cause  of  E,  it  assumes  that  an  E,  of  which  it  does 
not  observe  the  cause,  is  to  be  referred  as  an  effect  to  the  same  C. 
Logicians  cannot  be  gainsaid  when  they  declare  it  to  be  wrong  to  do 
so  according  to  the  canons  of  formal  logic.  For  it  is  quite  clear  that 
the  particular  judgment,  many  E  are  effects  of  C,  in  no  way  war- 
rants our  concluding  ad  suMiernantem,  that  all  E  are  effects  of  C. 
Nor  can  the  hypothetical  judgment,  if  C  exists,  E  exists,  be  converted 
simply  into  the  judgment,  if  E  exists,  C  exists.  But  we  would  re- 
mind those  who  would  lay  too  much  stress  on  this  fact  that  the 


CHAPTER  vii.]         Criticism  of  Newton  s  Canon.  317 

scientific  enquirer  in  drawing  the  conclusions  here  impugned  does  not 
pretend  to  be  following  the  abstract  ideal  of  a  perverse  logic.  His 
knowledge  of  things  and  of  the  universal  ways  in  which  natural  events 
do  as  a  matter  of  fact  usually  occur,  is  so  ample  that  he  feels  himself 
justified  in  making  good  any  short-comings,  which  such  conversion 
may  have  in  respect  of  formal  logical  validity.  There  might  be  in 
nature,  he  would  say,  a  hundred  similar  effects  due  to  a  hundred 
different  proximate  causes,  only  it  "is  not  so  in  fact ;  as  a  matter  of 
fact  similar  effects  flow  from  causes  which  do  not  resemble  each  other 
merely  in  being  able  to  produce  these  similar  results,  but  this  ability 
itself  depends  upon  an  ulterior  similarity  between  the  causes. 

We  hardly  need  dwell  on  this  any  longer.     In  order  to  make  up 
for  what  our  conclusions  lack  in  point  of  mere  logical  cogency,  we 
appeal  to  the  fulness  of  the  knowledge  we  have  already  actually 
acquired,  and  such  an  appeal  must  obviously  carry  with  it  enormous 
weight.     On  the  other  hand  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  justifica- 
tion so  derived  has  its  limits.     Newton  has  expressed  the  principle 
in  question  in  his   second  rule  as  follows  :    £  eifectuum  naturalium 
ejusdem  generis  esedem  sunt  causae/     I  think  we  may  without  lessen- 
ing our  respect  for  his  immortal  genius  confess  that  this  formula  by  no 
means  fulfils  from  a  logical  point  of  view  those  requirements  of  pre- 
cision, which  as  a   mathematician  he  knew  so  well  how  to  satisfy. 
We  do  not  forget  that  this  rule  is  not  put  forward  as  a  logical  law, 
but  just  as  a  rule  or  practical  maxim  of  natural  philosophy,  probably 
called  forth  by  the  brilliant  discoveries  which  it  preludes.     But  even 
as  such  it  is  not  a  little  indefinite  and  every  single  one  of  its  terms 
needs  to  be  explained.     To  begin  with,  the  words  idem  genus  require 
to  be  defined,  so  that  we  may  know  what  effectus  nalurales  belong  to 
the  same  and  what  to  a  different  genus.     I  do  not  lay  much  stress 
upon  that,  nor  can  we  even  in  logic  altogether  dispense  with  some 
such  vague  expressions  ;  for  the  rest  we  interpret  it  in  this  connexion 
in  the  sense  that  merely  quantitative  differences  would  not  make  a 
difference  of  kind  between  processes  resembling  each  other  in  form. 
But  what  are  ejfcctus  naturales  ?     If  by  these  words  we  understand 
every  natural  event  so  far  as  it  is  referred  as  an  effect  to  any  cause 
whatever,  the  whole  proposition  which  ends  with  the  words  ecedem 
causa  is  evidently  untenable,  so  long  as  this  last  conception  is  left 
indefinite.     If  in  the   idem  genus  we  include   as  we  did  just  now 
quantitatively  different  results,  these  can  only  have  causas  ejusdem 
'generis,  not  causas  easdem ;   the  causes  no  less  than  the  effects  must 
differ  from  each  other  in  respect  of  quantity.     But  this  is  not  all; 


3 1 8         Universal  Inductions  from  Perception.     [  BOOK  n. 

the  necessity  of  their  being  ejnsdem  generis  is  rebutted  by  the  most 
common  experiences,  which  teach  us  that  causes  may  often  differ 
widely  from  each  other  and  yet  be  equivalent  and  bring  about  one 
and  the  same  kind  of  effect.  Suppose  the  velocity  with  which  a 
body  B  approaches  a  point  C  to  be  uniformly  accelerated,  this  much 
is  of  course  clear  and  necessary,  that  some  force  must  act  on  it  able 
to  produce  this  and  just  this  effect ;  but  of  how  many  different  kinds 
may  the  forces  be  which  do  this !  They  can  act  as  a  pull  a  fronle 
from  the  point  C,  they  may  also  act  on  B  as  a  push  a  /ergo,  so  as  to 
drive  it  towards  C.  The  former  mode  of  effect  may  be  due  to  the 
forces  of  electricity  or  gravity,  the  latter  to  a  series  of  self-accumulating 
shocks.  If  we  persist  in  regarding  all  these  causes  as  casdem  or  as 
ejusdem  generis,  because  in  spite  of  their  essential  differences  in  other 
respects  they  all  agree  in  producing  just  this  one  effect,  we  not  only 
use  words  in  a  very  improper  way,  but  we  turn  the  rule  into  a  trivial 
tautology.  For  it  is  obvious  that  all  causes,  which  are  to  have  effects 
of  the  same  kind,  must  at  least  be  so  far  themselves  of  the  same  kind 
as  to  be  each  and  all  of  them  capable  of  producing  these  effects; 
they  must  therefore  be  equivalent  as  regards  this  effect.  This  is 
a  mere  deduction  from  the  law  of  identity  and  as  such  requires  no 
special  maxini  of  physical  science  to  enforce  it;  such  a  maxim  should 
it  is  evident  represent  something  as  in  point  of  fact  true,  which  on 
formal  logical  grounds  is  not  necessary;  that  is  to  say,  in  this  par- 
ticular case,  such  a  maxim  will  assert  that  the  causes  of  similar 
natural  processes  are  not  only  similar  in  reference  to  these  events, 
but  are  also  similar  independently  of  them.  But  as  we  have  just 
seen,  there  are  experiences  which  prove  that  what  this  maxim  asserts 
cannot  be  universally  true. 

There  is  still  another  sense  however  in  which  the  words  effedus 
naiurales  may  be  used;  they  may  mean  not  so  much  natural  pro- 
cesses as  processes  in  nature,  that  is  to  say  not  such  events  as 
incidentally  arise  on  a  petty  scale  out  of  the  application  of  physical 
laws  to  fortuitous  groupings  of  conditions,  but  such  processes  as  have 
their  abiding  place  in  the  grand  theatre  of  nature,  processes  which 
would  be  considered  ends  of  nature  by  anyone,  who  felt  himself 
justified  in  using  this  conception.  There  is  nothing  in  Newton's 
language  to  force  us  to  interpret  it  in  this  way,  but  that  something  of 
the  sort  was  before  his  mind  is  probable  from  the  prominent  position 
he  gives  his  rule  in  the  introduction  to  a  work,  which  was  intended 
to  embrace  in  one  vast  intuition  those  very  abiding,  all-embracing,  and 
all-determining  events  of  nature  as  a  whole,  which  we  have  described, 


CHAPTER  vii.]        Criticism  of  Newto^s  Canon.  319 

— we  mean  the  revolution  of  the  "planets,  the  path  our  earth  pursues, 
and  the  unceasing  tendency  of  bodies  to  fall  or  press  toward  each  other. 
Viewed  in  this  light  the  above  proposition  would  not  be  a  direct  rule 
to  guide  us  in  our  investigations,  but  the  expression  of  an  actual  fact, 
of  which  the  existence  has  indirectly  a  controlling  influence  on  the 
path  investigation  will  strike  out ;  we  mean  of  the  fact  that  there  are 
at  work  in  the  world  not  an  infinite  number  but  a  very  small  number 
of  highest  and  most  universal  mutually  independent  causes,  to  one 
of  which  every  group  of  interrelated  effects  is  in  the  gross  to  be  re- 
ferred, though  in  detail  one  and  the  same  effect  is  not  always  due  to 
the  same  cause  but  may  be  due  to  very  diverse  equivalent  proximate 
causes.  It  would  still  be  difficult  to  fix  the  line  of  demarcation  sepa- 
rating those  great  causes  from  these  petty  ones;  nor  would  it  be 
less  difficult  to  make  out  what  part  of  the  proposition  thus  interpreted 
most  deserves  to  be  insisted  on,  that  which  points  to  the  sameness  in 
kind  of  the  highest  or  that  which  points  to  the  difference  in  kind  of 
the  proximate  causes.  Anyhow  the  scientific  praxis  of  Newton  is  so 
admirable,  that  we  do  better  to  try  to  emulate  it  than  to  make  a 
superfluous  parade  of  its  general  maxims. 

I  will  return  to  an  instance,  A  chemist  observes  that  a  particular 
element  C  yields  the  reaction  E  \  he  then  finds  that  a  strange  body, 
which  he  is  examining  for  the  first  time,  exhibits  the  same  reaction  E^ 
he  infers  from  this  that  the  body  in  question  is  C,  and  this  inference 
so  far  from  being  based  on  the  simple  conversion  of  that  observation 
rests  on  the  consciousness,  which  he  has,  of  having  already  tested  all 
the  elements  to  be  found  on  earth,  and  of  having  got  this  particular 
reaction  E  from  none  of  them  except  from  C,  Formally  this  proof 
by  exclusion  is  not  in  a  formal  sense  absolutely  safe,  but  yet  carries 
with  it  great  probability.  If  a  new  element  C1  is  discovered,  which 
gives  the  same  reaction  as  C,  he  is  so  much  the  wiser,  and  forthwith 
looks  about  for  some  other  test,  by  which  to  distinguish  the  two. 
Not  quite  the  same  amount  of  probability  attaches  to  the  conclusion 
drawn  from  spectrum-analysis.  It  is  argued  that  materials,  which  in 
the  spectra  of  the  heavenly  bodies  produce  the  lines  E,  are  identical 
with  those  terrestrial  elements,  which  in  a  gaseous  state  display  the 
same  lines  E  in  their  spectra.  Now  we  have  not  experimented  with 
those  non- terrestrial  substances,  and  so  we  cannot  be  sure  as  we  were 
sure  in  the  former  case  that  there  are  not  several  elements,  differing 
in  other  respects  yet  agreeing  in  having  this  one  reaction  E.  It  is 
very  probable  there  are  not,  because  we  know  of  no  instance  of  one 
terrestrial  element  having  the  same  lines  in  its  spectrum  as  another 


3  2O         Universal  Inductions  from  Perception.     [  BOOK  n. 

without  being  the  same  element,  besides  which  the  bodies  of  our 
solar  system  may  be  regarded  as  connected  fragments  of  what  was 
once  a  single  mass.  Many  bodies  that  are  chemically  quite  different 
display  the  same  colors  in  a  light  which  falls  upon  or  passes  through 
them,  and  this  proves  that  the  capacity  in  question,  i.  e.  the  capacity 
of  reflecting,  absorbing,  and  transmitting  different  waves  of  light,  does 
not  cohere  quite  simply  with  the  chemical  nature  of  substances.  On 
the  other  hand  two  elements  are  not  attended  with  peculiar  effects  E 
or  E1,  merely  because  the  one  is  called  or  is  Potassium,  the  other 
Sodium.  The  truth  is  that  the  only  reason  for  their  being  or  being 
called  the  one  or  the  other  is  that  the  universal  forces,  with  which  bodies 
assert  themselves  against  one  another,  occur  in  the  two  bodies  in 
question  with  specific  coefficients  of  different  magnitude.  But,  it  may 
be  objected,  there  are  conditions,  which  we  cannot  reproduce  in  any 
experiment.  Under  such  conditions, — e.g.  in  the  temperature  pre- 
vailing on  the  sun's  surface, — might  not  one  of  these  coefficients,  by  the 
combination  of  which  one  element  is  characterised,  assume  a  value 
which  under  terrestrial  conditions  it  would  only  exhibit  for  another 
element  ?  The  result  would  be  that  different  elements  might  occa- 
sionally exhibit  the  same  lines  in  their  spectra.  All  this  is  not  so 
utterly  unlikely,  and  so  we  cannot  banish  all  doubt  from  our  minds  as 
to  the  glimpse  into  the  constitution  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  which 
spectral  analysis  has  vouchsafed  to  us. 

7.  The  case  (-E—C}  would  agreeably  to  our  use  of  symbols 
mean,  that  we  argue  backwards  from  the  absence  of  an  effect  E^ 
which  in  other  observations  we  found  to  follow  on  C,  to  the  absence 
of  C.  There  is  no  need  of  further  explanation ;  all  we  can  correctly 
Infer  from  the  absence  of  E  is  this,  that  although  there  may  possibly 
be  many  different  causes  C1,  C2,  C3 . . . ,  all  capable  of  producing  E, 
no  one  of  them  has  been  actually  operative,  either  because  no  one 
of  them  existed  or  because  each  and  all  of  them  met  with  obstacles, 
which  rendered  the  production  of  E  impossible ;  the  latter  alternative 
Is  settled  as  before,  according  as  traces  are  or  are  not  to  be  found 
of  another  effect  E1,  which  takes  its  place. 

.  262,  Now  supposing  that  in  one  of  the  ways  described  it  has  been 
set  beyond  a  doubt  that  C  either  is  or  contains  the  cause  of  E,  this 
last  question  can  only  be  answered  by  repeated  observations  and 
experiments,  by  which  we  shall  test  one  after  another  the  several 
elements  of  C  and  see  what  is  the  effect  of  each.  We  may  have 
no  difficulty  in  distinguishing  these  elements,  or  we  may  only  be  able 
to  separate  them  by  means  of  artificial  arrangements.  In  order  to 


CHAPTER  VIL]  TypBS  of  Induction*  3  2  I 

this  we  substitute  for  the  cause  C  and  effect  E  two  equivalent 
composite  groups  consisting  of  the  events  a  +  Z>-{-d  and  a-h/3-fS 
respectively.  The  relations  which  result  are  manifold.  The  follow- 
ing are  some  of  the  simplest  cases  and  will  serve  as  examples. 

i.  The  case  (C—a  =  JE).  The  material  analogy  conveyed  by 
these  symbols  is  plain.  They  signify  that  the  absence  or  experi- 
mental suspension  of  one  part  a  of  the  cause  C  produces  no  change 
in  the  effect  E.  If  this  be  really  the  case,  if,  that  is  to  say,  the  E 
now  observed  be  exactly  the  same  as  the  E  formerly  observed,  we 
shall  naturally  conclude  and  shall  be  perfectly  justified  in  concluding 
that  a  has  nothing  to  do  with  producing  the  effect.  But  this  is  just 
what  we  do  not  always  find ;  we  are  now  dealing  with  all  these  cases 
simply  with  regard  to  the  manner  in  which  they  appear  to  our  obser- 
vation, and  we  must  remind  the  reader  that  very  often  the  effect,  so 
far  as  we  can  observe  it,  remains  unchanged,  whereas  in  fact  the  real 
effect  has  through  the  suspension  of  a  undergone  a  change  into  E^. 
Suppose  six  cords  of  equal  length  are  fastened  to  the  corners  of  a 
regular  hexagon,  on  which  is  slung  a  weight  If  we  then  remove  the 
first,  third,  and  fifth  cords,  the  weight  will,  if  the  remaining  cords 
are  strong  enough,  not  only  remain  hanging,  but  will  appear  to  main- 
tain its  absolute  place  in  space.  Yet  the  latter  is  certainly  not  the 
case;  the  tension  of  the  three  remaining  cords  is  increased,  and  as 
they  have  stretched  a  little  the  weight  itself  has  sunk  slightly  in  a 
vertical  direction,  and  herein  consists  just  the  new  effect  E\  which 
has  taken  the  place  of  E",  the  difference  between  the  two  is  lost  to 
a  superficial  observer ;  who  is  led  to  conclude  wrongly  that  the  three 
other  cords  contributed  nothing  to  the  original  effect  JSt  whereas  in 
point  of  fact  the  work  which  they  did  before  has  but  been  vicariously 
undertaken  by  the  other  constituent  parts  of  (7.  It  is  hardly  requisite 
to  notice  how  common  an  error  it  is  to  suppose,  because  an  effect  is 
so  minute  as  almost  to  escape  our  notice,  that  it  therefore  does  not 
exist  at  all.  Such  an  error  always  avenges  itself  on  us  later,  and 
the  risk  we  run  of  falling  into  it  is  so  obvious  that  all  kinds  of 
methods  are  resorted  to  in  order  to  magnify  these  slight  effects  and 
bring  them  within  the  range  of  our  perception. 

2.  The  case  (C-a=z—J£).  It  is  found  that  on  a  vanishing  in 
the  observation  or  on  its  being  experimentally  suspended  the  whole' 
of  E  vanishes.  In  such  cases  we  naturally  incline  to  the  assumption 
that  a  alone  is  actively  concerned  in  bringing  about  or  at  any  rate 
in  sustaining  E.  That  this  may  be  the  case,  but  is  not  so  universally, 
we  learn  by  comparing  this  with  other  observations;  let  us  instead 

Y 


322       Universal  Inductions  from  Perception.       [BOOK  n. 

of  a  cause  the  other  parts  of  C  to  vanish  one  after  the  other ;  then 
we  shall  often  find  that  the  whole  E  disappears  in  exactly  the  same 
way  with  the  intermission  of  b  and  d\  from  which  we  gather  that 
it  depends  not  upon  a  single  part  of  C,  but  upon  the  simultaneous 
presence  and  conjunction  of  all  or  at  any  rate  of  several  of  them. 
Every  complex  machine,  every  living  body  affords  an  example  of  this ; 
in  both  there  are  many  parts  the  lesion  of  any  one  of  which  is  enough 
to  put  an  end  to  the  motion  of  the  one  and  the  life  of  the  other, 
although  no  one  of  them  by  itself  would  have  been  able  without  the 
co-operation  of  the  rest  to  produce  and  sustain  motion  and  life.  The 
fact  that  with  the  destruction  of  a  single  part  of  the  brain  a  a  definite 
spiritual  function  ceases  is  no  proof  that  just  this  single  part  was  the 
organ,  which  produced  that  function ;  even  the  counter  experience, 
that  no  lesion  of  other  single  parts  has  the  same  result,  does  not 
render  this  conclusion  perfectly  certain ;  it  always  remains  possible, 
that  a  was  no  more  than  the  indispensable  part,  in  which  the  effect 
of  all  the  rest  took  just  this  form  E.  The  function  must  then  cease 
just  as  much  when  a  is  hampered  as  when  all  the  remaining  parts 
besides  a  of  the  brain  are  hampered  in  the  discharge  of  their  functions. 
In  order  to  settle  whether  It  is  so  or  not,  we  must  try  to  observe  the 
changes  of  E  into  I?1,  which  arise  when  a  is  left  undisturbed,  while 
the  functions  of  the  remaining  organs  are  checked  in  this  action. 

3.  The  case  (C—a  =  E+ct).  The  part  a  disappears  in  our  obser- 
vation from  C  or  is  by  experimental  means  made  to  lapse,  whereupon 
the  effect  E  acquires  a  new  element  a  which  it  had  not  before,  or 
anyhow  an  effect  a  now  arises  for  the  first  time ;  we  may  then  con- 
clude that  the  remaining  parts  of  C  involve  the  ground  to  which  a 
is  due,  but  that  a  hindered  that  ground  from  taking  effect  in  such 
a  way  that  on  the  removal  of  a,  a  can  for  the  first  time  exhibit  itself. 
But  the  observation  does  not  entirely  justify  the  conclusion ;  for  it 
remains  open  to  doubt,  whether  when  a  disappeared  a  new  and 
hitherto  unnoticed  condition  Z  did  not  enter,  which  alone  has  to  do 
with  the  production  of  a,  a  being  capable  neither  of  producing  a  nor 
of  arresting  it.  We  set  aside  this  doubt  by  an  experiment,  which 
makes  us  sure  that  the  means  we  took  to  suspend  a  really  pro- 
duced no  other  or  further  effect  than  this  negation  of  a,  and  did  not 
at  the  same  time  contain  a  positive  influence  Z,  to  which  the  appear- 
ance of  a  can  be  attributed.  Whenever  a  state  of  equilibrium  is 
destroyed  by  removing  one  of  the  forces  which  preserved  it,  we  have 
an  instance  of  this  ;  in  the  economy  of  living  functions  also  Physiology 
meets  with  a  variety  of  such  cases.  Suppose  the  severing  of  a  nerve 


CHAPTER  VII.]  TypCS  of  Induction.  323 

elicits  violent  movements,  and  that  we  can  make  sure,  as  in  this  case 
we  can,  that  the  act  of  severance  has  not  produced  any  lasting  and 
positive  excitement,  but  has  only  annulled  an  influence  which  was 
active  before;  in  such  a  case  we  cannot  help  believing  that  the 
organisation  is  so  planned  that  one  function  holds  another  in  check, 
and  we  therefore  refer  the  movements  observed  to  the  removal  of  the 
check.  There  is  much  in  history,  which,  if  we  consider  it,  leads  us 
to  take  the  same  view.  Of  course  there  are  positive  stimuli,  which 
have  driven  mankind  along  a  certain  path  of  historical  development, 
but  the  majority  of  great  and  violent  revolutions  are  due  to  the 
removal  of  checks,  which  prevented  ever  present  tendencies  and 
feelings  from  unfolding  themselves ;  and  even  those  positive  impulses 
for  the  most  part  only  guide  events  for  a  while  in  their  particular 
directions;  after  a  time  everything  takes  another  turn,  because  un- 
wittingly and  unintentionally  the  given  impulse  has  removed  or 
weakened  the  checks  which  restrained  forces  of  quite  a  different  kind 
and  of  a  different  tendency. 

4.  The  case  (C—a=J£~a).  This  case  does  not  require  con- 
sidering afresh,  but  has  already  been  dealt  with  under  the  second 
and  third  heads.  If  the  suspension  of  a  part  a  of  C  occasions  the 
disappearance  of  a  part  a  of  the  effect,  a  and  a  must  necessarily  be 
connected  as  cause  and  effect,  and  a  may  be  the  exclusive  cause  of 
a  and  a  the  exclusive  effect  of  #,  so  that  a  is  the  cause  adequate 
to  produce  or  sustain  a ;  but  it  may  be  that  a  is  only  either  the  one 
or  the  other  as  combined  with  the  remaining  parts  of  C,  and  this  last 
may  continue  to  be  the  case,  even  when  counter  experiments  shew 
that  any  other  part  of  C  may  be  suspended  without  a  being  annulled 
in  the  same  way,  for  the  parts  which  still  remain  may  serve  as  sub- 
stitutes for  the  parts  set  aside.  And  this  is  not  all.  It  may  be  that 
a  does  but  indirectly  condition  a,  as  in  the  third  case ;  then  another 
part  of  C"3  perhaps  d+f>  is  the  cause  which  produces  and  sustains  a, 
only  a  third  part  b  arrests  the  action  of  d+f,  while  finally  this  check 
in  turn  is  balanced  by  a  in  such  a  way  that  the  removal  of  a  enables 
the  counteracting  force  of  b  to  suppress  a.  All  the  other  conditions 
of  life  C  may  be  left  unimpaired,  yet  if  only  oxygen  a  be  withdrawn, 
the  living  functions  of  the  animal  body  are  suspended,  without  so 
visibly  altering  its  structure  in  other  respects  as  a  different  cause  of 
death  might  alter  it.  No  one  has  ever  ventured  to  Infer  from  this 
fact,  that  oxygen  by  itself  produces  life ;  it  was  plain  that  it  could 
only  produce  life  in  union  with  the  constituent  parts  of  the  body,  that 
is,  as  a  stimulus  acting  upon  these,  or  as  one  collateral  cause  among 

Y  2 


324       Universal  Inductions  from  Perception.      [  BOOK  n. 

many.  There  were  some  however  who  ascribed  to  it  a  more  positive 
r6le;  it  was  they  declared  the  very  stimulus,  which  by  its  direct 
influence  awakens  and  elicits  those  organic  movements,  of  which  life 
is  the  totality.  It  has  been  impossible  to  confute  this  interpretation 
of  the  facts  altogether ;  but  it  is  certainly  not  the  whole  truth ;  it  only 
shares  in  the  truth  along  with  another  view  according  to  which  the 
influence  of  oxygen  consists  in  the  removal  of  obstacles,  which  these 
functions  themselves  throw  in  the  way  of  their  own  further  continuance, 
owing  to  their  consumption  of  the  organised  materials. 

5.  The  case  (C  +  a  =  l?).    If  a  fresh  cause  a  be  added  to  C  without 
having  been  before  contained  therein,  the  aggregate  effect  E  can  only 
remain  unmodified  under  certain  conditions,  which  are  the  same  as 
those  under  which,  in  the  first  case,  the  lapse  of  a  constituent  part  a 
until  then  contained  in  C  left  E  unaltered.     Two  cases  are  possible. 
Either  there  is  to  be  found  in  the  observation,  while  a  is  present  in  it, 
a  Z  which  escapes  our  notice  although  it  cancels  the  effect  of  <2, 
or  our  experiment  is  at  fault  and  we  have  not  succeeded  in  intro- 
ducing a  in  such  a  way  that  it  can  exhibit  its  effect.     If  however 
a  is  really  active  the  aggregate  E  must  be  really  altered  into  -51,  but 
this  change  may  either  withdraw  itself  from  observation  or  it  may  not 
affect  the  particular  part  of  the  aggregate  E,  to  which  in  our  negli- 
gence we  alone  directed  our  attention,  in  which  case  it  will  equally 
pass  unnoticed. 

6.  The  case  (C+a  =  .#+«).    A  fresh  element  a,  on  being  added 
to  the  causes  C  which  have  thus  far  operated,  gives  rise  to  the  fresh 
element  a  in  what  was  the  effect  E.     It  may  then  be  that  a  is  by 
itself  the  sufficient  cause  which  would  produce  -the  effect  a  in  the 
objects  in  question.     But  it  may  also  be  the  case  that  a,  like  the  last 
drop  which  makes  a  cup  overflow,  is  no  more  than  the  cause  which 
completes  the  tale,  so  that  neither  those  previous  causes  without  it, 
nor  it  without  them,  would  have  brought  about  this  result.     Lastly, 
it  may  happen,  that  the  effect  E  or  more  generally  the  fact  E,  which 
by  being  augmented  by  a  passes  over  into  J?1,  is  neither  a  mere  state 
nor  an  event  ever  repeating  or  continuing  itself  in  the  same  way.     It 
may  itself  be  a  process   of  development  or  growth,  which   once 
generated  by  a  group  of  causes  C  is  forthwith  constrained  by  the 
nature  of  the  objects,  on  which  these  causes  act,  to  transform  itself 
from  E  into  E1 ;  in  that  case  a  is  an  idle  addition  to  (7,  or  such  an 
addition  as  may  no  doubt  have  its  effect  on  other  occasions,  but  on 
this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  entrance  of  a.     When  we  introduce 
into  a  patient's  system  the  drug  a  we  are  left  in  doubt,  whether  the 


CHAPTER VIL]  ^ypeS  of  InductlOK.  325 

favourable  turn  a  taken  by  the  disease  is  due  to  the  reputed  efficacy  of 
the  drug,  or  whether  the  disease  would  not  have  taken  the  same  turn 
without  a  at  all  It  is  not  altogether  easy  to  settle  such  a  doubt, 
because  in  this  case  the  possibility  of  experiment  is  confined  within 
such  narrow  limits.  If  we  have  once  observed  that  in  several  cases 
the  desired  result  has  ensued  upon  the  introduction  of  a,  we  shrink 
from  the  experiment  of  omitting  what  may  be  but  is  not  certainly 
superfluous.  On  the  other  hand  counter  experiences  may  offer  them- 
selves unsought  and  seem  to  prove  that  a  is  not  wanted,  and  yet  not 
remove  the  ambiguity.  The  cases  compared  are  seldom  of  quite  the 
same  kind,  and  it  can  hardly  be  proved  that  the  a  which  is  now  left 
out  has  not  found  a  substitute  in  some  Z  of  equivalent  influence. 
We  meet  with  similar  embarrassment  in  dealing  with  social  and 
historical  phenomena;  it  is  difficult  to  decide  whether  a  new  turn 
taken  by  events  is  to  be  attributed  to  a  measure  or  occurrence  a, 
which  is  observed  to  precede  it.  Still  harder  is  it  to  discover  wherein 
the  efficacy  of  a  in  all  cases  consists,  and  what  collateral  conditions 
involved  in  C  favour  it  and  render  it  possible. 

7.  The  case  (C  +  a  =  C  +  &)>  Two  causes  have  an  element  C  in 
common,  but  have  also  distinct  elements  a  and  b  which  differentiate 
them.  It  is  impossible  that  two  such  causes  should  have  exactly  the 
same  effect,  but  it  is  quite  possible  that  of  their  aggregate  effect 
a  certain  portion  on  which  we  fix  our  attention  is  the  same,  or  lastly 
that  so  much  of  this  portion  as  falls  within  our  observation  is  the 
same.  Such  is  the  case  which  I  denote  by  the  above  formula.  The 
most  obvious  conclusion  to  draw  from  it  is  of  course  that  both  causes 
produce  a  like  effect  in  virtue  of  their  like  element,  and  that  so  far  as 
regards  this  effect  their  dissimilarity  is  without  influence.  I  hardly 
need  say  that  this  conclusion  is  very  often  the  correct  one,  even  when 
two  or  more  causes  have  nothing  else  in  common  than  just  a  few 
attributes,  while  a  and  b,  in  which  they  disagree,  dilate  into  clusters  of 
very  many  attributes.  But  it  may  be  that  C  by  itself  alone  never  pro- 
duces or  sustains  the  like  effect  we  spoke  of ;  in  order  to  do  so  it  may 
always  require  to  be  backed  up  by  a  or  b  or  d,  in  which  case  we  must 
regard  the  latter  elements  as  equivalent  and  companion  causes  of  E. 
It  may  even  be  the  case  that  the  part  C,  which  remains  the  same  in 
different  causes,  is  quite  inoperative  as  regards  E  and  that  E  is  en- 
tirely dependent  on  the  unlike  elements  of  the  two.  Let  three  forces 
act  on  a  particle  situate  in  a  fixed  plane,  the  one  of  them  C  acting 
along  a  line  vertical  to  the  plane,  the  other  two  a  and  b  along  diver- 
gent lines  in  the  plane ;  we  may  then  quite  well  substitute  for  the  two 


326       Universal  Inductions  from  Perception.       [  BOOK  n. 

latter  forces  otherss  which  give  the  same  resultant.  The  first  force  ^ 
the  only  one  common  to  both  systems  of  forces,  is  at  the  same  time 
the  only  one  which  does  not  help  to  determine  the  direction  and 
magnitude  of  the  resultant.  It  is  universally  true  that  any  balance  of 
forces  and  any  movement  admits  of  being  resolved  in  a  thousand  ways 
into  very  different  combinations  of  particular  causes.  It  may  of  course 
be  objected  that  in  all  such  cases  a,  b,  and  d  are  not  so  widely 
different  from  each  other  as  to  be  disparate,  that  they  still  involve 
a  common  element  jc  in  spite  of  their  differences.  This  x  we  shall 
be  told  must  be  reckoned  as  belonging  to  the  common  C,  and  then 
C  -f  x  will  always  be  the  true  cause  of  the  like  effect  E.  It  may  be 
answered  that  such  an  objection  though  true  is  yet  irrelevant,  for 
it  amounts  to  no  more  than  a  restatement  of  what  in  the  abstract  is 
a  truism,  viz.  that  like  consequents  always  have  like  grounds.  In  this 
connexion  however  we  are  dealing  not  with  the  abstract  but  with  the 
concrete,  and  are  concerned  to  know  the  guise  in  which  these  like 
grounds  of  like  consequences  appear  in  the  actual  observation,  and 
we  found  just  now  that  the  like  elements  or  attributes  in  two  causes 
are  not  always  the  vehicle  of  these  like  grounds.  On  the  contrary 
these  like  grounds  are  in  fact  often  concealed  in  the  combination  of 
prima  facie  unlike  elements,  attributes,  or  conditions.  These  ambigui- 
ties then  must  be  got  rid  of  by  means  of  collateral  experiments.  We 
must  know  whether  C  alone  is  able  to  produce  or  sustain  E\  if  it  is, 
then  of  course  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  a  and  I  are  without 
effect,  but  they  are  anyhow  elements  in  the  cause,  which  we  could  do 
without,  inasmuch  as  we  then  get  the  case  (C  -  a  =  JS)  and  its  con- 
sequences as  above  considered.  We  must  know  furthermore  if  a  and 
b  alone  produce  E  or  no ;  if  they  do,  then  agreeably  to  the  same  first 
case  C  is  not  necessarily  inoperative,  though  it  will  be  no  more  than 
a  contributing  cause  of  E,  which  might  be  dispensed  with.  If  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other  is  the  case,  then  C  +  a,  C  +  b,  C  +  d  are  pairs 
of  mutually  indispensable  contributing  causes  of  E,  and  it  is  now  time, 
by  new  combinations  of  our  perceptions  or  by  varying  the  experi- 
ments, to  find  out  what  is  the  common  element  x  .in  a,  b,  and  d,  and 
perhaps  also  what  is  the  particular  element  c  in  'C,  which  together 
constitute  the  true  and  sufficient  cause  c  +  x  of  the  identical  effect  E. 
263.  By  means  of  the  inductions  which  we  have  thus  far  passed 
in  review,  we  shall  not  always  be  able  to  determine  even  the  proxi- 
mate and  sufficient  causes  of  an  effect,  much  less  to  find  out  the  sort  of 
causal  tie,  which  holds  the  two  together.  To  do  both  is  our  end  and 
aim  and  we  shall  come  nearer  to  reaching  it,  if  we  can  observe  the 


CHAPTER vii.]       Quantitative  changes  of  Causes  327 

changes  of  quantity  on  the  part  of  the  effects,  which  attend  changes 
on  the  part  of  the  causes.  There  is  scarcely  any  sort  of  effect,  which 
does  not  admit  of  some  quantitative  change  or  other.  Even  such 
eifects  as  do  not  directly  display  a  more  or  a  less,  may  be  made  to  do 
so  indirectly.  Thus  a  state  of  equilibrium  cannot  be  more  or  less 
equilibrium,  but  it  may  oppose  a  greater  or  less  resistance  to  any 
attempts  made  to  destroy  it,  or  the  force  needed  to  maintain  it  may 
vary.  As  before,  I  group  together  the  simplest  cases  we  can  observe 
by  way  of  example. 

i.  The  case  (mJ?  =  mC).  Let  us  represent  to  ourselves  once 
more  the  pure  case,  which  we  before  denoted  by  ^/^and  may  now 
denote  by  C  E.  This  formula  means  that  C  is  the  whole  cause  and 
nothing  else  than  the  whole  cause  of  E,  E  the  whole  effect  and 
nothing  but  the  effect  of  C,  Assuming  then  that  both  terms  admit  of 
direct  quantitative  determination,  we  regard  it  as  a  self-evident  prin- 
ciple that  like  differences  between  two  values  of  C  will  find  a  response 
in  like  differences  between  corresponding  values  of  E,  Cand  -S'thus 
standing  in  simple  direct  proportion  to  one  another.  Then  m  E  will 
be  =  m  C.  This  formula  is  no  mathematical  equation  bu^:  a  logical 
symbol  and  presupposes  that  the  effect  no  less  than  the  cause  is 
capable  of  being  measured  by  a  standard  of  its  own  suited  to  its 
nature  and  permissible  in  its  case.  It  asserts  that  if  this  is  so  the  unit 
of  the  effect  E  is  contained  in  any  effect  whatever  exactly  the  same 
number  of  times  as  the  unit  of  the  cause  C  is  contained  in  the  cause 
which  operates  to  produce  that  effect.  This  relation  however  is  self- 
evident  only  in  cases  where  a  number  m  of  particular  causes  C  pro- 
duce, each  by  itself,  the  same  effect  E>  and  where  all  we  do  is  to  add 
up  the  sum  of  these  separate  effects,  which  will  then  be  proportional 
to  the  sum  of  the  causes.  Suppose  we  pay  away  the  same  amount 
C  of  money  on  m  different  occasions,  and  each  time  for  the  same 
amount  of  goods  E^  then  assuming  that  prices  remain  stationary,  the 
total  bought  will  be  mE  when  the  total  spent  is  m  C.  Let  us  take  another 
example.  Suppose  m  to  be  equal  but  separate  impacts  which  act  oa 
the  same  number  of  different  elements  and  give  to  each  of  them  the 
velocity  E>  then  the  sum  of  all  the  velocities  produced  will  be  m .  E, 
or  the  amount  of  the  motion  generated  will  be  m.E9  if  we  regard  the 
number  of  elements  as  the  index  of  the  mass.  It  is  otherwise  if  the 
several  causes  and  their  effects  are  actually  bound  up  with  one 
another.  A  lump  sum  m  C  will  buy  more  goods  than  would  the; Same 
sum  in  m  separate  purchases.  Here  there  intervene  complicate'd^5m| 
mercial  considerations,  which  enhance  its  value  in  the  eyes  of  the1 


328       Universal  Indiictions  from  Perception.       c  BOOK  n. 

seller;  in  the  abstract  it  remains  true  that  each  C  is  no  more  than 
the  condition  and  adequate  ground  of  a  single  E\  this  is  the  only 
consequent  which  in  the  abstract  the  ground  justifies,  it  is  only  in  the 
real  effect  that  it  is  modified  by  those  accessory  causes.  In  the  same 
way  an  impulse  C  may  give  a  body  the  velocity  E,  but  m  C  if  it  acts 
on  the  body  all  at  once  is  not  unlikely  to  shatter  it  instead  of  moving 
it  forward,  m  C  always  remains  the  rational  ground  of  the  velocity 
mE,  but  the  result  is  modified  by  other  circumstances  consisting  in 
the  texture  of  the  body.  There  is  only  one  condition  under  which  it 
is  self-evident  that  we  can  expect  the  cause  m  C  to  be  followed  by  its 
due  effect,  the  motion  mJ£,  viz.  that  we  may  regard  a  material 
element  as  the  mere  substratum  of  motion,  destitute  of  any  native 
power  of  reaction  of  its  own.  We  may  put  it  in  a  general  way  thus. 
In  applying  our  principle  we  suppose  the  m  fold  cause  to  be  equal 
to  m  particular  causes  C,  and  assume  that  there  are  no  circumstances 
of  any  sort  present,  which  would  compel  a  single  element  in  this  sum 
to  take  more  or  less  or  other  effect  than  if  it  were  present  alone  and 
the  rest  of  the  terms  not  there.  The  m  fold  cause  will  then  produce 
the  m  fold  effect,  and  conversely  in  cases  where  our  observations 
reveal  this  relation  approximately  we  may  be  pretty  sure  that  we  have 
before  us  a  pure  case  C  E>  which  is  identical  in  the  sense  specified 
with  a  pure  causal  relation  B  F. 

2.  The  case  (E  =  (£).  It  is  often  the  case  that  a  cause  C  acts  on 
the  same  object  /  times,  /  being  understood  to  mean  either  the  number 
of  times  this  action  regarded  as  momentary  is  repeated,  or  the  number 
of  time  units,  in  each  of  which  the  continuous  force  C  produces  a 
certain  degree  of  effect.  Now  if  this  force  is  of  such  a  kind  as  to 
allow  the  object  exposed  to  its  influence  to  remain  identically  the 
same,  the  same  effect  would  take  place  afresh  in  the  object  every 
fresh  time  we  let  the  same  cause  operate  on  it.  Thus  after  the  cause 
had  operated  /  times  or  after  the  time  /  had  elapsed  there  ought  to  be 
present  in  the  body  /  times  as  much  effect,  provided  that  is  that 
agreeably  to  the  law  of  persistence  every  earlier  given  effect  is  pre- 
served and  not  annulled  by  any  counteracting  force.  This  is  the  case 
with  motion  in  space,  in  the  case  of  which  we  presuppose  that  the 
causes  producing  motion  either  do  not  change  the  object  moved 
or  only  bring  about  in  it  inner  states,  which  throughout  exercise  no 
counteracting  influence  upon  its  assumption  of  new  motions  e.  If  by 
the  effect  E  we  understand  the  velocity  generated,  E  will  always 
=  e .  /  and  depend  on  the  time.  Now  for  an  opposite  case.  A  con- 
stant cause  C  acts  continuously  on  an  object  during  a  certain  time  /, 


CHAPTER  viL]         and  Effects  must  be  observed.  329 

during  the  whole  of  which  time  the  object  maintains  an  uniform  state 
JE,  always  equal  to  the  constant  6.  Such  a  case  cannot  be  a  pure 
one ;  besides  C  there  must  be  contributing  causes  or  conditions  Z, 
which  cancel  the  influence  of  the  law  of  persistency  and  render  it 
impossible  for  the  particular  impulses  to  accumulate,  and  thus  would 
leave  the  effect  E  constant  and  independent  of  the  time.  One  more 
example.  A  cold  body  grows  warm  under  the  rays  of  the  sun,  and  Is 
then  found  to  maintain  a  constant  temperature  for  any  length  of  time 
during  which  it  is  further  exposed  to  the  same  rays.  The  mere 
incidence  of  the  rays  cannot  have  caused  this  phenomenon ;  it  is  only 
accountable  for  on  the  hypothesis  of  a  companion  cause,  namely 
the  radiation  which  proceeds  from  the  heated  body :  when  it  has  once 
reached  a  certain  temperature  relative  to  its  surroundings  it  is  obliged 
by  the  law  of  radiation  to  give  out  in  its  turn  just  so  much  heat  as  it 
continues  to  receive. 

3.  The  case  (dE  =  =d  C).     There  is  really  no  case  except  that  of 

simple  movement  through  space  in  which  we  can  assume  that  the  effect 
produced  in  the  object  a  will  not  in  any  way  prejudice  the  effect  im- 
mediately to  follow.  In  general  this  a  is  changed  by  the  first  operation 
into  a :  and  this  fact,  that  the  object  that  receives  the  effect  does  not 
remain  the  same,  constitutes  a  variable  concomitant  condition  Z9 
which  associates  with  each  fresh  impulse  of  the  cause  C  effects  of 
which  each  is  more  different  from  the  first  than  that  which  it  succeeds. 
Let  us  first  assume  that  the  change  of  a  into  a  is  of  such  a  kind  as  to 
tend  to  thwart  the  next  operation  of  the  cause,  in  the  same  way  as  an 
already  compressed  body  offers  resistance  to  any  fresh  compression, 
as  the  mutual  approximation  of  its  elements  increases  the  repulsions 
operative  between  them.  The  measure  of  this  resistance  cannot  be 
a  constant  quantity  independent  of  all  the  agencies,  which  here  co- 
operate. It  must  on  the  one  hand  be  proportional  to  the  specific 
intensity  of  the  inner  repulsions,  to  which  the  resistance  is  due  and 
which  are  different  for  different  bodies ;  on  the  other  hand  it  must  be 
proportional  to  the  amount  of  compression  already  effected,  since  it  is 
this  which  by  bringing  the  elements  closer  to  one  another  in  the  manner 
described  intensifies  their  mutual  repulsions.  In  the  former  of  these 
two  conditions  we  get  a  constant  coefficient  for  the  influence  which  the 
cause  C  may  still  exert,  a  coefficient  which  depends  on  the  nature  of 
the  object  a]  the  other  condition  compels  the  amount  of  such  a  sub- 
sequent influence  to  stand  in  inverse  ratio  to  the  amount  of  the  result 
E  already  attained  to,  and  this  last  amount  itself  continues  to  depend 


330       Universal  Inductions  from  Perception.       [BOOKII. 

in  case  of  two  different  causes  C  and  Cn  on  their  respective  amounts. 
Now  natural  causes  are  never  quite  instantaneous  in  their  action.  We 
can  analyse  every  C  into  a  number  of  d  Cs  which  are  successive, 
though  for  the  rest  their  distribution  in  time  is  arbitrary.  Each  of 
these  fractions  dC  of  the  cause  would  if  it  acted  singly  produce 
a  corresponding  and  constant  fraction  of  the  effect  dE  =  m.dC,  but 
inasmuch  as  each  of  them  acts  on  an  object  which  is  already  modified 
by  the  action  of  its  predecessor,  the  effect  d E  is  altered  for  each  of 
them.  It  therefore  makes  no  difference  whether  we  regard  C  and  Cn 
as  two  different  causes  or  as  two  different  values,  at  which  one  and 
the  same  growing  cause  C  has  stopped  in  its  growth  or  is  for  the 
purpose  of  our  analysis  supposed  to  have  stopped.  If  we  then  signify 
by  JE'=/(Ctt)  the  result  already  produced  by  n  successive  dC,  we 
obtain  for  the  effect  dE  which  will  result  from  the  addition  of  yet 

another  dC  the  following :  dE  =  = .  dC.     Among  pure  quantitative 

functions  it  is  the  logarithm  C,  which  shows  this  mode  of  growth,  and 
so  we  come  upon  logarithmic  expressions  in  calculating  operations 
which  by  their  own  results  create  obstacles  to  their  own  repetition 
proportional  to  those  results. 

4.  The  case  (dE—mEdC}.  We  have  just  seen  that  a  cause 
cannot  when  repeated  have  its  effect  diminished  merely  because  it  is 
not  acting  for  the  first  time.  Just  as  little  can  its  effect  be  increased  by 
the  mere  fact  that  it  has  already  acted  several  times.  Both  effects  are 
ascribed  to  habituation:  we  say  'practice  makes  perfect/  and  also 
6  habit  hardens/  An  increase  in  the  effect  produced  .  obliges  us,  no 
less  than  a  decrease,  to  assume  a  contributing  cause  Z ;  this  Z  con- 
sists in  such  a  modification  of  the  object  a  influenced  by  the  cause 
into  a  as  facilitates  every  subsequent  operation  of  that  cause  by 
continually  opposing  to  it  less  and  less  resistance.  Thus  the  first  blow 
shakes  a  stone  in  such  a  way  that  the  second  blow  has  only  to 
intensify  the  vibrations  already  going  on  within  it  in  order  to  over- 
come the  cohesion  of  its  parts.  If  nothing  else  enters  into  the  calcu- 
lation we  must  for  reasons  of  the  same  sort  as  in  the  above  case 
reckon  the  magnitude  of  the  effect  produced  as  at  any  moment  pro- 
portional to  the  aggregate  result  or  to  the  integral  of  the  earlier 
effects.  In  the  case  of  pure  quantitative  functions  of  C  it  is  the 
exponential  function  ec9  which  *  possesses  this  peculiar  property  of  a 
differential  quotient  equal  to  the  integral  itself.  Thus  we  shall  often 

1  [There  is  here  an  unavoidable  ambiguity  of  notation,  e  which  was  before  the 
symbol  for  effect,  here  stands  for  the  base  of  Napierian  logarithms.] 


CHAPTER  viL]  Symbolical  Ilhtstrations.  331 

meet  with  applications  of  this  formula  as  well  as  of  the  other  in 
mathematical  expressions  of  the  forms  which  natural  effects  assume. 

5.  The  case  (dE  =  m .  sin  C).  In  no  one  of  the  cases  which  we 
have  thus  far  examined  do  we  get  effects,  which  alternately  increase 
and  decrease  at  the  same  time  that  their  causes  go  on  steadily  in- 
creasing. Whenever  therefore  E  periodically  alternates  from  increase 
to  decrease,  while  C  changes  in  one  uniform  direction,  there  must 
exist  besides  C  one  or  more  companion  causes  Z,  the  relations  of 
which  to  C  are  either  in  themselves  variable  or  are  so  deranged  be- 
cause it  happens  that  they  operate  together  that  the  effects  of  all  now 
accumulate  upon  and  now  cancel  each  other,  and  so  pass  through 
maxima  and  minima  from  the  one  to  the  other  of  these  reciprocal 
attitudes.  We  can  conceive  of  the  combinations  possible  in  this  case 
being  infinitely  numerous ;  the  formula  I  have  used  is  no  more  than 
a  very  inadequate  symbolical  expression  of  these  possibilities. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  Discovery  of  Laws. 

264.  IN  the  relations  between  causes  and  effects  examined  in  the 
previous  chapter  lie  the  clues  by  which  we  are  guided  in  instituting 
fresh  experiments  or  seeking  for  fresh  observations  in  order  to  ex- 
clude the  possibility,  which  still  remains,  that  different  causes  may 
produce  the  same  effect.  The  general  import  of  this  procedure  is 
always  the  same:  from  the  impure  observations  SP  or  C E \VQ  have 
to  discover  the  pure  case  2 II  or  BF,  by  eliminating  from  the  observa- 
tion all  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  causal  nexus  before  us.  I  see 
no  reason  to  analyse  this  general  precept  any  further  into  a  number  of 
separate  methods.  It  is  much  more  worth  our  while  to  point  out;  that 
in  elementary  algebra  we  have  already  an  instructive  type  of  the  very 
*  various  modes  of  operation  by  which  we  may  reach  this  end.  We 
have  given  us  equations  which  jointly  determine  the  relations  of  two 
or  more  unknown  quantities ;  these  equations  we  transform  in  all  sorts 
of  ways  by  adding  on  new  quantities,  by  subtracting  others,  by 
multiplication  and  division  of  the  whole ;  and  are  thus  at  last  able  to 
compare  the  equations  immediately  with  one  another,  and  adapt  them 
to  the  elimination  of  particular  unknown  quantities.  The  present 
problem  is  to  be  solved  in  a  similar  way,  now  by  a  timely  addition  of 
fresh  conditions,  whose  influence  we  can  calculate;  now  by  a  sus- 
pension, equally  calculable  in  effect,  of  given  conditions ;  or  again  by 
altering  the  relative  position  of  the  co-operating  cause ;  or,  lastly,  by 
modifying  our  own  attitude  towards  the  material  we  have  to  observe. 
I  will  not  stop  to  decide  whether  we  shall  ever  be  able  to  reach  by 
such  means  a  pure  case  B  F\  but  even  supposing  we  were  so  lucky 
as  to  have  discovered  the  exact  cause  C  of  the  exact  effect  E,  we 
should  yet  in  no  case  have  completely  satisfied  our  curiosity,  save  in 
"the  case  of  historical  enquiry.  For  the  only  conclusion  we  could  draw 
from  this  pure  case  C  E  would  be  that  whenever  the  same  C  really 
recurred  the  same  E  must  attend  it.  But  the  practical  needs  of  life, 


Laws  are  hypothetical  Judgments.  333 

no  less  than  the  interests  of  science,  urge  upon  us  the  further  question : 
how  will  E  change  into  El  when  C  passes  over  into  C1,  or  what 
shape  will  an  effect  E  have  to  assume  when  the  place  of  the  C 
observed  is  taken  by  another  C1,  of  which  we  can  state  exactly  how 
it  differs  from  C?  In  a  word,  we  desire  not  only  to  be  certain  that 
there  really  is  a  connexion  between  C  and  JE9  but  to  know  the  law 
according  to  which  that  connexion  comes  about  and  varies. 

285.  The  term  law  has  different  meanings  as  we  use  it  in  con- 
nexion with  different  circles  of  human  interests.  Its  logical  meaning 
however  never  varies.  Stated  in  its  complete  logical  form  a  law  is 
always  a  universal  hypothetical 'judgment ',  which  states  that  whenever  C 
is  or  holds  good,  j??is  or  holds  good,  and  that,  whenever  C  undergoes 
a  definite  change  into  C1  through  a  variation  of  itself  dC,  E  also 
becomes  El  through  a  definite  variation  of  itself  d  E  which  depends  on 
dC.  A  law  is  hypothetical,  because  it  is  never  meant  to  be  a  mere 
enumeration  of  what  happens ;  its  sole  function  is  to  determine  what 
should  or  must  happen  when  certain  conditions  are  given.  All  laws 
are  thus  hypothetical  in  their  import,  and  those  which  refer  to  per- 
manently given  or  permanently  presupposed  conditions  are  no  excep- 
tion to  the  rule ;  they  only  seem  to  be  so  because  they  are  not  stated 
in  the  form  of  an  hypothesis.  Thus  we  enunciate  the  following  in  a 
categorical  form  as  a  law  of  nature :  all  ponderable  elements  attract 
one  another  inversely  as  the  square  of  their  distances  from  each  other. 
Here  we  merely  state  the  fact  that  in  the  case  of  such  elements  a 
particular  condition  is  adequate  to  produce  this  consequence;  this 
condition  is  perpetually  fulfilled  and  consists  in  their  simultaneous 
presence  in  the  same  world.  Again  the  constitution  of  a  state  cate- 
gorically maps  out  the  relations  which  hold  between  the  various 
groups  of  its  members,  but  always  under  the  tacit  proviso  that  so  long 
as  the  state  exists  at  all,  these  fixed  ordinances  shall  be  constantly 
maintained  and  renewed  as  generation  succeeds  to  generation. 

But  besides  being  hypothetical — that  it  is  as  a  matter  of  course — 
every  law  is  also  universal,  and  must  on  that  account  be  as  strictly 
distinguished  from  a  mere  universal  matter-of-fact  as  from  a  decree 
made  for  a  particular  case.  Kepler's  law  that  all  planets  move  in 
ellipses  round  the  sun,  which  is  fixed  at  one  of  the  foci,  is  originally 
no  law  at  all,  but  the  mere  expression  of  a  fact.  It  gets  the  name  of 
law,  thanks  to  the  accessory  idea  (which  is  perfectly  justified)  that  all 
planets  owe  their  movement  to  a  common  ground,  and  that  we  may 
therefore  assume  that  the  proposition  will  continue  to  hold  good  no 
longer  as  a  mere  proposition,  but  as  an  actual  law  for  bodies  which 


334  ^e  Discovery  ofL  aws.  i  BOOK  1 1. 

are  still  beyond  our  ken,  provided  always  that  they  show  themselves  to 
be  planets  by  revolving  round  the  sun.  A  law  which  gives  powers  of 
expropriation  for  the  purpose  of  laying  down  a  particular  line  of  rail- 
way is  logically  considered  a  decree  or  mandate ;  but  inasmuch  as  the 
mandate  is  not  arbitrarily  given  but  is  based  on  a  general  law,  which 
pronounces  expropriation  under  certain  conditions  to  be  always 
legitimate,  it  may  fairly  itself  assume  the  more  pretentious  name.  It  is 
implied  in  the  idea  of  a  law  that  it  should  pay  such  regard  to  variations 
or  differences  in  the  condition  and  consequent,  only  the  idea  cannot 
always  be  realised.  The  certainty  that  two  bodies  attract  each  other 
is  in  itself  a  fact  which  needs  to  be  further  determined ;  natural 
science  does  not  see  in  it  a  law  until  it  can  assign  the  particular 
ratio  in  which  the  attractive  force  varies  in  its  amount  in  dependence 
on  differences  and  variations  in  the  mass  and  distance  of  the  bodies3 
or  on  some  other  condition  of  variable  magnitude. 

It  is  the  same  with  moral  and  judicial  laws  also.  A  commandment 
so  universal  as  that  which  enjoins  love  of  our  neighbours  may  fairly, 
as  an  expression  of  the  deepest  motive  which  can  govern  us,  possess 
a  higher  value  than  can  any  law,  yet  in  its  form  it  lacks  the  precision 
of  a  law ;  for  it  is  neither  clear  prima  fade  what  result  should  follow 
from  such  love,  nor  in  actual  life  can  the  commandment  be  fulfilled, 
without  the  love  which  it  prescribes — whatever  it  may  consist  in — 
having  a  definite  degree  of  liveliness,  or  without  its  force  flowing 
along  a  channel  in  one  case  along  which  it  does  not  flow  in  another. 
The  general  formula  we  have  quoted  gives  no  hint  whatever  as  to 
what  this  channel  shall  be.  Judicial  laws,  on  the  other  hand,  are 
based  on  the  distributive  suum  cuique  in  its  widest  significance. 
Whether  they  prescribe  actions  or  fix  penalties,  the  predicate  they 
attach  to  every  case  of  the  recurrence  of  what  they  bring  under  the 
general  notion  of  any  legal  relation  is  not  intended  to  be  incapable  of 
modification.  Differences  in  quantity  between  various  cases  have  a 
real  significance  in  the  eye  of  the  law  :  it  is  only  the  defectiveness  of 
our  standards  for  determining  those  differences,  which  compels  us  in 
practice  to  be  content  with  roughly  graduating* the  scale  of  legal  con- 
sequences, when  we  would  far  rather  make  it  exactly  proportionate  to 
the  individual  differences  on  which  those  consequences  depend,  It 
would  seem  that  none  but  purely  negative  laws  and  moral  prohibitions 
ignore  any  such  graduation  of  ground  and  consequent.  I  leave  it  to 
the  reader  however  to  judge,  whether  in  a  theoretical  sphere  negative 
judgments  are  to  be  regarded  as  laws  at  all,  and  not  rather  as  contra- 
positions, in  which  for  merely  logical  purposes  we  have  changed  the 


CHAPTER  vni.j    Difference  betzveen  Laws  and  Rides.         335 

positive  assertion  of  a  law  into  the  negation  of  its  opposite.  In  any 
case  by  putting  it  in  the  form  of  a  universal  negative,  we  lose  a  part  of 
the  truth,  viz.  the  measure  of  the  distance  by  which  each  case  is 
separated  from  the  predicate,  which  is  simply  denied  of  them  all  As 
regards  moral  prohibitions,  it  is  true  that  we  do  not  find  in  them  as 
such  any  reference  to  such  a  gradation  or  adjustment  of  penalty  to 
guilt,  nevertheless  in  passing  judgment  on  a  breach  of  them,  we 
always  make  such  reference.  They  prohibit  beforehand  any  appro- 
priation of  another's  property,  but  the  commission  of  such  an  act  is 
according  to  its  particular  nature  subjected  to  very  various  degrees  of 
disapprobation  and  punishment. 

286.  There  is  a  difference  of  intention  between  a  law  and  a  rule^ 
which  may  in  most  cases  be  easily  seized,  though  it  cannot  be  main- 
tained in  all.  In  practical  life  a  law  determines  a  state  which  is  to 
be  brought  about  by  an  activity  or  mode  of  conduct,  and  which  is 
essential  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  ends  of  the  political  or  social  com- 
munity; the  rule  supervenes  as  a  practical  ordinance,  and  since  there 
are  many  possible  courses  of  conduct,  all  in  themselves  equally  con- 
tributory to  the  realisation  of  that  state,  the  rule  helps  us  partly  to 
select  the  most  advantageous  of  those  courses,  partly  to  secure,  if  only 
by  fixing  a  definite  mode  of  procedure,  the  requisite  uniformity  and 
harmony  between  individual  performances.  In  theoretical  investiga- 
tions of  reality,  we  mean  by  a  law  the  expression  of  the  peculiar 
inward  relation  which  exists  between  two  facts  and  constitutes  the 
ground  at  once  of  their  conjunction  and  of  the  manner  of  this  con- 
junction ;  and  in  every  simple  case  there  is  but  one  law.  The  rule,  on 
the  other  hand,  prescribes  a  number  of  logical  or  mathematical  opera- 
tions of  thought,  by  which  we  are  so  to  combine  our  perceptions  as 
to  arrive  at  conclusions,  which  in  their  turn  tally  with  reality,  and  there 
may  be  several  such  rules  all  equally  sound  for  one  and  the  same  case. 
Thus  it  is  only  for  the  law  that  we  claim  an  objective  truth.  The  rule 
is  merely  subjective,  and  sums  up  the  various  adjustments  of  our 
thought,  by  which,  starting  from  the  standpoint  we  occupy  over 
against  things,  we  so  far  master  their  connexion  as  to  be  able  to 
calculate  and  predict  the  consequences  flowing  from  given  facts  of 
reality,  and  divine  aright  their  antecedent  grounds  and  causes.  These 
operations  of  thought  which  the  rule  prescribes  need  not  take  the 
same  path  as  the  development  of  things  themselves.  They  need  not 
necessarily  move  a  principio  ad  principiaium  ;  instead  of  the  conditions 
on  which  a  thing  really  depends  they  may  employ  trustworthy  signs 
or  symptoms.  They  must  never  indeed  lose  all  connexion  with  the 


336  The  Discovery  of  L  aws.  c  BOOK  1 1. 

reality,  but  they  are  free  to  make  use  of  any  roundabout  method, 
which  our  attitude  towards  things  necessitates,  and  to  transform  the 
inner  relations  of  things  as  they  like.  This  difference  in  intention 
between  a  law  and  a  rale  is  no  doubt  a  wide  one,  yet  in  making-  it  we 
are  hardly  ever  quite  unbeset  by  doubts,  least  of  all  where  we  are 
concerned  with  the  investigation  of  reality.  It  is  clear  at  the  outset 
that  not  a  few  of  the  methods  of  procedure  at  present  in  vogue  are  mere 
rules ;  but  more  than  that,  it  remains  an  open  question  whether  any 
one  of  the  laws,  which  we  believe  ourselves  to  have  discovered,  really 
deserves  the  name  in  the  special  sense  explained  above.  We  are 
accustomed  to  use  the  name  where  we  have  reached  very  simple  and 
universal  propositions  about  the  actual  conjunction  of  phenomena. 
Thus  we  regard  it  not  as  a  rule,  but  as  a  law  of  nature,  that  the  force 
of  gravitation  diminishes  according  to  the  square  of  the  distance  ; . 
yet  the  inner  nexus  between  the  terms  of  this  proposition  is  still  un- 
discovered, and  we  do  not  know  how  it  is  that  the  quantity  of  space, 
which  intervenes  between  two  bodies,  can  cause  their  reciprocal  effect 
to  vary  as  it  does.  Ultimately,  therefore,  even  this  law  is  a  mere  rule, 
which  teaches  us  how  to  calculate  from  given  data  of  distance  and 
mass  the  variations  of  their  effects ;  it  does  not  exhibit  the  inner  con- 
nexion of  these  effects  with  their  conditions.  We  shall  have  occasion 
to  recur  later  on  to  this  question.  At  present  it  is  enough  to  notice 
that  in  the  considerations  which  immediately  follow  we  shall  look  on 
the  law  as  no-  more  than  the  simplest  rule  which  conjecture  has  to 
guide  it  in  getting  at  the  genuine  nature  of  things. 

267.  Thus  far  we  suppose  that  the  means  specified  have  enabled 
us  to  discover  as  accurately  as  possible  the  pure  causal  connexion 
between  C  and  E.  We  also  suppose  our  experiments  or  observations 
to  have  supplied  us  with  a  number  of  pairs  of  values  of  this  cause 
and  its  corresponding  effect,  these  values  being  quantitatively  deter- 
mined and  forming  a  double  series.  It  is  anticipating  somewhat,  yet 
we  may  suitably  preface  our  attempt  to  determine  the  universal  law 
of  such  a  double  series  by  a  consideration  of  the  various  causes, 
which  may  produce  a  divergence  between  the  quantitative  relations 
which  we  find  and  the  true  relations  of  things  which  we  are  in  quest 
of.  In  the  first  place  let  it  be  borne  in  mind  that  what  we  observe  is 
not  the  things  themselves,  but  the  impressions,  which  things  make 
upon  us.  We  will  not  at  present  attempt  to  settle  whether  the  im- 
pression produced  in  our  consciousness  can  ever  be  like  the  things 
and  their  relations  which  produce  it.  One  thing  however  is  clear  on 
the  face  of  it,  and  that  is,  that  it  is  not  obliged  to  be  like  them,  but 


CHAPTER  viii.]    *  Personal '  errors  of  observation.  337 

may  change  with  every  change  in  the  disposition  of  the  recipient 
subject.  Hence  a  doubt  as  to  how  far  we  can  conclude  from  the 
subjective  excitements  produced  in  us  by  an  assumed  external  world 
to  the  objective  nature  of  this  reality,  and  this  doubt  affects  the  whole 
realm  of  our  knowledge.  We  will  not  go  into  it  at  present,  but 
are  content  to  understand  by  such  truth  or  correctness  of  our  observa- 
tions, as  we  at  present  aspire  to,  their  universal  validity  for  all  human 
observers,  who  are  normally  constituted  and  placed  under  similar  con- 
ditions. If  it  is  asked  how  we  can  be  sure  that  any  particular  obser- 
vation possesses  such  universality,  we  can  only  answer  that  practically 
the  ultimate  decision  in  every  case  rests  with  the  overwhelming 
majority  who  agree  in  their  views,  as  opposed  to  the  minority  who 
disagree.  If  anything  appears  to  me  different  from  what  it  appears 
to  everyone  else  under  exactly  similar  conditions,  there  must  be  some 
error  in  my  individual  observation,  an  error  which  will  vary  and  may 
be  set  right  by  repeating  the  observation,  if  it  can  be  traced  to  mere 
momentary  inattention,  but  which  becomes  a  permanent,  and  in  a 
narrower  sense  personal  error ;  when  the  anomalous  organisation  of 
the  individual's  senses  is  to  blame  for  it.  How  widespread  is  such 
defecliveness  of  sensible  apprehension  in  regard  to  the  qualitative 
content  of  sensation,  is  shown  by  the  way  people  will  differ  in  their 
judgments  as  to  the  resemblance  and  contrast  of  colors,  or  the 
harmony  and  dissonance  of  tones.  Such  disagreements,  however, 
are  equally  noticeable  where  it  is  a  quantity  which  has  to  be 
estimated.  For  all  practical  determinations  of  quantities  given  in 
reality  ultimately  rest  on  the  accuracy  of  our  sensible  impressions, 
and  all  that  artificial  methods  and  instruments  of  measurement  can  do 
is  to  transform  what  is  too  big  or  too  small,  the  one  by  splitting  it  up, 
the  other  by  somehow  magnifying  it,  in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  both 
within  the  sphere  of  more  moderate  intermediate  quantities,  of  whose 
equality  or  inequality  we  can  judge  with  sufficient  accuracy  by  help  of 
our  sensible  faculties  alone.  And  really  it  is  to  such  a  simple  judg- 
ment as  this  last  that  all  our  measurements  are  reducible.  Nature 
does  not  endow  us  with  a  power  of  specifying  offhand  how  great  is 
the  difference  between  two  unequal  quantities  of  space,  or  time,  or 
intensity;  we  only  acquire  such  a  power  by  long  practice,  and  then 
very  imperfectly.  All  that  we  are  directly  sensible  of  is  that  two 
quantities  of  the  same  kind  are  on  the  whole  equal  or  unequal ;  the 
amount  of  their  difference  is  measured  in  an  indirect  way  by  finding 
out  how  many  definite  and  equal  units  of  quantity  taken  together 
exactly  make  up  that  difference.  We  say  that  a 'line  b  is  bigger  than 


338  The  Discovery  of  Laws.  •  c  BOOK  n. 

a  line  a,  because  to  begin  with  it  contains  a  length  equal  to  a,  while 
perception  reveals  to  us  a  further  residue  d,  which  that  a  does  not 
contain.  The  size  of  d  is  only  to  be  found  by  employing  a  standard 
of  length,  and  it  is  found  the  more  accurately  the  smaller  the  units, 
which  we  can  distinctly  observe  by  our  senses,  and  which  added  all 
together  produce  a  length  equal  to  d.  But  even  if  we  use  a  micro- 
*  scopical  standard  we  must  admit  that  everything  ultimately  depends 
on  the  certainty  with  which  sense-perception  shews  us  that  the 
extremity  of  the  d  to  be  measured  exactly  coincides  with  the  extremity 
of  one  of  these  infinitesimal  units  of  measurement.  When  intervals  of 
time  are  equal  we  recognise  them  pretty  accurately  as  being  so  in 
virtue  of  our  feeling  of  the  equality  of  one  beat  with  another;  but  we 
can  only  measure  unequal  intervals  against  each  other  by  dividing 
th->m  into  beats  or  equal  recurring  units ;  nothing  but  the  immediate 
sensible  impression,  however,  informs  us  of  the  equality  of  these  units 
themselves.  And  when  we  use  clockwork  to  mark  the  recurrence  of 
these  units  with  audible  ticks,  the  accuracy  with  which  it  does  this 
still  rests  ultimately  on  the  certainty  and  precision  of  the  visual  im- 
pressions, which  helped  us  to  set  out  the  spatial  dimensions  of  the 
works  and  their  parts  in  such  a  way,  that  their  movement  shall  in  fact 
give  out  those  signals  at  equal  intervals.  Lastly,  if  this  expedient  is 
to  serve  to  fix  the  times,  on  -the  expiration  of  which  certain  pheno- 
mena only  observable  by  other  senses,  as  by  the  eye,  occur,  nothing 
but  the  immediate  impression  can  tell  us  that  a  phenomenon  of  this 
other  kind  exactly  coincides  in  time  with  this  audible  signal,  and  it  is 
just  here  as  we  know  that  our  judgment  is  for  physiological  reasons 
not  so  acute  as  we  could  wish  it  to  be — on  the  contrary,  it  needs  the 
previous  correction  of  our  personal  error. 

In  conclusion,  I  will  but  briefly  mention,  what  is  familiar  to  every 
one,  the  relativity  of  all  our  determinations  of  measure.  There  is 
nothing  absolute  except  the  numerals  by  the  help  of  which  we  count 
the  recurrences  and  specify  the  number  of  units  found.  The  units 
themselves  can  only  be  determined  relatively  to  each  other,  and  there 
is  no  sense  in  asking  how  big  anything  is  unless  we  measure  it  by  a 
presupposed  standard.  To  find  those  units,  that  is,  to  determine 
them  in  such  a  way  that  they  may  be  fixed,  useful,  and  unambiguous,  is 
itself  a  problem,  which  the  art  of  observation  has  to  solve.  It  is 
enough  at  present  to  remark,  that  in  unchangeable  natural  bodies  we 
have  a  means  of  determining  units  of  length,  while  we  have  exact 
periodic  astronomical  appearances  whereby  to  determine  units  of  time; 
and  if  it  is  the  intensity  of  moving  forces  that  we  have  to  me  sure, 


CHAPTER  vni.]    Error  due  to  position*     Projections.        339 

we  can  sometimes  observe  how  they  balance  each  other^sometimes 
what  velocities  they  generate.  As  yet  however  we  are  without  means 
of  arriving  at  observable  units  of  measurement  for  the  strength  of 
sensations,  feelings,  and  desires. 

268.  Supposing  that  this  primary  defect,  the  personal  error,  has 
been  remedied,  what  we  observe  may  still  fall"  very  far  short  of  the 
truth,  owing  to  the  position,  which  either  individually  or  as  men 
generally  we  occupy  towards  things  themselves.  We  could  illustrate 
this  from  other  than  spatial  phenomena,  still  it  is  they  which  enable 
us  most  readily  to  appreciate  the  frequency  with  which  the  same 
process  or  the  same  object  yields  very  different  images  according  to 
the  point  of  view  of  the  spectator.  I  think  I  may  hazard  the  asser- 
tion that  every  regular  event  gives  a  regular  projection  of  itself  for 
any  point  of  view  we  like  to  take,  but  the  rules  by  which  we  reason 
from  one  such  phase  of  the  object  to  another  are  framed  in  such  a 
way  as  to  favor  one  point  of  view  more  than  another,  and  on  that 
account  it  is  often  exceedingly  difficult  to  go  back  from  the  event  as 
projected  to  the  event  which  produces  the  projection.  A  "circular  move- 
ment will  only  appear  circular  to  a  spectator,  whose  standpoint  is 
somewhere  in  the  line  drawn  through  the  centre  of  the  circle  at  right 
angles  to  its  plane ;  to  an  eye  situated  anywhere  outside  this  axis  and 
this  plane  it  will  appear  an  oval  \  while  if  one  views  it  from  any  point 
in  the  plane  of  the  circle  but  outside  its  circumference.,  it  will  appear 
as  an  oscillation  in  a  straight  line.  The  synthesis  of  the  times 
traversed  by  the  moving  point  and  the  loci  corresponding  to  the  times 
will  form  a  separate  series  for  each  point  of  view,  and  each  such 
series  will  be  regular  in  its  formation,  though  one  of  them  will  have 
much  more  value  than  another  as  an  indication  of  what  really  takes 
place.  Now  if  this  was  all  that  met  our  observation  and  if  we  had 
not  already  got  a  stock  of  other  experiences  in  regard  to  what  is  true 
in  reality  and  of  usual  occurrence,  we  should  have  no  reason  to  desire 
any  other  rule  than  that,  say,  which  in  our  example,  expresses  the 
rectilinear  oscillation.  But  in  nature  we  are  seldom  left  without 
secondary  features,  which  force  themselves  simultaneously  on  our 
observation  and  lead  us  first  to  doubt  and  then  to  correct  our  first 
impressions.  That  we  observe  that  circular  movement  means  not 
that  we  think  or  represent  it  mentally  but  that  we  see  it,  and  we  only 
see  it  if  rays  of  light  are  reflected  from  it  on  our  eyes.  Hence  it 
follows  that  changes  in  the  apparent  size  and  illumination  of  the  body 
must  accompany  its  movement  for  every  observer  who  is  placed 
outside  the  axis.  Only  a  person  who  takes  his  standpoint  in  that 

z  2 


34O  The  Discovery  of  Laws.  [BOOK  n. 

axis  itself.can  fail  to  notice  these  variations  and  so  feel  no  impulse  to 
seek  an  explanation  of  them.  Now  let  us  place  ourselves  in  the  very 
plane  of  the  circle,  the  body  will  then,  as  it  travels  from  one  ex- 
tremity a  of  its  apparently  rectilinear  path  towards  the  middle  of  the 
same,  wax  in  size  and  brightness,  while  after  passing  the  middle  it 
will  wane  in  both  respects  till  it  reaches  b ;  if  it  then  recedes  from  b 
to  a  this  decrease  in  bulk  and  brightness  continues  at  first,  reaches  its 
minimum  at  mid-path,  while  from  these  onwards  to  a  the  body  waxes 
afresh.  If  one  takes  it  that  all  these  appearances  are  real,  one  has 
many  questions  to  answer.  Why  does  the  body  reverse  the  direction 
in  which  it  is  moving  when  it  reaches  the  extremities  of  its  path,  and 
why  does  its  velocity  increase  as  it  approaches  the  middle  and 
decrease  as  it  approaches  the  ends?  Either  there  is  something  in 
that  middle  point  the  effect  of  which  is  to  draw  the  body  towards  it, 
or  there  must  be  present  and  at  work  in  the  prolongations  of  its  path 
equal  and  opposed  forces  urging  it  in  that  direction.  But  why,  if  that 
be  so,  should  it  pass  through  both  the  minimum  and  the  maximum  of 
its  size  and  brightness  at  the  same  middle  point  and  yet  the  force  or 
forces  remain  uniform?  The  easiest  conjecture  to  make  would  be 
that  the  two  appearances  were  merely  coincident;  quite  apart  it 
might  be  said  from  its  movement  along  its  path  the  body  is  subject  to 
periodic  increases  and  decreases  of  bulk,  which  however  are  merely 
functions  of  the  time  not  of  the  place.  Still  as  at  any  time  /  it  must 
be  in  some  place  or  other  it  may  at  the  moment  of  its  greatest  bulk 
just  as  well  be  in  the  middle  of  its  path  as  anywhere  else,  and  as  its 
bulk  requires  in  order  to  reach  its  minimum  the  time  /,  which  it  takes 
to  accomplish  a  half  oscillation,  this  minimum  too  must  take  place 
just  as  the  body  occupies  this  same  middle  point. 

But  who  would  credit  such  an  explanation  as  that?  In  the  rest  of 
nature  such  periodic  enlargements  are  altogether  unheard  of,  while 
changes,  such  as  we  have  described,  in  the  apparent  size  and  bright- 
ness of  bodies  are  quite  familiar;  we  know  that  bodies  are  liable  to 
them  according  as  they  alter  their  distance  from  our  eye.  Relying  on 
such  analogies  then  we  shall  try  to  grasp  or  apprehend  the  fact 
observed  as  the  projection  of  other  and  truer  facts.  We  notice  no 
withdrawal  of  the  body  between  the  loci  of  the  maximum  and  mini- 
mum, on  the  contrary  both  coincide  with  each  other  in  the  middle  of 
the  path.  Moreover  the  ways  by  which  it  goes  and  returns  appear 
coincident  at  every  point.  Taking  all  these  considerations  together 
we  are  obliged  to  suppose  that  the  true  path  is  a  plane  closed-up 
curve,  one  of  the  diameters  of  which  must  lie  along  our  line  of  sight 


CHAPTER  viii.]  From  facts  to  Law  we  go  €  per  saltum/    341 

at  the  centre  of  its  apparent  path.  By  comparing  the  particular  ap~ 
parent  loci  occupied  at  successive  moments  of  time  we  shall  further 
discover  whether  the  true  path  is  a  circle,  an  ellipse,  an  oval,  or  what. 
The  mere  mention  of  the  name  of  Copernicus  will  be  enough  to  make 
the  reader  understand  how  the  accumulation  of  insoluble  difficulties 
in  the  facts  as  observed  impels  us  to  transform  our  views  of  nature,  and 
how  much  at  once  becomes  clear  when  we  grasp  what  is  sensibly 
given  as  a  mere  projection  of  a  reality  beyond  our  observation.  In 
order  to  that  however  we  must  already  be  in  possession  of  a  store  of 
universal  truths  as  well  as  of  earlier  experiences  of  facts ;  pure  logical 
precepts  may  stimulate  but  cannot  conduct  us  to  the  goal. 

269.  We  must  now  go  back  a  step.  Before  we  try  to  interpret  the 
observed  facts  in  the  manner  specified,  we  must  be  in  possession  of 
the  actual  laws,  which  we  think  of  reducing  by  means  of  such  inter- 
pretation to  a  form  at  once  simpler  and  more  in  correspondence  with 
the  real  course  of  things.  Nothing  is  given  to  help  us  in  the  dis- 
covery of  these  laws  beyond  the  series  of  values  displayed  by  the 
causes  and  their  corresponding  effects.  Now  even  if  we  assume 
that  these  numbers  before  us  are  perfectly  correct  as  a  statement  of 
what  we  succeeded  in  observing,  still  the  transition  from  this  series 
of  isolated  terms  to  the  universal  law  of  its  formation  is  always  ^jump 
on  the  part  of  thought,  How  do  we  know  that  such  and  such  a  law 
is  the  only  one  valid  for  the  series  and  true  ?  There  is  no  process  of 
demonstration  by  which  we  can  find  such  a  law,  none  by  which  it 
could  be  shown  to  be  what  it  claims  to  be.  We  can  never  do  more 
than  guess  at  the  law  and  then  by  the  help  of  innumerable  secondary 
considerations  heighten  the  probability  of  its  being  the  true  one.  It 
is  of  importance  to  be  quite  clear  on  this  point.  If  we  have  to  start 
with  a  limited  number,  say  n  terms  of  a  numerical  series  given  in  the 
order  in  which  they  succeed  one  another  in  the  series,  it  will  be  easy 
to  find  a  simple  general  formula,  exactly  corresponding  to  these  given 
n  terms  and  expressing  their  general  term;  but  even  then  this 
formula  need  not  necessarily  be  the  only  possible  one :  it  may  at 
least  be  apprehended  in  different  ways.  For  example,  let  the  given 
terms  be  i,  3,  5,  Y,  9 ;  then  if  i  denotes  the  place  in  the  series  occu- 
pied by  the  first  of  the  given  terms,  zn—i  will  exactly  express  the 
general  term.  But  if  we  think  the  general  term  in  exactly  this 
manner  it  will  hardly  correspond  to  a  real  physical  relation,  of  which 
it  is  meant  to  serve  as  the  regular  expression.  The  same  given  series 
may  however  be  thought  as  an  arithmetical  progression  with  the 
initial  term  r  and  the  difference  2,  and  besides  that  as  the  series  of 


242  The  Discovery  of  Laws,  EBOOKH. 

differences  got  by  subtracting  the  square  of  a  whole  number  from  the 
square  of  the  one  following  it  in  the  numerical  series.  Both  readings 
of  the  series  may  be  expressed  by  the  same  general  term,  both 
determine  every  term  of  this  series,  but  the  genesis  of  each  term  is 
conceived  differently  in  the  one  case  and  in  the  other,  and  this 
difference  of  mariner  is  of  importance,  because  it  allows  of  our  making 
different  assumptions  in  regard  to  the  physical  relations  of  the  pheno- 
mena expressed  by  this  series. 

Thus  without  going  any  further  we  here  have  unsolved  doubts  in 
plenty.  But  this  is  not  all.  The  presuppositions  we  make  in  this 
case  are  not  at  all  the  same  as  what  we  make  in  the  case  of  observa- 
tions; a  general  term  found  in  the  manner  just  described  holds 
exactly  for  only  the  n  terms,  from  which  it  has  been  generalised. 
Not  so  with  the  laws  which  must  be  generalised  from  observations ; 
we  require  these  to  hold  good  no  less  for  the  values  of  the  causes  and 
effects  which  we  have  not  observed  than  for  those  which  we  have. 
We  can  of  course  interpolate  terms  in  a  given  series ;  that  is,  we  can 
calculate  missing  links  in  such  a  way  that  they  will  fit  into  a  series 
agreeably  to  a  law  of  its  formation,  which  we  have  beforehand  ab- 
stracted from  the  given  terms,  and  which  often  proves  to  be  not  a 
little  complex.  But  then  we  assume  that  the  particular  law  developed 
from  the  given  terms  holds  equally  good  for  terms  not  given, — 
an  assumption  which  is  always  permissible  when  we  are  merely 
concerned  with  the  completion  of  a  conceivable  series,  but  which  is 
altogether  inadmissible  when  the  question  is  whether  this  conceivable 
series  itself  corresponds  to  a  sornething  real  even  where  this  cor- 
respondence has  not  been  observed.  Thus  before  we  demand  that  a 
•  law,  which  we  have  somehow  got  out  of  the  given  terms,  should  be 
extended  to  terms  not  given,  we  must  have  reasons,  which  justify  our 
pursuing  such  a  method  of  interpolation  at  all  We  may  illustrate 
this  by  a  very  simple  example.  Let  us  figure  to  ourselves  the  values 
of  C  as  so  many  abcissae  x,  each  larger  than  the  last  by  A  x,  and  the 
values  of  E  as  so  many  ordinates  y.  Now  if  the  given  series  gives 
the  same  value  y  =  £  for  all  values  m  A  x  of  x,  it  may  of  course 
be  the  case  that  the  equation  would  hold  good  for  all  the  unob- 
served ordinates,  which  correspond  to  fractions  of  a  Ax.  In  that 
case  the  line  joining  the  extremities  of  all  the  ordinates  is  a  straight 
line  and  parallel  to  the  axis  in  which  the  abscissae  are  taken.  Still 
this  does  not  follow  as  of  course.  Take  any  two  A  x  we  like, 
the  ordinate  y  between  their  extremities  may  have  every  possible 
value,  and  the  curve  which  unites  the  various  co-ordinates  y  may 


CHAPTER  vino       Risks  of  regular  observations.  343 

describe  every  conceivable  path.  It  may  be  real  or  imaginary,  straight 
or  crooked,  j;  may  pass  through  one  or  "several  maxima  or  minima,- 
even  through  infinity,  and  all  these  indeterminable  paths  may  be  as 
different  as  you  please  in  the  interval  of  one  A  x  from  what  they  are 
in  that  of  another.  From  such  considerations  as  these  we  may  derive 
a  minor  rule  for  selecting  observations,  like  that  we  have  noticed 
above  for  imperfect  inductions.  The  rule  in  question  forbids  us  to 
form  the  series  of  pairs  of  values  in  such  a  way  that  C  progresses  ac- 
cording to  a  regular  law,  and  none  but  the  particular  values  of  E  are 
permitted  to  appear,  which  correspond  to  these  symmetrical  values 
of  C.  If  we  do  so  the  chances  are  that  we  shall  only  get  a  series 
of  singular  values,  of  maxima  or  minima,  or  fixed  values  of  JS, 
which  periodically  recur,  and  which  either  give  us  no  insight  or  sug- 
gest false  surmises  as  to  the  intermediate  course  of  the  curve.  A 
regular  advance  of  C  by  equal  increments  no'  doubt  helps  us  to  guess 
the  universal  law  of  the  series ;  but  if  we  wish  to  confirm  this  guess 
we  must  make  the  increments  of  C  change  as  unsymmetrically  and 
irregularly  as  possible.  To  put  it  quite  simply,  a  man  who  never 
observes  a  place  of  public  resort  but  once  in  every  seven  days 
and  that  on  a  Sunday  afternoon,  has  no  right  to  suppose  because  it  is 
crowded  then,  that  it  is  as  crowded  on  a  week-day.  A  man  who 
never  looks  at  the  moon  but  through  a  chink  which  only  allows  him 
to  see  it  at  its  full  height,  cannot  guess  the  path  it  pursues  through  the 
heavens  for  the  rest  of  its  time.  If  on  the  other  hand  we  find  that 
the  values  which  y  assumes  for  intermediate  values  of  #,  taken  at 
random  from  between  the  values  already  considered,  adapt  themselves 
to  the  law  derived  from  these  latter,  we  have  for  the  first  time  some 
justification  for  interpolating  all  the  other  j/'s  in  conformity  with  this 
law.  Strict  logic  would  not  admit  even  this  to  be  a  complete  justifi- 
cation ;  so  long  as  it  is  impossible  to  observe  all  the  successive  values 
of  C  and  all  the  corresponding  effects  E,  so  long  we  remain  in  doubt 
whether  the  law  which  holds  good  in  the  cases  observed  would  hold 
in  those  not  observed. 

This  doubt  is  narrowed  in  practice  by  collateral  considerations 
based  not  on  general  principles  of  logic,  but  on  our  actual  knowledge, 
which  as  a  rule  is  enough  for  the  purpose, — of  the  matter  under  in- 
vestigation. If  for  instance  we  are  investigating  the  way  in  which 
a  particular  natural  force  acts,' we  know  for  certain  that  E  cannot  be 
infinite  for  any  finite  value  of  C;  and  we  shall  know  enough  of  the 
peculiar  character  of  the  force  in  question  to  be  able  to  judge  whether 
it  is  possible  for  its  effects  to  increase  steadily,  or  to  oscillate  periodically, 


244  The  Discovery  of  Laws.  i  BOOK  n. 

or  to  sink  to  zero  for  particular  values  of  C ;  lastly  we  shall  know  if 
they  are  likely  to  accumulate  undiminished  by  the  lapse  of  time,  or 
whether  we  must  assume  that  some  counterforce  is  constantly  annulling 
wholly  or  partially  the  results  generated.  It  is  these  assumptions, 
which  are  grounded  in  fact,  which  justify  our  transferring  the  law  for 
the  pairs  of  values  we  have  actually  observed  to  values  not  observed, 
and  of  doing  so  with  a  strong  probability  of  being  right.  There  is 
still  another  expedient  in  cases,  where  there  is  no  restriction  to  the 
number  of  possible  expedients.  By  means  of  autographic  arrange- 
ments attached  to  the  apparatus  in  which  the  effects  of  the  force  are 
rendered  visible,  we  can  compel  the  force  to  register  of  itself  the 
results  which  it  produces  at  each  moment  of  its  continuous  working. 
By  help  of  such  mechanical  means  our  observations,  which  would 
otherwise  be  always  limited  in  number,  are  so  infinitely  extended  that 
they  follow  each  other  without  any  break,  and  the  visible  curve  thus 
generated  allows  us  to  form  as  safe  a  judgment  as  can  possibly  be 
based  on  observation  in  regard  to  the  continued  or  intermittent  nature 
of  the  effect,  the  uniformity,  retardation,  or  acceleration  of  its  rate  and 
Its  periodical  or  non-periodical  increase.  It  is  always  of  course  open 
to  those  who  are  given  to  logical  hyper-criticism  to  object  that  every 
curve  drawn  consists  ultimately  of  a  series  of  point-like  deposits  of 
pigment  and  that  these  only  appear  as  a  continuous  line  to  the  naked 
eye,  which  interpolates  whether  we  like  it  or  no.  After  all,  we  may 
be  told,  you  have  only  got  a  number  of  particular  perceptions  and 
these  do  not  allow  you  to  infer  the  nature  of  effects,  which  found  no 
pigment  available  to  register  themselves  by  and  which  therefore  cor- 
respond to  the  gaps  between  the  colored  points,  which  make  up  the 
curve.  Let  us  leave  such  objections  to  answer  themselves ;  all  I  wish 
to  do  is  to  accentuate  the  truth  that  the  discovery  of  an  universal  law 
is  always  a  guess  on  the  part  of  the  imagination,  made  possible  by 
a  knowledge  of  facts.  This  knowledge  is  recalled  to  our  memory 
by  the  resemblance  of  the  given  case  to  analogous  earlier  cases, 
and  thus  offers  itself  as  an  explanation.  But  a  demonstrative  method, 
or  a  method  which  involves  no  logical  jumps,  a  sure  logical  receipt 
for  arriving  at  the  true  universal  law  of  a  series  of  events,  does 
not  exist. 

270.  If  we  return  to  our  series  of  values  in  order  to  see  how  far 
the  problem  in  hand  is  successfully  solved,  we  are  confronted  by 
numerous  cases  in  which  it  emphatically  is  not  Among  such  are  all 
those  statistical  calculations,  which  view  a  result  E,  which  really  de- 
pends on  the  co-operation  of  several  conditions,  by  sole  reference  to 


en  AFTER  vin.3          Partial  Laws.     Statistics,  345 

the  influence  of  a  single  one  of  these  conditions,  and  then,  attempt  to 
find  an  universal  law  in  regard  to  the  relations  of  the  two.  Thus  it 
is  attempted  to  estimate  a  man's  present  expectation  of  life  by  sole 
reference  to  the  age  he  has  already  reached.  The  self-contradictori- 
ness  of  the  problem  at  once  shows  itself;  if  a  variable  quantity  E  is 
a  function  of  C,  x,y,  and  z}  we  cannot  express  it  as  a  mere  function 
of  C  alone,  entirely  neglecting  x,y,  z,  which  ought  to  enter  into  the 
true  expression  as  part  of  the  collateral  conditions.  Nor  in  fact  would 
a  man  ever  make  such  an  attempt  unless,  once  more,  he  had  experi- 
ence which  taught  him  to  put  some  trust  in  it.  However  much  the 
procedure  may  lack  precision  from  a  theoretical  point  of  view,  he  still 
knows  that  as  a  matter  of  fact  something  comes  of  it,  though  not 
quite  what  he  wishes;  and  conversely  it  is  the  absence  of  all  result  in 
other  cases,  which  induces  him  to  abstain  from  similar  attempts. 
What  result  we  do  usually  arrive  at  in  such  cases  is  based  on  the  fol- 
lowing considerations.  Among  the  conditions  on  which  the  continu- 
ance of  a  man's  life  depends,  that  which  in  estimating  it  we  regard  as 
the  most  important  is  beyond  doubt  the  age  C,  which  he  has  already 
attained ;  for  inseparably  bound  up  with  that  age  is  a  modification  of 
his  bodily  system,  which  continues  slowly  to  run  its  course  and  is 
ultimately  sufficient  of  itself,  even  though  all  other  conditions  remain 
favorable,  to  make  death  inevitable.  During  long  periods  of  one's 
life  however  the  action  of  C  changes  slowly  and  inconsiderably,  while 
in  other  sections  of  one's  life  it  increases  very  quickly  and  significantly; 
hence  it  follows  that  the  same  outward  conditions  have  an  uniform 
influence  on  the  body  during  one  period  of  life,  and  during  another 
an  equally  uniform  but  uniformly  different  influence.  It  is  upon  this 
interaction  of  the  present  stock  of  vitality  and  circumstances  that  a 
man's  capacity  of  further  life  really  depends,  and  so  we  may  suppose 
that  between  certain  fixed  ages  the  expectation  of  life  decreases 
according  to  one  tolerably  constant  law,  between  certain  other  limited 
ages  according  to  a  different  but  equally  constant  law;  we  cannot 
however  conceive  of  an  universal  law  which  should  determine  the 
expectation  of  life  universally  for  the  whole  of  life,  and  so  for  any 
age  a  man  may  have  reached.  In  such  investigations  therefore  partial 
laws  or  formulas  are  usually  laid  clown,  which  are  only  meant  to  hold 
each  of  them  for  values  of  C  which  lie  between  two  fixed  limits,  and 
to  help  us  to  estimate  the  corresponding  values  of  E.  Theoretical 
significance  these  formulae  have  none  ;  they  are  merely  practical  short 
cuts  or  synoptical  expressions  of  how  things  take  place  in  the  gross  ; 
if  they  are  very  simple  and  yet  exact  enough  for  our  purpose,  they  aid 


346  The  Discovery  of  Laws.  [BOOK  ii. 

our  calculations ;  if  they  are,  to  start  with,  of  a  complicated  nature  it  is 
at  best  empty  affectation  to  lay  them  down  at  all ;  in  such  cases  it  is 
more  useful  to  go  back  to  the  original  form  of  a  table  containing  in  its 
simplest  form  the  mass  of  observed  facts,  from  which  *  they "  were 
derived. 

271.  But  matters  may  be  less  unfavorable,  and  we  may  be  able  to 
reckon  on  the  presence  of  a  universal  law  capable  of  being  expressed 
by  the  help  of  two  centres  of  relation  C  and  E,  The  question  then 
arises,  which  we  are  to  choose  of  the  many  laws  that  may  with  equal 
truth  or  with  equal  approximation  to  the  truth  be  supposed  to  under- 
lie the  series  of  pairs  of  .values  presented  us.  In  raising  this  question 
we  make  assumptions  slightly  different  from  those  we  have  hitherto 
made.  The  numerical  terms  of  our  series  will  not  represent  the 
observable  facts  with  such  complete  accuracy  as  we  supposed  before ; 
they  will  contain  inaccuracies,  but  we  are  for  the  present  content  to 
believe  that  these  are  small,  and  that  they  are  not  all  on  one  side,  but 
exceed  the  truth  about  as  often  as  they  fall  short  of  it.  Accepting 
these  conditions  a  doubt  arises  whether  the  particular  formula,  which 
fits  in  most  accurately  with  the  given  values,  is  to  be  regarded  at 
all  as  the  law  we  want.  The  pure  case  B  F  will  hardly  fall  within 
our  observation  quite  unalloyed;  the  result  which  the  condition  B 
would  by  itself  alone  involve  will  be  somewhat  altered  by  the  simul- 
taneous co-operation  of  other  causes  which  we  can  never  wholly 
eliminate,  and  this  matter  of  fact,  impure  already,  will  be  still  further 
modified  for  the  worse  by  the  slight  flaws  which  are  inseparable  from 
our  observation.  Thus  the  data  from  which  we  start  involve  what 
we  want  along  with  disturbing  elements  which  we  do  not  want ;  a 
formula,  which  was  exactly  adjusted  to  those  data,  would  be  a  copy 
of  this  mixed  matter  of  fact,  but  not  a  law  for  the  pure  case,  which 
we  sought  to  separate  from  its  alloy  of  accidental  and  irrelevant  cir- 
cumstances. This  consideration  forms  the  general  ground  upon 
which  we  permit  ourselves  if  at  all  to  neglect  the  slight  divergences, 
which  still  remain  between  the  given  values  and  a  law  approximately 
covering  them ;  we  then  put  down  these  differences  as  due  to  unknown 
disturbing  causes.  Cases  however  may  arise,  in  which  a  law  com- 
pletely answers  to  the  given  values  and  must  yet  be  regarded  as  not 
the  true  one,  or  anyhow  as  less  true  than  another,  which  answers  less 
closely  to  them ;  this  will  be  the  case  when  there  are  known  disturbing 
causes,  which  must  necessarily  act,  but  of  which  we  find  no  hint  given 
In  the  former  law.  Let  us  assume  that  two  bodies  a  and  b  revolve 
together  on  different  planes  and  at  different  distances  round  a  third  c, 


CHAPTER  VIII.]     The  true  law  Hot  the  observed  Cd$e»  347 

which  steadily  attracts  both;  and  that  it  strictly  follows  from  our 
observations,  that  the  two  bodies  describe  two  similar  regular  ellipses: 
then  either  the  observation  itself  must  be  pronounced  defective,  or 
the  elliptical  orbit  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  law  of  these  movements 
in  the  desired  sense.  For  if  we  only  admit  first  the  attraction 
between  c  and  a  and  between  c  and  b  and  admit  of  none  between 
a  and  ft,  a  fortiori  however  if  we  do  admit  there  to  be  attraction 
between  these  two,  the  path,  which  a  would  describe,  were  5  not 
present,  must  be  modified  when  b  is  present  together  with  it.  Either 
therefore  the  real  paths  of  the  two  bodies,  when  they  are  moving 
together,  diverge  from  a  true  ellipse,  in  which  case  our  observations 
are  inaccurate  and  fail  to  reveal  to  us  these  slight  divergences;  or 
the  ellipse  is  the  actual  path  of  either  body,  in  which  case  the  .path 
prescribed  by  law  is  some  other  one,  which  they  would  traverse, 
except  for  these  disturbances.  For  after  all  in  such  investigations  as 
these  our  aim  is  not  merely  to  get  an  universal  expression  or  copy  of 
the  facts  as  they  result  from  the  application  of  an  universal  law  to  the 
definite  conditions  of  a  special  case ;  what  we  do  want  is  rather  such 
a  general  statement  of  the  law  as  will  allow  us,  just  because  these 
special  circumstances  are  excluded,  to  judge  of  the  results  which  would 
follow,  though  the  collateral  circumstances  were  changed,  from  the 
same  or  similar  main  conditions.  In  such  cases  then  as  this  we  shall 
be  inclined  to  doubt  the  truth  of  an  assumed  law,,  when  it  fits  in  with 
a  faultless  and  all  too  striking  exactness  to  the  given  observations.  If 
it  be  asked  what  other  law  should  be  held  to  be  a  truer  one,  we  answer 
that  that  can  only  be  conjectured  according  as  the  disturbances  we 
disregarded  can  be  estimated  on  other  grounds.  The  doubt  raised 
in  us  however  may  induce  us  to  combine  our  observations  in  a 
new  way,  or  to  institute  experiments  which  may  throw  light  on  the 
matter. 

272.  In  case  there  are  several  laws,  which  all  come  about  equally 
near  to  fitting  the  data  before  us,  we  are  accustomed  conformably  to 
the  above  to  prefer  the  simpler  and  to  see  in  simplicity  as  it  were  a 
guarantee  of  truth.  Against  this  view,  which  raises  the  simplex  sigittum 
wri  into  a  universal  principle,  logic  must  enter  a  no  less  universal 
protest.  If  what  we  have  to  do  is  to  calculate  a  special  case  by  the 
light  of  a  general  law,  the  simpler  formula  is  of  course  to  be  preferred, 
because  it  is  more  convenient ';  but  from  a  more  general  point  of  view 
its  simplicity  is  no  test  of  its  truth  or  probability.  We  must  carefully 
consider  what  we  may  generally  expect  in  the  particular  field,  which 
we  would  explore.  If  it  is  clear  that  in  that  field  a  result  E  depends 


348  The  Discovery  of  Laws.  [BOOR  n. 

on  divers  independent  determining  elements,  then  a  simple  law  expres- 
sive of  their  connexion  Is  of  course  not  Impossible,  but  extremely 
unlikely.  Properly  the  first  feeling  we  should  have  on  finding  such  a 
law  would  be  one  of  distrust  in  its  validity;  we  should  believe  we  had 
taken  things  too  easily  in  our  observations  or  in  our  reasonings  and 
had  left  out  of  sight  some  of  the  essential  conditions  \  we  shall  only 
be  satisfied  if  a  searching  investigation  shows  that  these  neglected 
conditions  really  always  cancel  one  another's  influence  in  such  a  way 
as  to  justify  our  excluding  any  reference  to  them  in  the  universal 
law.  Say  we  have  found  from  mere  observation  that  a  body  starting 
from  the  surface  of  a  sphere  under  the  attraction  of  the  centre  of  the 
sphere  always  reaches  a  certain  other  concentric  surface  with  the  same 
final  velocity,  no  matter  along  what  path  it  passes  from  the  one 
surface  to  the  other ;  such  a  remarkable  discovery  as  this  we  could 
only  credit  on  one  condition,  namely  if  it  were  shown  that  this  remark- 
able compensation  of  different  collateral  conditions  really  takes  and 
must  take  place  in  the  case, 

We  are  easily  deceived  in  similar  cases,  when  the  result  found  Is  not 

so  paradoxical  as  the  above.     The  formula  T  =  it  A  /  -  seems  to 

V    g 

unite  all  the  determining  elements,  upon  which  the  time  of  a  pendulum's 
swing  depends,  for  a  superficial  observation  does  not  give  any  effect 
to  the  angle  of  vibration.  A  more  exact  theory  however  shows  that 
this  simple  expression  is  only  approximative  and  that  the  true  law  is 
far  more  complicated.  A  certain  speculative  principle  which  we  may 
come  across  later  on  leads  us  to  suppose  beforehand  that  in  nature 
there  exists  a  variety  of  compensatory  arrangements,  in  virtue  of  which 
certain  types  of  resulting  events  are  maintained  in  perpetual  conformity 
with  the  same  simple  law,  no  matter  how  different  the  medium, 
through  which  in  particular  cases  these  types  are  realised.  Nevertheless 
one  should  only  count  upon  the  presence  of  such  arrangements, 
where  observation  beyond  doubt  reveals  them;  on  the  other  hand, 
where  we  have  no  means  of  thus  forecasting  the  limits,  within  which 
the  result  of  imperfectly  known  conditions  must  confine  itself,  the 
supposition  of  simple  laws  and  the  predilection  for  them  remains  an 
error  only  to  be  guarded  against  by  a  thorough  exploration  of  all 
essential  details  of  the  given  object  of  investigation.  The  present 
state  of  natural  science  does  not  perhaps  make  these  warnings  so 
necessary  as  they  were  a  score  of  years  ago,  when  there  was  a  strong 
tendency  to  explain  suck  complex  phenomena  as  organic  life  by  very 
simple,  but  no  less  inadequate  principles.  Of  course  it  is  very  different 


CHAPTER  viii.3     Discovery  needs  prior  knowledge.  349 

when  the  object  with  which  we  are  dealing  belongs  to  a  class  of 
phenomena,  which  we  cannot  regard  as  changeable  products  of  a 
number  of  independent  causes,  but  rather  as  themselves  manifesta- 
tions of  those  fundamental  forces,  whose  constant  action  under  all* 
sorts  of  secondary  conditions  makes  up  the  complex  tissue  of  physical 
processes.  For  these  cases  which  do  in  fact  realise  approximately  or 
completely  the  type  of  the  presupposed  pure  case  £  F,  we  certainly 
must  regard  the  simplicity  of  the  law  as  a  sign  of  its  probable  validity ; 
yet  not  for  the  somewhat  aesthetic  reason  that  simplicity  is  in  all  cases 
a  characteristic  of  truth,  but  because  for  these  pure  cases  only  one  of 
the  simple  forms  of  regular  coherence  —  already  noticed  (263) — • 
between  cause  and  effect  is  in  fact  conceivable. 

273.  The  reader  will  have  noticed  how  much  importance  attaches 
to  already  acquired  knowledge  for  the  discovery  of  new  laws,  and 
how  we  even  went  so  far  as  to  appeal  to  all  manner  of  previous  con- 
siderations and  accessory  thoughts,  through  which  alone  the  imme- 
diate data  of  sense  come  to  have  a  precise  meaning.  The  usual  way 
of  stating  the  necessity  we  are  thus  under  is  to  say  that  we  need 
hypotheses •,  in  order  to  make  use  of  the  results  of  observation.  In 
fact  we  may  be  inclined  to  apply  this  term  hypothesis  to  several  of 
the  modes  of  thought,  of  which  we  have  already  availed  ourselves. 
Thus  we  may  say  it  was  to  make  an  hypothesis  to  infer  back  as  we 
did  from  a  periodical  increase  and  decrease  of  an  effect  while  the 
cause  constantly  increases  to  a  shifting  of  the  relative  positions  of  the 
active  elements  associated  in  the  cause.  I  think  fit  however  in  the 
interests  of  logic  to  define  terms  differently  and  to  distinguish  between 
postulates,  hypotheses,  &n&  fictions.  The  regressive  inference  just 'men- 
tioned is  a  postulate,  that  is,  it  expresses  the  conditions  which  must 
be  set  up,  or  the  ground  of  explanation  which  must  be  given  by  some 
reality,  whether  thing,  force,  or  event,  before  we  can  think  the 
phenomenon  in  the  form  in  which  it  is  presented  to  us;  it  thus 
requires  or  postulates  the  presence  of  something  that  can  account  for 
the  given  effect.  The  postulate  is  not  therefore  an  assumption  which 
we  can  indifferently  make  or  leave  alone,  or  discard  for  another ; 
rather  it  is  an  absolutely  necessary  assumption,  without  which  the 
content  of  the  observation  with  which  we  are  dealing  would  contra- 
dict the  laws  of  our  thought.  Nor  is  it  at  all  necessary  that  the 
postulate  should  be  so  indefinite  in  respect  of  its  content  as  it  might 
appear  io  be,  judging  by  the  way  in  which  I  have  just  described  it ; 
on  the  contrary,  what  must  be  there,  or  have  been  there,  or  be  ac- 
complished in  order  thai  we  may  conceive  the  given  phenomenon  as 


35<o  The  Discovery  of  Laws.  [BOOK  n. 

really  happening  may  be  something  altogether  definite.  What  is  left 
indefinite  is  the  answer  to  be  given  to  an  essentially  different  ques- 
tion, namely,  the  question  who  or  what  that  is,  which  by  its  concrete 
'nature  introduces  exactly  those  conditions,  which  according  to  the 
postulate  must  needs  be  fulfilled  in  order  that  the  given  appearance 
may  be  possible.  If  a  body  of  known  mass  moves  in  a  known  curvi- 
linear path  with  a  known  velocity,  we  can  assign  with  perfect  accu- 
racy the  sum  of  the  conditions,  i.  e.  of  the  resultants  B,  Bl . ..  which 
must  act  upon  the  body  at  every  moment  if  it  is  to  move  in  this  way. 
All  that  remains  indefinite  is  the  source  from  which  B  and  Bl  come, 
whether  they  are  both  of  them  simple  impacts  of  simple  forces  or 
themselves  the  resultants  of  several  jpint  forces,  whether  in  short  they 
are  effects  of  forces  or  communications  of  already  existing  move- 
ments. It  is  clearly  an  abuse  of  language  at  once  to  apply  the  term 
hypothesis  to  all  such  demands  of  thought.  If  someone  merely  tells 
us  that  this  curvilinear  path  requires  forces  of  a  certain  intensity  and 
direction  to  divert  the  motion  from  the  tangent  just  so  much  in  every 
moment,  we  should  answer  him  in  some  such  way  as  this  :  you 
teach  us  nothing  which  we  did  not  know  before,  you  merely  repeat 
the  conditions,  which  it  was  evident  from  a  hare  analysis  of  the  given 
appearance  must  be  supplied  by  any  theory,  which  could  be  brought 
forward  in  explanation  of  the  facts. 

But  we  mean  something  else  by  an  hypothesis ;  we  mean  by  It  a 
conjecture,  which  seeks  to  fill  up  the  postulate  thus  abstractly  stated 
by  specifying  the  concrete  causes,  forces,  or  processes,  out  of  which 
the  given  phenomenon  really  arose  in  this  particular  case,  while  in 
othep  cases  may  be  the  same  postulate  is  to  be  satisfied  by  utterly 
different  though  equivalent  combinations  of  forces  or  active  elements. 
Thus  we  may  fix  at  once  two  characteristics  of  the  hypothesis. 
Firstly  it  is  far  from  being  an  empty  surmise,  which  comes  into  our 
heads  without  any  reason  at  all :  it  always  rests  on  a  postulate,  which 
we  must  accept,  and  is  designed  to  explain  the  contradictions  or 
lacunae,  which  make  the  given  appearance  prima  facie  unthinkable. 
These  it  explains  by  assuming  a  secret  inner  organisation  of  real 
things  and  processes,  in  which  these  contradictions  vanish,  while  at 
the  same  time  it  becomes  conceivable  how  and  why  the  said  contra- 
dictions unavoidably  arise  for  us  in  the  outward  appearance,  which 
alone  we  can  observe.  The  second  characteristic  of  an  hypothesis  is 
closely  connected  with  the  former :  every  hypothesis  is  meant  to  be 
an  account  of  a  fact,  and  is  no  mere  figure  of  thought  or  means  of 
envisaging  the  object.  A  person  who  sets  up  an  hypothesis  believes 


CHAPTER viii.]  Postulates,  Hypotheses,  'and  Fictions.        351 

he  has  extended  the  series  of  real  facts  which  he  can  observe  by  a 
happy  divination  of  facts  not  less  real  though  falling  outside  the  range 
of  his  observation.  In  such  a  case  there  is  no  need,  for  the  facts  thus 
divined  to  be  simple  and  ultimate  facts ;  they  in  their  turn  may  give 
rise  to  researches  going  still  further  back  into  the  grounds  of  their 
possibility ;  it  is  enough  for  the  hypothesis  if  the  facts  it  supposes  can 
be  conceived  as  really  existing,  though  we  reserve  for  another  time  ' 
the  question  how  they  come  into  existence.  Students  of  Optics 
found  (to  put  it  briefly)  that  observed  facts  make  it  necessary  to 
postulate  that  rays  of  light  act  in  the  same  moment  in  a  different 
manner  on  their  right  side  and  on  their  left,  and  that  this  action  itself 
alternates  incessantly  with  the  time,  and  that  therefore  there  must  be 
some  cause  capable  of  bringing  about  just  this  phenomenon.  The 
physical  hypothesis  was  that  this  postulate  would  be  satisfied  by 
transverse  vibrations  on  "the  part  of  atoms  of  ether.  What  maybe 
the  source  of  these  transverse  vibrations,  which  form  so  indispensable 
a  preliminary  in  the  explanation  of  the  phenomena,  remains  a  question 
for  the  future  to  solve ;  in  any  case  however  it  involves  no  contradic- 
tion, which  would  prevent  our  conceiving  it  as  a  process  which 
actually  takes  place. 

We  have  still  to  explain  what  we  mean  by  fictions.  These  are 
assumptions  made  by  us  with  full  consciousness  of  the  impossibility 
of  the  thing  assumed,  whether  it  be  because  it  is  self-contradictory  or 
because  for  other  than  intrinsic  reasons  it  cannot  pass  muster  as  a 
constituent  of  reality.  Fictions  are  of  use  when  there  is  no  proposi- 
tion Z7,  under  which  a  given  case  M  can  be  logically  subsumed  as  a 
case  of  its  application,  whereas  there  is  a  proposition  T\  from  the 
actual  applications  of  which  M  is  only  distinguished  by  a  definite 
difference  d.  We  then  class  M  under  T19  draw  therefrom  the  con- 
clusions we  want  and  correct  them  later  on  by  adding  on  such  modi- 
fications 6,  as  are  rendered  necessary  by  the  distinction  d,  which  still 
remains.  The  finding  of  the  circumference  of  the  circle  by  inclusion 
of  it  between  an  outer  and  an  inner  polygon  may  be  regarded  as 
merely  a  method  of  limitation,  unless  we  like  to  consider  the  con- 
ception of  the  length  of  a  curve  as  in  itself  a  sort  of  fiction  ;  but  any- 
how the  formula  ds2  =  dx*-\-  dy*  is  certainly  a  fiction,  if  the  symbol 
=  signifies  real  equality  and  not  the  mere  approximation  thereto, 
As  long  as  ds  is  a  real  arc,  so  long  the  equation  is  false ;  but  as  soon 
as  ds  loses  all  quantity  all  the  terms  become  nought  and  the  equation 
loses  all  meaning.  It  leads  however  to  an  infinite  approximation  to 
the  true  value,  as  by  gradually  diminishing  ds  we  gradually  diminish 


352  The  Discovery  of  Laws,  [BOOK  n. 

the  error  committed  and  by  so  doing  render  the  sum  or  the  integral 
of  ds  ultimately  Independent  of  it.  It  is  hardly  requisite  to  remark 
upon  the  extraordinary  importance  of  such  modes  of  procedure  for 
the  intellectual  process  of  discovery ;  but  we  also  encounter  them  in 
other  branches  of  knowledge,  and  the  lawyers'  custom  of  turning  to 
the  most  nearly  allied  maxim  of  law  Tl,  when  there  is  no  special  rule 
under  which  a  particular  case  may  be  brought,  is  from  a  logical 
point  of  view  to  he  classed  as  a  fiction,  though  we  generally  apply  the 
name  only  to  cases  of  a  peculiar  kind.  Jurisprudence  must  of  course 
be  left  to  shape  its  own  nomenclature;  still  I  cannot  believe  that 
what  used  to  be  regarded  as  a  fiction  was  not  something  more  than 
a  mere  transfer  determined  by  a  fresh  act  of  legislation  of  all  a  man's 
legal  rights  and  obligations  to  a  subject,  who  per  se  stood  in  no  rela- 
tion to  these.  I  think  it  depended  on  something  further,  and  in  the 
case  of  the  Roman  adoption  the  assumption  of  the  father's  name  who 
adopted  seems  to  me  to  prove  that,  as  a  psychological  fact,  an  attempt 
was  made  to  begin  with  to  regard  a  relationship  which  could  not  be 
established  in  reality  as  yet  after  all  established,  while  the  corresponding 
sum  of  rights  and  duties  was  determined  as  the  result  and  on  the 
basis  of  this  fiction. 

274.  So  important  are  the  results  which  we  expect  from  hypothesis 
that  we  cannot  blame  the  attempt  so  often  made  to  subject  to  some 
sort  of  discipline  the  free  course  of  the  discoverer's  imagination  from 
which  alone  hypotheses  can  flow.  But  we  must  observe  that  though 
most  of  the  rules  laid  down  are  truly  excellent  so  far  as  they  can  be 
carried  out,  yet  we  must  not  regard  a  particular  hypothesis  as  ille- 
gitimate because  it  disregards  them ;  if  we  do  we  seriously  curtail  the 
utility  of  hypothesis.  Let  us  illustrate  our  meaning.  It  is  alleged  in 
the  first  place  that  the  hypothesis  must  satisfy  the  postulate,  on  which 
it  is  based,  not  by  a  fictitious  representation,  but  by  assigning  a 
reality,  and  that  it  should  therefore  make  assumption  only  of  what 
may  be  thought  as  fact,  not  of  what  is  inherently  self-contradictory. 
This  is  obvious  enough;  still  we  go  too  far,  if  we  require  that  the 
content  of  an  hypothesis  should  always  carry  with  it  the  possibility  of 
being  directly  refuted  by  subsequent  observation.  We  may  look  on 
this  requirement  as  constituting  an  ideal,  and  it  certainly  is  a  very 
useful  rule  to  observe,  for  it  teaches  us,  where  we  can,  to  construct 
our  hypothesis  in  such  a  manner,  that  its  falsity,  if  it  be  false,  transpires 
at  once  instead  of  being  for  ever  proof  against  direct  refutation  by 
reason  of  its  content  being  wholly  inaccessible  to  observation.  Still 
we  should  have  to  sacrifice  many  useful  assumptions,  if  we  pressed 


CHAPTER  vni.]    Hypothesis  should  rest  on  Analogy.        353° 

this  demand  in  all  cases.  The  teaching  that  the  points  of  light,  so 
conspicuous  in  the  heavens  of  a  night,  are  bodies  of  vast  size,  only 
very  remote  from  us,  is  at  the  bottom  only  an  hypothesis,  by  means 
of  which  we  try  to  understand  the  otherwise  inexplicable  daily  and 
yearly  motions  of  these  lights.  However  false  this  assumption  may 
be,  it  is  clear  that  no  future  advance  of  science  can  ever  directly  refute 
it ;  we  must  therefore  abide  content  if  our  hypotheses  are  thinkable 
and  useful,  if  they  are  capable  of  explaining  all  interconnected  ap- 
pearances, even  such  as  were  still  unknown  when  we  constructed 
them,  if  that  is  to  say  they  are  indirectly  confirmed  by  the  agreement 
of  all  that  can  be  deduced  from  them  in  thought  with  the  actual  pro- 
gress of  experience.  But  if  we  would  be  so  fortunate  as  to  find  an 
hypothesis,  which  will  not  lack  this  subsequent  confirmation,  we  must 
not  simply  assume  anything  that  can  be  barely  conceived  as  real ;  we 
must  only  assume  that,  which  besides  being  thinkable  conforms  so  to 
speak  to  the  universal  customs  of  reality,  or  to  the  special  local  cus- 
toms which  prevail  in  that  department  of  phenomena  to  which  the 
object  we  are  investigating  belongs.  We  do  proceed  so  in  all  fields  of 
enquiry.  For  instance,  if  in  the  text  of  a  legal  enactment  a  particular 
phrase  only  admits  of  an  ambiguous  deduction  being  made  in  regard 
to  a  given  case,  we  do  not  interpret  it  in  an  arbitrary  fashion  by 
simply  allowing  our  wits  to  play  freely  on  it ;  we  go  back  to  the  ratio 
leg-is  on  which  the  formula  is  based,  and  by  the  light  of  that  seek  to 
interpret  the  phrase  in  a  manner  suitable  to  the  particular  case.  It  is 
the  same  in  the  natural  sciences ;  there  too  a  successful  hypothesis  is 
always  due  to  the  attention  paid  to  analogies  noticeable  in  the 
material  world  at  large  or  in  particular  departments  thereof.  Nothing 
but  the  analogy  of  fluids  and  of  the  atmosphere  could  have  originally 
suggested  the  hypothesis  of  the  continuous  filling  of  space  by  matter ; 
there  was  nothing  in  solid  bodies  to  suggest  the  idea,  for  most  of 
them  are  not  only  divisible  into  parts  but  are  composed  of  a  number 
of  actual  parts.  In  the  case  of  such  bodies  the  notion  of  the  con- 
tinuity of  matter  was  only  applicable  in  regard  to  their  minute  parts, 
and  so  it  became  a  scientific  truth  that  they  consisted  of  discrete 
atoms,  each  of  which  could  just  fill  its  own  small  space  continuously 
and  no  more.  Now  when  it  was  found  that  solid  bodies  became 
fluid  and  fluid  ones  solid,  and  that  even  gases  assume  solid  and 
liquid  shapes  under  certain  conditions,  the  atomistic  theory  was  fully 
justified  from  that  point  of  view ;  it  only  transferred  what  was  actually 
true  of  one  part  of  the  body  or  of  certain  forms  of  it,  to  other  bodies 
or  other  forms,  in  the  case  of  which  the  same  state  could  not  as  a 

A  a 


254  ^ie  Discovery  of  Laws*  CBOOKII. 

matter  of  fact  be  demonstrated  to  be  real,  though  it  could  be  shown 
to  be  possible,  inasmuch  as  upon  this  assumption  the  appearances 
presented  by  them  remained  perfectly  conceivable.  As  soon  as  it  is 
found  that  certain  groups  of  phenomena  are  readily  explained  on  the 
supposition  that  nature  habitually  acts  in  such  and  such  a  way,  fresh 
discoveries  are  made,  every  day,  because  people  at  once  try  how  far 
other  facts  may  be  referred  to  the  same  principle.  Such  was  the  case 
with  the  undulatory  theory.  On  the  surface  of  water,  in  strings,  on 
resonant  surfaces,  waves  could  be  directly  seen  and  their  shape 
rendered  visible  in  particular  cases  by  artificial  means ;  there  was  no 
apparent  reason  for  supposing  these  movements  to  be  confined  to 
certain  materials  and  there  was  accordingly  much  to  be  said  in  favour 
of  the  hypothesis,  which  sought  to  explain  on  the  same  principle  first 
the  propagation  of  sound  by  the  air,  next  the  movement  of  the  lumi- 
niferous  ether,  and  lastly  the  phenomena  of  heat. 

Similarly,  in  the  organic  world,  people  stumbled  at  a  few  points  on 
a  division  of  labour  of  which  they  had  never  dreamed ;  where  before 
very  different  functions  had  been  attributed  to  the  same  substratum, 
each  of  these  functions  was  shown  to  have  a  special  organ  of  its  own, 
which  did  not  do  service  for  any  other  function.  It  was  then  sug- 
gested hypothetically  that  the  same  thing  went  on  in  regard  to  the 
nerves  organic  to  the  different  sensations  of  colour  and  sound; 
whether  the  truth  of  the  matter  has  been  reached  is  still  open  to 
doubt,  but  from  the  point  of  view  of  logic  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  hypothesis  is  justified.  Again,  movements  are  often  observed  in 
plants,  even  contractile  movements ;  still  it  does  not  appear  that  these 
are  due  to  the  contractions  of  living  contractile  tissues  as  are  the 
movements  of  an  animal's  body ;  consequently,  plausible  as  this  hypo- 
thesis is  in  itself,  it  is  not  advanced  in  this  case,  because  prima facie  it 
does  not  seem  to  agree  with  the  habits  of  nature  in  this  region ;  on 
the  other  hand  it  is  worth  while  enquiring  whether  this  semblance  is 
not  a  fallacious  one. 

275.  There  is  yet  another  condition  which  a  hypothesis  must  fulfil 
It  should  be  exactly  adjusted  to  the  postulate  which  it  is  framed  to 
meet,  and  not  contain  either  more  or  less  than  it  must  contain  if  it  is 
to  answer  to  the  demands  of  the  postulate.  Hence  a  rule  which  must 
be  carefully  observed  in  constructing  hypotheses.  When  we  have  to 
account  for  something  which  happens,  we  must  not  look  vaguely 
about  as  if  for  inspiration ;  we  must  before  anything  else  rigorously 
analyse  what  is  given,  and  so  lay  down  the  exact  postulate  which  the 
hypothesis  must  satisfy.  When  we  have  done  so  we  may  neglect  for 


CHAPTER  viiL]       Shou  Id  fit  postulate  precisely*  355 

the  moment  the  secondary  features,  of  which  we  know  from  other 
sources  that  they  can  easily  be  treated  as  mere  accessories,  when  we 
come  to  define  in  a  more  concrete  manner  any  hypothesis  which  can 
come  under  discussion ;  but  all  essential  elements  of  the  problem,  all, 
that  is,  which  are  not  themselves  mere  consequences  of  other  ele- 
ments, must  be  accurately  observed,  for  it  is  entirely  from  the  way  in 
which  they  are  conjoined  that  we  have  to  conjecture  the  most  suitable 
form  of  the  hypothesis  we  shall  choose.  We  must  then  make  a 
survey  of  our  world,  to  see  if  it  contains  any  elements,  causes,  forces, 
or  combinations  of  forces  of  such  a  kind  as  to  satisfy  the  postulate 
laid  down ;  after  the  fullest  survey  of  these  and  guided  at  once  by  a 
practical  and  theoretical  motive  we  shall  make  choice  of  those  which 
fulfil  the  specified  requirements  in  the  simplest  manner  and  in  the 
most  complete  accord  with  the  ruling  analogies  of  the  particular 
department  in  question. 

For  example,  a  body  is  found  covered  with  wounds ;  our  first  con- 
cern will  be  to  settle  whether  the  wounds  must  have  been  inflicted 
while  the  man  was  still  alive  or  after  he  was  dead;  we  then  try  to 
estimate  the  magnitude,  mode,  and  direction  of  the  forces,  which 
could  have  caused  the  wounds.     Having  thus  ascertained  the  con- 
ditions we  found  a  postulate   on  them,  and  enquire  whether  this 
postulate  is  satisfied  by  assuming  a  mere  natural  force  to  have  acted 
or  only  by  presupposing  a  weapon  to  have  been  wilfully  employed, 
This  enquiry  may  be  said  to  settle  ilitform  of  the  hypothesis,  e.g.  we 
may  have  to  make  the  assumption  that  murder  was  committed,  after 
which  we  proceed  to  detect  the  agent  not  by  the  help  of  ill-founded 
fancies,  but  by  asking  ourselves  what  persons  there  are  of  whom  the 
deed  might  be  expected,  partly  because  their  relations  to  the  murdered 
man  would  have  supplied  a  motive?  partly  because  there  is  nothing  in 
their  characters  to  prevent  our  suspecting  them  without  direct  evi- 
dence.    We  have  no  space  to  give  in  all  the  necessary  detail  an 
example,  \vhich  would  illustrate  the  extreme  care  which  in  judicial 
investigation  is  taken  to  satisfy  every  part  of  the  postulate ;  a  con- 
viction founded  on  it  is  not  regarded  as  a  safe  one,  unless  It  accounts 
for  every  single  circumstance,  which  because  it  Is  a  violation  of  the 
ordinary  course  of  things  would  require  to  be  specially  accounted  for 
even  if  we  were  not  dealing  with  a  case  of  felony.     In  such  a  case 
a  man  is  forced  to  be  circumspect  by  the  vastness  of  the  issues  at 
stake;   his  judgment  is  rendered  keener  by  the  thought,  and  he 
reasons  with  far  greater  accuracy  than  he  would  in  conducting  many 
a  philosophical  speculation,  in  which  much  worse  errors  are  condoned 

A  a  2 


356  The  Discovery  of  Laws.  [BOOK  n. 

because  they  can  do  no  one  any  harm,  We  find  plenty  of  people 
who  without  seriously  examining  some  phenomenon  which  strikes 
them  as  strange  put  it  down  to  what  they  call  the  fluid  of  animal-mag- 
netism, and  this  without  specifying  the  circumstances  which  need  to  be 
explained.  They  talk  in  a  vague  and  general  way  of  this  fluid  being 
emitted  and  immitted,  forgetting  that  such  barren  generalities  are  per- 
fectly useless  as  explanations  of  the  kind,  quantity,  and  sequence  of 
the  phenomena  for  which  they  are  supposed  to  account.  Natural 
science  is  not  so  liable  to  go  wrong  in  this  way  because  it  must  state 
its  problems  with  so  much  mathematical  precision  even  to  render  them 
intelligible. 

276.  I  shall  presently  have  to  speak  of  individual  facts,  in  treating 
of  which  the  important  point  is  not  so  much  the  simplicity  of  the 
hypothesis  framed  with  a  view  to  their  comprehension  as  the  com- 
pleteness with  which  the  hypothesis  covers  all  that  is  contained  in 
the  facts.  Experience  teaches  us  in  how  many  roundabout  ways  an 
event  is  sometimes  brought  about  in  a  particular  case,  whereas  in 
other  cases  it  may  arise  from  several  simpler  causes.  But  at  present 
we  arc  not  concerned  with  individual  facts;  we  are  still  trying  to 
discover  the  mailer  of-fact  which  is  the  common  basis  of  a  whole 
class  of  frequently  recurring  events;  and  here  in  deference  to  a  sort 
of  principle  of  'the  least  cause'  we  must  prefer  the  simpler  hypothesis 
to  the  more  complicated:  not  because  simplicity  in  itself  is  any 
guarantee  of  truth,  hut  because  if  we  go  out  of  our  way  to  assume 
any  datum  whatever,  which  is  not  indispensable  in  order  to  the  pro- 
duction of  the  thing,  we  make  an  utterly  void  supposition  overstepping 
tho  ftivcn  postulate  and  therefore  unjustifiable  in  point  of  method. 
Bui  our  procedure  may  be  logically  correct  without  being  endorsed 
by  reviiity,  Suppose  we  have  selected  our  hypothesis  and  are  trying 
to  deduce  from  it  the  original  appearance,  we  may  find  that  our  de- 
ductions do  not  u;.;Tee  with  the  data,  either  because  our  analysis  of 
the  latter  was  defective,  or  because  fresh  observations,  which  were 
impossible  before,  have  brought  out  new  aspects  of  the  thing.  In 
that  case  the  hypothesis  must  needs  be  amended.  This  maybe  done 
in  two  ways*  The  hypothesis  contains  elements,  which  in  themselves 
admit  of  being  modified,  and  we  determine  these  in  a  more  suitable 
manner,  so  tliat  as  grounds  for  the  deduction  of  the  given  fact  they 
arc  no  longer  either  too  wide  or  too  narrow  but  just  adequate.  The 
other  way  is  to  add  on  fresh  subsidiary  hypotheses  in  regard  to  a  few 
of  its  leading  features.  In  advocating  this  mode  of  procedure  just 
here  I  am  at  issue  with  a  much-advocated  theory  which  regards  such 


CHAPTER  viii.]  Subsidiary  Hypotheses,  357 

a  grafting  of  fresh  hypotheses  upon  old  ones  as  a  sufficient  proof  of 
the  Inadmissibility  of  the  latter,  and  insists  that  we  ought  to  replace 
them  at  once  by  simpler  ones.  We  do  not  really  act  upon  any  such 
theory  either  in  everyday  life  or  in  science.  We  do  not  pull  a  house 
down  and  build  it  up  anew  just  to  get  rid  of  a  flaw,  which  a  slight 
modification  of  its  construction  would  remedy ;  we  do  not  at  once 
devise  a  brand  new  constitution  when  a  few  provisions  of  the  old 
one  begin  to  be  oppressive ;  and  widespread  as  is  unfortunately  the 
tendency  to  ride  principles  to  death,  the  opportune  adjustment  of 
necessary  changes  to  what  is  permanently  good  in  old  institutions 
has  always  been  considered  the  true  art  of  statesmanship.  And  if  we 
look  at  the  way  in  which  the  body  of  science  has  grown  up  historically 
we  see  that  it  too  is  very  willing  to  essay  new  points  of  view  under 
old  and  incommodious  forms,  if  only  not  to  lose  any  of  the  truths 
which  have  once  been  won  through  those  forms.  I  do  not  mean  to 
•say  that  science  should  or  will  rest  content  with  such  methods ;  we 
all  trust  that  the  result  of  all  our  painful  investigations  may  prove  a 
simple  and  thoroughly  consistent  whole ;  but  until  we  have  arrived  at 
that  result  we  must  not  be  deterred  by  the  oddly  complex  and  patch- 
work garb,  in  which  our  views  must  needs  be  clothed,  if  we  are 
careful  to  adjust  them  to  each  freshly  known  or  better  known  feature 
of  our  object  by  means  of  subsidiary  hypotheses  tacked  on  to  our 
earlier  assumptions  in  regard  to  it  This  is  the  only  way  in  which  we 
can  hope  to  reach  the  simple  and  plain  result  we  seek.  The  more 
carefully  we  now  proceed  the  more  surely  may  we  expect  that  in  the 
course  of  our  procedure  (just  as  in  any  intricate  calculation,  which 
must  yield  a  simple  result  in  a  foreseen  manner)  our  manifold  assump- 
tions will  spontaneously  reduce  themselves  to  simpler  and  more  uni- 
versal ones,  so  that  in  spite  of  all  the  circuitous  reasonings  employed 
a  net  result  will  remain  with  us,  which  is  not  only  simple  and  synop- 
tical, but  completely  covers  every  part  of  our  postulate.  In  conclusion, 
all  will  admit  that  a  lucky  gift  of  insight  may  make  us  able  to  clo  with- 
out all  these  roundabout  methods ;  but  logic  cannot  impart  inspiration  ; 
the  only  method  it  can  teach  is  what  we  have  cited : — we  must  curb 
our  impatience  and  steadily  go  on  transforming  a  hypothesis  once 
essayed,  until  we  educe  from  its  inappropriate  transitional  forms  a 
simple  shape  of  it,  which  satisfies  both  our  requirements  and  those  of 
the  object.  We  must  not  be  in  a  hurry  to  lay  down  before  our  labour 
is  finished  principles  good  for  nothing  but  parade,  or  we  shall  be 
misled  into  making  light  of  problems,  into  neglecting  inconvenient 
peculiarities,  into  acquiescence  in  views  which  in  a  rough  and  coarse 


3  5 8  The  Discovery  of  Lazvs.  [  BOOK  IL 

"manner  reflect  the  large  outlines  of  a  thing,  but  are  quite  inadequate 
to  account  for  its  particular  features. 

277.  A  nice  point  remains  to  be  noticed.  Nothing  can  seem  more 
imperatively  necessary  than  that  a  hypothesis,  which  is  meant  as  a 
conjecture  of  something  which  really  is  or  happens,  must  before  all 
things  allege  nothing  but  what  is  in  itself  possible :  and  of  course  it 
must  assume  nothing  which  is  ascertained  to  be  impossible:  but  still 
there  is  a  doubt  as  to  where  the  possibility  which  is  still  admissible 
begins  and  ends.  I  have  tried  to  solve  ihe  doubt  by  carefully  choosing 
my  words ;  I  have  said  that  the  hypothesis  may  legitimately  involve 
anything  that  can  be  mentally  represented  as  given  matter-of-fact,  but 
nothing  else,  and  I  really  believe  not  only  that  this  is  all  we  should 
require  but  that  we  may  admit  so  much  as  this  to  be  possible  without 
coming  into  conflict  with  the  idea  of  the  hypothesis.  The  hypothesis 
intends  to  conjecture  a  fact,  but  it  is  also  content  that  this  fact  should 
when  conjectured  just  exist  in  the  way  in  which  facts  really  observed  s© 
often  exist :  viz.  that  while  we  can  conceive  it  or  picture  it  we  cannot 
explain  the  manner  in  which  it  may  possibly  come  to  be.  Nothing 
can  warrant  our  assuming  by  way  of  hypothesis  a  circle,  which  is  at 
the  same  lime  a  triangle ;  it  is  beyond  the  constructive  power  of  our 
fancy  to  frame  a  mental  image  of  such  a  figure,  nor  could  it  ever 
present  itself  to  our  senses  as  a  given  matter  of  fact.  On  the  other 
hand  we  may  assume  the  existence  of  invisibly  small  yet  extended 
atoms  of  unchangeable  shape  and  size;  there  is  no  contradiction  in 
the  notion  of  them,  which  would  prevent  our  conceiving  them  as 
possible  objects  of  perception,  were  our  senses  rendered  more  acute 
by  artificial  means.  There  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  look  on 
the  existence  of  such  atoms  as  real,  and  suppose  that  though  they  are 
inaccessible  to  our  unaided  senses  they  are  yet  the  basis  of  the  pheno- 
mena which  we  can  observe.  We  may  probably  have  to  modify  this 
idea,  when  we  try  to  think  it  out  and  examine  its  possibility  as  an 
element  in  the  system  of  nature;  but  still  there  is  no  need  to  do  sof 
till  we  have  availed  ourselves  of  it  as  a  preliminary  principle  and  found 
it  of  permanent  use  in  accounting  for  particular  phenomena.  In  the 
same  way  the  theory  of  transverse  undulations  of  a  luminiferous  ether 
answers,  we  saw,  the  requirements  laid  down  by  a  postulate  of  ob- 
servation, and  such  undulations  can 'no  doubt  be  conceived  as  really 
taking  place,  though  no  light  has  yet  been  thrown  on  their  physical 
origin.  The  entire  supposition  of  an  infinitely  extended  homogeneous 
or  isotropic  ether  is  indispensable  so  far  as  we  can  see  to  our  theory 
of  the  propagation  of  light,  but  it  belongs  to  the  same  class  of  ideas; 


CHAPTER  viiij   Hypothesis  should  be  imaginable,  359 

we  can  picture  it  clearly  enough,  but  we  cannot  in  the  least  see  how 
so  uniform  a  distribution  of  interacting  elements  Is  possible  as  a 
mechanical  result.  Those  who  admire  the  logical  methods  of  natural 
science  occasionally  deceive  themselves,  when  they  represent  the  whole 
structure  of  our  cognitions  as  resting  on  absolutely  sure  foundations ; 
we  are  rather  like  men  who  are  tubbing  a  well  with  masonry;  like 
them  we  build  from  above  downwards  and  so  are  we  obliged  to 
assume  a  substructure  of  hypothetical  facts,  which  we  trust  will  be 
sufficiently  firmly  upheld  for  a  time  by  the  unanalysed  ground  at  the 
bottom  to  support  our  superstructure,  until  we  can  carry  our  know- 
ledge a  step  deeper  down  and  replace  the  hypothetical  basis  of  our 
knowledge  by  a  basis  of  facts,  and  then  go  through  the  whole  process 
over  again.  It  must  be  admitted  that  at  this  rate  we  leave  a  doubt  as 
to  where  hypotheses  and  fictions,  laws  and  rules  respectively  begin 
and  end;  I  have  hinted  at  this  idea  before  and  1  shall  recur  to  it 
«a,orain. 


CHAPTER   IX. 

Determination  of  Individual  Facts. 

278.  WE  cannot  be  certain  about  a  matter  of  fact  unless  we  have 
ourselves  directly  perceived  it;  and  even  then  only  on  the  supposition 
that  our  Interpretation  of  the  sensible  impression,  which  is  all  that  is 
originally  given,  is  correct.  We  interpret  this  by  combining  it  in  the 
form  of  a  judgment  into  a  whole  of  interconnected  parts.  When  our 
information  comes  to  us  through  others,  we  can  only  be  sure  that  our 
information  is  trustworthy  when  we  can  rely  on  the  witnesses  or. 
reporters.  There  may  be  much  to  recommend  and  justify  the 
confidence  we  repose  in  them,  but  nothing  can  ever  demonstrate 
its  necessity.  Again  we  habitually  argue  back  from  given  facts  to 
facts  not  given,  but  only  attested  by  the  former  as  their  causes, 
Every  such  inference  is  liable  to  be  wrong,  because  although  every 
consequent  must,  have  a  ground  and  a  single  ground  adequate  to 
produce  it,  still  there  may  have  been  several  different  but  equivalent 
matters  of  fact,  all  equally  entitled  to  be  called  the  cause— because 
each  of  them  involved  the  ground— of  the  given  effect.  Again  we 
frequently  argue  forwards  from  observed  circumstances  or  events  to  a 
future  or  contemporaneous  fact,  which  however  withdraws  itself  from 
our  observation.  There  is  an  uncertainty  about  all  such  inferences, 
because  ever}'  condition  may  in  the  actual  course  of  nature  meet  with  ' 
a  counter  condition,  which  though  it  never  annuls  the  consequences 
of  the  other,  yet  hinders  them  from  actually  assuming  the  particular 
form  in  which,  except  for  that  hindrance,  they  would  have  manifested 
themselves.  It  follows  that  wherever  any  tiling  is  outside  the  range  of 
immediate  perception,  we  are  in  our  judgments  of  reality  limited  to 
probabilities,  and  have  to  look  about  for  means  by  which  to  raise 
these  probabilities  as  nearly  up  to  the  level  of  certainty  as  is  sufficient 
for  our  purpose. 

279.  In  thinking  about  such  matters  we  are  swayed  by  two  very 
general  and  somewhat  antagonistic  principles.  In  the  first  place  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  a  train  of  events,  causally  related  and  belonging  to 
one  another,  which  runs  its  course  by  itself  in  a  work!  of  its  own ;  on 


Objections  to  simple  Explanations  361 

the  contrary,  every  such  series  of  events  goes  on  in  one  and  the  same 
world  at  one  and  the  same  time  with  numberless  others.  It  always 
therefore  seems  utterly  unlikely  that  any  cause  should  unfold  without 
a  hitch  the  whole  endless  series  of  effects,  which  would  have  flowed 
from  it  if  it  could  have  acted  alone  upon  the  component  parts  of  the 
world.  A  conviction  that  such  is  the  case  colours  our  daily  life  and 
conversation ;  it  finds  expression  in  the  old  warning  not  to  moor 
one's  ship  by  a  single  anchor,  nor  one's  life  by  a  single  hope.  If  we 
are  anxious  to  bring  about  a  particular  result  we  take  a  variety  of 
precautions,  each  of  which  will  effect  what  we  want ;  if  one  miscarries, 
another  will  reach  it ;  if  they  all  come  to  nothing  through  the  opera- 
tion of  external  disturbing  causes,  we  shall  be  able  to  console  ourselves 
with  the  conviction  that  such  a  conspiracy  of  chance  as  would  prevent 
a  single  one  of  the  many  causes  on  which  we  relied  from  producing 
the  desired  effect  was  quite  as  improbable  as  that  they  should  one  and 
^,11  have  succeeded.  In  the  same  way  we  distrust  a  historian  who 
deduces  mighty  revolutions  from  mere  trifles,  or  the  doctrinaire  who 
because  some  tendency  really  had  a  decisive  influence  in  an  earlier 
epoch,  pretends  to  see  in  all  the  details  of  the  history  of  centuries 
just  its  reactions  and  no  more.  The  former  loses  sight  of  the  innu- 
merable collateral  conditions,  in  virtue  of  which  alone  so  trifling  an 
event  could  even  seem  to  be  fraught  with  such  vast  consequences  ; 
nor  do  the  reasonings  of  the  other  carry  conviction  with  them  ;  man- 
kind is  a  collection  of  many  heads,  which  for  ever  teem  with  uncon- 
nected and  incalculable  impulses.  We  cannot  believe  that  these  have 
been  wholly  without  influence  in  determining  the  course  of  history, 
especially  when  conjoined  with  the  influences  of  nature,  which  follow 
an  arbitrary  order  or  disorder  of  their  own.  We  are  aesthetically  dis- 
satisfied with  any  poetry  which  sets  before  us  a  human  character 
which  is  unswervingly  self-consistent  in  all  its  actions,  great  and 
small;  such  a  character  lacks  the  air  of  being  a  genuine  creation 
of  reality,  because  no  trifling  irrationalities  of  behaviour  are  ascribed 
to  it,  no  venial  but  wayward  likes  or  dislikes  :  such  a  mere  personifica- 
tion of  an  abstract  quality  is  wearisome  in  fiction,  while  in  life,  If  such 
a  man  could  live,  he  would  be  so  repulsive  that  we  should  hardly  feel 
towards  so  impersonal  a  being  the  moral  obligations,  which  are  only 
intelligible  between  persons.  No  less  incredible  would  a  story  be  in 
which  all  the  endeavours  and  resolves  of  a  thoughtful  man  were 
brought  to  nought  by  a  constant  recurrence  of  adverse  accidents. 
Were  such  a  work  meant  seriously  it  would  shock  us,  and  we  could 
only  endure  it  as  a  bit  of  comedy  which  awoke  in  us  the  soothing: 


362  Determination  of  Individual  Pacts.        [BOOKII. 

reflexion  that  the  whole  sphere  of  action  was  an  insignificant  one,  as 
well  as  a  happy  disbelief  in  the  reality  of  what  was  being  tricked  out 
before  us  as  a  possibility.  Even  music  seems,  not  untrue  indeed,  but 
insipid  and  unmeaning,  if  the  flow  of  its  melody  can  be  too  easily 
discerned  beforehand.  It  must  not  make  the  simple  forward  move- 
ment which  answers  to  its  initial  strain ;  it  must  reveal  its  living 
elasticity  by  the  suddenness  of  the  turns  which  it  seems  constrained 
to  make  by  obstacles,  which  encounter  and  thwart  it.  Lastly  we 
distrust  any  practical  project  which  instead  of  co-ordinating  side  by 
side,  paratactically,  to  use  a  phrase  of  syntax,  independent  conditions 
of  success,  lets  them  depend  liypotactically  on  u  web  of  mutually 
conditioning  presuppositions.  Such  schemes  onh' provoke  ill-success; 
for  in  multiplying  the  parts  of  the  structure  we  only  multiply  the  points 
of  contact  with  hostile  influences,  and  by  making  one  depend  on 
another  perpetuate  the  effects  of  a  check  once  received. 

280.  The  second  of  the  two  principles  mentioned  is  suggested  by 
the  (act,  that  although  we  can  imagine  several  different  groups  of 
equivalent  causes  agreeing  in  the  attribute  of  producing1  one  particular 
effect,  still  each  of  these  groups  will  have  in  addition  to  the  common 
effect  other  and  peculiar  accessory  effects  of  its  own  which  will 
differentiate  it  from  the  rest.  Now  what  we  look  upon  as  a  single 
matter  of  fact  is  very  often  a  complex  whole  composed  of  manifold 
effects  all  gathered  into  one.  The  different  combinations  of  causes 
then  adequate  to  produce  just  this  complex  effect  will  be  very  few, 
so  much  so  that  may -be  only  one  of  the  many  combinations  we  are 
accustomed  to  meet  with  in  our  experience  will  be  really  adequate. 
So  long  therefore  as  a  given  matter-of-fact  is  only  known  to  us  in  its 
large  outlines  we  arc  accustomed  to  suppose  very  various  causes  in 
order  to  account  for  it ;  as  soon  however  as  the  finer  side  traits  which 
characterise  it  torne  to  be  known,  our  choice  of  causes  narrows 
itself  considerably,  till  at  last  we  find  that  there  an;  very  few  facts, 
of  which  we  can  make  hypothesis,  which  will  satisfy  all  the  require- 
ments of  the  postulate  founded  on  the.se  data.  Among  these  facts  we 
then  select  that  one  in  particular  which  ai  once  is  the  simplest  and 
presupposes  the  least  number  of  mutually  independent  and  co-operating 
elements.  Nor  is  the  above  principle  a  ruling  thought  in  science  only; 
it  governs  the  most  various  considerations:  a  whole  chain  say  of 
simple  facts  is  net  before  us  in  evidence,  which  taken  in  connexion 
with  each  other  may  be  conveniently  explained  if  we  assume  that  a 
particular  deed  was  committed ;  from  such  a  hypothesis  we  can,  we 
will  suppose,  deduce  every  tiling  in  the  facts  except  those  slight 


CHAPTER  ix.]  and  to  complicated  ones.  363 

accessory  'circumstances,  which  depend  on  accidental  conditions  and 
really  give  to  each  particular  commission  of  a  deed  a  peculiar  com- 
plexion of  its  own,  which  it  shares  with  none  other.  The  defendant 
will  ascribe  each  link  in  this  chain  of  incriminating  evidence  to  a 
separate  cause  compatible  with  his  innocence,  and  will  try  to  explain 
away  the  conjunction  of  them  all  as  due  to  a  mere  unfortunate  coin- 
cidence ;  but  the  persons  trying  him  will  turn  their  attention  ex- 
clusively to  the  assumption  which  explains  them  all  in  their  connexion 
with  each  other,  and  are  hardly  likely  to  listen  to  his  forced  pleadings. 
Just  in  the  same  way  a  patient  often  consoles  himself  by  referring 
each  of  the  several  symptoms  of  his  malady  to  a  trifling  cause  of  its 
own ;  but  he  does  not  for  all  that  deceive  the  physician,  who  by  his 
diagnosis  pitilessly  exposes  the  serious  complaint,  which  at  once 
renders  the  concurrence  of  all  these  accidents  conceivable. 

I  hardly  need  add  that  these  obvious  principles  of  judgment 
£>nly  suffice  to  recommend  one  preliminary  conjecture  in  preference 
to  another;  where  we  have  important  issues  to  decide  we  must 
never  forget  that  what  is  improbable  is  still  possible.  It  is  not  enough 
therefore  merely  to  follow  out  to  its  conclusions  the  particular  as- 
sumption which  the  evidence  before  us  forces  upon  us  as  the  most 
natural.  For  it  even  to  come  near  to  deserving  belief,  it  is  not 
enough  that  all  the  evidence  should  of  itself  converge  in  favour  of  it ; 
we  must  have  carefully  tested  the  less  likely  suppositions  which  the 
nature  of  the  matter  admits  of,  and  have  found  that  they  leave  just  as 
many  lacunae  and  contradictions  in  the  facts  to  be  explained  as  does 
the  former.  Besides  this  we  must  take  care  as  far  as  possible  to  argue 
only  from  positive  evidence ;  negative  evidence  is  ambiguous :  whether 
it  alleges  the  omission  of  an  action,  or  the  absence  of  a  state,  it  can 
only  be  used  to  prove  a  matter-of-fact  when  what  it  denies  may  be 
regarded  as  being  necessary  under  any  other  presupposition.  All  that 
follows  from  a  denial  of  anything  is  just  the  denial  in  turn  of  what  we 
cannot  think  without  virtually  affirming  the  thing  denied.  Lastly  in 
deciding  a  question  the  mere  quantity  of  evidence  matters  little—- 
what matters  is  the  quantity  of  independent  evidences.  And  in  this 
connexion  we  must  be  on  our  guard  against  a  common  form  of  error 
in  reasoning.  We  may  be  right  In  punishing  a  fault  once,  but  when 
its  inevitable  consequences  crop  up  again  and  again  the  inclination 
we  feel  to  chastise  the  offender  over  again  for  each  of  these  in  turn  is 
wrong :  in  the  same  way  the  probability  of  a  conjecture  is  unfairly 
exaggerated  for  us,  when  after  the  mark  which  first  led  us  to  make  it, 
the  consequences  necessarily  involved  in  the  possession  of  that  mark 


364  Determination  of  Individual  Pacts.        [  BOOK  n. 

gradually  disclose  themselves  ;  no  doubt  they  agree  with  our  con- 
jecture, but  we  cannot  use  them  to  strengthen  it.  In  conclusion,  the 
observance  of  all  these  rules,  of  whose  application  it  would  be  much 
more  interesting  to  give  examples  than  to  formulate  them  in  this  dry 
logical  manner,  is  compatible  with  much  error;  still  we  must  not 
underrate  their  real  value  on  that  account  One  practical  maxim  we 
may  draw  from  the  consideration  of  all  these  imperfections :  where  we 
must  act,  whether  we  would  or  no,  and  where  we  can  never  rise  in 
our  calculations  to  the  level  of  certainty,  there  we  may  confidently 
trust  to  probabilities  ;  where  on  the  other  hand  we  are  not  obliged  to 
act  at  all,  or  at  any  rate  not  obliged  to  do  anything  extreme  and 
irrevocable,  the  proper  course  is  not  to  regard  our  personal  convic- 
tions, which  rest  on  mere  probabilities,  as  sufficient  warrant  for 
carrying  out  our  belief  in  action. 

281.  Where  we  have  malters-of-fact  given  us,  with  whose  inner 
coherence  we  are  in  a  measure  acquainted,  and  would  estimate  mope 
accurately  the;  probabilities  based  on  such  coherence,  \ve  trench  on  a 
field  which  spreads  beyond  the  scope  uf  the  general  precepts  of  logic, 
and  in  it  \vc  mu.vt  rely  only  upon  our  actual  knowledge  of  the 
particular  case.  In  regard  to  future  events,  however, •— and  *I  shall 
consider  no  others  in  what,  follows— we  often  find  ourselves  differently 
placed.  Of  a  number  of  mutually  exclusive  alternatives  we  may 
know  that  one  or  the  oilier  must  happen;  but  not  know  of  any 
ground  for  preferring  one  to  the  rest ;  nevertheless  practical  needs 
may  force  us  to  make  choice  of  one,  and  to  base  our  actions  on  the 
supposition  that  it  will  happen.  Under  such  circumstances  we  can  only 
regard  all  equally  possible  cases  as  equally  probable  in  reality.  There 
is  no  other  rule  by  which  we  can  be  guided  in  aur  judgments.  Now 
we  disclaim  uli  iumciedg-e  of  the  circumstances  which  condition  the 
real  issue,  so  that  when  we-  talk  of  equally  possible  cases  we  can  only 
mean  tho.se  particular  cases  which  are  co-ordinated  as  equivalent 
species  in  the  compass  of  an  universal  case;  that  is  to  say,  if  we 
enumerate  the  special  forms,  which  the  ^enus  can  assume,  we  get  a 
disjunctive  judgment  of  the  form  :  if  the  condition  //*  is  fulfilled,  one 
of  the  kinds/1,/"-,/'1  .  „  of  the  universal  consequent  F*  will  occur  to 
the  exclusion  of  the  rest.  Which  of  all  these  different  consequents 
will  in  fact  occur,  depends  in  all  cases  on  the  special  form  6\  or  t?'\ 
or  b*  ,  ,  .  ,  in  which  that  universal  condition  is  fulfilled.  If  we  knew 
tins  particular  form  of  /?,  say  l?'\  we  should  be  able  to  deduce  for 

*  [«  Becli ngmiff  *  and  *  Folge/  the  initial  letters  of  the  English  words  not  being 
comx'meul  symbol*.] 


CHAPTER  ix.]        Disjunctive  basis  of  Probability,  365" 

certain  the  corresponding  value  _/3  of  the  consequent,  assuming  at 
least  that  we  had  discovered  the  law  by  which  B  and  F  are  connected 
together.  For  our  present  purpose,  however,  we  suppose  that  we  are 
ignorant  of  the  special  shape  which  B  will  assume  if  it  does  really 
occur ;  it  follows  of  course  that,  if  B  be  realised,  some  one  or  other 
of  the  consequents/*1,/"2,/"3  .  .  .  must  follow ;  but  from  our  point  of 
view  they  all  remain  equally  possible,  inasmuch  as  the  only  condition,, 
so  far  as  we  know,  of  their  being  any  of  them  realised,  is  the  validity 
of  B  in  general,  and  that  holds  equally  good  for  all  and  favours  none 
in  particular.  Let  us  assume  for  the  present  that  the  universal  con- 
dition B  can,  if  it  assumes  all  the  variations  compatible  with  its 
nature,  produce  n,  say  six  different  consequents/*1,/"2 . .  ./"6,  then  the 
general  condition  B  must  be  realised  in  n,  i.  e.  six  different  ways,  for 
each  of  the  equally  possible  and  mutually  exclusive  consequents  to 
be  able  to  realise  itself.  Thus  we  see  that,  assuming  what  is  equally 
possible  to  be  equally  real,  the  chance  that  a  particular  case  will  occur 
admits  of  being  mathematically  determined  ;  for  each  of  these  f  has 
an  equal  share  in  the  prospect  of  being  realised  in  a  particular  case, 
with  the  others  which  are  equally  entitled  with  it  to  be  real ;  but  the 
sum  of  all  these  probabilities  must  be  a  constant  quantity  independent 
of  their  number,  for  it  must  denote  the  certainty  that  some  one  or 
another  of  the  particular  consequents/;  however  many  they  be, — that 
is  to  say  that  ^generally — must  occur  in  each  individual  case  so  soon 
as  the  general  condition  B  is  realised  in  any  one  of  its  forms.  This 
certainty  is  equally  absolute  for  every  B  and  every  F>  and  only  in  re- 
lation to  it  do  the  respective  chances  of  the  several  cases  admit  of  being 
quantitatively  determined  ;  consequently  there  is  no  reason  for,  or  ad- 
vantage in  assuming  the  constant  in  question  to  have  any  other  value 
than  unity;  the  chance  of  any  one  particular  case  of  the  n  co-ordinated 

I                                                                 n .  i 
cases /thus  becomes  =  -»  and  the  sum  of.  the  n  chances  = =r, 

J  n  n 

or  in  other  words  i  is  the  exponent  of  certainty.  Thus  far  I  have  used 
the  expression  e  co-ordinated  cases '  without  explaining  It ;  I  do  so 
now  in  order  to  prevent  misunderstanding :  a  co-ordinated  case  is  a  case 
which  answers  to  one  and  only  one  of  the  mutually  exclusive  values 
&\  &z . .  of  the  condition  B>  and  these  rival  values  may  occur  in  reality ; 
it  does  not  answer  to  a  more  general  form  B*  of  this  condition,  which 
can  never  exist  in  reality,  because  it  embraces  several  of  the  particular 
values  #,  I?  . . ;  it  follows  that  each  of  these  /'s  is  also  an  elementary 
and  particular  form  of  the  consequent,  without  in  turn  itself  comprising 
other  species  which  can  exist  apart  by  themselves,  and  of  which  it  is 


366  Determination  of  Individual  Pacts. 

merely  the  general  expression.  For  example  we  may  if  we  choose 
give  the  disjunctive  judgment  the  form  :  if  B  holds  good,  then  either 
fl  or  Fm  holds  good,  by  Fm  being  understood  all  the  m  or  n—  i  con- 
sequents/, which  are  not/1;  in  such  a  statement/1  and  Fm  are  not 

co-ordinate  terms  ;  the  chances  of/1  indeed  remains  - ,  but  the  chance 
of  Fm  is  the  sum  of  the  chances  of  all  the  elementary  cases  which  in 
thought  we  unite  under  this  formula,  and  so  it  = . 

Now  it  often  happens  that  we  are  led  to  institute  an  enquiry  by  the 
interest  which  attaches  for  us  to  some  property  which  the  different 
cases  comprised  under  FM  have  in  common,  and  for  that  reason  we 
separate  them  from  the  rest  and  denote  them  by  a  common  name  as 
one  case,  to  which  we  oppose  the  rest.  If  we  would  then  formulate 
the  probability  of  this  collective  case  Fm9  we  may  say  it  is  equal  to 
the  proportion,  which  the  number  of  elementary  cases  combined  in  it 
bears  to  the  aggregate  sum  of  all  possible  cases ;  or  we  may  state  it* 
more  accurately,  taking  account  of  the  connexion  of  the  whole  matter  9 
thus  :  the  probability  of  F™  is  equal  to  the  ratio,  in  which  the  num- 
ber of  the  variations  of  B,  which  may  issue  in  a  case  of  the  kind  Fmt 
stands  to  the  entire  sum  of  all  possible  variations  of  B ;  in  a  simpler 
and  more  general  form  still ;  the  probability  of  Fm  is  equal  tq  the 
ratio  which  the  number  of  chances  favourable  to  it  bears  to  the. sum 

of  all  thinkable  chances,  =  — .    This  fraction  Is  what  we  understand 

n 

by  the  mathematical  probability  of  a  future  event,  and  is  not  at  the 
bottom  essentially  different  from,  but  only  more  accurately  determined 
than  the  probability  of  common  parlance.  For  usually  we  say 
vaguely  a  thing  is  probable  without  specifying  the  degree  of  proba- 
bility which  attaches  to  it  \  of  two  events  that  one  is  pronounced 
absolutely  probable,  whose  mathematical  probability  is  the  greatest  or 
at  any  rate  usually  if  wrongly  regarded  as  greatest,  the  other  event 
only  appearing  improbable  in  comparison  with  it.  In-  treating  of 
chances  mathematically  we  do  not  ordinarily  talk  of  a  thing  being 
improbable,  but  if  we  did  we  could  only  mean  that  which  is  relatively 
less  probable. 

282.  From  small  beginnings,  which  seemed  at  first  to  be  useless 
except  to  satisfy  scientific  curiosity,  the  calculus  of  chances  has  de- 
veloped in  the  hands  of  the  greatest  mathematicians  into  an  extensive 
body  of  doctrine,  bearing  fruit  in  the  most  diverse  fields  of  scientific 
research,  besides  throwing  light  on  many  practical  questions,  the 


CHAPTER  ix.]    Statement  of  Chances  not  a  Prediction.      367 

grand  logical  achievement  in  fact,  which  the  modern  spirit  of  dis- 
covery has  to  set  over  against  the  wonderful  but  fruitless  theories  of 
antiquity.  In  this  form  it  has  outgrown  the  limits  of  this  treatise, 
and  though  every  detail  of  it  would  always  be  more  entitled  to  a 
place  in  a  system  of  logic  than  those  useless  syllogistic  subtleties, 
which  in  deference  to  OUT  extravagant  love  of  classical  literature  we 
have  to  be  always  repeating,  still  I  am  forced  to  confine  myself  to 
the  enumeration  of  the  simple  logical  thoughts,  which  are  merely 
preliminary  to  calculations  into  which  we  cannot  at  present  go  any 
deeper.  But  in  doing  so  I  am  conscious  that  a  gap  is  left,  and  must 
point  out  that  this  gap  needs  to  be  filled,  though  I  do  not  attempt  to 
fill  it  myself. 

1.  In  the  first  place  we  must  make  it  clear  to  ourselves  what  we 
mean  by  the  probability,,  which  we  have  just  learned  to  measure  in 
the  simplest  cases  mathematically.     It  does  not  imply  any  positive 
assertion  on  our  part  touching  the  real  future  occurrence  of  the  event, 
tt>  which  we  attribute  it ;  it  does  not  express  any  objective  property 
or  nature  belonging  to   the  event,  but  denotes  throughout  what  is. 
purely   subjective,  viz,   the   degree   of   confidence,   which   we   may 
reasonably  accord  to  the  future  occurrence  of  a  particular  case,  when 
all  that  we  have  given  us  to  go  upon  in  forming  our  judgment  is  the 
number  of  cases  possible  under  the  particular  given  conditions  and 
not  any  actual  ground  carrying  with  it  the  necessity  of  one  of  them 
to  the  exclusion  of  the  rest.     Let,  in  accordance  with  §  281,  the 
probability  that  a  particular  side  of  the  die  will  face  upwards  after  the 
throw  =  Y61  the  probability  that  one  of  the  five  other  sides  will  fall 
upwards  =  5/6 ;  then  all  that  these  two  numbers  signify  is  this,  that 
before  the  throw  the  trust  we  may  reasonably  repose  in  the  occurrence 
of  the  first  case  must  stand  to  our  trust  in  that  of  the  second  in  the 
ratio  1:5.;  they  contain  no  positive  prediction  that  the  one  or  the 
other  will  occur,  or  that  on  repeating  the  throw  the  one  will  occur  more 
frequently  than  the  other.    We  postpone  the  question,  how  far  such 
an  inference  from   the  calculated   probability  to  the   real   event  is 
permissible. 

2.  If  two  mutually  independent  variable  conditions  B  and  J91  may 
lead  to  n  and  nl  different  cases  respectively,  the  chance  that  a  par- 
ticular case  in  the  one  series  will  coincide  with  a  particular  case  in 
the  other  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  chances,  which  each  of  the 

.         .  .  ,  ,  r^ft      ml  1  1 

two  has  m  its  own  series,  i.  e.  to  the  product  of  -  *  -^ ,  where  m  and 
m1  respectively  signify  the  number  of  favourable  chances  belonging  to 


368  Determination  of  Individual  Pads.        c  BOOK  n. 

each  in  virtue  of  the  constitution  of  its  condition  B  or  J5\  If  two 
dice  -are  thrown,  the  side  which  the  one  shows  uppermost  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  side  which  the  other  shows  uppermost;  but  each  die 
has  6  sides,  each  of  which  may  fall  uppermost,  and  each  of  these 
may  with  equal  possibility  coincide  with  any  one  of  the  six  sides  of 
the  other;  there  are  thus  36  possible  cases  and  the  probability  of 
each  single  one  of  them  is  yarj  =  yc .  */„.  If  however  we  look  upon  it 
as -making  no  difference,  which  of  the  two  similar  dice  shows  the  one 
and  which  the  other  of  two  different  numbers  of  points,  the  proba- 
bility of  any  two  in  particular  concurring  =  2  .  y..c  =  yi8;  for  if  we 
throw  but  one  die  or  the  die  B  there  is  of  course  but  a  single  chance 
of  any  particular  side  falling  uppermost,  but  if  we  throw  two  dice, 
that  is  in  case  of  the  combination  B  -f-  2?1,  there  are  always  two 
chances  in  favour  of  any  two  differently  marked  sides  falling  upper- 
most together.  On  the  other  hand  the  probability  that  two  similarly 
marked  faces  will  fall  uppermost  together  must  still  remain  =  y.u.,  for 
there  is  only  one  combination  which  can  produce  a  particular  doublet? 
Lastly,  if  our  object  be  to  throw  both  dice  together  and  get  a  par- 
ticular number  of  points  between  the  two,  the  sum  7  has  most  proba- 
bility =  Y.  =  %, ,  for  it  has  6  favourable  chances  in  the  combinations 
6 -HI,  5-fs,  3  +  4,  each  of  which  occurs  twice;  the  smallest  proba- 
bility, viz.  y,,6  attaches  to  the  sums  2  and  1 2,  each  of  which  can  only 
be  produced  in  one  way, 

Again,  suppose  we  put  in  an  urn  B  17  black  and  3  white  balls,  in 
a  second  urn  -Z?1  6  black  and  4  white  balls,  and  then  ask  what  chance 
there  is  of  drawing  two  white  balls,  one  from  each  urn ;  it  is  evident 
that  in  this  case  as  in  the  last  what  the  one  hand  grasps  is  quite  in- 
dependent of  what  the  other  hand  has  grasped ;  but  the  probability  of 
drawing"  a  white  ball  out  of  the  first  urn  is  m  =  3  favourable  chances 
out  of  20,  the  probability  of  drawing  a  white  from  the  second  urn  is 
ml  =  4  out  of  10.  Now  there  are  xo  balls  in  J3\  and  we  may  draw 
a  white  ball  from  B  with  any  one  of  them ;  also  there  are  four 
whites  among  these  ten ;  consequently  the  chance  of  one  of  these 
four  being  drawn  along  with  whatever  we  draw  from  the  other  urn 
would  be  Yio  ;  but  as  the  chance  of  our  drawing  a  white  ball  from 
that  other  urn  was  only  %„,  the  chance  of  our  drawing  two  whites 

together   one  from   each  urn  will  =  —  •  -j  =  s/ao .  4/10  =  Yf>D .   We 

should  get  another  result  if  we  gathered  all  the  balls  into  one  vessel 
and  drew  twice  out  of  it,  taking  care  however  to  restore  the  ball  first 
drawn  before  we  drew  a  second.  The  result  of  the  second  draw 


CHAPTER  IX.]  Examples  of  tklS  Calculus.  369 

would  then  as  in  the  above  case  be  Independent  of  that  of  the  first; 
for  each  draw  the  probability  of  a  white  ball  being  drawn  would  =  7/30, 
so  that  the  probability  of  two  whites  being  drawn  in  succession  would 
=  Yso  •  Vso  ^  49/9oo>  t^lat  *s  to  Sa7  would  be  less  than  in  the  first  case. 
The  difference  of  the  two  results  may  seem  strangely  great,  as  with- 
out calculating  it  one  would  hardly  suppose  there  was  any  essential 
difference  between  the  two  modes  of  proceeding;  there  is  however, 
inasmuch  as  it  is  harder  or  easier  to  draw  one  of  the  white  balls  just 
according  as  there  are  more  or  fewer  black  balls  mixed  with  them. 
The  chance,  7/(,0,  of  drawing  a  white  out  of  the  whole  collection  of 
balls  amounts  no  doubt  to  14/9  of  the  chance,  viz.  p/20  that  there  is  of 
drawing  a  white  out  of  the  urn  which  contains  20  balls;  for  the  same 
reason  however  it  amounts  to  only  7/12  of  the  other  chance  4/10,  which 
is  the  chance  of  drawing  another  white  from  the  other  urn,  which 
contains  10  in  all  Consequently  the  chance  of  drawing  two  whites 
by  the  second  method  is  only  1'1/9 . 7/;12  or  49/f)4  of  the  chance  of  ob- 
taining the  same  result  by  the  first  method ;  we  have  in  fact 
49/r>4  •  Vioo  =  4%oo-  &  is  better  to  be  quite  clear  on  this  point,  so  I  will 
take  a  still  simpler  example.  Let  us  assume  that  the  urn  B  contains 
but  one  white  and  no  black  balls,  while  Bl  contains  one  white  and  one 
black;  then  if  we  draw  from  B  we  are  certain  of  one  white  ball, 
whose  probability  therefore  =  i ;  and  we  may  draw  either  a  white  or 
a  black  from  JB1,  with  either  of -which  it  may  concur;  thus  the  chance 
of  either  of  these  cases,  one  of  which  consists  in  two  whites  following 
one  another  is  Y2  =  i .  l/2.  Such  is  the  result  got  by  the  first  method, 
that  of  dividing  the  balls  in  separate  urns.  By  the  second  method 
however,  which  consists  in  putting  them  all  in  one  urn,  we  are  cer- 
tain of  nothing;  for  the  first  as  for  the  second  draw  the  chance  of 
a  white  is  the  same  =  2/s ,  and  that  of  two  whites  in  succession 
15  =  */0,  that  is  to  say  smaller  than  it  is  upon  the  first  method. 

3.  Suppose  the  variations  of  a  condition  B  produce  a  series  of 
cases  of.-the  kind  f,  but  the  actual  occurrence  of  one  of  these  cases 
modifies  the  condition  J2:  which  leads  to  consequences  of  the  kind 
f1;  the  chance  that  a  particular  case  of  the  series /"will  coincide  with 
a  particular  case  of  the  series  fl  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  inde- 
pendent chance  of  f  into  that  of /"as  modified  by  the  occurrence  of 
the  former.  We  get  such  a  case  by  slightly  modifying  the  last 
example.  If  we  put  back  the  first  ball  drawn  into  the  urn,  which 
contains  30  balls,  we  leave  the  second  draw  independent  of  the  first ; 
but  if  we  do  not  restore  it,  the  urn  will  only  contain  6  white  out  of 
29  balls ;  the  chance  of  still  drawing  a  white  becomes  V29  and  that  of 

•  Bb 


3  70  Determination  of  Individual  Facts.        c  BOOK  11. 

alighting  on  two  in  succession  =V3(r  %9?  and  is  only  about  0-88  of 
the  chance  which  there  was  of  drawing  two  successive  whites,  when  the 
ball  first  drawn  was  put  back  Into  the  urn.  This  was  to  be  expected.,  as 
the  number  of  white  balls  is  now  proportionately  less  than  that  of  the 
black,  among  which  they  must  be  sought  Under  this  head  fall  many  of 
the  problems  to  which  the  calculus  of  probability  may  be  applied,  and 
great  care  must  be  taken  to  discriminate  them  from  the  former  class, 
We  very  often  have  to  do  with  events,  whose  chance  of  recurring  in  the 
future  depends  on  the  number  of  cases,  in  which  on  previous  occasions 
either  they  themselves  or  others  standing  in  a  definite  relation  to  them, 
have  been  realised ;  and  it  is  not  always  easy  by  analysing  this  inter- 
dependence to  ascertain  the  influence,  which  the  occurrence  of  one  case 
exercises  in  conditoning  the  probability  of  the  one  to  be  next  expected. 
I  have  no  space  to  illustrate  this  by  examples,  but  shall  give  an 
instance  of  a  different  sort.  An  eye-witness  imparts  something  he 
has  seen  to  someone,  who  in  turn  imparts  the  information  to  a  third 
person.  Now  we  know  from  experience  that  the  farther  news  travels 
in  this  manner  the  more  distorted  it  becomes,  and  accordingly  it  has 
been  proposed  to  ascertain  what  degree  of  trust  may  be  reasonably 
reposed  in  a  statement  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  people  con- 
cerned in  its  transmission  to  us.  I.  do  not  believe  that  any  amount  of 
calculation  will  really  help  us  to  answer  the  question.  To  begin 
with,  it  is  not  quite  plain  what  we  are  driving  at.  An  allegation  is 
either  right  or  wrong ;  but  if  wrong  it  deviates  more  or  less  from  the 
truth ;  and  we  might  assign  to  it  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  credi- 
bility according  as  it  deviates  more  or  less,  supposing  it  to  be  possible 
to  measure  against  one  another  the  different  amounts  of  these  de- 
viations. But  this  we  shall  seldom  be  able  to  do;  each  term  of  a 
judgment,  expressing  an  original  observation,  can  be  taken  apart  and 
falsified  in  a  way  peculiar  to  itself  and  when  falsified  can  be  variously 
combined  with  other  terms;  the  aggregate  of  errors  thus  arising  can- 
not be  regarded  as  constituting  a  series  of  terms,  which  we  can 
compare  together,  and  we  should  thus  have  no  available  standard  by 
which  to  estimate  the  objective  credibility  of  the  statement  as  handed 
clown.  But  after  all  this  is  not  what  we  really  want ;  we  want  to 
ascertain  the  particular  degree  of  trust  which  may  be  based  on  our 
knowledge  of  a  single  condition,  which  we  have  stated,  viz.  of  the 
number  of  limes  a  bit  of  intelligence  has  been  handed  on  from  person 
to  person  before  it  reaches  us.  But  here  the  objection  at  once  occurs 
that  this  condition  of  transmission  does  not  in  itself  contain  anything 
that  could  at  all  justify  us  in  predicting  a  gradual  falsification  of  the 


CHAPTER  ix.j         The  transmission  of  Evidence,  3  7 1 

statement  transmitted.  When,  as  in  the  above  example,  we  have 
drawn  a  white  ball  and  removed  it  from  the  vessel,  which  has  In  it  30 
balls,  7  of  them  white,  we  know  that  the  conditions  of  a  fresh  draw 
are  changed  and  we  know  exactly  by  how  much ;  on  the  other  hand 
If  we  restore  the  ball  we  are  equally  certain  that  the  conditions  are 
the  same  as  before,  that  the  second  draw  is  a  res  Integra  so  to 
speak  and  its  chances  the  same  as  those  of  the  first.  It  is  to  the 
latter  not  to  the  former  case  that  the  problem  now  before  us  cor- 
responds; the  mere  fact  of  transmission,  taken  irf  itself,  cannot 
cause  me  to  transmit  something  else  than  I  have  heard;  so  far  as 
the  mere  transmission  goes  there  would  be  not  a  mere  probability 
but  an  actual  certainty  that  the  last  hearer  will  accurately  receive 
the  original  statement  Thus  the  falsification  of  a  statement  de- 
pends not  on  the  number  of  times  it  has  been  passed  on  but  on  the 
size  and  sort  of  errors  made  In  It  each  time  it  has  been  passed  on  ;  con- 
sequently our  knowledge  of  the  number  of  times  it  has  passed  from 
mouth  to  mouth  will  only  help  us  to  estimate  its  trustworthiness3  if  the 
size  of  the  various  errors  be  either  constant  or  a  regular  function  of 
that  number.  There  is  not  the  least  ground  for  assuming  any  such 
thing ;  we  see  it  to  be  quite  the  reverse  if  we  really  reflect  on  the  very 
various  cases  which  may  occur.  The  eye-witness  A  may  or  may  not 
have  wished  to  communicate  aright  what  he  has  rightly  observed ; 
his  hearer  B  has  or  has  not  understood  him  aright,  or  he  may  have 
understood  him  and  yet  desire  to  hand  it  on  himself  In  a  distorted 
form ;  a  third  person  C,  who  Intended  to  distort  afresh  what  he  already 
misunderstood,  may  chance  to  hit  upon  the  actual  truth  In  what  he 
communicates.  If  we  consider  all  these  possible  conditions  we  see 
clearly  that  the  trustworthiness  of  a  communication  in  no  way  depends 
in  any  regular  manner  merely  on  the  number  of  times  It  has  passed 
from  mouth  to  mouth.  We  disregard  these  conditions  because  we 
are  ignorant  of  them ;  but  if  we  had  the  power  of  knowing  them  all 
the  question  would  answer  itself  and  we  should  not  need  to  calculate 
It  at  all.  All  we  can  do  in  the  matter  therefore  Is  to  make  utterly 
arbitrary  assumptions  in  regard  to  all  these  conditions,  which  would 
be  tantamount  to  bringing  the  whole  thing  down  to  the  level  of 
arithmetical  examples,  which  had  no  bearing  on  or  application  to  real 
events.  Such  would  be  the  following  sort  of  calculation :  say  that 
we  hear  and  in  turn  report  anything  with  such  accuracy  as  to  deduct 
one  tenth  of  its  credibility;  then  after  the  2oth  repetition  of  the  state- 
ment its  credibility  would  only  be  O'92°  =  0*1216,  only  a  little  more 
than  3/7  of  what  it  was  originally.  Here  all  Is  arbitrary  assumption  -3 

B  b  2 


3  72  Determination  of  Individual  Facts,      [  BOOK  n. 

it  is  arbitrary  to  assume  that  the  credibility  diminishes  in  geometrical 
progression,  instead  of  arithmetical ;  the  latter  is  quite  as  conceivable. 
No  less  arbitrary  is  it  to  suppose  at  all,  that  the  exponent  or  difference 
of  term  from  term  must  be  equal ;  the  result  too  which  we  thus  reach 
has  no  meaning ;  it  might  perhaps  be  true  of  frivolous  street-gossip, 
but  as  regards  serious  historical  traditions  it  is  a  gross  exaggeration 
of  the  rate  at  which  their  untrnst\vorthiness  increases. 

4.  Given  certain  facts  we  have  to  conjecture  their  true  causes ;  we 
must  calculate  the  probability  with  which  the  given  effects  would  follow 
from  the  various  possible  causes,  and  select  that  cause  as  the  true  one 
on  presupposition  of  which  the  facts  would  most  naturally  follow. 
I  draw  four  times  in  succession  from  a  bag,  and  draw  from  it  3  white 
and  i  black  ball,  restoring  the  ball  each  time,  and  the  question  is 
asked  what  number  of  balls  of  each  sort  must  the  bag  most  probably 
have  contained  in  order  to  give  this  result.     In  order  to  answer  the 
question  we  must  know  the  whole  number  of  balls  in  the  bag,  in 
order  that  we  maybe  able  to  state  the  number  of  conceivable  com- 
binations capable  of  causing  the  given  result.     Suppose  there  were 

4  altogether.    Now  to  account  for  the  result  at  all  there  must  be  at  kkast 
i  while  and  i  black  ;  lio\v  many  more  of  each  kind  remains  indefinite; 
there  are  3  possible  combinations,  which  we  can  assume:  3  whites 
4-  i  black,  2  whites  -f  2  Mack,  i  white  -f-  3  black.  For  these  3  com- 
binations the  chances  of  drawing  a  white  are  respectively  %,  %,  Y4,  of 
drawing  a  black  V4>  s/«»  7'i »  lne  j°^nt  chances  however  of  drawing  In 
4  successive  draws  3  whites  and  r  black  become  on  these  various 
assumptions  2y,,,,(;,  u/,,ffi1  :i/.^ ;  consequently  the  first  assumption,  that  3 
whites  and  i  black  ball  were  in  the  bag,  is  the  most  likely;  at  the 
same  time  the  fractions  got  give  the  particular  probability  which  each 
of  the  other  two  possesses.     A  very  simple  consideration  confirms 
this  solution.     Had  the  bag1  had  in  it  but  a  single  white,  according 
to  the  third  hypothesis,  we  must  in  4  draws  have  grasped  it  3  times, 
while  we  only  once  grasped  a  black  ball  out  of  three  which  offered 
themselves,— a  supposition  obviously  less  probable  than  four  draws  In 
which  each  ball  has  his  turn.     It  may  be  noticed  that  this  calculation 
of  course  presupposes  that  the  different  causes,  which  we  can  assume 
in  'order  to  account  for  the  given  facts,  in  themselves  possess  equal 
probability ;  this  was  the  case  here  so  far  as  any  distribution  of  the 
two  colours  among  the  4  balls  was  in  itself  quite  as  possible  as  any 
other;  where  the  probabilities  of  the  causes  are  not  equal,  due  account 
must  be  taken  of  the  same  in  our  calculations. 

5.  When  we  see  the  same  result  repeat '  itself  under  the  same 


CHAPTER  ix.]          The  Chances  of  Recurrence.  3  7  3 

genera!  condition  B  we  are  led  to  expect  it  to  occur  again  if  B 
recurs.  The  chance  of  its  really  doing  so  admits  of  being  calculated. 
A  bag  has  in  it  two  balls  and  it  is  found  that  so  often  as  we  draw  we 
always  get  balls  of  one  colour,  say  white,  so  that  the  colour  of  the 
other  ball  remains  unknown  to  us.  Hence  we  expect  to  get  a  white 
upon  drawing  a  third  time,  supposing  ourselves  to  have  drawn  twice. 
How  shall  we  measure  the  probability  of  our  expectation  ?  One  ball 
must  be  white,  so  that  there  are  only  two  possibilities,  either  the  other 
is  black  or  both  are  white.  Now  two  whites  have  already  been  drawn 
in  two  draws,  and  the  probability  that  this  which  has  happened  would 
happen  becomes  on  the  first  assumption  %,  on  the  second  =  i ; 
consequently  the  odds  in  favour  of  the  rival  assumptions  stand  to 
each  other  as  i:  4  and  as  their  sum  must  be  =  i,  the  first  must  be 
put  =  Y5,  the  other  =  4/5.  In  case  we  make  a  third  draw  the  odds  in 
favour  of  the  white  are  Y2  on  the  first  assumption  and  i  on  the  second; 
Jhe  sum  of  the  favourable  chances  presented  by  both  assumptions 
taken  together  is  thus  3/c .  J/2  +  */B .  i  =  9/10.  In  this  case  the  actual 
event  had  occurred  and  we  only  knew  and  calculated  the  a  priori 
chance  which  it  had  of  occurring  under  two  rival  presuppositions  as  to 
its  conditions ;  but  even  where  we  have  not  this  knowledge,  we  may 
draw  an  inference  as  to  the  chance  that  an  event  will  recur  from  the 
number  of  times  we  have  actually  observed  it  occur.  Suppose  we 
are  quite  ignorant  of  its  conditions  and  grounds  and  only  know  that 
an  event  E  has  once  occurred  under  certain  conditions?  say  at  some 
critical  moment  of  time  /,  it  may  at  first  sight  seem  as  if  the  chance 
of  its  occurring  a  second  time  under  the  -same  conditions -was  exactly 
as  great  as  its  chance  of  not  occurring  at  all  But  this  is  a  miscalcu- 
lation ;  were  It  true  the  observed  fact  of  its  having  once  occurred 
would  be  ignored  in  our  calculation,  and  as  the  same  reflexion  might 
be  fairly  made  after  the  event  had  occurred  for  the  m^  time,  we  might 
find  ourselves  In  the  absurd  position  of  maintaining  that  the  fact 
of  an  event  having  occurred  even  an  infinite  number  of  times  did  not 
make  its  occurrence  next  time  any  more  likely  than  It  would  have 
been,  if  it  had  never  yet  occurred  at  all.  This  however  would  be 
evidently  paradoxical ;  for  every  fresh  repetition  of  an  event  is  a  fresh 
and  additional  testimony  to  the  continuance  of  the  unknown  causes 
on  which  it  depends,  and  so  strengthens  the  probability  of  its  occur- 
ring again.  Our  conclusion  therefore  in  regard  to  the  first  case  must 
be  this ;  that  E  will  not  occur  is  in  itself  just  as  likely  as  that  it  -will ; 
but  for  the  existence  of  causes  which  bring  about  E  we  have  the  testi- 
mony of  this  one  observed  case  of  Its  occurrence ;  for  the  existence 


3  74  Determination  of  Individual  Pacts,       {  BOOK  n. 

of  causes  which  prevent  E  we  have  nothing  but  the  bare  possibility. 
We  consequently  have  two  reasons  for  expecting  E  to  recur,  where  we 
have  only  one  for  expecting  it  not  to,  as  the  two  chances  stand  to  one 
another  in  the  ratio  2:1,  while  their  sum  must  =  r,  the  chance  that  E 
will  recur  =  2/3,  In  general  therefore,  if  an  event  J?or  a  particular  cyclical 
course  of  like  events  E  has  been  observed  m  times  without  any  ex- 
ceptions  the  probability  that  E  will  happen  again  in  the  same  way 

is  —  „ in  this  fraction  the  denominator  represents  the  sum  of 

m  +  2 

conceivable  cases,  since  after  ;;/  real  cases  have  occurred  there  are 
always  two  additional  cases,  which  we  can  think  of  as  occurring, 
viz.  the  repetition  or  non-repetition  of  Ea}  the  numerator  as  usual 
denotes  the  number  of  favourable  chances.  I  think  this  simple 
deduction  of  the  formula  will  satisfy  the  reader;  it  is  to  me  as  con- 
vincing as  the  more  obscure  analysis,  by  which  it  is  usually  obtained. 
One  sees  that  as  m  increases  the  fraction  approaches  nearer  and  nearer 
to  unity,  and  so  it  becomes  more  and  more  nearly  certain  that  E  will 
recur.  The  example  usually  adduced  is  that  as  the  alternation  of  day 
with  night  has  been  now  historically  attested  for  5000  years,  the  prob- 
ability of  the  same  alternation  recurring  to-day  =  1,826,2 14 : 1,826,2 15 ; 
that  is  one  may  bet  1,826,214  to  i  on  its  occurring  again.  Now  if  it 
is  true  of  calculations  of  probability  in  general  that  they  do  not  express 
what  will  actually  occur  in  the  future,  but  only  the  degree  of  subjective 
confidence,  which  we  repose  in  their  occurrence;  it  is  in  a  certain  sense 
doubly  true  of  these  cases,  as  we  clearly  feel  when  m  is  a  very  small 
number.  For  then  the  assumption  from  which  we  start  is  that  the 
number  m  of  cases  in  which  E  has  been  observed  to  occur  testifies  with 
a  certainty  proportional  to  the  magnitude  of  m  to  the  continuance  on 
the  next  occasion  of  the  causes  favourable  to  E\  and  this  assumption 
is  itself  but  a  probability,  the  strength  of  which  is  somewhat  arbitrary, 
and  of  which  we  only  know  that  it  increases  with  the  increase  of  m, 
Properly  therefore  the  formula  would  not  directly  measure  the  prob- 
ability that  E  will  recur,  but  the  probability  of  this  probability,  which 
comes  to  this,  that  not  only  the  value  to  be  assigned  to  the  prob- 
ability, but  also  our  confidence  in  this  value  approaches  nearer  and 
nearer  to  certainty  as  m  indefinitely  increases. 

6.  A  future  event  may  be  fraught  with  good  or  evil  for  us,  and  it  is 
usually  a  sense  of  these  consequences  to  ourselves  which  impels  us  to 
gauge  the  strength  of  our  confidence  in  its  happening.  We  shall 
shape  our  motives  and  actions  according  to  its  strength,  and  these 
will  therefore  depend  doubly  on  the  likelihood  of  the  event  E  and 


CHAPTER  ix.]  Mathematical  Expectation.  375 

on  the  comparative  amount  of  the  advantage  we  hope  to  derive  from 
it.  If  we  multiply  the  probability  of  E  into  the  amount  of  attendant 
advantage  we  get  what  we  term  mathematical  expectation,  which  thus 
admits  of  being  precisely  determined.  Let  a  game  be  so  arranged 
that  the  player  gets  two  thalers  if  on  the  first  toss  he  throws  heads  and 
five  thalers  if  he  throws  first  tails  then  heads.  The  probability  of  the 
former  case  is  =  Y2,  its  expectation  =  ya .  2  ;  the  probability  of  the 
second  case  is  =  Y4,  its  expectation  =  y4 .  5  ;  lastly  the  aggregate  expec- 
tation of  winnings  when  play  begins  can  only  be  the  sum  9/4  of  these 
two  expectations ;  for  though  the  two  lucky  cases  exclude  one  another 
according  to  the  arrangements  yet  the  expectation  of  winnings  must 
clearly  be  greater  when  both  the  two  prizes  are  offered  than  when 
only  one,  and  the  expectation  of  the  one  must  be  exactly  left  over,  if 
the  expectation  of  the  other  is  reduced  to  nothing  by  the  gradual 
diminution  of  the  prize  assigned  to  it.  The  same  reasoning  would 
apply,  if  it  were  agreed  that  the  player  should  receive  two  thalers  if  he 
threw  heads  the  first  time,  and  then  another  five  in  case  tails  followed. 
The  two  winning  cases  are  then  compatible  with  each  other,  but  here 
too  all  that  can  be  won  is  either  two  or  seven  thalers,  and  the  chance  of 
winning  either  is  Y4.  In  this  case  then  as  in  the  former  ®/i  of  a  thaler 
represents  the  aggregate  expectation  of  the  player  and  the  utmost  he 
can  reasonably  stake  upon  it.  Suppose  again  that  of  different  events 
J£,  JS19  E\  which  we  may  expect,  some  are  fraught  with  evil  others  with 
good  consequences  to  us ;  in  that  case  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  aggre- 
gate expectation  which  we  may  entertain,  if  by  our  own  actions  we  are 
willing  to  risk  their  happening,  must  equal  the  difference  between  the 
sum  of  the  mathematical  expectations  of  the  favourable  events  and  the 
sum  of  the  expectations  of  the  unfavourable  ones.  If  this  difference 
be  a  negative  quantity  it  expresses  the  magnitude  of  the  risk  we  ran 
or,  more  correctly  speaking,  the  magnitude  of  the  anxiety  we  should 
feel.  This  principle  is  wide  and  important  in  its  applications ;  by 
means  of  it  we  are  not  only  able  to  determine  what- bets  and  games  of 
chance  are  fair  and  equitable — a  sort  of  calculation  we  could  as  well 
do  without  as  we  can  do  without  its  object — but  it  also  assists  us  in 
arranging  the  most  serious  public  and  private  business,  such  as  the 
management  of  finances,  the  undertakings  of  trade  and  the  organisa- 
tion of  all  sorts  of  insurance  companies. 

7.  This  is  the  place  to  mention  one  other  idea.  Even  the  mathe- 
matical expectation  of  an  event  does  not  determine  its  value  for  us  irre- 
spectively of  our  own  condition  before  it  occurs;  in  judging  of  its  real 
value  for  us  we  must  take  this  condition  into  account.  A  moment's 


376  Determination  of  Individual  Pads.        c  BOOK  1 1. 

joy  to  the  miserable  or  a  trifling  gift  to  the  poor  is  of  greater  value 
than  a  fresh  triumph  to  the  fortunate  or  splendid  winnings  to  the  rich. 
No  doubt  as  a  matter  of  fact  one  that  has  much  is  wont  lo  desire  so 
much  the  more,  but  in  this  respect  logic  takes  the  point  of  view  of 
equity.,  according  to  which  it  ought  not  to  be  so :  in  assuming  as  a 
self-evident  principle  that  the  relative  value  of  an  advantage  bears  an 
Inverse  ratio  to  the  advantages  of  the  position  to  which  it  Is  added, 
it  expresses  the  standard  according  to  which  a  man  seems  to  be 
justified  in  desiring  to  improve  his  condition,,  when  the  good  things 
available  for  this  improvement  have  also  to  satisfy  the  wants  of  others, 
This  general  law  does  not  admit  of  being  mathematically  applied, 
unless  all  the  advantages  of  a  situation  and  all  the  good  things  requisite 
In  order  to  better  it  admit  of  being  mathematically  compared ;  it  is 
therefore  chiefly  of  use  in  regard  to  the  increase  of  a  capital,  which  can 
be  expressed  in  money.  Let  V  be  a  capital  which  we  have  already 
got,  and  z  the  addition  which  it  is  to  receive :  then  this  Increase  of  11 
may  always  be  regarded  as  the  sum  of  an  infinite  number  of*  smaller 
Increments  each  of  the  size  dz ;  the  relative  value  however  of  each 
subsequent  (n  -f  i)th  augmentation  by  a  dz  Is  in  inverse  proportion  to 
the  size  of  V  as  already  enhanced  by  the  preceding  increments,  that 

/>     '7 

is  to  F-t-  ndz.  and  would  thus  =  -•  - T~  •     ^n  this  formula /&  Is  a 

y  V'^-ndz 

specific  coefficient,  which  differs  with  the  different  sorts  of  cumula- 
tive advantage,  but  Is  constant  for  all  z  of  the  same  kind  and  docs 
not  admit  of  further  determination  in  the  abstract;  and  as  it  forms  a 
common  factor  in  all  values  which  we  can  compare  we  omit  it  in 
what  follows.  The  relative  value  of  the  aggregate  Increase  by  2  is 
then  the  integral  of  this  expression,  in  which  we  must  replace  ndz  by 
values  of  s  ranging  from  o  up  to  z  :  it  is  therefore 

=  log(F+s)-logPl 

In  accordance  with  this  formula  we  should  find  that  for  a  capital 
17=  1000  the  relative  values  of  the  increase  when  z  =  1000,  =•  2000, 
=  30005  =  4000,  arc  approximately  i,  i .  6,  2,  2,3:  that  is  to  say, 
they  grow  very  much  more  slowly  than  do  the  increments  themselves. 
For  the  different  capitals  F=  iooo?  =  2000,  =  3000,  =4000,  the 
^dative  values  of  the  increase,  when  each  is  augmented  by  z  =  1000, 
are  approximately  0-301,  0-1763  0*125,  °*°97*  When  we  have  thus 
calculated  the  relative  values  of  the  advantages  which  some  event  will 
bring  us?  we  may  multiply  them  by  the  chance  there  Is  of  their  ever 

V  +  % 

being  attained  which  we  will  call  m :  by  this  means  we  get  m  log  (— nr-  ) 


CHAPTER  ix.]       Futile  Applications  of  Calculus.  377 

for  our  moral  expectation  of  them,  I.  e.  the  mathematical  expectation  of 
these  advantages  reduced  to  their  relative  values ;  and  this  is  what  in  all 
sorts  of  enterprises  determines  the  amount  of  risk  we  may  prudently 
incur  in  view  of  some  prospective  advantage.  We  have  assumed  the 
factor  m  to  be  constant  however  high  z  is ;  it  may  be  so,  but  it  may 
also  be  a  function  of  z  or  of  V  +  #,  in  which  case  of  course  it  is  to  be 
included  under  the  integral  sign  and  brought  into  the  integration.  In 
point  of  fact  there  are  many  sorts  of  undertakings  in  which  while  the 
first  success  is  hard  to  win,  subsequent  successes  become  easier  and 
easier,  or  in  which  the  possibility  of  further  success  diminishes  with 
the  increase  of  what  has  been  won.  Lastly  the  formulae  do  not  help 
us  to  measure  all  that  one  may  wish  to  measure.  By  treating  z  only 
as  the  sum  of  dz,  without  taking  account  of  the  time  /  which  it  takes 
to  achieve  the  summation,  they  neglect  the  distinction  between  gradual 
and  sudden  improvements.  The  real,  actual,  or  physical  values  of  the 
two  may  be  the  same,  but  their  psychical  effect,  or  to  put  it  simply  the 
pleasure  they  occasion,  may  be  different,  and  this  after  all  enters  as  a 
factor  into  the  idea  of  the  comparative  value  of  an  advantage.  Let  us 
assume  first  that  the  extent, to  which  a  particular  satisfaction  admits  of 

being  further  enhanced  =  -=»  ,  if  ^represents  the  degree  of  satisfaction 

of  the  same  sort  to  which  one  has  already  attained;  and  secondly  that 
the  increase  in  the  satisfaction  generated  remains  proportional  to  the 

2 

size  z  of  the  sudden  increase  in  the  advantage;  then  ~  will  measure 

the  pleasure  due  to  the  accession  of  z.  But  it  is  easy  to  see  that 
these  are  not  the  only  conceivable  assumptions:  it  might  even 
possibly  be  found  that  the  eventual  enjoyment  is  also  a  function  of 
m,  L  e.  of  the  chance  that  z  will  occur :  we  might  perhaps  be  more 
deeply  affected  on  winning  a  satisfaction,  of  which  we  had  almost 
despaired,  than  on  winning  one  of  even  greater  comparative  value 
that  was  more  probable. 

283.  The  last  observation  just  touched  upon  problems  which  have 
not  as  yet  been  brought  within  the  range  of  calculation,  though 
there  is  nothing  to  prevent  their  being  so  brought,  if  an  advance  in 
psychological  knowledge  should  ever  afford  us  starting-points  from 
which  to  grapple  with  them.  Other  problems  there  are  to  which  it 
is  but  an  idle  play  of  words  to  try  to  apply  the  calculus  of  chances. 
For  although  this  method  of  inference  does  start  from  our  ignorance 
of  the  special  grounds,  which  condition  a  particular  event,  still  it 
/makes  certain  presuppositions,  which  we  cannot  neglect.  In  the  first 


378  Determination  of  Individual  Facts,        c  BOOK  n; 

place  it  presupposes  the  truths  logical  and  mathematical,  of  which 
we  must  make  use  in  order  to  be  able  to  calculate  at  all.  The  truth 
of  special  laws,  limited  in  their  action  to  a  group  of  facts,  the  non- 
existence  of  which  is  just  as  conceivable  as  is  their  existence,,  may., 
as  we  shall  presently  see,  be  proved  by  means  of  calculation;  but 
from,  what  basis  could  one  legitimately  start  to  show  the  law  of 
Identity  or  the  doctrine  of  disjunctive  judgments  to  be  more  or  less 
probable  ?  The  very  simplest  determination  of  any  probability  pre- 
supposes a  disjunction  of  all  possible  cases  to  be  given,  that  each 
of  these  cases  is  identical  with  itself  and  not  the  same  as  any  other, 
and  that  each  of  them  is  exclusive  of  the  rest.  It  follows  that  before 
we  set  about  to  prove  an  event,  or  a  state,  or  a  series  of  events  to  be 
probable,  we  must  have  presupposed  the  particular  content  in  ques- 
tion to  be  part  and  parcel  of  a  world,  in  which  universal  laws 
demarcate  what  is  true  from  what  is  untrue,  what  is  possible  from 
what  is  impossible,  what  may  easily  occur  from  what  may  not. 

But  the  calculus  of  probabilities  is  subject  to  other  limitations 
besides  these.  The  object,  which  its  problems  concern,  must  be 
regarded  by  it  as  not  merely  thinkable  in  the  abstract ;  it  must  also 
presuppose  the  presence  of  conditions,  which  necessitate  the  realisa- 
tion of  one  of  the  disjoined  cases  to  the  exclusion  of  the  rest;  to 
use  the  language  of  its  formulae  there  must  always  be  a  certainty  =  r, 
which  is  the  sum  of  all  the  probabilities  of  the  particular  cases,  which 
we  can  think  of.  This  was  noticeable  in  our  examples  throughout 
If®,  die  has  been  thrown  or  //"two  have  been,  we  can  determine  the 
respective  chance  of  any  of  the  particular  cases  which  may  result; 
but  unless  we  specify  how  many  dice  are  to  fall  and  how  many 
times  in  succession,  .it  is  quite  impossible  to  determine  the  scope 
of  the  disjoined  possibilities  and  the  unity  by  reference  to  which  the 
chances  of  each  arc  to  be  severally  measured.  It  follows  that  we  can 
only  calculate  such  events  as  depend  on  one  another  within  a  regu- 
larly ordered  world;  ultimate  facts,  which  contain  an  independent 
absolute  being  of  their  own,  we  cannot  calculate.  It  would  be  mere 
senseless  play  of  wit  to  reason  thus :  prior  to  all  existence  there 
is  the  same  chance  of  the  existence  of  something  as  of  nothing ;  but 
one  or  the  other  must  take  place;  therefore  the  chance  of  something 
existing  is  =  % :  but  this  something  would  necessarily  be  either  one 
or  many;  consequently  the  chance  of  there  being  many  elements 
is  Y4J  and  the  chance  of  there  being  one  is  Y4 :  lastly  assuming  that 
there  are  n  elements,  they  may  be  all  alike,  or  some  different,  or  all 
different ;  the  case  of  these  being  all  alike  would  be  but  one  of  the  m 


ix.]       //  must  have  determinate  Data.  379 

cases  which  would  thus   arlse5  and   consequently  Its   probability  is 

=  — .     Prior  to  all  existence,  we  must  observe,  there  can  exist  no 
4m  ' 

ingenious  spirit  to  Institute  such  a  calculation  of  what  will  be  ;  could 
we  conceive  however  of  such  a  spirit  as  existing  outside  the  world  and 
speculating  as  to  whether  it  is  likely  to  come  into  existence  or  no3 
still  that  nothing  would  involve  no  condition  of  any  sort,  which  would 
necessitate  a  real  settlement  of  the  alternative  presented  in  thought 
between  being  and  not  being,  so  that  the  end  of  the  whole  matter 
would  still  be  nothing.  But  suppose  the  alternative  to  have  been 
somehow  settled  in  favour  of  being,  this  being  could  not  possibly  be 
something,  which  were  merely  thinkable  in  abstractor  it  must  be 
capable,  of  existing  and  can  only  be  some  determinate  being,  which 
excludes  all  other  thinkable  being.  Such  determinate  being  would 
from  the  very  beginning  have  a  certainty  of  its  own  =  i,  while  the 
fyobability  of  all  other  kinds  of  being  would  be  not"  exactly  =  o, 
so  much  as  an  idea  without  any  assignable  meaning.  It  would  be 
different  if  we  wished  to  determine  the  probability  of  these  ultimate 
facts  from  given  data :  on  the  assumption  that  all  reality  is  bound 
together  by  law,  these  given  data  would  (not  as  the  ground  of  their 
reality,  but  as  the  source  of  our  knowledge  of  them)  constitute  a 
condition  which  would  compel  us  to  assume  the  one  or  other  form  of 
those  ultimate  facts  to  the  exclusion  of  the  rest. 

284.  There  is  one  other  point  we  shall  do  well  to  bear  in  mind. 
In  probability  we  have  after  all  no  more  than  a  measure  of  the 
confidence  we  may  legitimately  place  in  the  occurrence  of  an  event* 
before  it  has  occurred.  After  it  has  occurred  however  what  was 
previously  its  greater  or  less  probability  does  not  continue  to  attach 
to  it  as  a  permanent  property,  from  which  we  may  regressively  draw 
some  other  conclusion  in  regard  to  the  causes  of  its  being  realised 
than  just  this  that  they  have  actually  come  about.  We  are  victims  of 
all  sorts  of  illusions  on  this  point,  For  example  an  event  E  occurs, 
which  on  previous  calculation  was  very  unlikely  to  occur  as  compared 
with  a  whole  class  of  cases,  which  for  the  convenience  of  thought  we 
gather  into  one  and  collectively  oppose  to  it  as  a  second  rival  case 
non-jE*;  in  such  a  case  we  are  apt  to  imagine  that  not  only  a  special 
and  peculiar  but  a  higher  cause  was  necessary  in  order  to  bring 
about  E.  To  take  a  common  instance  :  some  object  is  of  little  signi- 
ficance, almost  unknown  and  seldom  spoken  of.  We  stumble  on  its 
name  once,  after  which  it  meets  our  eye  again  and  again  in  conversa- 
tion, in  books,  in  periodicals ;  here  is  a  coincidence,  the  chance  of 


380  Determination  of  Individual  Facts.        [  BOOK  u. 

which,  if  calculated  beforehand,  was  infinitely  small  and  we  call  it  a 
very  strange  incident.  But  a  moment's  reflexion  will  convince  us  that 
there  is  very  little  strangeness  about  it ;  how  infinitely  more  numerous 
are  the  cases  in  which  the  incident  does  not  turn  up  than  those  in 
which  it  does  \  How  many  names  just  catch  our  ear  once  without 
ever  being  repeated  in  such  a  way  that,  their  repetition,  strikes  us  as 
odd  1  To  put  what  1  mean  in  a  perfectly  general  way,  let  us  suppose 
there  to  exist,  some  condition  B  or  some  group  B  of  different  but 
co-operant  conditions;  these  according  to  the  different  and  in  the 
abstract  equally  possible  variable  attitudes,,  winch  they  can  assume 
towards  each  other,  would  bring  about  a  number  n  of  different 

results  £ ';  the  probability  of  each  individual  E  is  then  =  -  and  by 

consequence  the  same  as  that,  of  every  other  determinate.  E,  but,  if  w 
be  Inlmitelv  great,  infinitely  small  as  compared  with  the  probability 
that  any  one  indifferently  of  all  the  remaining  «— i  events  will  happen, 
which  we  collectively  oppose  to  it.  But  the  latter,  the  collective  prob- 
ability has  another  significance  than  the  former-— the  individual,  for 
all  the  ;/—  i  events  cannot  bo  KMlised,  but  only  one  of  them  to  the 
exclusion  of  the  rest. 

A  famous  instance  will  illustrate  the  extent  to  which  we  may  be  led 
astray  by  such  ial.se  comparison  of  things,,  which  are  essentially 
different..  The  pluneljiry  system,  according  to  Laplace,  and  so  far  as 
he  knew  it,  consists  of  11  planets  and  18  satellites;  we  are  ac- 
quainted with  the  revolutions  of  the  sun,  of  10  of  the  planets,  of  the 
rnoons  of  Jupiter,  of  Saturn's  ring  and  of  erne  of  his  satellites;  the  ro- 
tations of  these  bodies  together  with  their  revolutions  form  a  group  of 
,43  movements  in  the  same  direction;  would  we  assume  that  this 
uniformity  is  all  u  mutter  of  chance,  we  find  on  calculating  it  that  the 
probability  of  such  an  assumption  being  true  is  something  less  than 
unity  divided  by  four  billions.  I  have  no  doubt  thai  fresh  advances 
in  astronomical  science  will  leave  this  number  substantially  correct, 
butwh.it  follows?  Simply  th;il  the  particular  cause  or  grouping  of 
cuuses  adequate4  to  produce  this  slate  of  things  is  or  lias  been  real 
it  does  not  follow  thai  this  grouping  of  causes  itself  requires  any 
other  cause  than  just  that  so-culled  chance,  by  which  we  mean  no 
more  than  that  the  mutual  relations  of  several  realities,  which  we  pre- 
sume to  form  a  group,  may  without  contradiction  be  combined  in  an 
infinite  number  of  ways.  Out  of  all  these  four  billions  of  possible 
never  more  than  a  single  one  can  be  realised,  and  no  matter 
which  of  them  it  IKJ,  we  shall  feel  just  the  same  surprise  at  its  hap- 


CHAPTER  ix.}      Facts  may  confirm  the  Calculus  381 

pening  In  particular  as  we  should  have  at  any  other  of  the  four 
billions,  had  it  happened.  The  case  would  be  utterly  different,  if  all 
those  other  dispositions  of  events  really  formed  a  single  second  case, 
capable  of  being  realised  as  such ;  in  that  case  its  chance,  denoted  by 
four  billions,  would  have  at  least  admitted  of  being  directly  compared 
with  the  probability  of  the  other  case,  i.  e.  with  unity,  although  even 
then  the  sort  of  conclusion  would  not  have  been  justified  but  only- 
rendered  more  attractive.  No  doubt  a  plausible  attempt  may  be 
made  to  justify  the  reduction  of  the  whole  number  of  cases  to  a  single 
pair  of  alternatives ;  nothing,  it  may  be  said,  but  this  given  disposition 
of  all  masses  and  motions  could  secure  the  stability  of  the  planetary 
system  and  the  continuance  of  its  movements ;  no  one  of  the  million 
other  arrangements  would  have  served  to  produce  this  state  of  equi- 
librium. We  concede  all  this,  but  might  it  not  be  also  pleaded  in 
favour  of  each  of  the  other  arrangements,  that  it  too  had  in  store  for 
the  planetary  system  a  particular  destiny  of  its  own,  that  on  presup- 
position of  it  alone  among  the  many  millions  of  possible  presupposi- 
tions could  that  peculiar  destiny  be  fulfilled,  so  that  if  the  uniqueness 
of  the  result  constitutes  a  claim  to  a  higher  origin  each  of  these  rival 
dispositions  may  with  equal  right  prefer  such  a  claim  ?  It  would  seem 
then  as  if  it  was  not  the  unique  result  as  such,  but  the  unique  result 
which  wast  better  than  its  fellows,  which  finally  prevailed.  But  why 
should  superiority  in  itself  constitute  improbability?  And  after  all 
would  this  case  which  ultimately  prevailed  be  better  than  others  ?  No 
doubt  as  things  are  our  blood  is  ever  fresh  and  new,  yet  at  the  expense 
of  for  ever  circulating  in  the  same  forms ;  but  is  it  really  and  without 
qualification  a  finer  thing  that  it  should  circulate  as  it  does  than  that 
it  should  not  ?  The  perpetual  repetition  of  these  forms  may  no  doubt 
appear  very  grand  to  us  to-day,  to-morrow  may  it  not  strike  us  as 
rather  tedious  ?  Would  it  not  be  a  finer  thing  if  the  planetary  system 
were  not  in  such  stable  equilibrium,  if  all  its  relations  were  for  ever 
changing,  so  that  vegetation  and  natural  beauty,  animals  and  man 
should  develope  in  ever  new  and  interesting  forms  and  histopy  be 
really  the  history  of  a  progress,  of  a  manifest  advance,  instead  of  the 
chronicle  of  a  cycle  of  ever  recurring  events  ?  And  to  conclude,  inas- 
much as  the  heavens  are  infinite,  may  not  all  the  millions  of  differently 
ordered  systems  be  actually  realised  therein  ?  With  us  the  system,  of 
equilibrium,  at  unknown  distances  the  rest?  And  then  surely  our 
own  system  would  only  possess  such  reality  as  its  probability  entitles 
us  to  claim  for  it,  it  would  be  but  one  among  millions. 

285.  Thus  far  we  viewed  the  calculation   of  chances  as  ci  mere 


382  Denomination  of  Individual  Pacts.        [BOOK  n. 

means  of  ascertaining  accurately  the  confidence  we  may  repose  in  the 
occurrence  of  future  events,  there  now  arises  a  natural  desire  to  know 
how  far  these  previous  calculations  are  as  a  rule  confirmed  by  the 
actual  course  of  events.  The  answer  usually  made  is  that  the  more 
numerous  the  cases,  which  make  an  event  F  possible,  the  more  closely 
does  the  number  of  times  it  actually  occurs  tend  to  coincide  with  the 
number  calculated.  We  can  only  get  an  answer  that  is  at  all  trust- 
worthy by  means  of  experiments  of  the  simplest  kind,  in  which  care 
is  taken  to  restore  after  each  mi}l  experiment  the  group  B  of  con- 
ditions, upon  winch  each  particular  case  F  depends,  in  such  a  way  as 
to  leave  the  composition  of  B  exactly  the  same  after  as  before  that 
experiment,  differenced  only  by  the  variations,  whose  Influence  on  the 
net  result  of  the  scries  of  experiments  it  is  the  very  object  of  our  en- 
quiry to  ascertain;  taking  care  at  the  same  time  to  prevent  the 
entrance  of  any  alien  cause  not  implied  in  the  Idea  of  such  variation, 
whether  that  cause  consists  in  external  circumstances  or  in  a  change 
of  the  object  of  the  experiment  or  in  unfair  intervention,  on  the  part 
of  the  person  experimenting.  These  conditions  are  fulfilled  in  ex- 
periments made  with  dice.  We  calculate  beforehand  that,  if  two  dice 
are  thrown  once,  the  chance  of  getting  a  particular  combination  of 
points,  e.g.  5  .  6  =  \/lH  =  0-056,  which  for  a  thousand  throws  would  be 
56;  if  now  we  make  trial  of  these  1000  throws  one  after  another,  and 
find,  as  In  fact  has  been  found  to  be  the  case,  that  the  specified  com- 
bination occurs  50  times,  we  see  that  this  number  already  approxi- 
mates pretty  clearly  to  the  number  calculated ;  yet  more  when  in 
10,000  throws  it  rises  to  5/0.  Each  single  throw  in  such  a  case 
depends,  if  we  leave1  out  of  account  the  uniform  or  changing  resistance 
of  the  air,  on  the  following  conditions  ;  on  the  velocity  with  which  and 
the  angle  at  which  the  die  impinges  on  the  receiving  plate,  upon  the 
position  of  its  sides  and  comers  at  the  moment  of  Impact,  upon  its 
own  elasticity  and  on  that  of  the  plate.  We  may  regard  the  last  of 
these  conditions  as  constant,  for  as  we  should  expect  from  a  calcula- 
tion of  its  probability,  the  die  will  extremely  seldom  touch  the  same 
point  of  the  plate,  so  that  the  elasticity  of  the  point  of  impact  will  not 
change  to  any  appreciable  extent,  if  it  was  the  same  to  begin  with  for 
all  points  of  the  plate.  If,  however,  we  would  still  regard  it  as 
variable,  it  may  be  included,  just  as  well  as  the  slight  and  gradual 
changes  in  the  shape  and  elasticity  of  the  die,  among  the  variations  of 
the  conditions,  the  effect  of  which  Is  being  investigated ;  for  since  the 
two  changes  do  not  depend  on  each  other,  but  may  co-operate,  they 
do  not  when  taken  together  favour  one  particular  throw  more  than 


CHAPTER  ix.]         but  do  not  necessarily  do  so*  383 

another,  but  favour  now  one  now  another  indifferently.  The  first- 
named  condition,  the  velocity  and  direction  of  the  die,  depends  of 
course  on  the  movement  of  the  hand  that  casts  it ;  but  were  one  even 
disposed  to  favour  a  particular  throw  by  this  means,  one  could  hardly 
do  so  effectually;  for  after  we  have  obtained  a  particular  throw,  we 
neither  retain  a  clear  recollection  of  the  group  of  muscular  feelings, 
which  accompanied  it,  nor  are  we  able  to  reproduce  the  exact  move- 
ments, on  which  those  feelings  depended,  so  as  to  exactly  copy  the 
throw;  and  the  least  deviation  would  have  the  effect  of  favouring 
some  other  combination  of  points  than  what  we  wished  to  throw. 
These  very  changes  therefore  of  our  movements  are  among  the  legi- 
timate variations  of  the  conditions  of  the  result  we  are  investigating. 

The  same  advantages  are  presented  by  a  rotating  drum,  into  which 
m  white  and  p  black  balls  are  introduced  and  into  which  each  time  we 
have  drawn  we  re-introduce  the  ball  drawn  before  drawing  again.  If 
we  then  turn  the  drum  we  do  not  of  course  restore  exactly  the  same 
position  to  the  balls,  which  they  had  before  we  drew,  but  still  we  only 
produce  one  of  the  variations  of  this  position,  with  the  influence  of 
which  we  wish  to  become  acquainted.  If  we  distinguish  the  whole 
condition  B,  upon  which  the  event  F  in  each  separate  case  depends, 
into  a  constant  and  a  variable  element,  we  may  say  that  in  the  first 
case  the  shape  of  the  die  forms  the  constant  element  as  does  the 
number  of  black  and  white  balls  in  the  second,  while  the  variable 
element  consists  in  the  first  case  of  the  velocity  and  direction  of  the 
die,  in  the  second  case  of  the  relative  positions  of  the  balls  and  the 
direction  given  to  the  hand  in  drawing.  If  we  actually  make  the 
second  experiment  the  result  obtained  is  similar ;  the  greater  the  num- 
ber of  draws  the  more  nearly  does  the  ratio  between  the  numbers  of 
the  white  and  black  balls  drawn  approach  to  the  ratio  between  the 
numbers  m  and  /,  in  which  they  were  present  in  the  drum. 

286.  Theoretical  considerations  have  been  based  on  the  results  of 
these  experiments,  which  I  cannot  persuade  myself  are  correct.  A 
vicious  circle  is  involved  in  all  attempts  to  show  that  the  results  men- 
tioned occur  always  with  an  intelligible  necessity.  In  the  first  place 
one  cannot  argue  from  m  series  of  experiments,  in  which  we  have 
really  obtained  it,  to  its  being  obtained  in  every  (m  +  i)®*  series,  so 
long  as  the  unknown  variations  of  the  conditions,  which  have  there 
produced  the  said  result  and  would  produce  it  here,  are  individually 
subject  to  no  rule  whatever.  For  the  idea  that  they  will  at  least  on 
the  whole  continue  to  compensate  themselves  in  the  same  way  here  as 
there — and  it  is  only  on  this  condition  that  the  attempted  universal!- 


384  Determination  of  IndividualJFacts.        [BOOK  IT. 

sation  of  the  observed  results  would  be  permissible— this  idea,  I  say, 
has  no  objective  validity,  nor  is  it  to  be  deduced  from  anything  we 
already  know  to  be  real ;  it  is  indeed  simply  a  way  of  expressing  our 
subjective  and  almost  tautological  maxim,  that  that  is  most  likely  to 
occur  in  reality,  which  previous  calculation  shows  to  be  most  likely. 
Provided,  that  is  to  say,  no  uniform  cause  gives  the  preference  to  one 
of  the  possible  cases  of  the  kind  F  over  another,  we  must  ascribe  the 
same  chance  of  being  realised  to  all  cases,  which  in  their  idea  are  co- 
ordinate or  equally  possible;  in  which  case  all  that  is  meant  by  saying 
that  some  particular  fact  or  event  is  to  be  expected  as  most  probable 
is  just  this,  that  in  a  great,  number  of  experiments  the  actual  number 
of  times  a  case  F  occurs  is  equal  to  the  calculated  number.  If  this 
expectation  is  verified  in  m  series  of  experiments,  that  has  actually  oc- 
curred m  times,  which  before  the  occurrence  was  the  most  probable: 
but'  it  does  not  therefore  become  a  demonstrable  necessity  that  it 
should  again  occur  in  every  (w-M)111  series  of  experiments;  that 
indeed  remains  the  most  likely  thing  we  can  expect,  when  we  are 
brought  face  to  face  with  this  new  series  of  experiments,  but  it  may 
always  turn  out  to  have  been  a  'wrong  expectation. 

I'n  the  second  place  no  single  series  of  experiments  cars  really  com- 
prise an  infinite  number  of  experiments  ;  it  must  always  stop  short  at 
some  finite  number,  however  large  it  be.  Thus  it  can  never  be  a 
real  fact  of  observation,  that,  the  number  of  a  dual  realisations  of  F 
approximates  without  limit  to  the  calculated  number  as  n  increases:  it 
is  always  an  inference  from  the  facts.  Now  assuming  that  in  »  ex- 
periments we  reach  a  point  at  which  the  two  numbers  coincide  or 
that  they  have  so  nearly  coincided  that  their  difference  need  not  be 
considered,  it  would  be  a  very  arbitrary  procedure*  to  break  off  the 
series  just  al  this  point,  It  is  obvious  that  the  law  of  such  equality  or 
approximation  conies  true  if  we  continue  the  series  till  it  comes  true 
and  no  longer*  But  what  if  we  prolong  the  series?  Possibly  the 
theoretical  and  the  real  results  will  converge  still  more ;  possibly  again 
each  additional  round  of  n  experiments  will  have  the  same  or  nearly 
the  same  result  as  the  first  had,  ami  the  difference  d  will  not  be 
sensibly  diminished  by  prolonging  the  series;  and  to  these  possi- 
bilities we  may  acid  any  other  less  regular  succession  as  also  possible. 
Only  these  different  suppositions  have  not  the  same  amount  of  proba- 
bility ;  so  long  as  we  consistently  avoid  presupposing  any  constant 
cause,  which  in  a  series  of  experiments  to  be  made  might  give  one 
F  a  preponderance  over  others,  our  most  probable  assumption  is 
merely,  that  as  n  goes  on  increasing  the  number  of  observed  realisa- 


CHAPTER  ix.j       True  import  of  suck  agreement.  385 

tions  of  F  will  continually  approximate  to  the  number  of  them 
calculated  beforehand.  If  in  a  large  though  limited  number  n  of 
experiments  this  expectation  is  not  verified,  a  constant  or  uniform 
condition  may  be  chargeable  with  the  result,  though  it  may  also  be  due 
to  the  combination  on  no  principle  of  variable  conditions.  As  often 
however  as  our  expectations  are  verified  by  what  really  occurs,  we 
are  presented  with  a  fact,  at  which  we  cannot  feel  any  surprise  just 
because  it  was  beforehand  not  improbable,  but  still  a  fact  of  which  we 
can  just  as  little  prove  that  it  was  necessary  as  we  can  prove  of  the 
verification  of  any  mathematical  chance  that  it  was  necessary.  In 
the  experiment  with  the  drum  and  balls  an  uniform  proportion 
gradually  revealed  itself  between  the  numbers  of  the  differently 
coloured  balls  drawn ;  I  cannot  believe  that  this  uniformity  is  really 
explicable,  if  that  means  anything  more  than  probable.  The  distinc- 
tion made  between  the  constant  and  the  variable  or  accidental  causes 
which  jointly  produce  an  effect  is  a  very  true  and  significant  one,  but 
tfiis  is  not  in  my  opinion  the  place  to  appeal  to  it.  It  is  argued  that 
however  irregular  the  successive  arrangements  of  the  balls  may  be, 
there  still  remains  one  constant  element,  namely  the  unchanging 
proportion  of  white  to  black  balls ;  this  in  a  great  number  of  draws 
must  make  itself  felt  by  producing  some  constant  effect :  for  there  is 
no  reason  to  suppose  that  just  where  the  hand  alights  balls  of  one 
colour  will  be  found  oftener  than  in  proportion  to  their  relative 
number :  if  such  were  found  to  be  the  case,  we  must,  it  is  argued, 
break  with  our  supposition  and  assume  some  constant  collateral  cause 
which  favours  that  colour.  Against  this  view  it  may  be  objected  that 
the  constant  causes  spoken  of  could  not  make  themselves  felt  by 
merely  being  there,  but  only  so  far  as  they  act.  In  the  experiments 
with  dice  the  shape  of  the  die  and  the  position  of  its  centre  of  gravity 
were  such  constant  causes  and  both  took  effect  in  each  single  case, 
In  virtue  of  the  former  the  die  could  only  fall  on  six  sides  and  not  on  a 
seventh,  in  virtue  of  the  latter  it  could  not  help  falling  on  one  of  its 
sides  instead  of  coming  to  rest  on  one  of  its  angles  or  corners  ;  on 
which  of  its  sides  it  should  fall,  however,  was  just  what  these  constant 
causes  did  not  determine.  It  is  the  same  with  the  experiments  with 
balls  in  a  drum;  two  of  the  conditions  are  constant;  firstly  the 
colours  are  only  white  and  black,  so  that  no  blue  or  red  ball  can  be 
drawn ;  secondly  their  numbers  m  and  p  are  constant,  though  the 
relative  numbers  of  the  few  balls  which  come  within  reach  of  the 
hand  each  time  it  draws  are  none  the  less  to  be  classed  as  variable 
elements  in  the  condition ;  hence  it  follows  that  this  constant  con- 

c  c 


386  Determination  of  Individual  Facts.        [  BOOK  n. 

dition,  the  ratio  m:p,  does  not  take  effect,  though  It  actually  exists. 

I  do  not  therefore  see  the  necessity  of  assuming — -what  contradicts 
our  presupposition — a  constant  collateral  cause  to  account  for  the 
apparent  anomaly  of  'a  different  proportion  of  balls  being  drawn  to 
what  is  in  the  urn.  On  the  contrary  all  that  is  needed  to  produce 
such  a  result  is  that  the  positions  of  the  balls  should  he  changed  on 
no  principle,  and  such  irregular  change  is  just  what  we  presuppose 
and  try  to  bring  about  by  turning  the  drum.  Such  change  of  their 
positions  renders  possible  every  and  any  combination  of  the  balls, 
makes  It  possible  even  that  all  the  balls  of  one  colour  should 
be  missed  and  even  that  this  exclusion  of  one  colour  should  be 
repeated  over  and  over  again  in  successive  experiments,  everything 
being  designedly  so  arranged  that  each  (;«-}•  i)M»  experiment  is  en- 
tirely independent  of  the  #/th.  All  that  can  be  said  against  this  is 
that  it  is  the  reverse  of  probable  ;  all  that  is  probable  is  that  the 
number  of  times  a  ball  of  a  particular  colour  is  grasped  will  tally  with 
the  number  of  balls  of  that  colour  which  there  arc  in  the  urn.  But 
this  too  is  no  more  than  a  probability;  if  it  be  nearly  verified  by 
experience  we  have  got  a  fact,  not  inexplicable,  inasmuch  as  we  see 
quite  well  how  easily  the  muses  which  contribute  to  that  result  may 
come  together,  but  not  explicable  in  the  sense  that  one  could  de- 
monstrate both  that  and  how  they  musi  thus  coincide  in  the  long  ran 
of  cases,  whereas,  when  the  cases  are  few  in  number,  there  is  no  must 
about  it. 

287.  In  the  foregoing  examples  we  were  cognisant  of  the  nature 
of  the  constant  causes  as  well  as  of  the  extent  to  which  those  which 
were  not  constant  might  vary;  hence  we  could  in  anticipation  of 
experience  make  assumptions  as  to  how  often  an  event  they  con- 
ditioned would  occur,  and  find  our  assumptions  verified  by  experience. 
We  now  turn  to  events  of  which  we  know  neither  the  constant  nor 
the  variable  causes,  but.  which  we  observe  to  occur  over  and  over 
again.  What  conclusions  can  we  draw  from  the  regularity  with 
which  they  occur?  Here  we  know  neither  how  many  are  the  cases, 
which  are  barely  possible,  nor  how  many  chances  in  favour  of  the 
event  in  question  there  may  be  among  them,  The  only  distinction 
we  make  is  between  the  occurrence  or  non-occurrence  of  E,  regard- 
ing as  cases,  in  which  its  occurrence  is  possible,  all  those  which 
realise  the  particular  centres  of  relation,  which  being  given  make  JS 
intelligible,  and  comparing  with  the  numbers  of  these  the  number  of 
ca^es  in  which  it  is  realised.  The  constant  and  variable  causes  on 
which  blindness  depends  are  hidden  from  us ;  but  the  number 


CHAPTER  ix.]    Statistical  generalisations  not  Laws.          387 

of  cases  in  which  this  defect  may  owing  to  those  causes  occur  is 
equal  to  the  number  of  the  population.  If  we  compare  with  the 
entire  number  of  persons  belonging  to  one  generation  the  total  number 
of  blind  people  among  them  and  conceive  of  this  comparison  being 
extended  over  several  generations,  we  can  quite  see  how  it  would 
transpire,  whether  such  a  constant  ratio  is  on  the  whole  to  be  found  be- 
tween the  two  numbers,  as  would  point  to  the  presence  of  a  group 
of  constant  causes  favourable  to  blindness  in  the  mass  of  men,  but  in 
the  individual  modified  in  their  effects  by  variable  causes.  But  this 
is  not  all ;  in  most  cases  it  will  probably  need  a  considerable  length 
of  time  for  the  variable  causes  to  realise  themselves  by  turns  in  such 
completeness  that  they  cancel  each  other's  influence  and  allow  the 
constant  ones  to  assert  themselves.  Hence  it  is  usual  to  try  and  dis- 
cover units  of  time,  in  which  the  ratio  of  the  actual  to  the  possible 
cases  of  E  becomes  the  same,  due  regard  being  had  of  course  to  the 
geriodical  changes  to  which  the  number  of  the  latter  are  liable.  Now 
the  year  happens  to  be  the  particular  unit  of  time  during  which  most 
of  the  variable  conditions,  which  affect  men  at  all  generally,  run 
through  the  cycle  of  their  possible  values,  and  so  the  first  question 
to  ask  in  investigations  referring  to  human  affairs  is  naturally  this  : 
within  these  units  of  time  does  the  ratio  of  the  actual  to  the  con- 
ceivable cases  of  jE1  remain  uniform  or  approach  to  uniformity  ?  The 
answer  to  all  these  questions  may  just  as  well  be  negative  as  affirm- 
ative. If  an  event  E  occurs  at  all  frequently  during  a  certain 
period  of  time,  there  must' be  within  that  period  some  constant  cause 
of  it,  at  least  in  the  sense  that  some  ratio  exists,  which  to  a  definite 
extent  promotes  the  combination  of  variable  cause  which  favours  E. 
Then  as  often  as  an  unit  of  time  recurs  and  the  same  proportion  of  real* 
cases  to  possible  ones  is  reproduced,  so  often  are  we  warranted  in  the 
regressive  inference,  that  that  constant  cause  has  existed.  But  it  is 
not  at  once  clear  how  we  can  argue  forwards,  that  for  the  next  equal 
interval  of  time  the  same  proportion  will  hold  good  as  a  predeter- 
mined law.  Such  an  assumption  can  only  be  regarded  as  the  safest 
rule  to  go  by  in  judging  of  the  future,  when  no  data  are  known 
pointing  to  the  intervention  of  some  change  in  those  unknown  con- 
ditions. If  the  rule  holds  good  as  foreseen  we  are  justified  in  once 
more  making  the  same  regressive  inference  as  before,  and  sure 
enough  the  oftener  we  can  make  it,  the  oftener  that  is  the  rule  is  con- 
firmed by  the  facts,  so  much  the  stronger  becomes  the  probability, 
that  the  group  of  conditions,  which  has  remained  constant  over  so  many 
units  of  time,  will  remain  unchanged  for  the  future.  To  more  than  this 

C  C  2 


388  Determination  of  Individual  Facts. 

probability  however  we  can  never  attain,  and  so  it  is  very  unsafe  to 
characterise  the  results  of  such  observations  as  laws  of  what  happens, 
or  actually  to  speak,  as  we  sometimes  do,  of  laws  of  big  numbers,  as 
if  the  mere  bigness  of  a  number  of  compared  cases  must  of  necessity 
introduce  a  regularity  in  the  course  of  a  certain  class1  of  events,  which 
has  no  independent  foundation  in  the  nature  of  those  events  and 
their  conditions.  A  law,  as  we  have  seen,  is  an  hypothetical  judgment 
and  enunciates  the  necessary  validity  of  a  consequent  provided  the 
antecedent  be  valid.  Statistical  laws  must  not  aspire  to  satisfy  this 
definition  or  they  certainly  lose  their  value  ;  for  they  say  no  more  than 
this :  if  in  the  next  unit  of  time  T  all  known  and  unknown  con- 
ditions be  as  in  the  last,  then  will  the  series  of  all  the  consequences, 
consequently  also  the  sum  total  of  JL\  be  the  same.  Of  course,  it 
will,  for  if  we  suppose  the  past  to  take  place  over  again,  it  will  wear 
just  the  same  aspect  as  it  wore  then.  Those  who  talk  about  statis- 
tical laws  no  doubt  do  not  mean  to  be  guilty  of  tautology ;  on  the 
contrary  they  mean  to  state  their  antecedent  clause  categorically, 
that  is,  to  assert  that  such  an  identity  of  all  conditions  will  take  place ; 
it  is  obvious  however  that  such  an  assertion  can  never  be  certain,  but 
only  probable.  Such  propositions  therefore  arc  not  laws,  but  analogies, 
which  extend  a  proportion,  which  has  held  good  in  n  cases,  to  the 
(u  +  i)th,  not  proving  but  only  assuming  that  between  n  and  n  +  i 
there  is  no  change  in  the  conditions  on  which  their  validity  depends. 

288.  Among  events,  which  in  their  frequent  recurrence  depend  at 
once  on  constant  and  on  variable  conditions,  may  be  properly  classed 
our  own  observations^  by  which  I  mean  the  simplest  kind  of  obser- 
vation, viz.  the  measurement  of  a  quantity  given  in  an  act  of  per- 
ception. Here  the  constant  cause  consists  in  the  true  value  of  this 
quantity,  for  this  under  entirely  similar  conditions  would  always  have 
the  same  effect  on  our  susceptibility.  The  variable  causes  are  the 
external  circumstances  and  the  changes  in  our  psychical  state,  which 
modify  that  effect  in  different  ways  on  different  occasions  of  its  re- 
petition. To  elicit  from  the  different  measurements  thus  obtained, 
the  true  value  of  the  tiling  measured,  would  be  impossible  if  we 
ascribed  to  the  measurements  made  every  conceivable  degree  of  in- 
accuracy :  that  would  mean  that  we  thought  we  might  substitute  for 
the  values  found  any  others  we  liked  as  more  correct,  and  that  would 
be  stultifying  the  very  idea  of  a  measurement.  We  therefore  pre- 
suppose that  knowledge,  aptitude,  and  attention  have  combined  to 
make  the  measurements  fairly  trustworthy  and  only  leave  a  chance  of 
error  very  small  compared  with  the  magnitudes  themselves  which 


CHAPTER  ix.]   Correction  of  Measurements.  The  Mean.    389 

have  to  be  measured.  Now  suppose  we  wish  to  determine  some 
single  unknown  quantity  A,  at  first  every  isolated  measurement  we 
have  of  it  must  pass  muster  as  a  true  determination  of  A ;  for  even 
if  we  had  doubts  of  its  accuracy  we  do  not  know  how  far  or  in  what 
direction  to  rectify  it  and  have  no  grounds  to  go  upon.  On  the 
other  hand  though  the  quantity  A  can  only  be  one  and  the  same, 
observation  may  give  us  different  values  for  it ;  we  have  then  no 
absolute  ground  for  trusting  one  value  more  than  another,  and  as  we 
must  now  suppose  all  our  observations  to  be  more  or  less  erroneous, 
we  are  most  probably  right  in  fixing  its  true  quantity  at  a  value, 
whose  assumption  involves  the  least  sum  of  errors  in  the  measured 
values.  The  arithmetical  mean  M"9  i.e.  the  sum  of  all  the  measured 
values  divided  by  the  number  of  measurements,  is  thus  to  be  regarded 
as  the  most  probable  value  of  A.  The  difference  between  this  mean 
M  and  the  true  value  A  is  the  residuary  error,  which,  so  long  as  we 
have  no  other  accessory  conditions  by  which  to  determine  A,  cannot 
be  got  rid  of,  but  only  reduced  by  multiplying  the  number  of  equally 
careful  observations. 

On  the  other  hand  if  we  have  repeatedly  measured  different  quanti- 
ties ABC)  and  are  still  furnished  with  other  conditions,  which  the 
values  thus  obtained  must  satisfy,  it  may  be  that  the  different  arith- 
metical means,  which  would  individually  give  the  most  probable  values 
of  ABC,  will  not  collectively  satisfy  these  accessory  conditions,  and 
so  stand  in  need  of  rectification.  For  example,  we  may  have  repeat- 
edly measured  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  and  found  that  the  sum 
of  the  mean  values  thus  obtained  amount  to  i8o°-f^°;  this  d°  being 
incompatible  with  the  nature  of  a  triangle  will  point  to  an  error  in  the 
result,  which  must  have  arisen  out  of  errors  in  the  measurements  and 
can  only  be  got  rid  of  by  altering  the  values  found.  But  the  reduction 
required  may  be  distributed  in  very  various  ways  among  the  three 
measured  angles ;  and  the  question  arises,  what  sized  error  may  be 
most  probably  ascribed  to  the  measurement  of  each  angle.  This 
suggests  an  enquiry  based  on  principles,  which  if  not  demonstrable 
•  a  priori  are  at  any  rate  very  probable  and  in  harmony  with  experience, — 
an  enquiry  into  the  relative  probability  of  the  occurrence  of  errors  in 
our  observations  generally.  In  the  idea  of  a  careful  observation  as 
such  there  is  nothing  to  imply  error  at  all.  The  chance  therefore  of 
our  having  hit  on  the  truth  is  always  greater  than  the  chance  of  our 
having  fallen  into  any  particular  error.  Similarly  it  is  involved  in  the 
presuppositions,  on  which  the  eliciting  of  true  values  from  observations 
always  depends,  that  the  chance  of  large  errors  is  less  than  that  of 


390  Determination  of  Individual  Facts.        [BOOK  IL 

small  ones,  and  the  chance  of  positive  errors  exactly  equal  to  the  chance 
of  negative  errors  of  the  same  size.  This  suggests  one  way  of 
picturing  the  problem.  Let  a  straight  line  be  chosen  as  the  axis  of 
abscissae,  take  in  it  any  starting-point  to  correspond  to  a  total  absence 
of  error,  and  from  this  point- let  there  be  divided  off  in  opposite  direc- 
tions abscissae  ±a,  -± fiy  +y,  in  ascending  order  of  magnitude.  At 
the  point  of  no  error  or  zero-point  draw  to  the  line  an  ordinate  of 
any  length,  symbolical  of  the  chance  of  there  being  no  error :  this 
will  be  the  longest  of  all  the  ordihates,  and  all  the  others,  drawn  at 
the  points  +  a,  i/^  .  •  will  diminish  in  length  symmetrically  on  both 
sides  of  it  according  as  the  errors  symbolised  by  a/ify,  the  respective 
chances  of  which  they  denote,  increase  in  size.  But  experience  at 
the  same  time  teaches  us  that  (he  chance  of  errors  does  not  simply 
decrease  in  the  same  proportion  as  their  size  increases.  So  long  as 
the  errors  are  trifling  the  chance  of  them  decreases  less  rapidly  than 
their  size  increases,  but  the  greater  they  are  the  faster  does  their 
decrease  in  probability  outstrip  their  increase  in  size.  Hence  the  line 
joining  the  upper  extremities  of  all  the  ordinates  cannot  he  formed 
of  two  straight  lines,  mooting  over  the  zero -point  and  symmetrically 
approaching  the  axis  of  abscissae  on  both  sides,  in  such  a  way  as 
to  form  a  triangle  with  a  segment  of  the  axis.  On  the  contrary  the 
line  in  question  is  a  curve,  the  vertex  of  which  lies  above  the  zero- 
point  and  which  branches  out  therefrom  in  two  symmetrical  limbs, 
which  are  concave  towards  the  axis  of  abscissae.  The  course  of  the 
curve  is  thus  easily  followed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  its  vertex,  it  is 
not  ho  easy  to  follow  as  it  approaches  the  axis*  We  may  regard 
errors  of  any  size  as  possible,  errors  of  even  infinite  size;  these  too 
will  have  their  degree  of  probability,  infinitesimal  though  it  be;  in 
consequence  each  limb  of  the  curve  must  ultimately  become  convex 
toward  the  axis  of  abscissae  and  approach  it  asymptotically.  But  we 
need  not  take  into  account  such  infinitely  large  errors;  we  may  consider 
that  in  careful  observation,  errors  which  transgress  by  the  whole 
amount  of  the  value  to  he  measured,  do  not  occur  at  all;  the  curve 
will  then  remain  concave  and  cut  the  axis  at  two  points. 

1  cannot  here  go  into  the  lengthy  investigations  which  have  been 
instituted  with  a  view  to  determine  more  exactly  the  most  probable 
form  of  these  curves,  their  equation  and  from  that  the  chance  that  an 
individual  error  will  occur.  Still  I  should  like  to  give  my  reader  some 
idea  of  the  means  to  this  end  ultimately  employed  in  such  speculations, 
though  I  will  not  follow  them  more  closely  than  my  purpose  requires. 
I  will  at  once  drop  out  of  sight  the  tracts  of  the  curve  which  approach 


CHAPTER  ix.i       Method  of  the  least  squares.  ^91 

the  axis  of  abscissae ;  we  are  only  concerned  to  ascertain  the  chance  of 
such  errors  as  we  must  expect  to  fall  into  even  in  careful  observations, 
and  accordingly  we  shall  only  consider  a  short  arc  of  the  line,  which 
lies  on  either  side  of  the  apex.  We  have  seen  that  this  line  can- 
not be  a  straight  line ;  the  next  simplest  thing  to  assume  is  that  its 
equation  is  of  the  second  degree.  The  symmetrical  values  of  the 
ordinates  on  this  side  and  that  of  the  zero-point  are  possible  on  such 
an  assumption,  accordingly  we  make  it  and  choose  from  among  the 
sections  of  the  cone,  which  however  all  lend  themselves  to  the  experi- 
ment,— the  circle.  Let  the  longest  ordinate  r,  drawn  at  the  zero- 
point  of  the  abscissae,  denote  at  once  the  true  value  of  the  quantity 
to  be  measured  and  the  magnitude  of  the  probability  that  this  true 
measurement  has  been  obtained  in  our  observations.  Let  the  abscissae 
+  a,  Hh/3,  ±y  denote  the  size  of  the  errors  by  which  the  different 
measurements  diverge  from  the  true  value  r ;  for  the  present  we  think 
jsf  these  as  expressed  in  parts  of  this  true  value,  so  that  ±a  +  /3 
are  for  r  =  i  proper  fractions  of  unity,  while '  if  we  take  r  =  r  they 
must  be  replaced  by  ±ra,  +  r(3  . . . ;  finally  the  ordinate y  which  cor- 
responds to  each  abscissa  denotes  the  chance  there  is  of 'that  particular 
error  in  measurement  being  made,  which  deviates  from  the  true  r  by  the 
size  of  this  abscissa  :  if  then  we  assume  that  the  equation  of  the  circle 
holds  for  the  curve  in  question,  y  is  =  r-s/i—^2,  where  x  is  the 
general  expression  for  the  changing  values  a,  j3,  y.  Now  we  saw  that 
the  chance  that  different  and  mutually  Independent  events  will  concur 
is  measured  by  the  product  of  their  respective  chances.  Bearing  this 
in  mind  we  shall  see  that  where,  as  here,  we  are  directly  compelled 
to  assume  a  number  of  errors  in  our  measurements,  because  these 
do  not  harmonise  with  an  ulterior  condition,  and  where,  "moreover, 
various  combinations  of  errors  may  be  assumed,  which  would  all 
satisfy  this  condition,  that  combination  of  errors  is  the  most 
likely  and  should  be  assumed,  which  allows  to  the  product  of  the 
individual  chances  of  error  the  highest'  value.  Now  this  product 
consists  of  nothing  but  factors  of  the  form  r^\ — 3?  and  it 
clearly  reaches  the  highest  value,  when  all  the  several  factors  take 
on  at  the  same  time  the  highest  values  compatible  with  the  con- 
ditions of  the  problem.  This  happens,  when  In  all  factors  at  once 
the  subtractive  elements — here  the  sum  a2  +  /32-f  y2 — are  reduced  to 
a  minimum.  This  minimum  value  presupposes,  as  one  -easily  finds 
out,  that  the  sum  of  the  errors  a  +  /3  +  y...  =  o;*  and  this  can  only  be 
the  case,  when  these  first  powers  of  the  errors  have  different  signs, 
and  must  be  the  case  when  the  arithmetical  mean  of  the  observations 


392  Determination  of  Individual  Pacts. 

to  which  they  belong,  Is  taken  to  be  the  true  value  r  of  the  quantity  to 
be  measured.  We  thus  find  that  this  obvious  and  in  simple  cases 
satisfactory  principle  falls  within  the  lines  of  the  process  of  deter- 
mining r  by  means  of  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  errors.  Now 
suppose  we  have  made  m  observations  of  a  quantity  and  have  de- 
rived different  arithmetical  means  from  them,  by  crediting  them  each 
with  this  or  that  error  and  correcting  •  it  accordingly ;  our  method 
seeks  to  determine  that  particular  mean  which  comes  nearest  to  the 
truth,  inasmuch  as  it  rests  on  the  most  probable  combination  of  such 
corrections. 

In  the  above  we  have  not  tried  to  exhaust  the  subject,  we  have  only 
just  approached  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  give  a  general  idea  of  what  is 
meant  by  this  method  of  the  least  squares  and  of  how  it  came  to  be 
called  by  that  name.  Our  brief  exposition  will  not  serve" as  a  basis 
for  a  number  of  more  delicate  solutions,  in  regard  to  which  as  well  as 
in  regard  to  the  introduction  of  the  calculus  the  reader  must  be  re^ 
ferred  to  the  classical  exposition  of  Gauss  and  to  the  text-books  which 
found  upon  that  exposition.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  validity 
of  the  method  always  depends  on  certain  very  probable  though  not 
strictly  demonstrable  presuppositions  •  for  its  full  and  adequate  sub- 
stantiation we  must  look  to  the  results  to  which,  especially  in  astro- 
nomy, it  has  led, 


CHAPTER   X. 

Of  Elections  and  Voting. 

280.  ELECTIONS  and  voting  are  processes  of  framing  judgments  ,* 
judgments,  that  is,  whose  validity  we  mean  to  create  by  our  own 
decision,  and  not  merely  to  acknowledge.  The  logical  calculus  has 
taken  account  of  these  processes  in  various  ways.  It  has  been  asked 
what  expectation  of  a  just  verdict,  or  of  a  proper  decision,  or  of  a  wise 
election,  can  be  based  upon  different  forms  of  procedure  ;  but,  as 
questions  like  these  can  never  be  answered  apart  from  special  and 
arbitrary  presuppositions  of  a  psychological  kind,  I  shall  here  exclude 
them,  and  confine  myself  to  the  enquiry  into  the  means  of  attaining 
what  is  formally  the  object  of  all  voting,  namely,  a  decision  that 
shall  express  as  completely  as  possible  the  collective  will  of  the 
voters,  independently  of  the  degree  of  wisdom  that  may  guide  the 
several  wills  which  go  to  compose  it. 

In  common  life  such  a  collective  will  takes  the  shape  of  public 
opinion ;  and  the  matter  which  it  affirms  or  rejects  has  been  gradually 
defined  by  the  countless  reciprocal  influences  of  all  who  have  the 
power  of  manifesting  inclination  or  aversion.  But  a  logical  treatment 
presupposes  that  the  matter  in  question  is  already  put  into  shape  as 
a  definite  proposal  V  or  a  series  of  proposals  F,  W,  Z\  that  the 
expression  of  will  takes  place  by  simple  acceptance  or  rejection  of 
what  is  so  put  forward;  and  finally  that  there  is  a  definite  and  limited 
number  S  of  equal  votes,  to  which  and  to  no  others  it  belongs  to 
establish  the  collective  will. 

290.  To  take  the  simplest  case :  if  there  is  a  single  proposal  V 
put  forward,  and  a  decision  absolutely  must  be  arrived  at,  the  only 
possible  ground  of  determination  is  an  Absolute  Majority.  It  is  the 
only  result  which  cannot  help  occurring  either  for  or  against  F;  sup- 
posing the  case  of  equality  of  votes  to  be  provided  for  by  some  fixed 
agreement  as  to  a  casting  vote,  or  as  to  giving  the.  preference  to  the 
affirmative  or  to  the  negative  conclusion.  But  there  are  great  limita- 
tions on  regarding  an  absolute  majority  as  the  true  expression  of 
what  could  rightly  be  called  the  collective  will  of  the  voters.  The 


394  Of  Elections  and  Voting,  [BOOK-IT. 

several  votes  are  themselves  no  exhaustive  expression  of  the  several 
wills  ;  being  restricted  to  '  Yes  ?  or  '  No  '  they  have  no  means  of  dis- 
tinguishing a  decided  will  for  or  against  from  mere  acceptance  or 
non-resistance.  This  constant  defect  in  all  voting  can  only  be 
remedied  by  previous  Discussion.  This  allows  fitting  expression  to 
different  intensities  of  affirmation  or  rejection,  and  gives  scope  for 
the  influence  of  personal  authority,  which  has  to  lose  its  power  in  the 
actual  and  formal  voting  in  which  the  votes  must  be  counted  and  not 
weighed.  It  is  for  the  individual's  sense  of  propriety  to  decide  how 
far  in  the  subsequent,  giving  of  the  votes  account  is  to  be  taken  of 
the  division  of  feeling  for  and  against,  which  after  discussion  is  at 
least  known  to  all.  Other  conventional  rules,  such  as  the  require- 
ment of  a  two-thirds'  majority,  diminish  this  evil  without  removing 
it  ;  the  only  unambiguous  result  would  be  unanimity,  but  neither  it 
nor  the  two-thirds'  majority  can  be  required  without  endangering 
the  certainty  of  coming  to  a  decision.  So  these  two  regulations  are 
only  appropriate  where  there  arc  other  weighty  reasons  for  giving  to 
the  conservative  preference  for  the  existing  state  which  is  known,  an 
advantage  over  the  impulse  to  innovations  whose  result  is  unknown. 

291.  No  general  reason  can  be  found  in  Logic  for  departing  from 
an  equal  value  for  all  participating  votes ;  but  in  actual  life  there  have 
been  both  fair  and  unfair  reasons  constantly  operative  to  attach 
different  weights  to  the  votes,  so  as  to  give  an  advantage  whether 
to  greater  wisdom,  or  to  the  more  important  or  the  more  specially 
menaced  interest,  or  to  claims  to  peculiar  preference  which  had  some 
historical  origin.  It  is  sometimes  done  by  simply  counting  the  single 
vote  of  the  preferred  person  as  equal  to  several  votes  ;  sometimes  by 
breaking  up  the  totality  of  voters  into  a  number  of  groups  in  each  of 
which  a  .separate  vote  is  taken,  and  substituting  the  majority  of  the 
majorities  which  arise  in  this  voting  for  the  absolute  majority  of  the 
total  number;  sometimes  by  having  recourse  to  indirect  voting,  in 
which  each  of  the  groups  transfers  its  right  to  a  delegate  and  leaves 
the  decision  to  the  majority  of  these  nominees. 

The  first  case  requires  no  separate  consideration ;  the  last  with- 
draws itself  from  all  logical  treatment  in  cases  where  the  deputy 
so  commissioned  has  to  vote  independently  himself,  and  not  to  re- 
present a  decision  already  taken  by  his  electors.  For  the  certainty 
with  which  the  result  in  that  case  corresponds  to  the  collective  will 
depends  upon  the  doubtful  reliability  of  the  electors'  judgment  in 
estimating  the  agreement  between  their  deputy's  sentiments  and  their 
own.  On  the  other  hand,  the  second  case,  that  of  division  into 


CH AFTER  x.j  The '  Winning  Minority!  395 

groups  which  are  to  vote  separately,  has  the  following  determinate 
peculiarities. 

1.  If  we  take  the  total  number  S  of  the  votes  as  =  2  m .  2  n,  one 
of  these  factors  indicating  the  number  of  groups  made,  and  the  other 
the  number  of  votes  in  each  group,  then  (m  +  i)  («  4-  i)  will  be  the 
number  of  votes  in  the  absolute  majority  of  the  several   absolute 
majorities  which  result  within  these  groups.     And  this  value  remains 
the  same  if  we  substitute  for  one  or  both  of  such  even  factors  the 
odd  numbers  next  above  (2  m  +  i)  (2  n  -f  i).     Suppose  M  on  the 
other  hand  to  be  the  simple  absolute  majority  of  the  total  number  of 
voters  S.  when  voting  without  subdivision,  we  may  easily  convince  our- 
selves that  (m  -f  i)  (n  +  i)  is  less  than  M  for  all  uneven  S  which  are 
greater  than  7  and  for  all  even  S  which  are  greater  than  12,  and  so 
in  all  cases  that  need  be  considered  with  reference  to  voting.     Thus 
it  is  always  possible  by  a  suitable  subdivision  of  S  to  bring  about  a 
decision  resting  on  the  minority  of  the  total  number  of  voters  ;  and  it 
may  be  asked  which  modes  of  division  are  the  most  adapted  for  making 
this  winning  minority  as  small  as  possible.     A  precise  answer  to  the 
question  would  be  far  more  lengthy  than  the  matter  deserves ;  for  in 
application  we  shall  always  have  to  be  satisfied  with  an  approxima- 
tion, because  our  precise  estimate  would  be  made  useless  by  any 
trifling  accident  that  prevented  a  vote  from  being  given  on  which  we 
had  reckoned.     So  I  content  myself  with  what  follows. 

2.  If  we  consider  S  as  the  product  of  two  even  or  of  two  uneven 
factors,  and  thus  either  =  2  m.  2  n  or  =  (2  m  4-  i)(2»  +  i),  if  we 
replace  m  in  the  formula  for  the  winning  minority  by  an  expression 
in  terms  of  n  and  S,  and  if  we  differentiate  with  respect  to  n,  we 
obtain  as  condition  of  a  .minimum    2  n   or   2  n  -f  i  =  V  S  which 
gives  the  other  factor  s  =  A/  *$*,  and  therefore  m  =  n. 

If  we  take  S  as  product  of  an  even  and  an  uneven  factor, 
=  27»(2»-hi),  we  obtain  in  .the  same  way,  as  a  condition  of  a 
minimum,  that  the  even  factor  =  */~~2  S,  which  gives  the  uneven 
=  V  i  5.  The  manner  of  their  deduction  prevents  either  of  the 
formulae  from  applying  precisely  in  these  cases  where  both  the 
number  of  votes  and  that  of  groups  can  only  increase  by  entire 
units,  and  not  continuously;  in  particular,  their  application  cannot  be 
regular  for  small  numbers  of  whose  amount  a  unit  is  a  considerable 
fraction  ;  and  lastly,  the  advantage  of  odd  numbers  over  even,  as  the 
winning  minority  for  (2  m  4-  i)  (2  n  -f  i)  is  not  larger  than  that  for 
2  m .  2  n}  will  also  be  detrimental  to  the  influence  of  these  rules. 
Still,  for  high  values  of  S,  as  unity,  or  the  difference  between  odd 


396  Of  Elections  and  Voting.  i  BOOK  n. 

and  even.,  forms  a  progressively  smaller  fraction  of  their  amount,  these 
two  formulae  really  give  the  two  least  values  of  the  required  minori- 
ties. They  are  obtained  by  separating  S  into  two  factors  either  as 
nearly  as  possible  equal  to  each  other  and  to  the  square  root  of  S,  or 
one  of  them  as  exactly  as  possible  double  the  other.  Thus  225  con- 
sidered as  15.15  and  as  9  .  25  gives  the  two  least  minorities  64  and 
65,  but  as  5.45  and  3.75  the  larger  ones  69  and  76;  11025  as 
105  .  105  and  as  147  .  75  the  least  minorities  2809  and  2812,  while  on 
the  other  hand  as  175 .  63  and  as  9  .  1225  it  gives  the  larger  numbers 
2992  and  3065;  and  finally  20.000  breaks  up  to  best  advantage  as 
200.  100  and  as  125  .  160,  with  the  minorities  5151  and  5103.  In  the 
case  of  small  numbers  the  influences  of  the  different  conditions  cross 
each  other  very  markedly ;  36  taken  as  6  .  6  gives  the  minority  16, 
but  even  as  4  .  9  gives  the  smaller  minority  15  because  of  the  favour- 
able influence  of  the  odd  factor  ;  the  most  advantageous  subdivision 
is  3.12  giving  14  as  the  minority;  for  in  this  the  even  factor  12 
comes  nearer  to  the  square  root  of  2  *$"  =  72  (which  is  greater  than  8) 
than  does  the  even  factor  4  in  the  division  4  .  9.  On  the  other  hand 
8 r,  being  the  square  of  an  uneven  factor,  has  no  subdivision  more 
favourable  than  9  .  9  giving  25  for  the  minority;  the  other  into  3  .  27 
is  too  remote  from  both  conditions.  For  144  one  minimum  49  is 
obtained  out  of  12  .  12,  the  oilier  45  out  of  9  .  16. 

3.  In  the  first  of  the  most  favourable  cases,  that  of  equal  factors,  the 
winning  minority,  expressed  in  terms  of  S,  =  (i  -f-  £  -\/*S')2;  in  the 
second,  that  in  which  one  factor  is  double  the  other,  it  = 

(i  +  i<\/7Sj(i  4-  JvT-S)- 

Both  expressions  approximate  to  the  value  {  S  (only  the  second  does 
so  more  slowly)  as  .S'  becomes  greater,  but  remain  always  greater  than 
that  fraction  as  long  as  S  does  not  become  infinite.  Thus  the  winning 
minority  has  a  lower  limit,  and  can  never,  by  the  most  advantageous 
subdivision,  be  reduced  to  a  quarter  of  the  total  number  of  votes. 

4.  Finally,  S  may  be  a  prime  number,  which  in  any  case  can  only 
be  made  divisible  if  increased  or  diminished  by  a  single  unit  at  least : 
i.e.  for  the  present  purpose,  by  giving  to  one  of  the  groups  a  single 
vote  more  or  less  than  the  others  have.     A  choice  is  therefore  in- 
evitable, and  may  be  exercised  as  we  please ;  beyond  a  doubt  it  is 
•equally  justifiable  to  consider  67  as  66  +  i  and  as  68— i,  making  in 
the  first  case  5  classes  of  n  votes  and  i   of  12,  in  the    second 
3  classes  of  17  and  i  of  16  ;  if  it  is  required  for  the  sake  of  fairness  that 
the  majorities  which  make  up  the  winning  minority  shall  always  in- 
clude those  of  the  more  numerous  classes,  we  shall  obtain  in  the  first 


CHAPTER  x.i         Strength  of  the  Voters  wishes.  397 

case  3. 6  +  1. 7  =  2  5,  in  the  second  3  .  9  ==  27.  When  once  this  path 
is  open,  it  is  followed  even  where  there  is  no  need ;  and  then  the 
inequality  of  groups  is  readily  put  up  with  as  long  as  it  remains 
within  reasonable  limits ;  and  it  further  diminishes  the  winning 
minorities  very  considerably.  Thus  we  obtain  for  64  =  6 .  9  +  i.io 
the  minority  3.5+  1.6=21  (even  if  we  make  a  rule  of  requiring 
the  majority  of  the  larger  group  to  be  in  it)  while  8  .  8  only  gave  the 
greater  minority  25.  We  all  know  that  this  resource  has  been 
abundantly  employed  from  Servius  Tullius  downwards  to  a  very 
unfair  extent,  which  must  look  for  its  justification  not  to  Logic, 
but  to  politics. 

292.  When  we  come  to  choosing  between  different  proposals 
F3  W}  Z,  Logic  as  such  would  make  requirements  that  diverge  from 
the  usages  -observed  in  practice.  If  a  number  of  persons  desire  to 
unite  in  a  collective  determination  such  as  to  produce  the  greatest 
general  satisfaction,  they  ought  not  to  obtain  the  result  as  an  in- 
evitable consequence  of  a  summation  of  declarations  of  will,  none 
of  which  takes  account  of  any  of  the  others.  A  rational  will  must 
attach  importance  to  not  giving  its  decision  without  knowledge  and 
consideration  of  the  other  voters'  inclinations  or  aversions,  opposed 
to  its  own ;  especially  as  the  necessity  of  finally  declaring  itself  in  a 
bare  Yes  or  No  leaves  no  means  of  finding  expression  for  the 
different  intensities  of  its  volition  and  so  of  securing  for  it  neither 
more  nor  less  than  the  just  measure  of  effect.  Previous  discussion, 
to  which  I  referred  above,  cannot  entirely  satisfy  this  requirement  ; 
for  if  everyone  wanted  to  declare  himself  completely,  the  discussion 
would  turn  into  voting,  only  without  the  precision  of  form  which 
makes  the  ascertainment  of  the  final  result  easy  and  certain.  So  an 
attempt  must  be  made  to  effect  by  the  actual  mode  of  voting  as 
nearly  as  possible  what  discussion  aims  at  doing. 

If  we  consider  F,  W,  Z,  as  three  persons,  one  of  whom  is  to  be 
elected,  we  may  adopt  the  following  procedure.  A  preliminary  vote, 
upon  all  three  candidates  at  once  would  show  what  degree  of  ap- 
proval each  of  them  meets  with,  compared  to  the  others.  If  no  one 
of  them  obtained  an  absolute  majority  of  the  votes,  the  relative 
majority  could  not  be  taken  as  decisive  except  in  elections  of  very 
small  moment ;  but  it  has  an  importance  which  may  be  seen  in  every- 
day life.  The  candidate  who  has  the  most  votes  compared  with  the 
others  attracts  attention  and  often  gains  the  other  votes  as  well ;  but 
just  as  often  his  prominence  arouses  antagonism,  and  compels  his 
opponents  to  combine  in  support  of  a  rival  Hence  it  is  the  general 


398  •          Of  Elections  and  Voting. 

rule  to  require  an  absolute  majority;  It  gives  the  only  security  that 
the  sum  of  negative  votes  must  be  less  than  that  of  affirmatives,  and 
that  therefore  the  will  of  the  majority  has  been  hit  upon ;  and  this  is 
the  ultima  ratio  which  must  always  give  the  final  decision  when 
opinions  remain  unreconcilable  and  yet  a  collective  resolution  is 
indispensable. 

But  further  ;  if  an  absolute  majority  has  been  obtained  *  for  one  of 
the  candidates,  say  for  F,  still  it  is  neither  essential,  nor  right  in  itself, 
to  accept  this  at  once  as  the  decision.  This  preliminary  voting  only 
showed  the  number  of  voters  who  preferred  or  postponed  each  of  the 
candidates  to  the  others;  the  degree  of  such  preference  was  left 
undefined,  and  so  also  was  the  feeling  of  each  voter  to  the  candidate 
whom  he  has  not  named.  To  bring  this  to  light  a  second  and 
tripartite  vote  would  be  required ;  being  a  vote  of  Yes  or  No  upon 
each  of  the  candidates  separately  so  as  to  give  each  elector  the  possi- 
bility of  directly  recording  his  vote  against  any  particular  candidate, 
while  before  he  could  only  express  it  by  preferring  another  to  him. 
If  we  suppose  that  in  the  first  voting  V  obtained  1 1  votes  out  of  2os 
W  5,  and  Z  4,  then,  excluding  incomprehensible  inconsistency  on  the 
electors'  part,  every  candidate  will  retain  in  the  second  process  the 
votes  of  those  who  preferred  him  to  the  other  two  in  the  first,  but 
the  remaining  votes  may  be  very  variously  divided.  It  is  possible 
that  V  may  now  meet  with  a  decided  opposition  of  9  votes,  while  Z 
who  was  only  preferred  by  4  may  find  no  opposition  at  all  and  win 
1 6  votes  more;  and  W  may  get  10  of  the  15  which  he  had  not 
before. 

To  obtain  a  final  result  out  of  this  it  must  be  considered  that  the 
votes  obtained  in  these  different  votings  are  of  unequal  value.  Those 
of  the  first  process  showed  how  many  voters  thought  a  candidate  the 
best,  ancl  though  their  approval  may  have  been  very  different  in 
degree  still  we  may  regard  all  these  preference  votes  as  homogeneous 
and  attach  the  same  weight  m  to  all  of  them.  For  the  best  that  any- 
one can  say  of  a  candidate  with  reference  to  the  election  as  such,  is 
that  he  is  for  him ;  whether  he  respects  him  more  or  less  apart  from 
this  is  indifferent,  for  every  election  can  only  aim  at  the  best  result 
under  the  given  conditions,  ancl  at  not  the  best  absolutely;  any  one  who 
is  for  For  W  under  the  given  conditions  is  for  him  altogether.  The 
same  assumption  holds  of  the  negative  votes  in  the  second  voting ; 
anyone  who  has  the  opportunity  of  pronouncing  directly  on  For  W 
by  Yes  or  No,  and  votes  against  both,  is  absolutely  against  them, 
J  [I.e.  in  the  preliminary  vote.] 


CHAPTER x.]      Preference,  Acq^l^escence,  Rejection.-          399 

and  has  accomplished  his  will  completely,  as  regards  this  election,  if 
the  vote  of  rejection  Is  carried ;  no  matter  how  thoroughly  he  may 
hate  or  despise"  V  or  W  in  other  ways.  So  all  the  unfavourable 
votes  may  be  considered  as  homogeneous  and  assigned  the  same 
weight  q.  But  those  favourable  votes  which  are  only  obtained  in  the 
second  voting  are  obviously  of  less  value  than  those  which  were 
obtained  in  the  first ;  they  are  only  permissive,  while  the  others  were 
preference  votes ;  and  this  difference,  which  marks  a  middle  grade 
between  voting  for  and  voting  against,  is  of  course  of  importance  for 
the  election  in  hand.  Still,  what  weight  a  permissive  vote  ought  to 
have  compared  with  a  vote  of  preference,  is  a  question  which  the 
voter  who  gave  it  could  probably  not  answer  with  precision ;  besides, 
Ms  acquiescence  would  not  indicate  the  same  degree  of  approval  for 
every  candidate  to  whom  he  gave  it,  but  a  greater,  perhaps,  for  W 
than  for  Z.  Therefore,  though  it  at  once  Involves  a  serious  failure 
of  accuracy,  yet  the  only  possible  attempt  to  make  a  general  estimate 
even  approximately  of  the  difference  of  the  permissive  votes  from  the 
preferential  is  to  assign  to  all  votes  of  the  former  class  a  common  value 
/>,  which  must  be  a  proper  fraction  of  m,  and  the  amount  of  which 
can  only  be  fixed  by  convention.  On  these  assumptions  the  votes 
would  be  calculated  in  the  above  example  as  follows :  for  F",  1 1  m  —  9  /», 
for  W,  5  #2  +  io/>  —  5  q,  for  Z,  4m  +  i6/>;  and  so  finally,  if  we 
arbitrarily  take  m  =  q  (giving  the  preferential  vote  equal  weight  with 

the  vote   of  rejection)  and/>  =  -   (giving  the   permissive   half  the 

weight  of  the  preferential),  the  result  would  be  only  2  votes  for  V,  on 
the  other  hand  5  for  W  and  lastly  1 2  for  Z,  in  marked  contrast  to  the 
result  of  the  first  voting. 

Various  circumstances  combine  to  make  these  logical  requirements 
tmrealisable  in  practice.  In  the  first  place,  on  grounds  of  social 
propriety,  we  should  desire  to  avoid  voting  against  persons  altogether. 
Next,  even  if  it  were  admitted,  there  would  be  great  reason  to 
doubt  whether  the  second  voting  would  be  carried  out  with  the 
requisite  impartiality,  even  supposing  it  to  take  place  before  the  first 
Those  who  were  determined  to  give  their  votes  of  preference  to  V 
would  probably  not  admit  even  to  themselves  that  they  could  be  content 
with  W  or  Z,  and  their  1 1  votes  would  appear  in  the  permissive  voting 
too  as  so  many  votes  against  W  and  against  Z  as  well.  And  lastly 
there  would  in  every  case  be  the  same  preliminary  question  what  was 
best  to  aim  at  with  a  view  to  the  matter  in  hand,  whether  the  com- 
pletest  satisfaction  of  the  majority  or  the  greatest  average  satisfaction 


400  Of  Elections  and  Voting.  [  BOOK  IL 

of  all;  and  this  would  have  to  be  determined  before  the  ralio  of  weight 
between  affirmative  and  negative  votes  could  be  fixed.  It  need  not 
necessarily  be  equality;  on  the  contrary,  there  may  be  cases  in  which 
a  single  unfavourable  vote  may  fairly  balance  more  than  a  single 
favourable  one,  and  the  decision  would  have  to  be  obtained  not  so 
much  by  the  greatest  number  of  votes  for  a  candidate,  as  by  the 
lowest  number  of  votes  against  him.  It  clearly  makes  a  difference 
whether  the  matter  in  hand  is  the  decision  of  some  gravely  responsible 
business,  say  an  election  to  some  office  of  political  importance,  or 
whether  it  is  the  organisation  of  amusements  in  common,  perhaps  the 
election  of  the  president  of  some  social  gathering.  In  the  latter  case 
it  would  be  absurd  to  make  9  members  out  of  20  discontented  in 
order  to  give  1 1  others  complete  satisfaction ;  but  in  the  former  it 
may  be  reasonable  to  satisfy  the  majority  of  decided  wills  completely, 
rather  than  light  upon  a  choice  that  only  met  with  the  lukewarm 
approval  of  all.  But  it  is  just  in  the  second  case,  where  the  method 
described  would  give  the  most  desirable  result,  that  the  inaclmissibility 
of  negative  votes  makes  its  application  difficult ;  in  the  first,  where  its 
result  might  be  less  desirable,  its  application  would  be  less  difficult,  for 
in  this  case  the  votes  of  rejection  would  be  a  less  serious  slight,  as 
they  might  possibly  be  directed  against  the  views  represented  by  a 
candidate  and  not  against  him  personally. 

298.  There  is  another  mode,  a  sort  of  process  of  elimination,  that 
may  answer  our  wishes  when  an  election  has  to  be  made  out  of  a 
very  large  number  of  candidates ;  as  when  a  constituency  has  to  name 
some  one  out  of  its  own  number.  It  is  usual  in  these  cases  to  take 
a  first  vote  by  way  of  fixing  upon  some  three  names  which  are  the 
first  to  attract  the  electors'  attention  before  minor  considerations  come 
in  to  restrict  it,  and  at  present  therefore  appear  the  most  desirable  to 
each  of  the  voters.  It  is  possible  in  this  process  to  attach  distinctions 
to  the  order  in  which  each  elector  names  or  writes  his  three  candi- 
dates ;  and  to  put  the  one  mentioned  first  above  the  others ;  but  1 
assume  for  simplicity's  sake,  that  the  order  of  naming  is  quite  indif- 
ferent. Then  it  is  conceivable,  though  very  improbable,  that  the  same 
three  candidates,  F,  W,  Z,  may  receive  all  the  votes ;  if  this  occurs,  It 
becomes  impossible  for  a  final  decision  to  be  obtained  by  election,  for 
a  fresh  vote  could  not  give  a  majority  for  any  of  the  three  unless  some, 
voters  retracted  their  previous  decision  without  any  ground  in  circum- 
stances for  doing  so.  In  this  and  all  similar  cases  the  only  remaining 
possibility  is  either  the  lot,  or  the  decision  of  some  external  will,  e.  g. 
that  of  a  higher  authority. 


CHAPTER  x.]        Indirect  and  Direct  Negatives.  401 

On  the  other  hand,  if  V  and  no  one  else  obtains  a  vote  from 
every  voter,  his  election  is  decided  beyond  a  doubt,  whatever  number 
of  votes  PFand  Z  may  have  obtained;  for  then  there  are  no  concealed 
votes  of  rejection  which  nothing  but  want  of  opportunity  has  hindered 
from  being  recorded.  But  supposing  V  to  have  only  obtained  an 
absolute  majority,  W  and  Z  considerable  minorities,  and  the  rest  of 
the  votes  to  have  been  scattered,  then  it  becomes  possible  that  there 
are  such  votes.  So,  considering  our  observations  above,  we  cannot 
hold  it  quite  justifiable  to  break  off  the  election  at  this  point  and 
regard  Fas  elected;  it  is  better  to  take  a  fresh  vote  for  W  against  Z, 
so  that  actually  voting  against  J^may  be  avoided  by  voting  for  Z, 
and  vice  versa.  One  of  the  two  must  obtain  a  larger  or  smaller  abso- 
lute majority.  Supposing  PFis  successful  a  third  vote  as  between 
him  and  V  will  give  a  final  decision.  Of  course  this  final  voting  will 
be  wholly  superfluous  if  the  absolute  majority  which  was  in  favour  of 
Fon  the  first  vote  maintains  itself  unaltered ;  but  a  reasonable  motive 
for  a  change  of  feeling  may  have  been  furnished  by  the  result  of  the 
second  voting.  If  in  it  the  votes  for  W  and  for  Z  are  nearly  equal, 
it  would  prove  either  that  F;s  opponents  are  not  united,  or  that  no 
other  choice  meets  with  more  uniform  agreement  than  that  of  F,  and 
this  would  give  the  previous  majority  a  reason  for  persisting  in  their 
conviction.  If  on  the  other  hand  J-Fgot  all  the  votes,  the  majority  in 
question  might  think  this  a  good  reason  for  going  over  in  the  last 
vote  to  the  minority,  already  considerable,  in  favour  of  W,  in  order  to 
produce  a  result  which  should  have  no  decided  opponents.  Many 
more  modifications  are  conceivable ;  I  will  not  follow  them  out,  for 
the  discussion  threatens  to  be  longer  than  its  importance  warrants ; 
moreover  it  is  at  least  doubtful  whether  such  a  process  of  elimination 
is  really  more  flattering  than  open  rejection.  And  finally,  Vt  who  is 
elected,  may  decline  the  post.  This  alters  the  conditions  with  reference 
to  which  the  votes  were  given  so  completely,  that  it  becomes  ne- 
cessary to  repeat  the  whole  process  of  election,  or  perhaps  to  make 
an  independent  selection  of  Y,  as  a  third  candidate  besides  IF  and  Z. 

294.  If  F,  W,  and  Z,  are  not  persons,  but  legislative  proposals, 
there  is  no  reason  for  shunning  the  direct  negative  vote  ;  and  it  might 
be  demanded  on  logical  grounds  that  a  vote  of  Yes  or  No  should  be 
taken  on  each  of  the  measures  proposed,  but  that  the  obtaining  of 
an  absolute  majority  by  one  should  be  no  bar  to  voting  on  the 
others.  The  decision  would  then  depend  either  on  the  largest  of  the 
majorities  or  on  a  fresh  vote  which  would  be  final  This  procedure 
would  cause  those  whose  opinion  had  gained  a  considerable  number 

Dd 


402  Of  Elections  and  Voting,  [BOOKII. 

of  votes,  to  adhere  to  it  in  the  final  voting ;  but  any  who  found  theirs 
in  a  hopeless  minority  would  have  time  to  attach  themselves  in  the 
final  vote  to  the  opinion  which  they  liked  next  best  to  their  own  and 
which  might  have  a  chance  of  gaining  the  deciding  majority  by  their 
accession.  Still,  there  is  here  too  the  same  psychological  reason  which 
I  mentioned  before,  against  this  procedure;  any  one  who  decidedly 
preferred  a  proposal  V  would  not  declare  freely  that  W  or  Z  would 
also  be  tolerable  to  him,  but  would  be  tempted  to  reject  them  both. 
Therefore  as  it  is  the  traditional  rule  that  the  adoption  of  one  proposal 
ipso  facto  shelves  all  posterior  ones,  the  order  in  which  V  W  Z  are  put 
to  the  vote  acquires  great  importance  as  affecting  the  choice  made.  1 
concur  with  Trendelenburg's  statement1  of  the  wish  that  maybe  felt  on 
logical  grounds  respecting  this  arrangement,  the  most  difficult  problem 
of  parliamentary  tact ;  viz.  that  the  adherents  of  every  opinion  should 
have  an  opportunity  of  emphasising  it  with  all  the  weight  they  can 
command ;  of  negativing  what  they  want  to  reject  directly,  not  in- 
directly by  the  acceptance  of  something  else  which  has  only  their 
partial  approval  \  of  affirming  what  they  wish  immediately  and  ex- 
clusively, not  by  the  rejection  of  something  else  of  which  they 
disapprove  only  in  part;  and  finally,  that  it  should  be  possible  for 
everyone  to  begin  by  defending  and  recommending  what  he  thinks 
best  of  all,  and  only  to  retire  upon  his  second  or  third  best  after  the 
first  has  failed.  But  whether  the  universal  accomplishment  of  this 
postulate  for  everyone  entitled  to  vote  and  in  respect  of  every  pro- 
posal before  a  meeting  is  not  as  a  whole  frustrated  by  a  fundamental 
contradiction ;  whether,  therefore,  it  is  conceivable  that  everyone's 
sentiments  should  be  gratified  by  just  those  proposals  being  broken 
up  on  the  parts  of  .which  he  thinks  differently,  and  just  those  united 
which  he  wants  to  see  accepted  or  rejected  together,  demands  no 
investigation.  It  is  quite  clear  that  in  each  case  the  solution  of  the 
problem  can  only  be  approached  by  an  acumen  developed  in  long 
and  uniform  practice,  after  entering  thoroughly  into  the  subject-matter 
under  discussion.  The  procedure  to  be  observed  can  only  be  learned 
or  taught  by  help  of  definite  instances,  not  by  universal  symbols 
representing  possible  cases,  and  only  in  practice;  general  rules  can 
give  very  little  help. 

•295.  It  may  happen  to  begin  with  that  the  proposals  in  question 

V  WZdo  not  compose  (he  complete  disjunction  between  the  members 

of  which  there  is  a  choice,  but  that  there  is  a  fourth  member  consisting 

of  the  rejection  of  one  arid  all  of  them  ;  r.  e.  that  speaking  generally  a 

1  [4  Uobcr  die  Mcthock  tier  Abstimmtingen,'  Berlin,  1850.] 


CHAPTER  x.]  The  '  Order  of  the  Day'  403 

new  resolution  is  as  such  unnecessary,  and  it  is  possible  to  maintain 
the  status  quo.  There  are  two  reasons  that  may  lead  to  the  choice  of 
this  alternative ;  either  the  desire  to  protect  that  particular  status  quo 
on  principle  against  all  innovation,  or  the  absence  of  an  acceptable 
proposal  among  those  put  forward,  though  on  grounds  of  principle 
there  is  no  opposition  to  a  reform.  It  is  important  to  provide  ex- 
pression for  the  distinction  between  these  two  dispositions.  The  mere 
*  rejection  of  all  individual  proposals  successively  does  not  provide  it ; ' 
this  only  proves  that  the  change  which  would  have  been  acceptable 
has  not  been  proposed ;  but  it  should  be  possible  to  reject  generally 
and  as  such  the  invitation  to  change  which  all  the  proposals  have  in 
common.  This  is  effected  by  the  motion  to  pass  to  the  order  of  the 
day,  that  is,  therefore,  that  the  whole  of  the  proposals  in  question 
should  be  excluded  from  being  debated  or  voted  on,  and  so  their 
common  element  should  be  negatived  in  a  correspondingly  general 
fqrm.  Where  anyone's  will  is  in  favour  of  such  a  negative  it  is  his 
parliamentary  duty  to  contribute  to  a  full  expression  of  the  state  of 
opinion  by  making  this  motion,  and  not  to  content  himself  with 
throwing  out  all  separate  proposals,  until  it  has  been  rejected.  Even 
where  there  is  only  a  single  proposal  instead  of  several,  the  motion  of 
the  order  of  the  day  may  be  in  place ;  its  meaning  then  is  to  reject 
not  this  particular  proposal  as  such,  but  "the  general  intention  out  of 
which  it  has  arisen  and  others  might  arise.  Thus  the  order  of  the 
day  when  voted  without  a  statement  of  grounds,  may  act  as  an  ex- 
pression of  contempt  for  a  proposal  that  is  legally  or  morally  disgraceful, 
or  as  a  refusal  to  entertain  one  that  is  extraneous,  and  beyond  the 
competence  of  the  voters,  or  finally  as  a  riddance  of  a  dangerous 
proposal  the  mere  discussion  of  which  it  is  the  interest  of  the  common- 
wealth to  avoid.  Or  such  acts  of  rejection  may  be  mitigated  by  a 
motived  order  of  the  day,  which  recognises  in  its  statement  of  grounds 
what  there  is  in  the  proposed  measure  that  is  just  in  itself,  but 
denies  the  propriety  of  introducing  and  debating  it  at  that  particular 
moment. 

296.  If  two  proposals  I7 and  H7are  so  related  to  each  other  by  way  of 
subordination  that  W  is  an  '  ameliorative  motion '  or  amendment  that 
aims  at  modifying  the  purport  of  the  substantive  motion  F by  addition, 
omission,  or  alteration,  then  it  is  logically  speaking  a  correct  usage  to  take 
a  provisional  vote  on  the  amendment  before  the  final  vote  on  the  sub- 
stantive motion.  For  no  decision  on  this  latter  can  rationally  be  solicited 
from  the  voters  till  its  wording  is  completely  and  unequivocally  settled  ; 
certainly  not  while  its  details  are  open  to  subsequent  modifications  the 

D  d  2 


404  Of  Elections  and  Voting.  [BOOK  n. 

acceptance  or  rejection  of  which  if  it  could  have  been  foreknown  might 
well  have  succeeded  in  totally  reversing  the  favourable  or  unfavourable 
impressions  which  had  been  prematurely  recorded.  The  vote  on  the 
amendment  W  serves  to  fix  unequivocally  the  purport  which  the  sub- 
stantive motion  Fhas  when  put  to  the  vote;  therefore  the  rejection  of 
V  annuls  the  previous  adoption  of  the  amendment,  which  was  only 
provisional, 

If  there  are  several  mutually  exclusive  amendments  W  and  Z  to  a 
substantive  motion  V,  or  several  accessory  proposals  about  the  special 
modifications  necessary  to  applying  I7  in  practice  (as  often  happens 
when  details  of  quantity  remain  to  be  fixed),  the  safest  course  would 
be  to  vote  separately  on  all  such  proposals  and  let  the  decision  go  by 
the  greatest  majority.  Only  if,  according  to  the  usual  practice,  the 
acceptance  of  one  by  an  absolute  majority  is  to  exclude  all  the  others 
from  being  voted  on,  the  order  of  putting  them  to  the  vote  becomes 
important,  and  the  obvious  advice  is  to  arrange  the  proposals  so  tljat 
the  two  least  divergent  shall  always  be  next  each  other.  This  is  the 
practice  under  a  rather  different  form  in  both  kinds  of  auction,  that  by 
bidding  and  that  by  offering1,,  and  in  those  cases  people  actually  cal- 
culate, and  quite  fairly,  on  the  uncertainty  in  which  each  person  who 
bids  must  be  about  the  degree  of  the  others'  desire.  For  as  the  bid 
or  its  acceptance1  by  the  buyer  are  alike  voluntary,  the  customer  is 
merely  declaring  what  value  the  object  has  for  him  according  to  his 
own.  estimate  and  no  right  of  his  is  attacked  by  the  open  competition 
of  others  or  by  his  ignorance  of  the  absence  of  any  eager  desires 
but  his  own.  Offering  seems,  speaking  generally,  in  favour  of  the 
seller,  for  it  compels  the  buyer  to  take  the  object  at  the  highest  price 
which  he  thinks  he  con  afford  to  give,  though  he  would  give  less  if  he 
could  foresee  the  absence  of  competition;  bidding  is  in  favour  of  the 
buyer  because  if  there  is  such  absence  it  is  available  to  him;  if  not, 
at  least  he  has  only  to  advance  on  the  last  bid,  and  his  time  for 
decision  is  not  excessively  curtailed.  This  is  a  procedure  in  which  an 
individual  tries  by  a  contest  with  others  to  secure  a  legitimate  personal 
advantage;  so  its  analogy  is  not  in  spirit  very  appropriate  to  the 
efforts  of  a  multitude  to  bring  to  pass  by  common  action  a  resolution 
advantageous  to  the  common  weal.  Still,  in  form,  they  must  take 
pattern  from  the  procedure*  of '  offering/  only,  as  a  rule,  it  will  be  rare 
to  find  proposals  that  can  be  so  simply  arranged  in  a  quantitatively 
graduated  series ;  most  commonly  WZ , . .  will  differ  in  purport  so  as 

1  [I,  e.  in  a  *Dutcli  auction/  where  the  auctioneer  offers  successively  lower  prices, 

and  the  first  customer  who  accepts  is  the  buyer,] 


CHAPTER  x.]  Priority  of  Motions.  405 

to  be  hard  to  classify.  In  that  case  they  must  be  arranged 
to  their  anticipated  degree  of  conformity  to  the  general  will ;  those* 
are  furthest  removed  from  the  status  quo,  that  demand  the  most"  extra- 
ordinary and  ample  measures,  and  therefore  have  little  probability  of 
success,  would  have  a  claim  to  be  put  to  the  vote  first ;  in  order  that, 
if,  contrary  to  expectation,  they  were  destined  to  turn  out  in  conformity 
with  the  general  will,  the  expression  of  that  will  might  not  have  been 
made  impossible  by  starting  from  a  more  likely  proposal  which  might 
easily  unite  all  the  votes  with  premature  resignation  based  on  that 
erroneous  estimate  itself.  After  the  rejection  of  such  extreme  pro- 
posals we  might  pass,  as  in  the  mathematical  method  of  limitation,  to  , 
the  mean  terms  of  the  series  which  are  more  likely  in.  themselves ; 
with  the  aim  of  procuring  the  final  decision  in  favour  of  the  proposal 
which  involved  the  least  possible  deviation  from  general  satisfaction. 
But  all  these  rules  are  ultimately  inadequate ;  for  instance,  where  the 
business  is  to  decide  upon  a  composite  whole  whose  different  parts 
can  only  be  discussed  by  degrees,  it  must  always  be  impossible  while 
the  special  deliberations  are  still  proceeding  to  discover  all  the  incon- 
sistencies, inconsecutivenesses,  and  contradictions  which  would  arise 
from  the  ultimate  conjunction  of  all  the  details  of  the  plan,  perhaps 
variously  modified.  In  such  cases,  as  in  the  case  of  amendments,  the 
special  deliberations  should  be  treated  as  no  more  than  preliminary, 
and  an  assembly  should  reserve  to  itself  the  power,  by  a  vote  on  a 
second  reading  or  by  some  final  vote,  to  annihilate  the  monster  which 
its  united  efforts  have  brought  into  existence.  Lastly,  It  is  true  that  the 
formal  aim  of  all  voting,  to  arrive  at  a  collective  will,  would  involve  in 
the  first  place  the  establishment  of  a  decision  Z  such  as  to  give  aD 
members  of  the  society  the  greatest  attainable  average  satisfaction  M, 
considering  the  lesser  satisfaction  of  one  as  compensated  by  the 
greater  satisfaction  of  another.  At  the  same  time  it  is  also  to  be 
desired  that  in  order  to  the  performance  of  the  obligation  arising  from 
the  acceptance  of  Z  an  equal  compliance  J/were  to  be  reckoned  upon 
in  all  members.  I  have  explained  why  the  former  end  cannot  be 
attained  in  perfection.  The  latter  on  the  other  hand  is  of  course 
a  desire  unrealisable  by  logical  means  ;  only  this  may  be  deduced  as 
a  logical  rule  which  the  nature  of  ethical  ends  makes  necessary  to 
their  realisation,  that  here  (for  Logic  can  require  it  nowhere  else)  we 
should  subordinate  our  personal  conviction  to  the  general  opinion 
when  different  from  our  own. 


BOOK   III. 

ON  KNOWLEDGE  (METHODOLOGY). 


INTRODUCTION. 

IN  the  enquiry  Instituted  in  the  last  book  as  to  the  means  by  which 
we  are  enabled  to  arrange  the  manifold  content  presented  to  our 
minds  under  those  ideal  forms  of  conception  and  association  with 
which  we  became  acquainted  in  the  previous  book  upon  Pure  Logic, 
nothing  was  said  as  to  the  general  question  of  logical  methods  with 
which  a  theory  of  the  nature  of  thought  ordinarily  concludes.  In 
passing  over  the  subject  in  that  place  1  conceive  that  I  was  guilty  of 
no  unpardonable  omission,  nor  was  it  mere  capriee  which  led  me  to 
reserve  that  and  other  questions  akin  to  it  for  this  concluding  section 
of  my  work, 

297.  Since  the  time  of  Aristotle  philosophers  have  distinguished 
between  the  analytic  and  synthetic  methods,  from  points  of  view 
essentially  the  same  in  all  cases.,  regarding  them  as  the  two  ultimate 
forms  to  which  all  methods  of  scientific  procedure  which  the  move- 
ment of  thought  follows  may  be  reduced.  In  the  view  of  antiquity 
any  subject- matter  presented  for  scientific  investigation  was  to  be  sub- 
mitted to  a  process  of  dissection  which  should  trace  it  to  its  simplest 
elements  or  to  ifs  most  universal  conditions.  Thus  the  analytic 
method  was  a  retrogressive  operation  proceeding  a  principiatis  ad 
princlpia^  while  the  principles  when  discovered  formed  as  it  were  the 
blocks  which  the  synthetic  or  progressive  method  proceeded  to  build 
up  into  the  individual  objects  of  experience. 

The  tv/o  expressions  analytic  and  synthetic  no  longer  precisely 
answer  to  the  instincts  of  modern  speech,  and  we  might  easily  be 
tempted  to  interchange  their  meanings.  We  no  longer  indulge  the 
hope  that  a  mere  dissection  of  the  object  presented  can  discover 
within  it  the  principles  of  which  we  are  in  search ;  experience  has 


Introduction.  407 

taught  us  on  the  contrary  that  for  the  human  Intelligence  general 
principles  have  largely  to  be  created  out  of  a  combination  and  com- 
parison of  the  manifold  facts  of  experience,  and  they  appear  to  us 
therefore  when  we  have  arrived  at  them,  as  the  final  outcome  of  a 
synthetic  operation  of  thought.  In  the  same  way  we  are  no  longer 
disposed  to  limit  ourselves  to  a  point  of  view  which  regards  general 
principles  as  atoms  of  truth,  from  the  mere  piecing  together  of  which 
particular  truths  are  derived ;  to  us,  rightly  or  wrongly,  general 
principles  appear  rather  as  containing  within  themselves  a  capacity  of 
development,  and  we  regard  the  derivation  of  the  conditioned  from  its 
conditions  as  consisting  at  least  as  often  in  an  analysis  of  the  content 
of  the  conditions  as  in  the  combination  of  them. 

But  the  question  of  language  is  not  worth  debating  further,  for  it  is 
plain  to  begin  with  that  neither  of  the  two  methods  can  be  carried 
out,  at  all  events  in  any  general  application,  without  the  other. 
No  method  of  analysis  can  arrive  by  the  mere  dissection  of  the 
particular  object  presented  to  it,  at  a  principle  or  a  general  truth, 
unless  at  every  stage  it  compares  the  result  a  of  the  last  step  with 
some  general  proposition  T9  and  by  endeavouring  to  bring  it  under 
the  latter— that  is  to  say  at  this  point  by  an  act  of  synthesis — -makes 
sure  whether  a  is  an  ultimate  principle,  or  whether  it  may  not  involve 
some  contradiction  for  the  removal  of  which  it  may  be  necessary  to 
continue  the  analysis  further  in  one  direction  or  another.  Nor  need 
the  proposition  T which  has  to  be  recognised  in  such  a  process  by 
any  means  always  belong  to  those  formal  logical  laws  whose 
supremacy  over  the  modus  procedendi  of  every  conceivable  method 
is  acknowledged  as  a  matter  of  course.  On  the  contrary  it  must 
often,  if  any  real  advance  is  to  be  made,  be  a  concrete  proposition 
which  Logic  cannot  furnish,  but  which  it  has  to  accept  on  purely 
extralogical  grounds,  and  to  which  the  results  arrived  at  by  the 
analysis  have  to  be  subordinated. 

As  little  can  a  method  of  synthesis  make  any  way  without  the  help 
of  analysis.  Even  supposing  it  to  start  with  a  number  of  elementary 
truths  A,  B)  C  in  its  hand,  it  could  never  get  beyond  the  tautological 
proposition  that  these  several  truths  are  all  true  at  once,  unless  it  can  go 
on  to  show  how  by  their  possessing  simultaneous  validity  in  respect  of 
one  and  the  same  object  this  or  that  fresh  consequence  x  orj/  is  neces- 
sarily developed.  But  whether  x  orj/  will  follow  can  only  be  decided 
after  an  examination  of  the  nature  of  the  object  in  question,  that  is  to 
say  by  a  return  for  the  time  being  to  analysis.  Such  an  analysis  can 
alone  furnish  us  with  the  determinate  minor  premiss  which  we  require 


408  Introduction. 

to  combine  with  the  general  truths  with  which  we  began,  and  which 
supply  our  major  premiss,  in  order  to  proceed  once  more  synthetically 
to  a  determinate  conclusion. 

It  must  be  allowed  that  in  certain  departments  the  synthetic 
method  has  the  appearance  of  a  greater  independence.  Thus 
geometry  Is  able  to  create  the  objects  to  which  it  desires  to  apply 
its  general  truths,  as  it  goes  along,  and  the  analytic  statement  of  the 
data  which  are  accepted  for  the  purpose  of  deducing  each  new 
proposition  occupies  only  a  small  place  in  its  demonstrations.  Still 
in  reality  it  cannot  be  wholly  absent.  And  in  the  wider  provinces  of 
scientific  activity  which  are  concerned  with  the  synthetic  construction 
of  real  things,  the  progressive  movement  from  principles  to  facts  is 
always  preceded  by  a  retrogressive  operation,  consisting  in.  a  com- 
prehensive analysis  of  the  dato,  which  is  essential  to  determining  for 
the  synthetic  procedure  itself  the  directions  in  which  it  has  to  look 
for  those  minor  premises  with  which  its  general  principles  cannpt 
possibly  dispense. 

208,  Thus  in  fact  the  distinction  between  the  two  methods  runs 
up  practically  into  the  following  antithesis,  which  has  long  attracted 
attention  :-•--•  the  Analytic  method  is  essentially  the  method  of  investi- 
gation, having  the  discovery  of  truth  for  its  object;  the  Synthetic  that 
of  exposition,  of  which  the  object  is  to  exhibit  a  body  of  truths, 
whether  obtained  in  one  way  or  in  another,  by  direct  or  indirect  pro- 
cesses, in  their  natural  and  objective  connexion.  And  by  exposition  I 
do  not  merely  understand  communication  to  others,  a  purpose  for 
which  an  exhibition  of  the  subjective  process  of  discovery  is  no  less 
necessary  and  no  less  instructive.  I  mean  rather  the  framing  of  the 
results  arrived  at  into  a  logical  whole,  in  which  form  alone  they  meet 
the  ideal  requirements  which  the  human  intellect  makes  of  any  body 
of  truth  that  is  to  be  fixed  and  independent. 

Such  being  the  case  it  appeared  to  me  hardly  desirable  to  introduce 
the  question  of  the  analytic  and  synthetic  methods  among  the 
questions  of  applied  logic,  inasmuch  as  neither  the  one  nor  the  other 
affords  any  practical  contribution  towards  the  solution  of  any  definite 
problems,— -the  analytic  method  as  little  as  the  synthetic,  notwith- 
standing that  we  regard  it  as  the  type  of  all  methods  of  investigation 
arfc!  discovery.  To  instruct  a  person  to  employ  the  analytic  method  is 
to  give  him  no  very  helpful  counsel ;  the  customary  general  definitions 
of  the  method  really  contain  nothing  more  than  an  indication  of  the 
direction  in  which  the  required  road  still  has  to  be  looked  for ;  to  find 
it  we  must  turn  to  the  special  expedients  of  applied  logic,  in  using 


Introduction.  409 

which  it  makes  very  little  difference  whether  we  choose  to  rank  them 
under  the  method  of  synthesis  or  under  that  of  analysis.  In  the  same 
manner  an  enquirer  who  has  the  synthetic  method  prescribed  to  him 
has  merely  got  his  problem  stated  :  to  the  question  how  to  solve  it,  in 
which  certainly  the  rules  of  a  method  ought  by  rights  to  be  of  service 
to  him,  no  very  sufficient  answer  is  afforded  by  the  general  direction 
to  work  downwards  from  principles  to  results. 

299.  All  this  is  changed  if  we  surrender  a  certain  privilege  which 
in  the  sphere  of  applied  logic  we  allowed  ourselves  to  claim,  and 
endeavour  by  this  surrender  to  give  completeness  to  our  treatment  of 
the  subject.  Thus  far  in  speaking  of  the  forms  of  proof,  of  the  search 
for  grounds  of  proof,  of  the  discovery  of  laws,  we  have  left  our  work 
throughout  in  a  certain  sense  incomplete.  Every  attempt  to  establish 
a  proposition  went  only  a  few  steps  back,  and  came  to  a  stand  as  soon 
as  some  other  proposition  was  reached,  which  served  for  its  founda- 
tion, and  the  validity  of  which  was  not  proved  but  assumed.  This 
procedure  answers  to  the  actual  course  of  thought  in  life  as  well  as  in 
the  sphere  of  the  special  sciences.  In  ordinary  life  our  judgment  of 
things  and  the  conclusions  we  draw  concerning  them  rest  not  on  a 
single  proposition  T,  nor  yet  upon  a  clearly  defined  group  of  homo- 
geneous elementary  truths,  but  on  a  large  number  of  truths  of  a  quite 
heterogeneous  character,  yet  possessed  of  an  equal  certainty ;  here 
a  proposition  A,  which  once  apprehended  forces  itself  upon  us  as  a 
necessity  of  thought,  there  a  proposition  B  expressing  an  immediate 
fact  of  perception,  and  presenting  itself  not  "exactly  as  necessary  but 
as  incontrovertible  ;  a  third,  again,  C,  may  be  a  principle  of  unknown 
origin,  but  one  which  at  every  moment  is  being  put  to  the  proof  and 
confirmed  afresh;  finally  we  have  many  a  proposition  D  springing 
from  equally  unknown  sources,  but  admitting  of  no  such  guarantee  of 
its  truth,  and  yet  seeming  to  bear  within  it  an  indefeasible  claim,  a 
claim  that  is  which  we  believe  ourselves  bound  to  satisfy  if  the  con- 
ceptions by  which  we  bind  together  the  data  of  experience  are  to 
answer  to  the  truth. 

Any  one  of  these  various  points  of  certainty — and  in  each  of  them 
we  may  suppose  a  number  of  elementary  convictions  to  be  contained 
and  compressed — is  used  indifferently  in  the  living  movement  of 
thought  as  occasion  arises,  to  answer  any  question  which  comes  up 
for  solution ;  nay  even  a  proposition  which  naturally  depends  on  some 
one  particular  assumption,  we  often  prove  from  a  different  one,  if  its 
dependence  on  the  former  is  not  at  once  evident.  In  this  way  we  are 
constantly  shifting  the  bases  on  which  our  judgments  rest;  at  one 


4  T  o  Introduction. 

time  we  set  out  from  pome  law  which  is  evident  to  us,  and  determine 
its  effects  ;  at  another  by  repeated  observation  of  the  effects  we 
strengthen  our  belief  in  the  law ;  consequences  which  appear  to  flow 
by  an  internal  necessity  from  some  acknowledged  principle,  are 
rejected  for  their  improbability  as  seen  from  a  different  standpoint ; 
now  we  start  from  A  to  prove  a  doubtful  13,  now  B  appears  the  more 
evident  of  the  two,  and  we  use  it  to  establish  A  ;  the  truth  being  that 
whatever  possesses  for  us  at  the  moment  the  strongest  psychological 
certainty  passes  for  the  point  of  vantage  from  which  the  other  more 
wavering  beliefs  are  to  be  secured. 

300.  So  entirely  unconstrained  as  this  in  its  operation  scientific 
thought  certainly  is  not ;  still  the  actual  science  which  we  possess,  as 
distinguished  from  the  ideal  science,  which  we  might  wish  to  possess, 
has  resemblance  enough  to  the  natural  processes  of  ordinary  re- 
flexion. Here  also  we  hardly  meet  with  any  enquiry  into  a  matter  of 
fact,  which  does  not  depend  for  its  determination  upon  certain  pre- 
suppositions which  we  adopt  now  as  undemonsirable  but  certain,  now 
again  as  undernonstrable  and  only  probable,  and  which  are  regarded 
either  as  ultimate  principles  of  the  particular  science  before  us,  or  as 
vouched  for  by  some  other  science.  Even  within  a  single  province 
of  enquiry  the  direction  in  which  the  required  proof  is  looked  for 
varies.  Without  exactly  questioning  the  certainty  of  a  proposition 
which  we  have  begun  by  regarding  as  the  source  from  which  others 
are  derived,  we  come  nevertheless  to  believe  that  there  is  some  other 
proposition  which  we  may  place  at  the  head  with  still  greater  security, 
and  from  which  we  may  derive  our  former  first  principle  with  all  its 
consequences. 

And  if  we  review  our  knowledge  as  a  whole,  distributed  as  it  is 
among  the  various  sciences,  we  shall  find  no  one  of  these  complete 
and  rounded  off  in  itself.  In  each  one  of  them  we  come  upon  formal 
or  material  principles,  whose  validity  is  admitted  because  they  are 
self-evident,  or  because  they  explain  certain  facts,  while  as  to  their 
origin  and  connexion  with  each  other  no  enquiry  is  made  if  the 
question  appears  to  have  no  immediate  bearing  upon  the  prosecution 
of  the  science  itself. 

This  point  of  view  we  kept  before  us  while  we  were  dealing  with 
the  subject  of  applied  logic,  and  we  saw  no  reason  to  depart  from  it 
so  long  as  our  subject  was  the  nature  of  investigation.  For  what  we 
commonly  call  Applied  Logic,  or  more  properly  the  exhibition  of  the 
possible  modes  in  which  Logic  can  be  applied,  presupposes  the 
existence  of  a  variety  of  cases  adapted  for  its  application,  and  this  is 


Introduction.  411 

only  possible  if  the  work  of  investigation  consists  in  taking  some 
given  fixed  point  to  start  from,  and  then  connecting  this  by  rule  and 
law  with  other  fixed  points  which  are  also  not  proved,  but  assumed. 
Such  is  the  character  of  all  investigations  in  which  we  are  ac- 
customed actually  to  engage,  and  in  this  our  knowledge  bears 
resemblance  to  our  life.  What  was  the  origin  of  our  race  in  the  first 
beginnings  of  history  we  know  not,  and  as  little  can  thought  carry  us 
to  its  far-off  future ;  for  most  of  us  the  memory  of  those  who  have 
gone  before  fades  away  in  no  very  distant  past,  and  for  all  alike  the 
prospect  granted  of  the  fortunes  of  those  who  are  to  come  after  us  is 
still  more  confined  ;  yet  in  the  midst  of  this  darkness  on  either  hand, 
there  lies  before  us  a  certain  space  of  life  comparatively  clear,  with 
plain  needs,  pressing  duties,  and  attainable  goals ;  our  joy  in  existence, 
and  our  confidence  in  acting  upon  the  present,  are  but  little  impaired 
by  the  uncertainty  of  the  beginning  and  the  end.  And  so  it  Is  with 
our  knowledge.  That  there  is  an  eternal  truth,  or  a  perfect  and  self- 
closed  circle  of  truths,  we  do  indeed  assume,  but  ordinary  reflexion 
has  for  such  a  system  of  truth  no  form  of  expression  adequate  to  it, 
nor  has  it  any  clear  conception  how  the  members  of  the  system  are 
related;  single  portions  only  become  plain  and  evident  to  us  in  a 
manner  which  we  are  incapable  of  analysing  to  ourselves,  in  the  course 
of  our  mind's  operation  as  it  comes  in  contact  with  reality.  In  the 
process  of  investigation  we  resemble  men  engaged  in  a  narrow  inland 
traffic,  and  we  endeavour  to  connect  the  uncertain  and  changing 
scenes  about  us,  with  the  isolated  peaks  which  rise  upon  our  view  out 
of  a  coherent  world  of  truth  which  we  cannot  see. 

301.  But  just  as  there  arrive  moments  in  life  when  the  present 
only  seems  endurable  or  intelligible  if  we  can  catch  some  glimpse  of 
its  connexion  with  the  past  and  with  the  future,  so  also  in  knowledge 
there  are  occasions  when  we  are  tempted  to  pass  out  of  the  petty 
business  of  ordinary  scientific  investigation,  and  reflect  upon  the 
points  it  starts  from,  and  the  points  it  aims  at ;  to  ask  where  they  are 
situated,  how  they  are  .connected  with  each  other,  and  whether  they 
are  secure.  For  the  principles  on  which  the  several  sciences  repose 
do  not  restrict  themselves  to  an  unaggressive  sway  each  within  its  own 
separate  province.  We  need  only  point  to  the  very  different  conse- 
quences in  respect  of  the  powers  that  shape  human  life  which  are 
deduced  from  the  principles  of  mechanical  science  on  the  one  hand? 
and  the  deliverances  of  conscience  on  the  other,  to  see  in  a  single 
emphatic  example  how  the  claims  of  different  sources  of  truth  may 
clash  and  conflict  in  dealing  with  a  common  subject-matter.  But  even 


4 1  2  Introduction. 

within  the  field  of  purely  theoretical  science  we  may  find  inducements 
enough  to  make  that  which  in  the  living  processes  of  thought,  and  in 
the  special  sciences,  figures  as  the  first  principle  from  which  all 
enquiry  starts,  itself  a  subject  of  enquiry. 

This  important  problem  philosophy  in  all  ages  has  kept  in  view 
and  pursued,  not  indeed  with  entire  success,  yet  not  altogether  with- 
out result ;  and  assuredly  its  complete  solution  would  be  also  the 
completion  of  philosophy ;  for  such  solution  could  only  consist  in  the 
establishment  of  a  perfected  system  of  connected  truths  at  once 
ultimate  and  concrete,  from  which  all  the  principles  which  direct  the 
researches  of  the  sciences  would  be  derivable,  which  would  supply  the 
key  to  their  precise  and  real  significance,  and  define  the  limits  of  their 
validity.  It  is  no  such  comprehensive  undertaking  as  this,  but  only  a 
modest  portion  of  it,  which  will  form  the  subject  of  the  concluding 
chapters  of  this  work.  Our  object  is  not  to  enquire  into  the  content 
of  the  principles  in  question,  but  into  the  grounds  upon  which  in  a 
subjective  sense  their  certainty  for  us  reposes  ;  to  ask  not  what  is  the 
truth,  but  what  are  the  marks  by  which  we  recognise  it  and  distinguish 
il  from  error ;  or,  if  we  arc  to  keep  the  old  terminology,  it  is  our  pur- 
pose by  following  a  method  of  analysis  to  obtain  clear  ideas  as  to 
I  he  path  by  which  we  may  hope  to  arrive  at  the  principles  of  a 
synthetic  development 

My  reason  for  treating  this  part  of  Logic  under  the  head  of  Know- 
ledge, the  further  discussion  upon  which  we  are  entering  will  elucidate — 
mi  elucidation  which  the  above  preliminary  designation  of  our  under- 
taking' itself  certainly  requires.  But  in  giving  it  the  name  of  Methodo- 
logy I.  confess  myself  to  be  employing  the  terra  to  some  extent  in  a 
sense  of  my  own.  Every  science  develops  its  characteristic  methods, 
methods  fruitful  in  their  results,  which  it  employs  in  dealing  with  a 
given  class  of  problems.  But  Logic  regards  all  such  methods  as 
special  artifices  with  which  it  has  no  concern,  but  which  it  belongs  to 
the  special  sciences  themselves  to  furnish,  General  methods  again, 
such  as  the  synthetic  and  analytic  procedure  of  which  I  have  been 
speaking,  do  indeed  find  a  mention  in  Logic  ;  but  by  formulating 
them  we  should  only  be  making  a  somewhat  barren  postulate,  until 
we  arc  clear  as  to  the  grounds  of  our  belief  that  the  one  has  actually 
led  us  to  the  discovery  of  the  truth,  and  that  in  the  other  we  have  an 
instrument  which  enables  us  to  deveiope  and  exhibit  it  in  detail. 

It  is  this  last-named  undertaking  which  I  desire  to  indicate  here  by 
the  term  *  method,'  using  it  to  denote  not  a  general  type  of  procedure 
which  lias  to  be  applied  over  and  over  again  in  a  thousand  instances, 


In  tr  eduction.  413 

but  rather  in  the  sense  of  a  definite  operation  which  thought  has  to 
go  through  once  and  for  all,  and  of  which  the  object  is  to  mediate 
between  the  various  sources  from  which  various  kinds  of  certainty 
appear  to  find  their  way  to  us,  and  to  arrive  at  a  knowledge  of  the 
connexion  between  them,  and-  of  the  limits  of  their  validity. 


CHAPTER    I. 
Ofi  Scepticism. 

302.  THK  human  mind  only  becomes  aware  of  the  laws  of  its  own 
activity  after  it  has  already  exerted  it  in  a  great  variety  of  ways,  when 
il  turns  back  by  an  art  of  reflexion  and  comparison  upon  the  various 
forms  which  this  activity  has  assumed,  and  makes  the  rules, which  it  has 
been  following  all  the  while  unconsciously,  an  object  of  separate  atten- 
tion. The  question  why  those  laws  are  binding  and  within  what  limits 
their  observ.uire  carries  with  it  the  promise  of  true  knowledge,  comes 
still  later,  li  can  only  arise  after  we  have  had  experience  of  errors 
into  which  we  appear  to  have  been  drawn  not  by  the  neglect  of  those 
laws,  but  1)}"  their  observance  in  dealing  with  the  different  subject- 
matters  presented  to  our  intelligence. 

If  then  this  has  been  the  case,  and  if  further  no  success  has 
attended  our  scattered  and  occasional  attempts  to  remove  the  diffi- 
culties and  contradictious  which  have  arisen,  by  giving"  a  better 
interpretation  either  to  that  \\hieh  seemed  to  us  to  be  truth,  or  to 
that  which  we  regarded  as  the  immediate  deliverance  of  direct  per- 
ception,—then  arises  that  mood  of  wide  and  general  doubt  which 
constitutes  Scepticism. 

As  a  transient  plia.se  of  longer  or  shorter  duration  this  sceptical 
mood  has  it.s  place  in  the  development  of  every  serious  mind ; 
several  times  in  the  history  of  Philosophy  it  has  been  emphatically 
insisted  on  as  the  nomu.il  and  necessary  condition  of  the  mind, 
which  is  called  upon  at  the  outset  of  the  scientific  life  to  regard  all 
traditional  knowledge  as  so  much  doubtful  prejudice,  which  has  to  be 
submitted  to  test  and  trial.  Finally  it  has  established  itself  as  a  per- 
manent result  in  the  sceptical  schools  of  Philosophy,  which  have 
believed  themselves  to  have  attained  to  the  conviction  of  the  im- 
possibility of  certain  knowledge.  In  this  final  form  in  which  alone 


The  Presupposition  of  Scepticism.  415 

Scepticism  pretends  to  have  arrived  at  a  definite  outcome,  we  shall  not 
find  it  so  entirely  free  as  it  flatters  itself  to  be  from  traditional  pre- 
judices. One  thing  above  all  however  is  clear;  an  unconditional 
denial  of  all  truth  this  final  outcome  of  Scepticism  cannot  by  any 
possibility  include,  inasmuch  as  not  the  solution  of  doubt  merely  but 
doubt  itself  is  only  possible  on  the  presupposition  of  some  sort  of 
acknowledged  truths. 

Whoever  entertains  a  hope  of  finding  a  path  out  of  the  labyrinth  of 
Scepticism  to  any  form  of  certain  knowledge  grants  this  already  : 
for  he  can  only  find  that  path  by  an  investigation,  and  any  form  of 
investigation  is  possible  only  on  the  assumption  at  all  events  of  formal 
principles  of  judgment  by  which  one  combination  of  ideas  can  be 
distinguished  as  true  from  a  second  as  false,  or  from  a  third  which  is 
doubtful  And  again  he  who  denies  that  such  a  way  out  is  to  be 
found,  in  the  very  act  of  denial  acknowledges  that  which  he  denies. 
When  the  old  Sophistic  taught  that  there  was  no  truth,  and  that  if 
tliere  were  it  could  not  be  known,  and  that  even  if  it  could  be  known 
still  it  could  not  be  communicated,  in  so  doing  it  contradicted  each, 
of  the  propositions  enunciated.  For  after  all  it  gives  out  its  three 
propositions  for  truth,  and  could  not  therefore  deny  all  truth  ;  it 
endeavoured  further  to  prove  the  soundness  of  its  contentions,  and 
was  bound  therefore  in  its  own  interest  to  presuppose  the  validity  of 
that  particular  form  of  the  apprehension  of  truth — mediate  appre- 
hension— the  impossibility  of  which  it  would  have  been  most  espe- 
cially pleasant  to  point  out ;  finally  it  denied  the  possibility  of 
communicating  truth,  at  the  very  moment  when  on  the  strength  of  its 
being  communicable,  it  was  setting  itself  to  convince  men  of  the 
truth  of  its  own  tenets.. 

Nor  can  these  contradictions  be  escaped  by  avoiding  the  form  of 
positive  assertion  in  the  expression  of  the  results  of  the  doctrine,  and 
instead  of  denying  the  validity  of  any  asserted  truth  simply  returning 
a  non  liquet  to  the  general  question  equally  with  all  particular  ones. 
Certainly  those  who  adopt  this  course,  and  we  along  with  them,  are  at 
liberty  to  give  this  answer  where  the  question  concerns  the  proof  of 
particular  contentions  from  truths  whose  validity  is  acknowledged  ;  but 
to  maintain  that  the  validity  of  all  truths  whatsoever  is  doubtful  is  a 
proposition  which  may  indeed  be  expressed  in  words,  but  the  words 
have  no  longer  any  real  idea  to  answer  to  them  ;  we  could  not  possibly 
explain  the  meaning  of  that  liquet  which  we  are  negativing,  if  we  had 
not  in  our  mind  certain  conditions  under  which  we  should  be  pre- 
pared to  affirm  it,  that  is  to  say  if  we  did  not  presuppose  some  uncon- 


4i6  •  On  Scepticism. 


[BOOK  III. 


ditionally  valid  truth,  from  which  Is  derived  our  right  to  doubt  what- 
ever cannot  be  proved  to  be  in  agreement  with  it. 

But  not  only  is  any  sceptical  conclusion,  in  whatever  form  main- 
tained, impossible  without  this  assumption,  but  the  very  fact  of  doubt 
itself  is  impossible  also — -impossible  at  least  in  the  only  sense  in  which 
we  are  here  concerned  with  it.  Uncertainty  indeed  there  would  be,  not 
sometimes,  but  at  least  as  concerns  the  future,  always  and  invariably, 
if  there  were  no  truth  to  teach  us  to  distinguish  between  what  is 
necessary  and  what  is  not;  but  on  the  other  hand  we  should  never 
in  that  case  have  occasion  to  raise  the  doubt  whether  a  given  pro- 
position holds  as  tried  by  this  or  that  standard,  inasmuch  as  it  would 
be  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  it  did  so  or  not,  unless  the 
standard  in  question  be  recognised  as  really  such,  as  a  veritable 
criterion,  In  a  word  as  truth. 

However  thorough-going  then  the  claims  of  Scepticism  may  be, 
still  it  can  never  get  rid,  not  only  of  the  recognition  of  some 
absolutely  valid  truth,  but  of  this  presupposition  also,  that  the  human 
mind  is  in  possession  of  certain  fundamental  principles  which  enable 
it  to  affirm  at  all  events  the  impossibility  of  proving  this  or  that  given 
conception  to  agree  with  the  truth  which  the  sceptic  recognises. 

303.  To  this  admission  the  sceptical  mind  readily  allows  itself  to 
be  driven  ;  it  lias  it  will  acknowledge  a  profound  belief  that  there  is 
some  absolutely  valid  truth ;  and  again  it  will  grant  that  necessary 
laws  of  thought  rule  all  our  enquiries  and  all  our  doubts  :  the 
question  which  troubles  it  is  whether  the  two— the  truth  and  the  laws 
of  thought-— coincide.  Just  because  we  know  that  there  must  be 
truth,  and  therefore  that  there  may  be  error,  how  are  we  to  be  sure 
that  those  necessary  laws  which  exist  in  our  mind  may  not  belong 
to  the  side  of  error,  and  everything  therefore  be  quite  different  in 
itself  from  that  which  by  the  laws  of  thought  it  necessarily  appears 
to  us  ? 

It  is  clear  that  a  scepticism  such  as  this,  which  is  not  driven  to 
doubt  through  any  special  cause  residing  in  the  nature  of  its  subject- 
matter,  but  which  simply  looks  upon  the  possibility  of  raising  a 
doubt  as  "ground  sufficient  for  actually  raising  it,  can  never  admit  of 
being  refuted  by  demonstration.  For  every  argument  which  can  be 
brought  into  the  field  against  it  can  only  rest  upon  the  self-evidence 
and  necessity  with  which  it  is  thought,  and  must  belong  therefore  to 
that  sphere  of  necessities  of  thought  as  to  which  the  old  barren 
question  can  always  be  renewed  to  infinity,  whether  after  all  things 
may  not  be  in  reality  quite  otherwise  than  thought  makes  them. 


CHAPTER!.]  Our  Truth  and  the  Truth,  417 

This  question  also  has  in  fact  been  raised  more  than  once  in  the 
history  of  philosophy;  at  the  beginning  of  the  modern  era  by  Des- 
cartes, who  after  convincing  himself  as  he  thought  that  the  soul  is 
furnished  with  an  equipment  of  innate  necessary  Ideas,  presented  the 
question  in  the  following  vivid  form : — might   not   an  evil  Demon 
have  so  constituted  our  nature,  that  all  our  thoughts  should  be  ne- 
cessarily false,  and  yet  appear  to  ourselves  clear  and  necessary  truths  ? 
And  this  hypothesis  he  considered  he  could  only  refute  by  pointing 
to  the  fact  that  among  these  innate  Ideas  is  to  be  found  the  con- 
ception of  an  absolutely  holy  and  perfect  God,  but,  he  argued  a 
finite  spirit  could  not  have  constructed  out  of  itself  that  which  is 
greater  than   itself,  the  thought  of  the   Infinite ;    only  an   actually 
existing  holy  God  could  have  implanted  this  in  us,  and  it  would  con- 
tradict the  nature  of  this  holy  God  to  practise  a  deception  upon  us. 
There  is  one  feature  in  this  demonstration  which  is  worthy  of  atten- 
tion ;  the  underlying  thought  that  in  the  immediate  assurance  which 
we  feel  of  the  significance  of  the  moral  Idea  lies  the  security  also  for 
the  truth  of  our  knowledge  :  but  certainly  the  off-hand  way  in  which 
the  two  are  thrown  together  here  in  Descartes'1  conclusion  will  con- 
vince no  one.     For  after  all  what  exception  can  justly  be  taken  to 
those  religious  views,  which  also  set  out  from  the  belief  in  a  holy 
God,  but  find  it  perfectly  compatible  with  the  purposes  of  His  wisdom 
in  the  education  of  mankind,  that  He  should  have  wholly  withheld  a 
large  portion  of  the  truth  from  our  human  knowledge  ?     And  sup- 
posing that  Fie  had  denied  to  us  not  a  portion  of  truth  only  but  all 
truth,  but  in  place  of  it  had  furnished  our  soul  with    imaginations 
which  for  it  are  necessities  of  thought,  what  right  should  we  have  had 
to  call  this  withholding  of  truth  and  bestowal  of  error  by  the  hard 
name  of  a  deception,  until  we  had  first  proved  that  our  soul  pos- 
sessed a  right  to  the  grant  of  truth  which  God  could  not  disregard 
without  prejudice  to  His  own  holiness,  and  that  the  apprehension  of 
all  existence  as  it  really  is,  was  the  necessary  prerequisite  for  the 
fulfilment  of  those  purposes  which  we  believe  that  in  His  holiness  He 
designs  to  accomplish  ?     Such  proof  Descartes  has  neither  furnished 
nor  attempted  to  furnish  ;  he  abandons  himself  in  the  above  line  of 
thought  with  all  confidence  to  the  guidance  of  certain  assumptions 
which  have  their  limited  place  in  determining  questions  within  the 
circle  of  the  intercourse  of  human  beings  with  each  other,  but  be- 
come mere  groundless  prejudice  when  they  are  applied  to  that  most 
comprehensive  of  all  questions,  what  is  the  significance  of  a  necessary 
law  of  thought,  which  manifests  itself  in  finite  minds;  his  argument 

E  e 


41 8  On  Scepticism, 


I  BOOK  III.. 


would  not  hinder  us  in  fact  from  -assuming,  not  indeed  that  a 
malicious  Dernon3  but  that  some  creative  power  had  so  fashioned 
us  that  all  things  should  actually  appear  to  us  by  a  necessity  of  our 
thought  otherwise  than  they  are. 

Two  alternatives  are  open  to  us.  First  we  can  if  we  please  leave 
any  person  who  is  disposed  to  assent  to  such  a  hypothesis,  to  him- 
self, on  the  ground  that  we  acknowledge  the  impossibility  of  refuting 
him,  so  long  as  his  doubts  are  suggested  not  by  any  positive  difficulty 
which  renders  them  irresistible,  but  merely  by  the  possibility  of  con- 
tinually renewing  them  without  any  positive  ground  whatever.  In 
the  presence  of  this  sceptical  disposition  we  should  fall  back  for  the 
purposes  of  science  upon  a  principle  from  which  in  the  ordinary 
affairs  of  life  our  opponent  himself  cannot  escape  and  does  not 
shrink,- — faith  in  reason.  We  should  continue  to  regard  a  necessity  of 
thought  as  true  until  through  the  conclusions  which  it  itself  produces 
it  proves  itself  to  be  no  such  thing,  and  compels  us  to  declare  it 
a  *  show  of  being*  only,  which  in  such  case  would  be  riot  entirely  a 
vain  show  but  an  appearance  standing  in  a  definable  relation  to  the 
truth  with  which  it  can  no  longer  be  identified.  This  attitude 
towards  the  sceptic  is  that  which  we  find  observed  in  life,  for 
through  the  world's  history  this  groundless  scepticism  has  always 
reappeared  from  time  to  time,  but  as  often  as  it  has  made  its  appear- 
ance men  have  simply  turned  their  backs  upon  it. 

But  in  science  such  a  treatment  of  the  question  is  not  altogether 
becoming.  The  second  alternative  appears  to  me  the  more  helpful 
one,  to  lay  bare  the  essential  groundlessness  of  this  curious  solicitude, 
which  asks  whether  after  all  things  may  not  be  quite  other  in  themselves 
than  that  which  by  the  laws  of  our  thought  they  necessarily  appear. 
What  after  all  is  the  meaning  of  this  addition  l  in  themselves,'  or 
this  being  in  itself  of  something  which  we  oppose  to  our  necessary 
conceptions  of  the  very  same  something-ami  which  is  supposed  to  be 
different  from  them  ?  We  are  here  in  fact,  as  we  now  propose  to 
show,  in  presence  of  a  prejudice  springing  up  from  the  accumulated 
effects  of  experience  and  education,  which  has  crept  into  the  heart  of 
that  very  Scepticism  which  conceives  itself  to  have  got  rid  of  all 
prejudices. 

304,  He  who  begins  to  reflect  upon  the  foundations  and  the  sources 
of  his  knowledge  finds  himself  at  starting  entangled  in  all  the  preju- 
dices which  have  grown  up  in  him  unconsciously  as  his  mind  has 
developed,  whether  arising  out  of  his  individual  experience,  .or  accepted 
from  others.  For  the  first  attitude  of  the  mind  can  never  be  doubt; 


CHAPTER  LI  The  prej^ldice  of  Scepticism.  419 

it  begins  always  with  entire  confidence  in  all  its  perceptions.  Now 
no  one  of  these  prejudices  is  more  universal  than  the  conception  of  an 
independent  world  of  things  with  which  we  habitually  contrast  our 
own  world  of  thoughts.  Errors  which  meet  us  within  this  latter  world 
we  regard  as  trifling  blemishes  easily  cured?  in  comparison  with  the 
great  and  dread  delusion  in  which  it  may  be  the  entire  system  of  the 
world  of  thought  is  involved  as  judged  by  that  other  world  of  actual 
things. 

The  doubting  question,  therefore,  whether  things  may  not  be  in  fact 
quite  different  from  what  they  necessarily  appear  to  us,  has  prima 
facie  an  intelligible  sense  only  upon  the  assumption  that  human 
knowledge  is  intended  to  be  a  copy  of  a  world  of  things,  and  in  fact 
that  truth  regarding  the  possibility  of  which  for  man  uncertainty  is 
felt,  has  been  most  commonly  defined  as  the  agreement  of  our  ideas 
with  the  real  condition  of  the  things  which  they  profess  to  copy. 
The  ordinary  consciousness  in  practical  life  never  departs  from  this 
standpoint ;  philosophy,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  course  of  its  specu- 
lations has  abandoned  it  not  unfrequently  on  the  strength  of  know- 
ledge of  which  it  believed  itself  to  be  already  in  possession.  But  a 
scepticism  which  in  an  enquiry  into  the  possibility  of  knowledge  pro- 
fessed to  renounce  all  prejudices,  was  bound  above  all  things  not  to 
retain  unquestioned  a  definition  of  the  truth  of  which  it  was  in  search3 
founded  upon  the  uncriticised  prejudice  that  there  is  such  an  external 
world  of  things.  To  dispute  that  this  assumption  is  a  prejudice  is 
possible  only  for  one  who  never  raises  a  doubt  at  all,  but  who  feels 
so  complete  a  satisfaction  in  the  direct  deliverances  of  simple  percep- 
tion as  to  find  in  it  at  once  a  convincing  evidence  of  the  existence 
of  the  external  world,  and  an  infallible  revelation  of  its  nature.  But 
he  who  once  entertains  a  doubt  of  the  truth  of  any  perception,  and 
at  the  same  time  holds  fast  as  if  it  were  a  matter  of  course  to 
the  assumption  of  the  existence  of  the  fact,  to  which  the  perception 
ought  by  rights  to  correspond,  can,  to  begin  with,  only  be  raising 
such,  a  doubt  at  all,  on  the  strength  of  definite  convictions  as  to 
the  nature  of  the  £  fact '  in  question,  convictions  which  appear  to 
him  to  be  necessities  of  Thought,  and  which  forbid  him  to  take 
the  given  perception  as  its  true  representation.  But  further,  as  he 
can  no  longer  regard  the  thing  itself  as  given  him  by  direct  per- 
ception, it  follows  that  the  obligation  to  retain  the  belief  in  its 
existence  at  all  can  in  its  turn  only  rest  upon  an  innate  necessity  of 
thought  compelling  him  to  supplement  and  complete  the  manifold 
world  of  perception  by  this  thought  of  a  world  not  perceived,  in  order 

E  e  2 


420  On  Scepticism. 


[BOOK  III. 


to  bring  his  ideas  In  their  totality  into  an  inward  harmony  In  agree- 
ment with  the  laws  of  his  own  thought. 

A  philosophical  review  of  these  questions  is  necessary,  not  indeed 
to  establish  our  immediate  faith  in  this  world  of  actual  things,  but  to 
give  us  scientific  justification,  for  holding  to  the  assumption  of  its 
reality,  and  on  this  point  the  systems  of  Idealism  and  Realism  have 
arrived  at  opposite  results.  To  bring  so  comprehensive  a  problem  to 
an  issue  is  not  In  the  least  our  business  here ;  on  the  contrary  it  is 
our  purpose  to  show  that  as  a  matter  of  arrangement  the  question 
ought  not  to  be  imported  into  these  introductory  discussions  on  the 
theory  of  knowledge.  With  this  view  we  have  to  consider  a  single 
thought  in  two  aspects  ;  we  have  to  remind  ourselves  in  the  first  place 
that  any  decision  of  the  question  postulates  the  recognition  of  the 
competence  of  thought,  secondly  we  have  to  show  that  nothing  else 
but  the  connexion  of  our  ideas  with  each  other  can  ever  be  made  the 
object  of  our  investigations. 

305.  A  few  words  will  suffice  for  the  first  point.  Every  criticism 
of  the  entire  apparatus  of  our  faculties  of  knowledge  P,  undertaken 
with  a  view  of  enquiring  into  its  agreement  with  the  nature  of  things, 
must  presuppose  in  order  to  Its  decision  a  second  source  of  truth -Q, 
winch  gives  us  a  knowledge,  free  from  all  alloy  of  error,  of  what  that 
nature  is  :  for  we  can  only  compare  known  with  known,  not  known 
with  unknown.  Supposing  now  that  this  Q  were  given  us,  it  matters 
not  whether  In  the  form  of  a  comprehensive  revelation  imparted 
originally  to  our  soul,  or  as  a  certainty  coming  suddenly  upon  us  as 
an  answer  to  particular  questions  one  by  one  as  they  present  them- 
selves, in  either  case  how  are  we  to  compare  it  with  the  claims  of  P 
which  requires  us  to  connect  our  single  ideas  according  to  deter- 
minate laws? 

If  P  and  Q  agree,  how  could  we  distinguish  the  one  from  the 
other,  in  order  to  convince  ourselves  that  it  is  not  only  our  subjective 
cognition  P  which  is  speaking  to  us,  but  that  it  has  the  additional 
confirmation  of  the  higher  objective  truth  Q,  evidencing  its  agree- 
ment with  the  tilings  themselves?  We  could  not  do  it  at  all;  the 
united  utterance  of  the  two  together  would  be  liable  to  precisely  the 
same  doubts  and  questionings  as  that  of  P  by  itself.  If  on  the  other 
hand  Q  told  us  something  different  from  P,  how  should  we  decide 
between  them  ?  Even  supposing  that  as  a  matter  of  fact  Q  gave  us 
truth  and  P  error,  how  else  could  our  faith  in  the  superior  credibility 
of  Q  be  arrived  at,  except  through  the  greater  immediate  certainty 
which  attended  its  utterance  as  compared  with  that  of  P?  But  this 


CHAPTER  LI  The  Circ le  of  Knowledge.  421 

certainty  is  inconceivable,  except  on  the  condition  of  Q  coinciding 
with  that  very  truth  which  constitutes  the  universal  law  of  our  sub- 
jective faculty  of  cognition  P;  what  contradicts  this  would,  even  if  it 
were  given  us  in  immediate  perception,  be  always  a  riddle  to  us,  and 
not  a  revelation.  If  then  Q  and  P  remain  opposed,  what  we  arrive  at 
is  not  a  refutation  of  P  on  the  strength  of  the  higher  claims  of  (2,  but 
we  experience  an  inner  conflict  between  two  utterances  of  that  faculty 
of  knowledge  which  is  peculiar  to  our  minds,  a  conflict  which  either 
can  find  no  higher  court  to  appeal  to,  and  in  that  case  can  never  be 
resolved,  or  must  be  settled  by  the  discovery  on  the  part  of  that 
faculty  itself  of  a  higher  point  of  view  within  its  own  province  from 
which  one  or  other  of  the  conflicting  utterances  may  be  corrected, 
and  the  apparent  contradiction  removed.  We  see  then  that  to  thought 
and  its  necessary  laws  we  are  as  a  matter  of  fact  limited  in  every 
resort ;  the  faith  which  reason  entertains  that  truth  whatever  it  may  be 
is^discoverable  by  thought,  is  the  unavoidable  postulate  of  all  enquiry; 
what  that  truth  is  can  be  discovered  only  by  the  reflective  operation 
of  thought,  continually  trying  and  testing  its  single  results  by  the 
standard  of  the  universal  laws  of  its  activity. 

306.  It  is  in  vain  to  shrink  from  acknowledging  the  circle  which  is 
here  involved,  for  that  there  is  no  escape  from  it  everyone  after  all 
must  see.  It  is  also  superfluous,"  because  there  can  never  come  a 
moment  in  our  experience — and  this  is  the  second  point  we  have  to 
urge — in  which  the  supposed  mischief  which  our  vague  suspicions 
apprehend  could  possibly  become  known  to  us.  All  we  know  of  the 
external  world  depends  upon  the  ideas  of  it  which  are  within  us  ;  it 
is  so  far  entirely  indifferent  whether  with  Idealism  we  deny  the 
existence  of  that  world,  and  regard  our  ideas  of  it  as  alone  reality, 
or  whether  we  maintain  with  Realism  the  existence  of  things  outside 
us  which  act  upon  our  minds.  On  the  latter  hypothesis  as  little  as  the 
former  do  the  things  themselves  pass  into  our  knowledge ;  they  only 
awaken  in  us  Ideas,  which  are  not  Things.  It  is  then  this  varied 
world  of  ideas  within  us,  it  matters  not  where  they  may  have  come 
from,  which  forms  the  sole  material  directly  given  to  us,  from  which 
alone  our  knowledge  can  start.  In  them,  and  in  the  course  which 
they  follow  as  they  change  and  connect  themselves,  we  endeavour  to 
discover  a  regular  and  orderly  arrangement,  guided  in  our  search  by 
those  universal  principles  of  our  thought  which  determine  for  us  what 
we  are  to  account  as  order  and  truth,  and  what  as  involving  a  contra- 
diction or  a  problem  to  the  reason. 

Every  discovery  of  such  a  law,  regulating  universally  and  without 


422  On  Scepticism.  [  BOOK-  1 1 1. 

exception  any  two  determinate  ideas1  B  and  F  in  their  conjunction 
with  each  other  in  our  minds,  is  the  attainment  of  a  fragment  of  that 
which  we  call  knowledge  of  Fact  2»  If  \vc  fail  in  our  effort  to  discover- 
such  a  constant  connexion  between  the  two,  then  we  have  a,  problem 
before  us,  which  we  always  set  to  work  to  solve  in  the  same  way. 
First  we  endeavour  to  find  some  universal  relation  between  B  and 
what  is  contained  in  a  third  idea  M,  and  between  F  and  what  is  con- 
tained in  a  fourth  idea  TV,  and  then  to  show  that  by  reason  of  a 
variable  relation  which  obtains  between  M  and  N,  that  between  B 
and  P  cannot  be  expressed  in  the  form  of  a  simple  law  such  as  we 
were  looking  for,  but  only  through  a  law  of  a  different  kind  which 
lakes  account  of  M  and  N  as  well 

If  finally  we  are  in  doubt  whether  a  relation  which  we  have  dis- 
covered to  exist  between  two  ideas  B  and  F'm  our  minds,  corresponds 
to  the  reality  of  things,  this  can  only  mean  that  we  doubt  whether  when- 
ever//and  /^reappear  as  ideas  in  our  consciousness  the  relation  between 
their  contents  which  we  have  collected  from  only  a  limited  number  of 
instances,  will  continue  to  obtain  universally  and  without  exception. 
But  if  the  question  be  once  more  repeated  :  is  a  relation  between  B 
and  F  as  established  for  consciousness  even,  by  invariable  experience 
also  true  in  itself,  such  a  question  is  only  intelligible  at  all  on  one  sup- 
position, namely  if  the  relation  existing  as  a  matter  of  fact  in  con- 
sciousness does  not  accord  with  the  universal  postulates  of  thought, — - 
those  postulates  which  thought  constrains  us  to  make  in  the  case  of 
any  relation  between  any  two  objects  whatever,  and  therefore  also  of 
those  which  we  arc  endeavouring  to  conceive  as  obtaining  between 
real  existences  independent  of  ourselves.  It  is  not  this  assumed 
external  world  of  the  Real  which  comes  in  here  between  our  ideas  as 
the  standard  by  which  their. truth  is  to  be  measured;  the  standard  is 
always  the  conception  of  which  we  cannot  get  rid,  of  what  such  a' 
world  must  be  if  it  dot's  exist,  the  conception  that  is  to  say  of  a 
thought  in  our  own  minds ;  this  it  is  by  which  we  measure  the  truth 
of  other  thoughts,  whether  they  contain  the  evidence  in  themselves,  or 
are  such  as  to  require  elucidation  from  without. 

307.  It  is  perhaps  superfluous,  but  it  may  not  he  without  its  use, 
to  repeat  this  simple  argument,  starting  from  the  opposite  side,  and  to 
ask  what  it  is  that  must  happen  if  we  are  to  discover  a  supposed 
piece  of  knowledge  Z  to  be  a  delusion.  Suppose  we  knew  from  our 
owa  observation  that  between  two  ideas  B  and  F  frequently  recurring 
in  our  experience  the  relation  Z  does  not  uniformly  obtain,  but  on  the 
1  ['  Vorstt4hmgui,rl  a  [Sache.] 


CHAPTER  i.]          E? 'TOT  only  detected  by  Truth.  423 

contrary  varies  according  to  the  varying  relations  in  which  B  is  found 
conjoined- with  M^  and  F  with  TV".  Suppose  on  the  other  hand  that 
•  another  human  being  lived  within  a  sphere  of  experience  where  those 
conditions  exclusively  obtain  under  which  the  relation  Z  between  our 
B  and  F  does  become  a  necessity.  It  will  follow  that  he  will  never 
have  occasion  to  doubt  the  universality  of  that  relation  Z>  nor  will 
his  faith  in  it  prejudice  the  coherence  of  the  rest  of  the  world  of  his 
ideas,  provided  only  that  Z  does  not  conflict  with  the  universal  laws 
of  his  thought  Unquestionably  the  assumption  that  Z  is  an  absolute 
relation  between  B  and  F  independently  of  further  conditions,  may 
make  it  much  more  difficult  for  him  to  find  a  simple  law  for  the 
relations  between  other  constituent  elements  of  his  experience,  as  C 
and  E)  which  he  would  at  once  discover  if  he  was  aware  of  the 
dependence  of  Z  upon  conditions  which  do  also  in  fact  determine  the 
relation  between  C  and  E.  But  so  long  as  he  does  not  extend  his 
Jaith  in  Z  beyond  the  objects  contained  in  the  world  of  his  ideas,  he 
will  still  be  in  a  position  to  systematise  the  objects  connected  in  that 
world,  however  awkwardly  he  may  have  to  express  their  connexion. 
We  indeed  who  possess  the  experience  which  he  lacks  are  aware  of 
his  error,  but  we  can  only  convince  him  of  it  by  taking  him  out  of  his 
more  limited  circle  of  experience  and  transplanting  him  into  a  wider. 
Then  when  he  himself  finds  fresh  conjunctions  of  ideas  arising  in  his 
mind  distinct  from  those  which  he  formerly  experienced,  he  will  allow 
that  he  has  been  in  error ;  still  all  he  will  have  to  concede  will  be  that 
he  was  mistaken  in  supposing  the  relation  Z  between  B  and  F  to 
obtain  universally;  that  relation  still  holds  true  when  the  conditions 
are  added  upon  which,  though  unawares  to  him,  its  validity  all  the 
while  depended. 

And  now  how  will  it  be  if  we  place  human  reason  as  such  in  the 
position  of  this  unfavourably  situated  observer,  and  imagine  it  confined 
to  a  mode  of  mental  representation,  coherent  indeed  in  itself,  but  not 
corresponding  to  the  real  relations  which  obtain  in  a  world  of  things 
external  to  it  ?  How  is  the  standing  delusion,  in  which  in  that  case 
we  are  all  involved,  to  become  known  to  us,  or  how  will  our  know- 
ledge suffer  supposing  it  to  continue  ?  Setting  aside  for  the  moment 
the  instruction  which  an  angel  from  heaven  might  impart  to  us,  what 
we  find  is  this  :  it  is  certainly  not  the  things  themselves  which  are  here 
making  their  way  all  of  a  sudden  into  the  midst  of  our  thoughts,  and 
laying  bare  their  falsity;  even  if  the  world  of  things  running  its 
independent  course  were  to  enter  some  day  upon  a  new  arrange- 
ment which  diametrically  contradicted  the  conceptions  which  we  had 


424  On  Scepticism.  [BOOK in, 

previously  formed  of  it,  such  contradiction  could  only  come  within 
our  observation  through  the  new  influences  awakening  in  us  a  set  of 
ideas  which  \ve  find  no  longer  to  observe  those  laws  of  combination 
which  we  had  hitherto  assumed  to  be  their  laws.  Then  we  have  fallen 
Into  one  of  those  errors  of  the  understanding  to  which  we  of  course 
allow  that  \ve  are  liable  ;  we  have  wrongly  interpreted  this  variable 
world  of  ideas,  that  world  which  is  the  sole  material  that  lies  open  to 
our  intelligence ;  we  recognise  now  that  we  have  learnt  a  new  lesson, 

•  and  that  the  proposition  Z  does  not  possess  the  universal  validity  with 
which  we  had  credited  it ;  but  \ve  have  learnt  also  that  it  does  con- 
tinue to  be  valid  still  when  the  conditions  of  that  validity  with  which 
we  have  now  become  acquainted  are  reckoned  in.  And  now  the 
universal  validity  of  Z  being  erroneous,  so  also  its  limited  validity  is 
true,  and  we  come  to  see  that  inasmuch  as  error  can  only  be  observ- 
able by  us  through  an  inner  contradiction  in  our  world  of  ideas,  it 
follows  that  the  recognition  of  truth  itself  consists  only  in  the  dis^ 
covery  of  laws  of  connexion  which  this  ideal  world  is  destined  always 
to  observe,  to  however  infinite  a  distance  we  may  imagine  its  varying 
course  to  be  prolonged.  Undoubtedly  the  discovery  of  these  laws  is 
an  undertaking  which  must  remain  incomplete ;  we  are  not  in 
possession  of  the  whole  truth,  we  are  in  search  of  it  \  still  so  often 
as  we  correct  a  previous  belief  Z  at  the  instance  of  fresh  experiences 
in  our  world  of  thought,  we  have  not  indeed  reached  as  yet  the  full 
truth,  but  we  have  removed  the  errors  which  without  such  correction 
would  have  lasted  on. 

308.  This  argument,  unless  I  am  much  deceived,  will  satisfy  no 
one.  We  are  left  after  all,  it  will  be  urged,  even  if  all  inner  contra- 

'  dictions  are  removed,  walled  in  within  the  all-embracing  delusions  of 
those  ideas  which  have  grown  up  into  a  solid  mass  within  us,  and 
never  see  the  truth  in  itself,  but  only  as  it  necessarily  appears  to  us, 
Now  then  let  us  call  in  our  angel  from  heaven,  who  beholds  from  his 
purer  atmosphere  things  as  they  are.  What  a  shock  we  fancy  it  would 
be  to  us  if  all  at  once  he  withdrew  the  veil  from  our  eyes,  and  we  saw 
how  entirely  different  things  really  are  from  what  we  had  imagined 
them. 

And  indeed  we  should  experience  a  very  agreeable  shock  if  in  that 
moment  it  were  revealed  to  us  how  our  old  ideas,  with  all  their  old 
meaning,  by  the  introduction  of  certain  simple  links  in  the  chain 
hitherto  concealed  from  us,  became  at  once  perfectly  intelligible,  with 
no  gap  or  contradiction  remaining,  and  intelligible  by  the  light  of  the 
old  laws  which  bad  all  along  directed  the  movement  of  our  thought* 


CHAPTER  i.)      How  judge  our  whole  Ideal  world?         '  42  5 

But  also  on  this  condition  •  only.  If  it  were  an  entirely  new  world 
which  rose  upon  our  view,  bearing  no  resemblance  and  no  relation  to 
that  in  which  we  had  lived  before,  we  simply  should  not  perceive  that 
everything  was  different  from  what  we  thought ;  for  what  that  meant 
to  us  was  that  everything  we  thought  was  different  from  what  we 
thought  it;  the  wholly  new  spectacle  admitting,  as  it  would,  of  no 
comparison  with  the  former  one,  could  on  this  ground  at  all  events 
give  us  no  shock  at  all,  pleasurable  or  otherwise  ;'  It  could  not  so 
much  as  occasion  us  surprise,  except  through  a  sense  of  contrast, 
that  is  to  say  by  being  brought  into  relation  with  our  previous  world 
of  illusion.  But  again  we  who  now  see  ought  to  be  the  same  persons 
who  before  were  blind.  If  that  moment  of  revelation  had  at  the  same 
time  transformed  the  laws  of  our  thought,  and  altered  the  conditions 
under  which  hitherto  we  had  distinguished  truth  and  error,  we  should 
indeed,  if  our  newly  discovered  world  completely  answered  to  these 
new  conditions  of  truth,  have  no  occasion  to  doubt  about  any 
particular  fact  in  it ;  but  what  could  preserve  us  from  the  grand 
fundamental  doubt,  whether  this  new  world  of  ideas  with  all  its  self- 
consistency  may  not  in  its  turn  distort  the  true  nature  of  reality,  and 
things  be  once  more  quite  different  in  themselves  from  that  which  in 
this  new  world  they  appear  to  be  ?  Do  you  hope  to  exclude  these 
doubts  on  the  ground  that  on  our  own  assumption  it  is  the  truth  of 
things  themselves,  and  nothing  else,  which  makes  up  the  content  of 
our  new  perceptions?  But  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  doubt,  the 
fact  that  our  representation  of  things  n  the  true  one  would  not  of 
itself  suffice.  We  must  also  possess  means  to  arrive  at  a  certain 
knowledge  that  it  is  the  true  one.  Now  such  means  we  do  possess  in 
regard  to  particular  parts  of  our  experience;  we  can  measure  their 
truth  by  asking,  are  they  as  judged  by  the  universal  laws  of  our 
thought  in  harmony  with  the  rest  of  that  same  experience  ?  But  it  is 
impossible  to  test  the  truth  of  the  entire  world  of  our  ideas  as  such  by 
comparing  it  with  a  reality  which  so  long  as  it  is  not  an  object  of 
knowledge  is  for  us  non-existent,  and  if  once  it  becomes  so  must  be 
subject  to  the  same  doubts  and  uncertainties  to  which  all  ideas  simply 
as  such  are  liable. 

And  finally  the  supposed  case  is  in  itself  impossible  and  absurd, 
What  can  be  the  meaning  of  saying  that  this  higher  intuition,  per- 
ception, cognition,  gives  the  thing  in  itself,  as  it  really  is  ?  We  may 
exalt  the  intelligence  of  more  perfect  beings  above  our  own  as  high 
as  we  please  ;  but  so  long  as  we  desire  to  attach  any  rational  mean- 
ing to  it,  it  must  always  fall  under  some  category  of  knowledge  or 


426  '    On  Scepticism. 


[BOOK  III. 


direct  perception,  or  cognition,  that  is  to  say  it  will  never  be  the  thing 
itself  but  only  an  aggregate  of  ideas  about  the  thing.  Nothing  is 
simpler  than  to  convince  ourselves  that  every  apprehending  intel- 
ligence can  only  see  things  as  they  look  to  it  when  it  perceives 
them,  not  as  they  look  when  no  one  perceives  them  ;  he  who  demands 
a  knowledge  which  should  be  more  than  a  perfectly  connected  and 
consistent  system  of  ideas  about  the  thing,  a  knowledge  which  should 
actually  exhaust  the  thing  itself,  is  no  longer  asking  for  knowledge  at 
all,  but  for  something  entirely  unintelligible.  One  cannot  even  say 
that  he  is  desiring  not  to  know  but  to  be  the  things  themselves ;  for 
in  fact  lie  would  not  even  so  reach  his  goal.  Could  he  arrive  at 
being  in  some  way  or  another  that  very  metal  in  itself,  the  knowledge 
of  which  in  the  way  of  ideas  docs  not  content  him;  well,  he  would  be 
metal  it  is  true,  but  he  would  be  further  off  than  ever  from  apprehend- 
ing himself  as  the  metal  which  lie  had  become.  Or  supposing  that 
a  higher  power  gave  him  'back  his  intelligence  while  he  still  re- 
mained metal,  even  then  in  his  new  character  of  intelligent  metal  he 
would  still  only  apprehend  himself  in  such  wise  as  he  would  be  repre- 
sented to  himself  in  bis  own  ideas,  not  as  he  would  be  apart  from 
such  representation. 

800.  In  dealing  with  these  fundamental  questions  I  ought  not  to 
be  blamed  for  the  lengthened  discussion  which  1  have  permitted 
myself.  It  is  true  the  outcome  is  small  We  have  convinced  our- 
selves that  this  changing  world  of  our  ideas  is  the  sole  material  given 
us  to  work  upon  ;  that  truth  and  the  knowledge'  of  truth  consist  only 
in  the  laws  of  interconnexion  which  arc  found  to  obtain  universally 
within  a  given,  set  of  ideas,  and  are  confirmed  as  often  as  those  ideas 
recur  in  our  consciousness ;  that  as  the  thoughts  which  lead  us 
towards  this  order  of  truths  make  way,  the  antithesis  between  our 
ideas  and  the  objects  to  which  we  conceive  them  to  be  directed, 
itself  a  purl  of  that  same  world  of  ideas,  necessarily  arises ;  that  the 
question  as  to  the  truth  of  tins  antithesis,  and  the  value  which  accord- 
ing as  we  answer  it  will  belong  to  our  ideas,  is  a  question  of  meta- 
physics which  has  no  business  to  be  mixed  up  with  an  introduction  to 
the  theory  of  knowledge  such  as  the  present ;  that  in  regard  to  this  or 
that  among  our  thoughts  we  may  doubt  as  to  the  possibility  of  bring- 
ing it  into  harmony  with  the  rest  of  the  content  of  our  consciousness, 
and  that  such  doubts  resting  on  definite  grounds  are  compatible  with 
the  endeavour  gradually  to  remove  them ;  that  on  the  other  hand  a 
scepticism  which  indulges  the  apprehension  that  everything  may  be 
in  reality  quite  different  from  what  it  necessarily  appears,  sets  out 


CHAPTER  i.]  The  reasonings  of  Scepticism.  427 

with  a  self-contradiction,  because  it  silently  takes  for  granted  the 
possibility  of  an  apprehension  which  does  not  apprehend  things  but 
is  itself  things,  and  then  goes  on  to  question  whether  this  impossible 
perfection  is  allotted  to  our  intelligence.  Finally  we  see  that  if  we 
set  aside  this  inadmissible  relation  of  the  world  of  ideas  to  a  foreign 
world  of  objects,  there  still  remains  a  further  line  of  enquiry  open  to 
us, — the  endeavour  to  discover  within  the  world  of  ideas  itself  what 
are  the  fixed  points,  the  primary  certainties,  starting  from  which  we 
may  be  enabled  to  bring  the  rest  of  the  shifting  multitude  of  its 
ideas  into  something  like  orderly  connexion.  I  shall  find  and  shall 
avail  myself  of  various  opportunities  hereafter  for  elucidating  this 
point  of  view;  I  go  on  at  present  to  glance  at  the  different  methods 
of  procedure  which  the  sceptical  philosophy  has  followed,  and  which 
have  been  pursued  in  the  various  departments  of  enquiry  to  which 
they  have  been  applied,  upon  the  whole  with  greater  completeness  in 
antiquity  than  in  modern  times,  when  many  of  its  questions  are  no 
longer  able  to  excite  an.  active  interest. 

310.  Sextus  Empiricus  has  left  us  a  collectanea  of  the  tenets  of 
Scepticism  down  to  his  own  time.  The  Sceptic  does  not  any  more 
than  other  men  deny  the  sensuous  perceptions,  the  feelings  of 
pleasure  and  pain,  which  we  experience.  They  force  themselves 
irresistibly  upon  him,  and  are  independent  of  his  opinion.  On  the 
other  hand  everything  that  is  contrasted  with  these  phenomena,  as  a 
noumenon,  or  as  a  thought,  which  itself  not  given  in  the  phenomenon, 
seeks  to  bring  the  content  of  the  perceptions  into  some  inner  con- 
nexion,— all  this  is  made  open  to  doubt,  and  any  statement  we 
venture  from  this  point  of  view  may  be  met  with  equal  propriety  by 
another  which  contradicts  it.  Nothing  therefore  remains  for  the 
wise  man  but  to  refrain  from  either  affirming  or  denying  either  the 
one  proposition  or  the  other,  and  to  find  in  this  suspension  of  judg- 
ment that  peace  of  mind  which  so  long  as  he  considers  it  his  duty  to 
decide  between  two  conflicting  hypotheses,  he  must  necessarily  seek 
in  vain. 

But  when  Scepticism,  not  content  with  representing  an  abstention 
from  any  affirmation  as  the  condition  of  mind  actually  found  in  its 
adherents,  undertakes  to  prove  it  on  logical  grounds  to  be  the  only 
legitimate  attitude  of  the  mind,  it  becomes  at  the  very  outset  false  to 
itself,  presupposing  as  it  does  at  all  events  at  this  point  the  truth 
of  those  logical  laws  of  thought  by  which  alone  it  can  establish  the 
cogency  of  its  own  reasonings.  And  not  only  so  but  in  its  efforts  to 
expose  the  impossibility  of  dogmatic  statements  it  is  compelled  to 


428  On  Scepticism.  [BOOK-III. 

assume  a  variety  of  dogmas  which  can  never  be  directly  given  In 
phenomenal  experience,  but  can  on!}7  be  derived  from  them  by  those 
very  processes  of  reasoning  whose  legitimacy  is  contested.  The  ten 
Tpo'Troi  or  logical  grounds  of  doubt,  which  Sextus  begins  by  rehearsing, 
all  come  to  this,  that  sensations  by  themselves  cannot  discover  to  us 
what  is  the  nature  of  the  object  which  excites  them.  The  first  rpoiros 
calls  attention,  to  the  different  organisations  of  different  animals  ; 
when  it  goes  on  further  to  the  proposition  that  by  reason  of  this  any 
object  must  appear  different  to  the  senses  of  one  animal  from  what 
it  does  to  those  of  another,  it  appeals  to  the  Dogma  that  nnlikes 
cannot  be  affected  alike  by  likes.  Nothing  short  of  this  argument 
would  have  justified  his  conclusion,  for  as  we  cannot  place  ourselves 
inside  an  animal's  consciousness,  this  supposed  difference  between 
the  sensation  of  one  animal  and  that  of  another  is  a  conclusion  given 
by  reasoning,  which  can  never  be  established  by  immediate  percep- 
tion. More  than  this,  the  argument  affirms  too  much;  there  js 
nothing  to  prove  that  visible  differences  in  bodily  organisation  are 
an  invariable  indication  of  corresponding  differences  of  feeling;  no 
one  will  easily  believe  thai  a  cat,  by  reason  of  its  elliptically  shaped 
pupil,  must  necessarily  perceive  the  world  of  space  differently  to  a 
man  with  his  circular  one. 

The  second  T/JOT™?  applies  the  same  argument  within  the  circle  of 
human  beings.  They  too  in  their  turn  are  variously  organised  ;  if 
then,  the  rpwoy  argues,  it  were  proposed—though  we  have  no  grounds 
for  so  doing—to  give  the  human  sensations  a  preference  over  the 
animal,  and  to  regard  these  as  true  and  adequate  to  the  thing  itself, 
we  arc  again  defeated  by  reason  of  the  individual  differences  which 
exist  between  roan  and  man.  So  that  all  we  can  say  is,  that  to  one 
man  the  thing*  appears  in  one  way,  to  his  neighbour  in  another  way; 
how  it  is  in  itself  remains  unsettled, 

The  two  next  r/«Wot  lead  to  the  same  result;  the  third  appeals  to  the 
differences  among  the  senses  themselves ;  to  the  eye  honey  is  yellow, 
to  the  tongue  sweet ;  it  may  be  that  there  are  other  forms  of  sensation, 
lacking*  to  us,  to  which  it  appears  something  different  again :  what 
it  is  in  itself  must  therefore  be  relegated  to  uncertainty,  as  we  have  no 
reason  for  accounting  the  deliverance  of  one  sense  truer  than  that  of 
another.  Even  supposing  however  that  we  keep  to  a  single  sense, 
the  fourth  T/XWO?  points  out  that  here  too  there  are  variations  of 
feeling,  according  to  age  and  state  of  health,  according  as  we  are 
hungry  or  satisfied,  asleep  or,  awake,  so  that  still  we  can  .only  say 
how  a  thing  appears  to  our  sense  under  each  of  these  varying  con- 


CHAPTER  I.]  SceptlCdl  TpOTTOL  abo^tt  objects*  429 

ditions,  but  not  how  it  would  appear  to  a  subject  which  was  ex- 
periencing none  of  them, 

These  four  rponoi  were  concerned  with  the  nature  of  the  subject 
which  frames  judgments ;  the  four  which  follow  relate  to  the  objects,, 
The  fifth  reminds  us  that  distance  and  position  alter  the  appearance 
of  one  and  the  same  thing :  the  sixth  points  out  that  no  object  pro- 
duces in  us  the  impression  of  itself  unmixed  with  those  of  others  ',  the 
seventh  that  the  composition  of  various  elements  in  single  objects 
causes  qualities  to  appear  in  them  which  are  entirely  wanting  in  the 
simple  elements  themselves,  and  effaces  others  'which  belonged  to 
them;  so  that  we  can  never  do  more  than  state  how  each  one 
appears  in  its  several  combinations  with  other  things,  nor  what  it 
is  like  in  itself  and  by  itself  apart  from  the  various  phases  which 
by  reason  of  those  relations  it  passes  through.  It  is  impossible  to 
read  the  examples  to  these  last  rporroi  without  a  feeling  of  astonish- 
ment that  the  scepticism  of  antiquity  should  have  seen  in  them 
throughout  only  impediments  to  scientific  knowledge.  In  modern 
science  they  have  become  one  and  all  starting-points  of  enquiry. 
Modern  science  has  not  been  content  with  raising  a  general  lamen- 
tation over  the  changeableness  of  phenomena  under  changing  con- 
ditions ;  it  has  questioned  experience ;  it  has  enquired  what  are  the 
special  connexions  which  obtain  between  any  one  of  these  conditions 
and  this  or  that  particular  change  in  the  phenomenon,  and  it  has  in 
this  way  arrived  at  a  knowledge  of  the  general  laws  which  govern 
this  endlessly  changing  play  of  events.  We  have  not  indeed  learnt 
what  a  thing  is  like  in  itself  when  it  stands  wholly  apart  from  all  the 
conditions  of  its  manifestation  to  intelligence ;  but  that  the  problem 
so  presented  is  absurd  the  ancient  scepticism  was  itself  aware3  as 
we  find  it  expressed  in  the  eighth  rpoTros :  Everything  stands  in 
relations  of  one  kind  or  another,  if  not  to  other  things,  yet  always  at 
least  if  it  is  to  become  an  object  of  apprehension,  to  the  subject 
apprehending  it;  what  it  is  like  in  itself,  apart  from  all  relations , 
remains  therefore  beyond  our  power  to  say. 

The  last  two  rpoirot  are  of  less  interest  for  us  :  the  ninth  reminds 
us  that  our  estimate  of  the  magnitude  and  the  value  of  things  is  con- 
ditioned by  their  rarity  or  frequency,  by  custom  and  by  contrast ;  the 
tenth  appeals  to  the  diversity  of  national  manners  and  morals  as  an 
evidence  that  here  too  we  can  only  say  what  appears  good  and  bad 
to  one  person  or  another,  not  what  is  good  and  bad  in  itself, 

311.  The  further  development  of  the  Pyrrhonian  WOTVTT&OW  in 
Sextu,  fsrom  whose  first  book  the  doctrines  I  have  cited  are  taken.,  I 


430  On  Scepticism.  [BOOK  in. 

here  pass  over.  It  will  here  be  evident  that  so  far  the  Scepticism  we 
have  been  considering  does  not  deny  the  reality  of  truth,  for  it  is  the 
Impossibility  of  attaining  to  truth  which  it  laments  over,  and  one  can 
only  make  that  an  object  of  quest  in  the  reality  of  which  one  believes. 
Nor  does  it  doubt  that  conformity  to  the  laws  of  thought  is  the 
necessary  condition  of  any  thought  being  true.  It  Is  incessantly 
enumerating,  in  disjunctions  alleged  to  be  complete,  sets  of  cases 
which  are  inferred  on  the  basis  of  these  laws  to  be  possible  and  to 
exclude  one  another;  and  it  is  by  this  same  logic 'of  thought  that  it 
undertakes  to  bring  us  to  acknowledge  the  necessity  of  withholding 
judgment  altogether.  It  is  true  that  this  procedure  has  to  be  sub- 
sequently corrected.  The  sceptical  argument  is  at  pains  to  include 
itself  in  the  uncertainty  to  which,  by  one  of  those  very  affirmations 
which  it  seeks  to  get  rid  of,  it  condemns  the  whole  of  our  pretended 
knowledge.  The  forms  of  argument  which  are  employed  for  this 
purpose  are  many  and  curious.  If  the  Sceptic  arrives  at  his  ne- 
gations by  a  process  of  demonstration,  he  is  not,  it  is  said,  in  so 
doing,  here  any  more  than  elsewhere,  laying  down  any  positive 
doctrine ;  he  is  simply  stating  that  to  him,  here  and  now,  at  this 
particular  moment  of  his  life,  and  in  the  particular  state  of  mind  in 
which  he  happens  to  be,  the  opinion  which  he  has  announced 
appears  to  be  the  true  one.  He  does  not  guarantee  its  continuing  so 
to  appear  even  to  himself  at  every  future  moment ;  if  he  is  driven  to 
acknowledge  some  one  else's  argument  to  be  convincing,  he  can 
always  answer,  the  truth  Z  which  this  man  teaches,  has  up  to  this 
moment  been  unrecognised,  yet  all  the  same  if  it  is  truth  it  has 
been  so  always  and  been  always  valid;  and  where  is  our  security 
that  some  third  person  may  not  hereafter  discover  and  demonstrate  a 
new  truth  to  upset  Z  in  its  turn,  which-  at  the  present  moment, 
though  it  already  holds  good,  is  neither  recognised  nor  capable  of 
being  either  apprehended  or  proved. 

These  questions  are  independent  of  the  relation  of  our  knowledge 
to  an  object  outside  itself;  they  concern  -the  ground  of  certainty 
generally,  and  our  right  to  the  confidence  we  repose  in  the  truth  of 
any  thought  in  our  minds;  in  this  view  we  reserve  them  for  con- 
sideration later.  But  apart  from  this  the  arguments  of  Sextus  involve 
at  once  a  prejudice  and  a  fallacy;  the  prejudice  of  the  existence  of 
that  World  in  itself  with  which  knowledge  was  contrasted,  a  pre- 
judice which  may  be  just  or  the  contrary — that  cannot  be  decided 
here— tfce  fallacy  that  the  conception  of  a  knowledge  which  appre- 
hends things  not  as  they  are  \nown  but  as  they  are,  means  anything 


CHAPTER  i.j       Asstimption  in  '  only  Phenomena!  431 

intelligible  at  all,  as  to  the  possession  or  non-possession  of  which  it 
is  possible  to  raise  a  controversy;  whereas  the  truth  is  that  upon  this 
at  least  thought  is  perfectly  clear  and  at  one  with  itself,  that  know- 
ledge under  whatever  form  can  never  be  things  in  themselves  but  only 
represent  them. 

312.  There  will  be  a  disposition  to  express  this  contention  in  the 
form  that  we  only  know  phenomena,  and  not  the  essence  of  things  in 
themselves,  and  so  stated  to  recognise  it  as  the  primary  truth  of  every 
theory  of  cognition.  I  avoid  that  particular  form  of  statement  be- 
cause it  still  contains  a  prejudice  which  I  should  wish  to  see  aban- 
doned. The  actual  assumption  indeed  of  the  existence  of  this  world 
of  things  which  is  given  by  the  categorical  form  of  the  proposition 
might  be  avoided  by  transforming  it  into  the  hypothetical:  ^"things 
exist  knowledge  apprehends  only  their  appearance,  not  their  essence, 
But  even  then  the  proposition  plainly  carries  the  idea  of  a  thwarted  pur- 
pose. That f  only '  implies  that  our  knowledge  which  was  intended  by 
rights  for  the  apprehension  of  the  higher,  the  essence  of  things,  has 
to  be  content  with  the  lower,  the  phenomenon.  Such  a  valuation  is 
once  more  a  prejudice,  it  may  be  legitimate,  it  may  be  not  legitimate, 
as  the  further  progress  of  Science  may  decide  which  we  are  not  here 
in  a  position  to  anticipate.  But  we  can  see  at  once  that  it  is  an 
arbitrary  proceeding  to  place  knowledge  in  the  position  of  a  means 
which  is  not  adequate  to  its  supposed  end  of  apprehending  things  as 
they  are.  And  we  may  at  once  pronounce  an  opposite  point  of 
view  to  be  conceivable,  which  should  regard  things  as  mere  means  to 
produce  in  us  in  all  its  details  the  spectacle  of  the  ideal  world.  If 
this  were  so  we  should  not  indeed  know  things  as  they  are  but  we 
should  not  therefore  fail  of  any  end  or  aim;  in  the  appearances 
which  things  present  to  us  would  reside  then  that  element  of  higher 
dignity  and  value  %vhich  we  sought  to  indicate  by  the  name  of 
essence ;  and  in  the  discovery  of  the  purport,  the  connexion  and 
the  laws  which  govern  this  inner  world  of  phenomena,  the  know- 
ledge of  truth  would  lie  not  indeed  exclusively  but  pre-eminently, 
and  at  least  as  truly  as  in  that  which  we  are  now  so  painfully  anxious 
to  arrive  at,  the  apprehension  of  that  which  must  always  remain 
outside  our  own  and  every  other  intelligence,  the  system  of  means 
through  which  the  series  of  phenomena  is  called  into  existence  within 
us.  But  to  continue  this  discussion  further  would  be  to  overstep 
the  limits  of  my  undertaking.  I  repeat  once  more  what  I  desire 
the  reader  to  understand  this  to  be ;  let  us  leave  entirely  out  of  the 
question  the  opposition  between  our  wdrld  of  ideas  ^  and  a  world  of 


43 2  On  Scepticism 

things ;  let  us  look  upon  the  former  alone  as  the  material  we  have 
to  deal  with;  and  let  us  endeavour  to  ascertain  where  within  this 
world  the  primary  fixed  points  of  certainty  are  to  be  found,  and 
how  it  may  be  possible  to  communicate  a  like  certainty  through  the 
medium  of  these  to  other  ideas  which  do  not  in  themselves  equally 
possess  it.  By  following  certain  circuitous  paths  which  will  be  found 
to  be  no  deviation  from  our  proper  route,  we  may  perhaps  arrive  at 
clearness  on  this  subject. 


CHAPTER   II. 

The    World  of  Ideas. 

813.  THE  problem  which  we  have  set  before  us  is  one  which 
ancient  philosophy  long  ago  declared  again  and  again  to  be  in- 
soluble. That  all  is  in  flux  was  the  familiar  doctrine  of  Heraclitus, 
a  doctrine  however  of  which  it  is  difficult  to  determine  the  precise 
significance.  That  it  was  understood  in  the  half  pathetic  sense  of  a 
lamentation  over  the  rapidity  of  change  appears  in  the  heightened 
form  subsequently  given  to  his  saying  that  it  is  impossible  to  cross 
the  same  river  twice — '  it  is  impossible/  it  was  added,  '  even  once/ 
But  against  the  testimony  of  observation  to  the  transitoriness  of 
things  the  most  ordinary  experience  might  have  set  counter  ex- 
amples of  duration  through  incalculable  periods  of  time ;  philo- 
sophical reflexion  could  only  have  universalised  the  former  set  of 
experiences  into  the  doctrine  cited  by  establishing  in  opposition  to 
superficial  appearances,  that  the  latter  also  do  but  veil  a  slow  process 
of  change  to  which  in  fact  they  are  always  subject.  We  do  not 
know  how  far  this  actually  took  place  and  whether  these  specu- 
lations passed  over  without  notice  the  circumstance  that  the  differ- 
ences in  the  speed  of  one  set  of  changes  and  another  at  once 
introduce  into  the  play  of  phenomena  a  contrast  between  the 
relatively  fixed  and  the  more  transitory  which  might  be  turned  to 
fruitful  account.  Once  more,  that  nothing  can  wholly  withstand 
agencies  of  change  operating  from  without,  that  everything  therefore 
must  be  susceptible  of  change,  is  a  conviction  too  easily  derived  from 
the  experience  of  every-day  life  to  have  needed  a  philosophy  to 
discover  it  But  it  remains  doubtful  how  far  Heraclitus  passed 
beyond  this,  and  taught  that  there  are  changes  in  all  things  springing 
from  causes  in  their  own  nature  and  not  merely  occasioned  by 
outside  influences,  and  whether  he  taught  this  simply  as  a  fact  of 
experience,  or  whether  he  held  continual  movement  to  be  the  con- 
dition of  the  possibility  of  all  natural  existence,  and  that  stable 
equilibrium  and  permanence  were  impossible. 

rf 


434  The  World  of  Ideas. 

There  is  much  to  lend  probability  to  a  view  which  should  credit 
him  with  this  more  advanced  conception,  but  the  question  can  as 
little  be  certainly  decided  as  the  more  important  one  what  precisely 
is  to  be  understood  by  the  '  all '  to  which  he  ascribed  this  ceaseless 
mutability.  The  expression  included  beyond  question  the  things  of 
sense ;  in  fact  the  very  starting-point  of  the  doctrine  could  have 
been  found  nowhere  else  but  in  the  changing  combinations  of  sensible 
qualities  and  relations.  But  did  it  include  at  the  same  time  the 
content  of  the  ideas  by  means  of  which  we  think  this  world  of  sense  ? 
Was  it  intended  that  not  only  all  that  is  real  but  all  that  can  be 
thought  as  well  is  subject  to  this  eternal  flux  ?  I  doubt  if  Heraclitus 
held  this  latter  opinion ;  the  universal  instability  of  all  determinations 
of  thought  would  of  course  render  all  enquiry  and  all  affirmation  im- 
possible. We  may  however  assume  from  the  lively  picture  which 
Plato  draws  in  the  Theaetetus  of  the  later  activity  of  the  school,  that 
they  at  all  events  had  no  hesitation  in  giving  this  extension  to  their 
master's  doctrine. 

At  this  point  it  is  taken  up  by  the  Sophists.  I  do  not  mean  that 
section  which  under  the  leadership  of  Protagoras  acknowledged  only 
the  subjective  validity  of  every  perception  for  the  person  who  ex- 
periences it,  I  mean  those  who,  disciplined  in  the  Eleatic  dialectic,  set 
themselves  to  demonstrate  that  every  conception  signifies  at  once 
what  it  does  mean  and  what  it  does  not  mean.  This  contention  was 
met,  principally  in  the  field  of  Ethics,  where  it  produced  its  most  per- 
nicious effects,  by  the  sound  instinct  and  sense  of  truth  of  Socrates, 
who  called  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  conceptions  of  good  and 
bad,  just  and  unjust,  are  fixed  and  unchanging,  and  cannot  be  deter- 
mined now  one  way  and  now  another  at  the  pleasure  of  individuals, 
but  that  they  have  to  be  accepted  as  permanent  and  self-identical 
conceptions  to  which  everyone  has  simply  to  subordinate  his  own  ideas 
on  these  subjects.  Plato  followed,  at  one  with  these  aims  of  his 
master,  but  impelled  by  more  many-sided  motives,  and  expanded  the 
convictions  received  from  Socrates  into  his  own  doctrine  of  Ideas,  a 
first  and  most  characteristic  attempt  to  turn  to  account  the  truth 
which  belongs  to  the  world  of  our  ideas  in  itself,  without  regard  to 
its  agreement  with  an  assumed  reality  of  things  outside  its  borders. 
The  philosophical  efforts  of  antiquity  have  the  attraction  of  exhibiting 
in  full  detail  the  movements,  the  struggles,  and  the  errors  of  thought, 
into  which  every  individual  still  falls  in  the  course  of  his  development, 
and  which  notwithstanding  the  culture  of  our  own  day  has  no  longer  the 
patience  to  follow  up  and  investigate.  I  shall  permit  myself  to  enter 


CHAPTER II]     The  'Ideas'  as  'Objective  Contents'  435 

therefore  into  a  review  of  this  doctrine  of  Plato,  approaching  it  at 
various  points  which  seem  pertinent  to  our  present  enquiry. 

314.  The  Platonic  expression  Idea1  is  usually  rendered  Universal 
conception2,  and  so  far  approximately  that  there  are  Ideas,  according 
to  Plato,  of  everything  which  can  be  thought  in  a  universal  form, 
apart  from  the  particular  perceptions  in  which  it  is  presented.  At 
the  same  time  it  is  only  for  the  purposes  of  a  later  set  of  conceptions 
which  we  shall  meet  with  presently,  that  it  becomes  important  to  be 
able  to  think  of  the  ideally  apprehended  content3  as  something  com- 
mon to  many  individual  contents,  that  is  as  a  universal.  What  Is 
essential  here  at  the  outset  is  not  so  much  that  it  can  be  separated 
from  different  particular  instances  which  contain  it,  as  that  it  has  been 
distinguished  as  a  content  with  a  meaning  of  its  own  which  we  pre- 
sent to  ourselves,  from  a  mere  affection  which  we  experience.  In  the 
latter  sense  it  might  have  been  involved  by  the  Heraclittc  or  pseudo- 
Heraclitic  doctrine  in  its  ceaseless  flux  of  events,  of  which  .dach  one  only 
is  in  the  moment  in  which  it  occurs,  and  no  one  has  an  abiding 
habitation  or  significance  in  the  world,  because  there  is  no  reason 
why  having  once  occurred  it  need  ever  recur  again  in  identically  the 
same  form.  The  former  conception  on  the  contrary  turns  the  mere 
affection  of  our  sensibility  into  an  independent  objective4  content 
whose  significance  once  is  its  significance  once  for  all,  and  whose 
relations  to  other  contents  have  an  eternal  and  self-identical  validity  even 
if  neither  it  nor  they  should  ever  be  repeated  in  actual  perception, 

I  have  had  occasion  to  explain  my  meaning  here  in  an  earlier  part 
of  this  work  (p.  1 1  ff.).  Perception  shows  us  the  things  of  sense  under- 
going changes  in  their  qualities.  But  while  black  becomes  white  and 
sweet  sour,  it  is  not  blackness  itself  which  passes  into  whiteness,  nor 
does  sweetness  become  sourness ;  what  happens  is  that  these  several 
qualities,  each  remaining  eternally  identical  with  itself,  succeed  each 
other  in  the  thing,  and  the  conceptions  through  which  we  think  the 
things  have  themselves  no  part  in  the  mutability  which  we  attribute 
on  account  of  their  changes  to  the  things  of  which  the  qualities  are 
the  predicates — and  even  he  who  attempted  to  deny  this  would  be 
affirming  it  against  his  will,  for  he  could  not  represent  sweetness  as 
passing  into  sourness,  without  separating  the  one  property  from  the 
other,  and  determining  the  first  for  his  own  thought  in  an  idea  which 
will  always  mean  something  different  from  the  second  into  which  it  is 

1  [f  Idee,*  Where  the  term  *  Idea '  represents  '  Idee '  and  not  *  Vorstellung*  it  is 
printed  with  a  capital  '  U]  •  '  a-.  ['  Allgemeinbegriff.'] 

8  ['Inhalt.']      '  *.[v.  Bookl.  p.  n.] 

F  f  2 


436  The  World  of  Ideas.  EBOOKIII. 

supposed  to  have  changed.  It  is  a  very  simple  and  unpretending, 
but  yet  a  very  important  thought  to  which  Plato  here  gives  expression 
for  the  first  time.  The  continual  change  which  goes  on  in  the 
external  world  may  affect  us  like  a  restless  whirling  eddy,  bewildering 
our  Intelligence,  yet  it  is  not  without  a  pervading  truth.  Whatever 
mutability  the  things  may  display,  that  which  they  are  at  each  moment 
they  are  by  a  transient  participation  in  conceptions  which  are  not 
transient  but  for  ever  identical  and  constant,  and  which  taken  to- 
gether constitute  an  unchangeable  system  of  thought,  and  form  the 
first  adequate  and  solid  beginnings  of  a  permanent  knowledge. 

For  it  was  one  of  the  conclusions  at  which  we  arrived  before1,  that 
to  the  making  of  this  earliest  immediate  stock  of  knowledge  there  con- 
tribute not  merely  the  separate  unity  of  each  conception  in  itself,  nor 
again  simply  the  fact  of  a  mere  uniform  contrast  between  this  and  all 
other  conceptions,  but  also  those  graduated  relations  of  resemblance 
and  affinity  in  which  different  conceptions  stand  to  each  other.  If  the 
white  becomes  black  and  the  sweet  sour  they  do  not  merely  become 
different  in  the  abstract,  but  pass  over  from  the  domain  of  the  one 
conception  in  which  they  participated  before  into  that  of  another  which 
is  separated  from  the  first  by  a  fixed  and  determinate  degree  of  con- 
trast, a  contrast  stronger  for  example  than  that  which  obtains  between 
white  and  yellow,  and  altogether  incommensurable  with  that  absolute 
gulf  of  separation  which  exists  between  white  and  sour. 

815.  I  refer  to  these  simple  examples  once  more  in  order  to  make 
it  clear  how  a  knowledge  may  be  possible  the  truth  of  which  is  wholly 
independent  of  the  question  of  Scepticism  as  to  its  agreement  with  a 
world  of  things  outside  it.  If  the  current  of  the  outer  world  had 
brought  before  us  only  once  in  a  transient  appearance  the  perception 
of  two  colours  or  two  sounds,  our  thought  would  immediately  separate 
them  from  the  moment  of  time  at  which  they  appeared,  and  fix  them 
and  their  affinities  and  their  contrasts  as  an  abiding  object  of  inner 
contemplation,  no  matter  whether  they  were  ever  presented  to  us 
again  in  actual  experience  or  not.  Again  supposing  we  could  never 
learn  how  these  ideas  are  able  to  appear  as  predicates  in  things,  and 
in  what  that  which  we  have  called  the  participation  of  things  in  them 
exactly  consists,  a  question  would  indeed  be  left  unanswered  which 
might  in  the  course  of  our  reflexions  prove  important,  but  still  the 
certain  knowledge  would  remain  to  us  undisturbed  that  the  series  of 
colours  and  the  scale  of  musical  tones  themselves  are  each  a  con- 
nected whole  with  fixed  laws,  and  that  in  regard  to  the  relation  of  the 
1  [Cp.p.  34  ff.] 


CHAPTER  n.]      Knowledge  of 'Ideas';  its  limits.  437 

members  to  each  other,  eternally  valid  true  propositions  are  vitally 
opposed  to  eternally  invalid  false  ones.  And  finally  the  question 
whether  after  all  colours  in  themselves  and  tones  in  themselves  are 
not  different  from  what  they  appear  to  us,  is  one  which  no  one  will  care 
to  raise  again.  Or  rather  we  do  meet  with  it  again  in  the  confused 
notion  that  sounds  are  in  fact  merely  vibrations  of  the  air,  colours 
merely  quiverings  of  the  ether,  and  it  is  only  to  us  that  they  appear 
in  the  form  of  the  subjective  feelings  which  we  know.  It  is  un- 
necessary to  enlarge  over  again  on  the  consideration  that  these 
feelings  do  not  cease  to  be  real,  and  are  not  got  rid  of  and  banished 
out  of  existence  as  intruders,  because  we  have  discovered  certain 
external  causes  not  resembling  them,  which  are  the  occasions  of  their 
making  their  appearance  to  us.  Even  if  these  vibrations  of  external 
media  appeared  to  differently  constituted  beings  in  the  form  of  modes 
of  sensation  entirely  unknown  to  us,  still  the  colouring  and  tones  which 
we;  see  and  hear,  would  constitute  for  us,  when  once 'we  have  ex- 
perienced them,  a  secure  treasure  of  knowledge  with  a  validity  and  an 
orderly  connexion  of  its  own.  The  feelings  of  such  other  beings 
would  remain  unknown  to  us  and  ours  to  them,  but  this  would  only 
mean  that  we  have  not  all  truths  for  our  portion,  but  that  what  we  do 
possess  we  possess  as  truths  in  virtue  of  the  identity  of  every  such 
content  of  perception  with  itself,  and  of  the  constancy  of  identical 
relations  which  obtain  between  different  contents.  Thus  we  readily 
understand  the  significance  of  Plato's  endeavour  to  bind  together  the 
predicates  which  are  found  in  the  things  of  the  external  world  in 
continual  change,  into  a  determinate  and  articulated  whole,  and  how 
he  saw  in  this  world  of  Ideas  the  true  beginnings  of  certain  know- 
ledge ;  for  the  eternal  relations  which  subsist  between  different  Ideas, 
and  through  which  some  are  capable  of  association  with  each  other 
and  others  exclude  each  other,  form  at  all  events  the  limits  within  which 
what  is  to  be  possible  in  experience  falls ;  the  further  question  what  is 
real  in  it,  and  how  things  manage  to  have  Ideas  for  their  predicates, 
appeared  to  Plato  not  to  be  the  primary  question,  and  was  for  the 
time  reserved. 

818.  There  is  one  wide-reaching  difficulty  connected  with  the  first- 
named  aspect  of  this  question.  How  precisely  are  we  to  conceive 
colours  when  they  are  not  seen,  or  tones  and  their  differences  when  the 
former  are  not  heard  and  the  latter  not  apprehended  by  comparison? 
Are  we  to  say  that  they  are  nothing  or  that  they  do  not  exist,  or  are 
we  still  to  attribute  to  them  some  predicate  which  we  can  hardly 
define,  some  kind  of  being  or  reality?  We  shall  not  be  disposed 


438  The  World  of  Ideas.  [BOOK  IIL 

at  first  to  consider  them  to  be  nothing  at  all ;  for  as  long  as  we  fix 
them  in  our  thoughts,  as  at  present  in  searching  for  an  answer  to  this 
very  question,  every  tone  and  every  colour  is  a  determinate  content 
distinguishable  from  every  other,  and  so  a  something  and  not  a  nothing. 
Still  this  decision  becomes  doubtful  when  we  consider  the  answer  which 
we  feel  ourselves  compelled  to  give  to  the  second  part  of  the  question. 
In  regard  to  things  we  do  imagine  ourselves,  dimly  enough,  to  know 
wherein  their  being  consists  even  when  they  are  objects  for  no  intelli- 
gence, but  exist  purely  for  themselves ;  but  what  is  meant  by  a  tone 
when  it  is  heard  by  no  ear  and  when  even  the  silent  idea  of  its  sound  is 
not  called  up  by  any  mind,  we  can  no  more  say  than  what  a  pain  is 
when  no  one  is  hurt  by  it.  But  how  can  that  which  is  not  either 
in  itself  or  in  our  consciousness,  be.  any  longer  anything  at  all  or 
be  distinguished  from  anything  else  ?  Still  this  conclusion  again  we 
hesitate  to  affirm.  There  is  clearly  in  our  first  conclusion,  speaking 
quite  generally,  a  certain  element  of  affirmation,  which  is  not  entirely 
to  be  cancelled  by  the  denial  contained  in  the  second.  Perhaps  it- 
may  appear  to  us  a  way  out  of  the  difficulty  to  turn  the  categorical 
form  of  our  judgment  into  a  hypothetical;  two  sounds  which  are 
neither  heard  nor  imagined  are  not  indeed  actually  anything,  and 
stand  in  no  actual  relations,  but  they  will  always  be  something  and 
the  one  will  be  different  from  the  other  and  stand  in  a  definite 
relation  of  contrast  to  it,  if  they  are  heard  or  imagined.  Yet  even 
this  does  not  at  once  satisfy  us,  for  in  order  even  to  imagine  how  the 
notes  a  and  b  can  be  subject  to  this  varied  fortune  of  being  presented 
to  imagination  at  one  time  and  not  so  presented  at  another,  and  then 
how  it  happens  that  when  they  are  presented  in  experience  the 
relation  Z  is  necessarily  thought  along  with  them,  whereas  whenever 
certain  other  sounds  are  presented,  they  are  no  less  necessarily 
accompanied  by  a  different  relation  Z1,— in  order  to  imagine  this  we 
are  constrained  to  ascribe  to  them  existence  and  definite  existence,  at 
a  time  when  according  to  this  view  they  did  not  in  fact  exist  at  all; 
for  so  alone  can  we  explain  their  subsequent  existence  and  the  definite 
form  which  their  relations  then  assumed. 

I  will  not  pursue  these  refinements  further,  but  will  conclude  with  the 
following  remarks.  We  have  undoubtedly  a  conception  of  affirmation 
or  <  position'  in  an  extremely  general  sense,  which  meets  us  in  various 
fields  of  enquiry,  and  for  which  languages,  dealing  as  they  do  in 
their  early  stages  with  highly  complex  and  concrete  notions,  and  not 
with  the  simplest  elements  of  thought,  have  commonly  no  abstract 
term  which  expresses  it  with  the  requisite  purity.  But  it  would  not  be 


CHAPTER  IT.]  Meanings  of  Reality.  439 

wise  to  Invent  a  technical  term  to  represent  it,  the  meaning  of  which 
would  always  be  doubtful,  because  it  could  never  come  naturally  to 
the  lips  or  to  the  thoughts  of  any  one  ;  the  very  term '  position9  which 
is  frequently  used  for  it  suggests  by  its  etymological  form  the  entirely 
alien  sense  of  an  act,  or  operation  of  establishing1,  to  the  execution  of 
which  that  state  of  affirmation  which  we  wish  to  express  then  seems 
to  owe  its  being.  It  is  best  however  to  keep  to  ordinary  speech,  and 
select  a  word  which  can  be  shown  to  express  in  common  usage,  ap- 
proximately at  all  events  and  unmistakeably,  the  thought  with  which 
we  are  concerned.  We  may  express  it  in  our  own  language  by  the 
term  Reality2.  For3  we  call  a  thing  Real4  which  is,  in  contradistinction 
to  another  which  is  not ;  an  event  Real  which  occurs  or  has  occurred, 
in  contradistinction  to  that  which  does  not  occur;  a  relation  Real 
which  obtains,  as  opposed  to"  one  which  does  not  obtain ;  lastly  we 
call  a  proposition  Really  true  which  holds  or  is  valid  as  opposed  to 
one  of  which  the  validity  is  still  doubtful.  This  use  of  language 
is  intelligible ;  it  shows  that  when  we  call  anything  Real,  we  mean 
always  to  affirm  it,  though  in  different  senses  according  to  the  dif- 
ferent forms  which  it  assumes,  but  one  or  other  of  which  it  must 
necessarily  assume,  and  of  which  no  one  is  reducible  to  or  contained 
in  the  other.  For  we  never  can  get  an  Event  out  of  simple  Being, 
the  reality  which  belongs  to  Things,  namely  Being  or  Existence> 
never  belongs  to  Events — they  do  not  exist  but  occur  \  again  a  Pro- 
position neither  exists  like  things  nor  occurs  like  events;  that  its 
meaning  even  obtains  like  a  relation,  can  only  be  said  if  the  things 
exist  of  which  it  predicates  a  relation ;  in  itself,  apart  from  all  "appli- 
cations which  may  be  made  of  it,  the  reality  of  a  proposition  means 
that  it  holds  or  is  valid  and  that  its  opposite  does  not  hold. 

Now  misunderstandings  must  always  arise,  when  under  the  per- 
suasion that  the  object  which  we  are  considering  must  have  some 
sort  of  reality  or  affirmation  proper  to  it,  we  endeavour  to  attribute  to 
it  not  that  kind  of  reality  which  is  appropriate  to  it,  but  a  different 
kind  which  is  alien  to  it.  Then  arises  the  conflict  just  noticed 
between  the  conviction  on  the  one  hand  that  we  are  right  in  ascribing 
to  it  some  sort  of  reality,  and  on  the  other  that  the  particular  form  of 
reality  to  which  our  misconception  has  brought  us  is  inadmissible. 

Now  Ideas,  in  so  far  as  they  are  present  in  our  minds,  possess 
reality  in  the  sense  of  an  Event,—they  occur  in  us :  for  as  utterances 

*  ['Setzrnig.']  2  [' Wirklichkeit.'] 

s  [Cp.  £  Metaphysic,'  p.  i,  and  for  ' Objectivitat '  contrasted  with  different  forms  of 
•  Wirklichkeit '  see  above,  p.  1 1  ff.]  *  ['  Wirklich.'] 


440  The  World  of  Ideas.  CBOOKIII. 

of  an  activity  of  presentation  they  are  never  a  Being  at  rest  but  a 
continual  Becoming ;  their  content  on  the  other  hand,  so  far  as  we 
regard  it  in  abstraction  from  the  mental  activity  which  we  direct  to  it, 
can  no  longer  be  said  to  occur,  though  neither  again  does  it  exist  as 
things  exist ,  we  can  only  say  that  it  possesses  Validity. 

And  finally  we  must  not  ask  what  in  its  turn  is  meant  by  Validity, 
with  any  idea  that  the  meaning  which  the  word  conveys  clearly  to  us 
can  be  deduced  from  some  different  conception;  as  if,  for  example, 
it  were  possible  to  find  certain  conditions  by  the  operation  of  which 
either  the  Being  which  belongs  to  things  could  be  so  modified  and 
attenuated,  or  the  momentary  act  of  Becoming  or  occurring,  in  which 
the  transient  reality  of  ideas  regarded  as  excitations  of  our  conscious- 
ness consists,  could  receive  such  fixity  and  independent  existence,  as 
that  both  the  one  and  the  other  in  different  ways  might  pass 
into  this  conception  of  Validity,  which  at  once  excludes  the  substance 
of  the  valid  assertion  from  the  reality  of  actual  beings  and  implies  its 
independence  of  human  thought  As  little  as  we  can  say  how  It 
happens  that  anything  u  or  occurs,  so  little  can  we  explain  how  it 
comes  about  that  a  truth  has  Validity;  the  latter  conception  has  to  be 
regarded  as  much  as  the  former  as  ultimate  and  underivable,  a  con- 
ception of  which  everyone  may  know  what  he  means  by  it,  but  which 
cannot  be  constructed  out  of  any  constituent  elements  which  do  not 
already  contain  it. 

317.  From  this  point  of  view  some  light  I  think  is  thrown  on  a 
surprising  statement  which  is  handed  down  to  us  in  the  history  of 
Philosophy.  Plato,  we  are  told,  ascribed  to  the  Ideas  of  which  he  had 
achieved  the  conception  an  existence  apart  from  things,  and  yet,  as 
these  same  critics  tell  us,  of  like  kind  with  the  existence  of  things. 
'  It  is  strange  how  peacefully  the  traditional  admiration  of  the  pro- 
fundity of  Plato  acquiesces  in  the  ascription  to  him  of  so  absurd  an 
opinion ;  we  should  have  to  abandon  our  admiration  of  him  if  this 
really  was  the  doctrine  that  he  taught,  and  not  rather  a  serious  mis- 
understanding to  which  in  a  quite  intelligible  and  pardonable  way  it 
has  laid  itself  open.  The  expression  of  philosophical  ideas  is  de- 
pendent upon  the  capabilities  of  each  language,  and  it  is  hardly 
possible^  in  giving  utterance  to  our  meaning,  to  avoid  using  words 
which  language  has  coined  to  express  a  cognate  thought  only  which 
is  not  our  real  meaning  at  all.  And  this  is  pre-eminently  the  case  when 
a  new  field  is  being  opened  out,  and  the  necessity  of  distinguishing 
the  precise  meaning  intended  from  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word 
is  as  yet  little  felt.  This  is  I  think  the  explanation  of  the  misuntjer- 


CHAPTER  ii. j    The  ^  I deds*  why  Eternal  and  Separate.     441 

standing  In  question.  The  truth  which  Plato  intended  to  teach  is  no 
other  than  that  which  we  have  just  been  expounding,  that  is  to  say,  the 
validity  of  truths  as  such3  apart  from  the  question  whether  they  can  be 
established  in  relation  to  any  object  in  the  external  world,  as  its  mode 
of  being  or  not;  the  eternally  self-identical  significance  of  Ideas, 
which  always  are  what  they  are,  no  matter  whether  or  no  there  are 
things  which  by  participation  in  them  make  them  manifest  in  this 
external  world,  or  whether  there  are  spirits  which  by  thinking  them, 
give  them  the  reality  of  a  mental  event.  But  the  Greek  language  then 
as  afterwards  was  wanting  in  an  expression  for  this  conception  of 
Validity  as  a  form  of  Reality  not  including  Being  or  Existence ;  and 
this  very  expression  Being  came,  often  indeed  quite  harmlessly,  but  in 
this  instance  with  momentous  consequences,  to  fill  the  place. 

Every  possible  content  of  thought,  regarded  as  an  individual  unity, 
distinct  and  separate  from  others,  all  that  class  of  things  for  whicli 
the  language  of  the  School  philosophy  in  later  times  invented  the  not 
inappropriate  name  of  Res  rafioms1  was  to  the  Greek  a  Being  (bv  or 
ova-La) ;  and  if  the  distinction  between  a  really  valid  truth  and  a  pre- 
tended truth  came  in  question  the  former  was  distinguished  as  ovras 
w.  The  language  of  ancient  Greece  never  found  any  term  to 
express  the  reality  of  simple  Validity  as  distinguished  from  the  reality 
of  Being,  and  this  constant  confusion  has  prejudiced  the  clearness  of 
the  Platonic  phraseology. 

318.  We  may  easily  see  that  everything  Plato  says  of  the  Ideas 
presents  itself  when  understood  in  the  manner  so  explained  as  natural 
and  necessary,  and  that  the  various  devices  to  which  he  resorts  in 
setting  forth  their  nature  have  this  purpose  and  no  other,  to  exhaust 
the  conception  for  which  no  adequate  term  could  be  found,  by  the 
help  of  a  variety  of  expressions  limiting  and  supplementing  each  other. 
Eternal,  without  beginning,  and  imperishable  (aidw,  ayeVwjra,  av&\e8pa) 
the  Ideas  could  not  but  be  named  in  the  presence  of  the  flux  of 
Hcraclitus,  which  seemed  in  danger  of  sweeping  them  away  along 
•with  the  sense-world  in  its  stream.  The  reality  of  Being  indeed  they 
have  or  have  riot,  according  as  transient  things  of  sense  are  clothed 
with  them  or  not ;  but  that  reality  which  consists  in  Validity,  which  is 
a  reality  all  their  own,  remains  untouched  by  all  this  change.  Their 
independence  of  time,  when  brought  into  comparison  with  that  which 
comes  and  goes  in  time,  would  hardly  be  otherwise  expressed  than  by 
this  predicate  of  eternity  which  at  once  partakes  of  time  and  denies 
its  power,  just  in  the  same  way  as  we  should  most  easily  recognise 
1  Is  Gedankending.'] 


442  The  World  of  Ideas.  '  [BOOK  in. 

that  which  has  no  validity  and  could  have  no  validity  in  itself  by  the 
fact  of  its  never  occurring  at  any  moment  of  time. 

Again,  we  understand  the  ideas  being  called  separable  or  separate 
from  things  (x^s  ™"  &VT&V),  first  because  the  image  (eldos)  of  their 
content  can  be  still  called  up  to  memory  after  the  things  which  origin- 
ally occasioned  its  appearance  in  us  have  vanished  from  real  existence, 
and  next,  because  the  content  is  taken  to  include  what  can  be  appre- 
hended in  a  universal  form,  and  remains  the  same  in  different  external 
manifestations,  so  as  to  be  independent  of  the  mode  in  which  it  is 
realised  to  sense  in  any  particular  instance. 

But  it  was  not  Plato's  intention  to  represent  the  ideas  as  inde- 
pendent merely  of  things  while  still  depending  for  their  special  mode 
of  reality  upon  the  rnind  which  thinks  them.  Reality  of  Existence  it 
is  true  they  enjoy  only  in  the  moment  in  which  they  become,  in  the 
character  of  objects  or  creations  of  an  act  of  presentation  now  actually 
occurring,  members  of  this  changing  world  of  Being  and  Becoming ; 
but  on  the  other  hand  we  all  feel  certain  in  the  moment  in  which  we 
think  any  truth,  that  we  have  not  created  it  for  the  first  lime  but 
merely  recognised  it ;  it  was  valid  before  we  thought  about  it  and  will 
continue  so  without  regard  to  any  existence  of  whatever  kind,  of 
things  or  of  us,  whether  or  not  it  ever  finds  manifestation  in  the  reality 
of  Existence,  or  a  place  as  an  object  of  knowledge  in  the  reality  of  a 
Thought.  This  is  what  we  all  believe  with  regard  to  truth  when  we 
set  out  to  search  for  it,  and  it  may  be  lament  over  its  inaccessibility 
at  least  to  any  form  r  of  human  knowledge;  the  truth  which  is  never 
apprehended  by  us  is  valid  no  whit  less  than  that  small  fraction  of  it 
which  finds  its  way  into  our  intelligence. 

The  independent  validity  of  the  Ideas  Plato  emphasises  again  in  a 
somewhat  different  form,  in  answer  to  the  doctrine  of  Protagoras, 
rescuing  them  in  their  character  of  being  in  themselves  that  which 
they  are  (aura  m&  aura  6Wa)  from  the  relativity  in  which  the  famous 
dictum  of  that  Sophist  was  in  danger  of  involving  them.  Even  granting 
that  his  doctrine  has  its  truth  so  long  as  it  is  confined  to  the  impres- 
sions of  sense,  and  that  viewed  in  this  relation  Plato's  opposition  to  it 
rests  upon  a  misunderstanding,  granting  that  is  to  say  that  my  sensa- 
tion is  as  true  for  me  as  yours  which  differs  from  it  is  for  you,  Plato 
would  still  be  right  in  insisting  that  for  neither  of  us  could  the  sensation 
be  possible  at  all,  unless  that  which  we  felt  in  the  sensation  whatever 
it  be,  red  or  blue,  sweet  or  bitter,  had  a  definite  and  constant  signi- 
ficance of  its  own,  as  a  member  of  a  world  of  Ideas.  This  world  of 
Ideas  is  the  permanent  and  inexhaustible  treasure-house  from  which 


CHAPTER  II.]  The  VOrjTO?  TOTTO?,  44  J 

the  things  of  the  external  world  draw  all  the  diverse  and  shifting 
attributes  they  wear,  and  the  mind  the  varying  series  of  its  experi- 
ences; and  a  sensation  or  idea  whose  content  has  no  fixed  and  deter- 
minate place,  no  fixed  relations  of  affinity  or  difference  in  the  universal 
world  of  thought,  but  stands  in  complete  isolation,  bare  of  all  relations 
to  anything  in  that  world,  the  possession  of  a  single  individual  mind 
alone,  is  in  fact  an  impossibility. 

While  Plato  by  thus  describing  the  Ideas,  takes  security  for  their 
independent  validity,  he  has  at  the  same  time  abundantly  provided 
against  the  confusion  of  the  validity  thus  implied  with  that  wholly 
distinct  reality  of  Existence  which  could  only  be  ascribed  to  a  durable 
thing.  When  he  places  the  home  of  the  Ideas  in  a  super-celestial 
world,  a  world  of  pure  intelligence  (voyras,  imepQvpdvtos  roVo*),  when 
again  more  than  this  he  expressly  describes  them  as  having  no  local 
habitation,  such  language  makes  it  abundantly  clear  to  any  one  who 
Understands  the  mind  of  Greek  Antiquity,  that  they  do  not  belong  to 
what  we  call  the  real  world.  To  the  Greek  that  which  is  not  in  Space 
is  not  at  all,  and  when  Plato  relegates  the  Ideas  to  a  home  which  is 
not  in  space,  he  is  not  trying  to  hypostasize  that  which  we  call  their 
mere  validity  into  any  kind  of  real  existence,  but  on  the  contrary  he  is 
plainly  seeking  to  guard  by  anticipation  against  any  such  attempt 
being  made.  Nor  is  it  any  objection  that  the  Ideas  are  called  unities 
(eVaSey,  ftoi/aSe?),  for  there  is  no  occasion  to  interpret  these  titles  from  an 
atomistic  standpoint,  whether  in  the  sense  of  material  indivisibility  or 
of  a  self-identity  resembling  that  of  a  self-conscious  subject.  For  in 
fact  what  constitutes  the  meaning  of  an  Idea,  and  of  a  complex  no  less 
than  of  a  simple  Idea,  is  that  it  manifests  itself  as  a  unity,  unifying  the 
elements  which  cohere  in  it  and  rejecting  that  which  is  alien  to  it. 
Nevertheless  although  these  various  expressions  point  one  and  all  to 
the  fact  that  Plato  never  asserted  the  existence  of  the  Ideas  but  only 
their  external  validity,  he  had  still  no  better  answer  to  make  to  the 
question,  what  then  are  they,  than  to  bring  them  again  under  the 
general  denomination  of  ovcr/a.  Then  the  door  was  opened  to  the 
misunderstanding  which  has  since  widely  spread,  though  .no  one  has 
ever  been  able  to  say  what  the  nature  of  that  existence,  into  which  he 
is  accused  of  having  hypostasized  his  ideas,  precisely  is. 

319.  There  are  two  objections  which  may  be  taken  to  the  view 
here  maintained.  First,  the  use  which  Plato  makes  of  the  Ideas  to 
explain  the  course  of  the  world,  in  which  they  assert  their  influence 
not  merely  as  valid  truths  but  as  operating  forces — this  is  a  point  to 
which  I  shall  come  later;  and  in  the  second  place,  the  attitude  of 


444  The  World  of  Ideas.  [BOOKIII. 

Aristotle.  For  it  is  really  the  very  definite  language  of  Aristotle  which 
has  established  the  doctrine  of  the  reality  of  the  ideas  as  a  dogma  of 
Plato,  whereas  Plato's  own  statements  are  in  no  way  inconsistent  with 
the  other  interpretation  which  we  have  preferred.  It  seems  incredible 
that  the  most  acute  of  Plato's  disciples,  informed  by  personal  inter- 
course with  the  master,  should  have  misunderstood  him  in  a  point 
of  such  serious  moment  as  this.  At  the  same  time  we  are  justified 
by  the  nature  of  his  polemic  not  against  particular  statements  of  Plato 
but  against  the  doctrine  of  Ideas  altogether,  as  well  as  by  many 
details  in  his  criticisms,  in  assuming  that  his  attack  is  in  part  directed 
against  certain  misunderstandings  of  the  Platonic  doctrine  which  had 
gained  hold  in  the  Academy  at  an  early  period.  For  he  could  not 
well  have  challenged  Plato  himself  to  show  where  the  Ideas  are,  when 
Plato  had  said  in  plain  terms  that  they  were  nowhere.  lie  could  not 
have  directed  against  Plato  the  criticism  that  there  must  logically  be 
Ideas  of  products  of  art,  for  one  passage  at  least  is  to  be  found  in  the 
Republic  which  is  entirely  in  agreement  with  that  criticism,  and  how 
far  Plato  was  from  having  overlooked  the  difficulty  there  involved,  is 
evidenced  by  the  opening  of  the  Parmenides,  Finally  as  to  Aristotle's 
objections  to  the  Ideas  that  they  are  superfluous,  bring  mere  copies 
of  individual  objects,  and  the  assumption  from  which  his  elaborate 
analysis  frequently  starts,  that  there  are  as  many  examples  of  every 
Idea  as  there  are  instances  of  its  application  in  reality,  these  are  criti- 
cisms which  do  not  really  apply  to  the  doctrines  of  Plato  himself.  That 
every  Idea  is  what  it  is  once  for  all,  that  what  we  arc  to  understand  by 
it  is  not  an  individual  thing  but  a  universal  comprehending  many  things, 
and  that  all  its  manifestations  are  only  copies  of  this  one  essential  reality, 
is  the  doctrine  which  he  never  abandons,  whatever  obscurity  may  siill 
•attach  to  that  operation  on  the  part  of  the  individual  things,  described 
as  imitation  or  participation,  by  which  they  provide  the  one  Idea  with 
a  countless  number  of  realisations  in  the  world  of  actual  existence. 

The  discussion  therefore  which  fills  the  Xllth  (XIHth)  book  of 
Aristotle's  Metaphysics  and  of  which  the  purport  is  to  exhibit  the 
absurdity  of  attributing  to  the  Idea  a  reality  identical  with  the  reality 
of  actually  existing  things,  I  cannot  regard  as  a  refutation  of  the  pure 
Platonic  doctrine,  and  the  less  so  inasmuch  as  at  the  end  Aristotle 
himself  equally  fails  to  find  a  decisive  and  unambiguous  expression 
for  that  more  appropriate  form  of  reality  which  he  desires,  in  contra- 
distinction to  this,  to  ascribe  to  them*  To  him  the  only  genuine 
ovoria  is  the  individual  thing,  and  there  we  must  certainly  agree  with 
him ;  to  the  individual  thing  alone  belongs  the  reality  of  Existence ; 


CHAPTER  ii.]    Aristotle  s  Universal  is  still  an  ova-ta.        445 

still  for  Aristotle  as  much  as  for  Plato  the  object  of  knowledge  is 
always  the  universal ;  not  only  in  the  sense  that  we  are  incapable  of 
exhausting  the  meaning  of  the  individual  thing,  but  that  so  far  as  we 
investigate  it  In  its  nature  and  its  workings  with  any  prospect  of  a 
result,  we  invariably  proceed  according  to  universal  principles.  But 
Aristotle  is  entirely  at  one  with  his  predecessors,  that  that  which  is 
not,  or  has  no  reality  in  any  sense,  cannot  be  an  object  of  knowledge 
either,  and  so  in  regard  to  the  universal  we  cannot  say  that  it  simply 
is  not,  but  that  in  a  sense  It  is  and  in  a  sense  it  is  not. 

I  do  not  propose  to  enter  into  Aristotle's  further  treatment  of 
this  question  in  detail  I  must  however  remark  that  by  placing  the 
universal  and  the  Idea  within  the  Individual  things  and  not  outside 
them  he  does  not  explain  the  possibility  of  knowledge ;  for  the  mere 
fact  of  the  presence  of  the  Idea  in  one  individual  does  not  entitle  us 
to  transfer  all  the  consequences  which  flow  from  it  to  a  second 
individual  In  which  it  happens  also  to  be  found ;  it  can  only  justify  us 
in  concluding  from  the  doings  of  one  real  thing  to  those  of  another, 
if  it  includes  within  itself  a  number  of  characteristics  so  related  that 
the  appearance  of  any  one  necessarily  implies  the  presence  of  the 
rest.  Such  considerations  would  at  once  conduct  Aristotle  back  to 
the  admission  that  the  Idea  is  certainly  In  a  sense  x^P^  rS)p  OVTCDV; 
but  in  what  sense  it  Is  so  was  impossible  for  him  to  define,  since  lie  no 
more  possessed  than  his  master  did  a  technical  equivalent  for  our  term 
validity;  and  thns  eventually  the  universal  conception  or  Idea  came 
to  be  for  him  also  an  ovo-io,  not  indeed  a  true  or  Trp&n]  ova-ia  but  still 

a  devrepa  ov<ria. 

320.  It  may  appear  to  us  a  strange  spectacle  to  see  two  of  the 
greatest  philosophers  of  antiquity  struggling  with  imperfect  success  to 
arrive  at  clearness  upon  so  simple  a  distinction  as  that  which  we  have 
been  considering.  But  such  a  view  would  do  both  of  them  injustice. 
The  apprehension  of  the  simplest  relations  of  thought  is  not  the 
simplest  act  of  the  faculty  of  thought,  and  the  whole  long  history  of 
philosophy  teaches  how  ready  we  all  are  at  any  moment  to  be  guilty 
of  a  degree  of  obscurity  In  the  application  of  ideas  which  if  reduced 
to  its  simplest  terms  would  appear  to  us  incredible.  Whenever  men 
have  believed  themselves  to  have  discovered  a  principle  which  appears 
to  represent  the  universal  element  in  the  constitution  and  develop- 
ment of  the  real  world,  they  invariably  go  on  to  exalt  It  into  the  posi- 
tion of  an  independent  reality  and  to  represent  it  as  a  pure  form  of 
being,  in  comparison  with  which  the  individual  things  retire  into  a 
position  of  subordinate  and  even  unreal  existence.  I  need  not  even 


446  The  World  of  Ideas.  [BOOKIII. 

refer  to  the  latest  phase  of  German  philosophy  which  aspired  to  set  on 
the  throne  of  the  Platonic  Ideas  the  one  absolute  Idea,  for  the  same 
tendency  is  apparent  enough  in  spheres  of  thought  outside  the  circle 
of  philosophy.  How  often  do  we  hear  in  our  own  day  of  eternal  and 
unchangeable  laws  of  nature  to  which  all  phenomena  and  their 
changes  are  subjected ;  laws  which  would  indeed  cease  to  manifest 
themselves  if  there  were  no  longer  any  things  for  them  to  control,  but 
which  would  even  then  themselves  continue  in  their  eternal  validity 
and  would  revive  with  their  old  effective  power  the  moment  a  new 
object  presented  itself  from  any  quarter  for  them  to  apply  to  ;  nay 
there  is  not  even  wanting  on  occasion,  the  enthronement  of  these 
laws  above  all  existing  realities  in  that  very  super-celestial  habitation 
which  with  Plato  is  the  home  of  the  Ideas.  Nevertheless  those  who 
hold  this  language  would  indignantly  repel  the  imputation  of  ascribing 
to  those  laws  an  existence  whether  as  things  or  as  persons  outside  the 
things  which  are  governed  by  them,  and  Plato  may  resist  with  equal 
justice  a  similar  misinterpretation  of  his  doctrines. 

Finally  it  must  be  added  that  we  ourselves,  in  drawing  a  distinction 
between  the  reality  which  belongs  to  the  Ideas  and  laws  and  that  which 
belongs  to  things,  and  calling  the  one  Being  or  Existence1  and  the  other 
Validity2,  have  so  far  merely  discovered,  thanks  to  the  resources  of  our 
language  a  convenient  expression  which  may  keep  us  on  our  guard 
against  interchanging  the  two  notions.  The  fact  which  the  term 
validity  expresses  has  lost  none  of  that  strangeness  which  has  led  to 
its  being  confounded,  as  we  have  seen,  with  existence.  It  is  merely 
that  we  have  been  so  long  accustomed  to  it ;  we  use  our  thought  as 
we  do  any  other  natural  faculty  without  troubling  ourselves  about  it, 
and  take  it  as  a  matter  of  course  that  the  content  of  manifold  per- 
ceptions and  phenomena  does  invariably  adapt  itself  to  general 
conceptions  and  can  be  read  by  us  in  the  light  of  general  laws, 
in  such  wise  that  the  consequences  which  those  laws  lead  us  to 
predict  are  found  to  coincide  with  the  actual  phenomenal  order  which 
supervenes.  But  that  this  should  be  the  case,  that  there  should 
be  universal  laws,  which  have  not  themselves  existence  like  things  and 
which  nevertheless  rule  the  operation  of  things,— remains  for  a  mind 
which  realises  its  meaning,a  profoundly  mysterious  fact  which  might  well 
inspire  rapture  and  wonder  in  its  discoverer ;  and  that  he  should  have 
made  the  discovery  will  always  remain  a  great  philosophical  achieve- 
ment of  Plato,  whatever  the  problems  it  may  have  left  still  unsolved, 

321.  One  of  these  problems  is  that  of  the  exact  nature  of  the 
1  ['Sein.']  2  ['Geltung.'] 


CHAPTER  ii.]    Ideas  and  the  Beginning  of  Motion.  447 

relation  of  things  to  the  Ideas  which  Plato  describes  by  the  terms 
participation  or  imitation.     I  do  not  propose  at  present  to  discuss 
this  question  at  large ;  but  there  is  one  defect  in  the  doctrine  of  the 
Ideas  which  a  criticism  of  Aristotle's — in  itself  not  well-founded — 
may  suggest  to  us.     Among  the  reasons  which  led  him  to  regard  the 
Ideas  as  both  superfluous  and  useless,  he  especially  emphasises  the 
fact  that  they  supply  no  beginning  of  motion.     However  true  this 
objection  may  be  in  itself,  the  fact  that  they  do  not  perform  this  task 
proves  little  against  the  doctrine  of  the  Ideas ;  the  real  objection  is 
that  they  do  not,  as  we  shall  see,  adequately  perform  the  task  for 
which  Plato  intended  them.     As  concerns  Aristotle's  criticism  let  us 
turn  to  the  sciences  of  our  own  day.     What  shall  we  say  of  our  Laws 
of  Nature  ?     Do  they  contain  in  themselves  a  beginning  of  motion  ? 
On  the  contrary,  they  all  presuppose  a  series  of  data  which  they 
cannot  themselves  establish,  but  from  which,  once  given,  the  necessary 
connexion   one  with   another   of   the  phenomena   which   ensue   is 
d"educible.     No  natural  law  ordains  that  the  different  bodies  in  our 
planetary  system  should  move,  or  that  their  course  should  be  directed 
towards  one  and  not  another  quarter  of  the  heavens,  or  that  the 
acceleration  which  they  impose  on  each  other  by  the  force  of  attraction 
should  have  the  particular  amount  which  it  has  and  not  a  different 
one.     But  is  the  whole  system  of  mechanical  truths  useless  and  mere 
empty  babble  (MvoKoyslv)  because  it  leaves  these  first  beginnings  of 
motion  to  be  explained  from  some  other  source,  and  starting  from  the 
fact  of  motion  as  it  actually  finds  it,  is  satisfied  with  explaining  its 
different   phases  in  their   necessary   connexion   with   each    other  ? 
There  may  be  obscurity  enough — though  after  all  not  more  than 
in  our  own  mode  of  representing  the  matter — in  Plato's  relegation  of 
the  primary  motive  impulses  upon  which  the  succession  of  phenomena 
depends,  to  that  dim  world  of  v\rj  which  represents  to  him  the  material 
which  is  given  for  the  Ideas  to  be  applied  to.     But  for  all  that  to  see 
in  the  world  of  Ideas  the  patterns  to  which  all  that  is,  ^anything  is, 
must  conform,  was  a  thought  of  which  the  importance  is  unfairly 
ignored  by  Aristotle.     For  he  was  himself  on  a  later  occasion  to 
have  recourse  to  that  very  same  thought,  for  the  explanation  of  indi- 
vidual phenomena :  he  too  found  himself  unable  to  allow  the  cause  of 
motion  which  communicates  the  actualising  impulse  also  to  control  its 
issue ;  this  had  been  decided  from  all  eternity  by  those  universal  laws, 
which  in  their  turn  take  no  part  in  the  communication  of  the  impulse. 
On  the  other  hand  it  must  undoubtedly  be  admitted  to  be  a  de- 
ficiency in  the  Platonic  doctrine  that  this,  which  was  its  actual  under- 


448  The  World  of  Ideas.  [BOOK  m. 

taking,  it  only  half  accomplishes.  An  account  of  the  necessary 
connexion  of  two  contents  of  thought  must  always  assume  the  logical 
form  of  a  judgment ;  it  cannot  be  expressed  in  the  form  of  a  mere 
notion  which  does  not  in  itself  contain  a  proposition  at  all  Thus  we 
have  always  employed  laws,  that  is  to  say  propositions,  which  express 
a  relation  between  different  elements,  as  examples  to  explain  the 
meaning  of  Validity  in  contradistinction  to  Existence,  The  term 
cannot  be  transferred  to  single  concepts  without  some  degree  of 
obscurity :  we  can  only  say  of  concepts  that  they  mean  something, 
and  they  mean  something  because  certain  propositions  are  valid  of 
them,  as  for  example  the  proposition  that  the  content  of  any  given 
concept  Is  identical  with  itself  and  stands  in  unchangeable  relations 
of  affinity  or  contrast  to  others.  Now  Plato  apprehended  the  elements 
of  the  world  of  thought  which  he  discovered  almost  exclusively  under 
the  form  of  the  isolated  concept  or  the  Idea.  We  need  not  look 
beyond  the  general  impression  which  his  Dialogues  leave  with  us  to 
be  aware  how  rarely  by  comparison  we  meet  with  general  pro- 
positions; they  are  by  no  means  entirely  absent,  on  the  contrary 
they  are  made  on  occasions  the  subject  of  important  disquisitions,  but 
that  it  is  propositions  as  such  and  nothing  else  which  must  necessarily 
form  the  most  essential  constituents  of  the  ideal  world,  is  a  truth 
which  never 'forced  itself  upon  Plato's  mind.  His  peculiar  point  of 
view  is  not  without  modern  parallels.  Kant  himself  in  his  search  for 
the  a  priori  forms  which  were  to  give  the  unity  of  an  inner  coherence 
to  the  empirical  content  of  our  perceptions,  made  the  mistake  at 
starting  of  developing  them  in  the  form  of  single  concepts,  the  Cate- 
gories, and  that  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  he  derived  them  from  the 
forms  of  the  judgment  itself.  And  now  having  got  them,  as  he  thought, 
in  his  Categories,  it  became  the  more  evident  that  there  was  nothing 
to  be  made  of  them,  and  thereupon  followed  the  attempt  to  derive 
judgments  out  of  them  again,  and  so  he  arrived  at  the  '  Principles  of 
the  Understanding'  which  it  was  now  possible  to  apply  as  major 
premises  to  the  minor  premises  furnished  by  experience.  It  seems 
therefore  that  this  disposition  to  bring  into  the  inadequate  form  of  a 
single  concept  truths  which  can  only  be  adequately  expressed  through 
the  proposition,  is  natural  to  the  imagination  at  all  times,  and  is  not 
peculiar  to  the  plastic  mind  of  ancient  Greece.  It  may  however  be 
remarked  in  passing  how  dangerous  a  tendency  it  is,  leading  the 
mind  as  it  does  away  from  the  full  concrete  reality  which  is  the  true 
aim  of  its  enquiries  to  a  barren  playing  with  empty  ideas  which  have 
become  separated  from  their  natural  foundations. 


CHAPTER  it.]         Truth  is  of  Judgments  not  Ideas.          449 

Thus  we  find  our  present  requirements  hardly  at  all  satisfied  in 
Plato,  and  even  the  need  of  satisfying  them  not  clearly  or  adequately 
recognised.  It  is  true  the  abstract  thought  that  the  Ideas  are  not 
only  a  multitude  of  individuals  but  that  they  make  up  all  together 
an  organic  and  articulated  whole— this  thought  is  the  soul  of  all  his 
teaching^  and  he  describes  with  enthusiasm  the  delight  which  he  finds 
in  the  dialectical  exercise  of  resolving  the  complex  structure  of  the 
Ideal  world  into  its  elements,  following  the  natural  joinings,  and  then 
putting  them  together  again ;  even  the  different  degrees  of  agreement 
or  of  contrast  between  individual  ideas  and  the  possible  modes  of 
combining  them  are  mentioned  as  subjects  worthy  of  investigation. 
But  in  the  examples  which  he  gives  of  the  application  of  his  method, 
the  art  of  Dialectic  ends  almost  invariably  in  a  mere  classification  of 
Ideas,  by  which  we  are  shown  the  place  which  belongs  to  any  one 
Idea  in  a  system  of  division  in  virtue  of  the  elements  which  it  com- 
bines, but  which  furnishes  us  with  no  single  proposition,  adds  no  jot 
to  our  knowledge  concerning  the  nature  of  anyone  of  .the  Ideas  which 
could  not  have  been  arrived  at  equally  without  this  circuitous  route  of 
classification.  If  we  want  to  know  what  can  be  said  or  cannot  be  said 
of  any  Idea  we  have  still  to  learn  it,  after  the  classification  as  much 
as  before,  from  other  sources.  The  joinings  and  articulations  of  truth 
which  Plato's  sole  aim  was  not  to  mutilate  he  ought  to  have  investi- 
gated with  a  firmer  hand ;  instead  of  making  a  systematic  collection 
of  the  flora  of  the  Ideas,  he  ought  to  have  turned  his  thoughts  to  the 
general  physiological  conditions  which  in  each  single  plant  bind  limb 
to  limb  according  to  a  law  of  growth.  Or,  dropping  the  figure,  the 
existence  of  a  world  of  Ideas  possessing  a  definite  meaning  and 
an  unchangeable  validity  being  once  clearly  and  emphatically  estab- 
lished, the  next  task  was  to  investigate  the  universal  laws  which 
govern  its  structure,  through  which  alone,  in  an  Ideal  world  as 
elsewhere,  the  individual  elements  can  be  bound  together  into  a  whole. 
Thus  the  question  to  be  dealt  with  at  this  point  was  what  are  those 
first  principles  of  our  knowledge  under  which  the  manifold  world  of 
Ideas  has  itself  to  be  arranged.  This  is  the  more  precisely  defined 
form  which  the  systematic  enquiry  into  Truth  and  the  source  of  Truth 
now  assumes  for  us. 


CHAPTER-IIL 

The  a  priori  and  the  Empirical  Methods. 

WHEN  we  feel  in  doubt  about  any  particular  point  of  belief 
within  the  sphere  of  our  knowledge  we  endeavour  to  clear  It  up  by 
analysing  the  conditions  which  have  led  us  to  entertain  the  belief;  \vc 
expect  to  learn  from  the  history  of  its  origin  whether  it  is  true,  or  if  it 
Is  false-How  it  must  have  grown  up.  And  whenever  in  the  history  of 
philosophy  the  question  has  arisen  as  to  the  capacity  of  the  human 
mind  for  the  attainment  of  truth  in  general,  mankind  have  thought 
that  the  same  path  would  lead  there  also  to  the  goal  It  has  been 
supposed  that  the  claims  of  our  ideas  and  our  judgments  to  the  name 
of  truths  could  be  decided  by  considering  the  process  by  which  they 
'  have  been  formed.  This  belief,  which  is  worth  considering  inasmuch 
as  it  lies  to  a  great  extent  at  the  root  of  certain  tendencies  of  philoso- 
phical enquiry  even  in  our  own  day,  leads  me  to  quit  for  the  moment 
the  subject  upon  which  I  have  entered.  It  is  necessary  to  attempt  to 
point  out,  that  this  method  of  criticising  our  Ideas  by  tracing  their 
genesis  does  not  present  the  advantages  as  applied  to  the  subject  of 
human  knowledge  generally  which  it  does  undoubtedly  possess  In  the 
case  of  particular  beliefs  or  ideas. 

For  the  two  cases  are  not  alike.  If  we  desire  to  test  the  accuracy 
of  any  particular  opinion,  we  have  a  basis  for  our  decision  in  other 
truths  of  which  we  are  in  acknowledged  possession,  on  the  one  hand 
general  principles  with  which  all  other  propositions  if  they  are  to 
have  validity  for  us  must  be  in  agreement,  on  the  other  hand  estab- 
lished facts,  which  must  not  be  contradicted  by  those  other  facts 
which  are  either  affirmed  or  assumed  by  the  view  under  question ; 
finally  we  have  certain  laws  of  thought  by  which,  given  certain  valid 
premises,  logical  conclusions  derived  from  them  are  distinguished 
from  illogical.  Throughout  we  start  from  some  truth  which  operates 
upon  the  mixture  of  our  thoughts  which  is  submitted  to  the  test  like  a 
fermenting  matter,  assimilating  that  which  is  akin  to  it,  and  rejecting 


Origin  and  Truth  of  Knowledge.  45 1 

that  which  is  alien.  Such  a  standard  given  us  to  start  with  and  itself 
independent  of  the  subject-matter  of  enquiry,  is  wanting  when  we 
turn  to  the  larger  problem  ;  to  test  the  truth  of  human  knowledge  in 
general  is  impossible,  without  assuming  as  the  basis  for  our  decision 
the  very  principles  which  are  on  their  trial. 

This  logical  circle  according  to  which  our  knowledge  has  itself  to 
determine  the  limits  of  its  own  authority,  we  have  already  seen  to  be 
unavoidable ;  but  we  increase  our  difficulties,  if,  instead  of  regarding 
those  principles  themselves  as  the  one  element  of  certainty  in  our 
knowledge,  from  the  vantage-ground  of  which  we  may  go  on  to  take 
possession  of  the  rest  of  its  domain,  we  explicitly  attribute  this  cer- 
tainty not  to  those  principles  themselves  but  to  a  particular  unanalysed 
application  of  them,  viz.  to  our  supposed  insight  into  the  origin  of  our 
knowledge.  The  theory  is  that  the  mode  in  which  knowledge  ori- 
ginates is  to  decide  its  claims  to  truth,  that  truth  moreover,  as  is 
supposed  by  this  view,  having  regard  to  a  reality  which  is  foreign  to 
and  transcends  knowledge.  But  if  this  is  our  aim  we  cannot  move  a 
single  step  without  making  certain  more  definite  assumptions;  first 
as  to  the  position  of  the  knowing  subject  as  regards  those  objects  of 
its  knowledge,  next  as  to  the  nature  of  that  relation,  between  it  and 
those  objects,  by  which  the  process  of  knowledge  is  carried  on.  For 
it  is  only  by  understanding  these  circumstances  that  we  can  learn  to 
estimate  the  dangers  which  stand  in  the  way  of  the  formation  of  true 
conceptions. 

The  pretence  therefore  of  setting  to  work  to  ascertain  the  process 
by  which  knowledge  comes  to  us,  by  a  simple  act  of  observation, 
discarding  all  prejudice  and  eschewing  all  admixture  of  principles 
whose  validity  can  be  called  in  question,  is  in  fact  a  groundless  illusion. 
Every  attempt  to  carry  out  such  an  undertaking  is  necessarily  full  of 
metaphysical  assumptions,  but  assumptions  disconnected  and  un- 
criticised,  because  they  are  merely  taken  up  at  the  moment  as  they 
happen  to  be  wanted  to  clear  up  a  difficulty.  The  circle  is  inevitable5 
so  we  had  better  perpetrate  it  with  our  eyes  open ;  the  first  thing  we 
have  to  do  is  to  endeavour  to  establish  what  meaning  it  is  possible  for 
us  to  attach  to  knowledge  in  its  widest  sense,  and  what  sort  of  relation 
we  can  conceive  to  subsist  between  the  subject  which  knows  and  the 
object  of  its  knowledge,  consistently  with  those  yet  more  general 
notions  which  determine  the  mode  in  which  we  have  to  conceive 
the  operation  of  anything  whatever  upon  anything  else.  What  we 
have  to  do  is  to  obtain  the  last-mentioned  conception,  which  amounts 
to  a  metaphysical  doctrine,  and  to  treat  the  relation  of  subject  and 

Gg  2 


45  2     The  a  priori  and  the  Empirical  Methods,    i  BOOK  in. 

object  as  subordinate  to  it;  we  are  not  to  begin  by  setting  up  some 
chance  theory  more  or  less  probable  as  to  that  one  relation,  and  then 
to  use  this  as  a  test  of  the  capacity  of  the  human  mind  for  appre- 
hending truth  at  all  I  say  nothing  of  the  question  how  far  it  is 
really  in  our  power  even  to  establish  the  facts  regarding  the  gradual 
development  of  our  world  of  thought;  certainly  the  process  of  that 
development  cannot  be  directly  observed,  for  every  observer  has  left 
it.  long  ago  behind  him.  And  even  though  in  many  cases  the 
developed  consciousness  may  still  retain  the  recollection  of  the  road 
by  which  it  has  come  to  its  present  set  of  ideas,  it  will  be  admitted  on 
the  other  hand  that  in  many  other  cases  these  pretended  observations 
of  the  development  of  our  ideas  are  merely  somewhat  fanciful  theories 
of  the  mode  in  which  we  think  we  may  conceive  it  to  have  taken 
place, 

823.  If  we  follow  the  attempts  which  have  been  made  to  arrive  in 
the  first  instance  at  some  fact  beyond  the  reach  of  doubt,  from  which 
we  may  proceed  with  security  to  test  the  origin  and  the  truth  of 
human  knowledge,  we  are  met  at  the  outset  of  modern  philosophy 
by  the  maxim  of  Descartes,  '  cogilo  ergo  sum,'  the  one  certain  truth 
which  the  doubt  of  all  received  opinions  seemed  to  him  to  leave  stand- 
ing. This  proposition  has  been  frequently  taken  as  a  point  of 
departure,  and  it  has  always  approved  itself,  from  as  far  back  as 
Augustine,  in  whose  writings  we  first  find  it,  for  a  truth  as  un- 
questionable as  it  is  absolutely  barren.  Not  the  smallest  step  to- 
wards the  establishment  of  any  theory  of  knowledge  whatever  has  it 
been  possible  to  take  from  this  proposition  by  itself,  without  calling 
in  other  and  wholly  independent  principles  to  help.  The  very 
criterion  which  follows  next  in  order,  that  all  ideas  are  true  which  are 
equally  clear  and  evident  with  this,  Descartes  himself  did  not  venture 
to  derive  from  that  primary  principle,  without  securing  himself  by  the 
roundabout  argument,  alluded  to  in  a  previous  chapter,  against  the 
objection  that  we  may  be  all  the  while  deluded  by  entirely  false  ideas 
possessing  an  equal  degree  of  evidence  with  the  true. 

In  point  of  fact  it  is  easy  to  see  that  from  this  beginning  we  never 
can  get  to  anything  further.  If  we  take  the  proposition  in  its  nega- 
tive sense,  that  is  to  say  that  nothing  is  certain  for  us  except  the  fact 
of  our  own  thought  alone,  and  there  is  no  such  certainty  in  regard  to 
the  real  existence  of  an  external  world,  then  I  recall  an  observation 
already  made:  even  if  such  external  world  be  really  existent,  still  it  is 
only  an  ideal  picture  of  it  and  not  that  world  itself  which  can  be 
present  in  us:  the  fact  therefore  that  nothing  possesses  immediate 


CHAPTER  III.]      ,  '  CogUo>  BTgO  SUm.'  453' 

certainty  for  us  excepting  our  own  world  of  thought,  can  never  settle 
the  question  whether  'it  alone  exists,  or  whether  there  Is  a  world  of 
existence  outside  it  to  which  it  enters  into  relation.  And  even  if 
the  idea  of  this  external  world  could  be  proved  to  be  a  necessary 
product  of  our  thinking  activity  which  we  are  compelled  to  form 
through  the  organisation  of  our  mind  and  the  laws  of  interconnexion 
to  which  our  thoughts  necessarily  conform,  if  that  is  to  say  we  could 
deduce  from  the  fact  of  the  cogito  that  our  assumption  of  an  external 
world  of  existence  must  necessarily  have  a  subjective  origin  in  the  laws 
of  our  own  minds :  even  then  the  truth  of  the  assumption  would 
be  neither  proved  nor  disproved;  for  even  if  that  external  world 
does  really  exist,  it  would  be  impossible  for  us  to  arrive  at  the  idea 
of  it  unless  the  nature  of  our  mind  and  the  workings  of  our  thoughts 
were  such  as  to  render  it  indispensable  for  the  avoidance  of  con- 
tradiction within  the  world  of  thought  itself. 

^  On  the  other  hand  if  we  turn  our  attention  to  the  affirmative  aspect 
of  the  proposition,  we  find  that  it  is  not  formulated  in  a  way  adapted 
to  its  purpose.  It  is  no  longer  the  expression  of  an  immediate  fact 
but  of  an  abstraction.  I  do  not  complain  of  Descartes  for  keeping  to 
the  first  person  of  the  verbs  c  cogito '  and  '  sum,9  for  obscure  as  the 
idea  of  the  '  ego '  may  be  which  they  contain,  and  provocative  as  it  is 
of  further  enquiry,  it  does  unquestionably  belong  to  the  original  form 
of  this  simplest  of  all  experiences,  and  a  theory  which  seeks  to  sup- 
plant the  '  cogito '  by  the  £  cogitare '  and  the  '  sum '  by  the  !  essej  as  the 
primary  and  most  certain  fact  of  experience,  has  no  claim  whatever 
to  the  credit  of  resting  on  a  basis  free  from  all  presupposition  and 
prejudice,  which  it  is  its  ambition  to  share  with  the  exact  methods  of 
the  natural  sciences.  There  never  meets  us  as  the  simplest  of  facts  an 
idea  which  merely  exists  and  which  no  one  has ;  we  never  meet  with 
a  consciousness  which  presents  itself  simply  as  consciousness  and  not 
as  the  consciousness  of  an  l  ego,1  which  in  it  is  conscious  to  itself 
either  of  itself  or  of  something  else.  Science  may  attempt  afterwards 
to  separate  by  one  means  or  another  the  occurrences  of  thought  and 
knowledge  from  this"  their  constant  condition  of  reference  to  a  subject 
whose  nature  remains  impenetrable  :  but  they  are  originally  given 
and  their  certainty  along  with  them  only  in  the  form  '  cogito J  c  I 
think/  not  in  that  of  the  infinitive  '  cogitart?  But  while  Descartes 
is  entirely  correct  in  employing  the  personal  form  of  the  verb,  it  must 
be  acknowledged  that  its  significance  was  overlooked  by  him,  and  the 
interpretations  which  it  received  at  the  hands  of  Kant  we  cannot 
enter  into  here. 


454     ^ie  a priori  and  the  Empirical  Methods,   i BOOK  in. 

We  may  add  that  Descartes'  principle  was  expressed  in  an  unservice- 
ably  abstract  form,  emphasising  as  it  does  In  the  various  mental  states 
which  carry  with  them  this  immediate  certainty  of  personal  experiences 
exclusively  their  universal  quality — that  is  to  say  it  emphasises  ex- 
clusively the  fact  of  cogitation  or  consciousness  in  the  widest  sense, 
which  is  an  element  entering  equally  into  very  various  mental  states, 
sensations  and  ideas,  emotions  and  the  will,  distinguishing  them  al! 
alike  from  that  which  we  suppose  ourselves-  to  conceive  as  the  con- 
dition of  a  being  without  a  self  and  without  a  soul  No  doubt  this 
element  of  consciousness  enters  into  everyone  of  our  mental  states  which 
we  observe,  but  what  can  be  the  use  of  noticing  this  common  quality 
alone  to  the  exclusion  of  those  concrete  elements  apart  from  which 
it  cannot  really  exist  or  become  an  object  of  direct  observation  at  all  ? 

The  really  fruitful  starting-point  of  enquiry  would  have  been,  not 
the  fact  that  the  * cogito^  is  found  in  every  form  which  conscious- 
ness can  assume,  but  the  question,  what  are  the  forms  in  which  it  }s 
found  ?  Not  the  bare  fact  that  we  are  conscious  or  struck  teaches 
us  the  truth  we  know;  it  is  what  we  think,  the  matter  or  content  of 
our  cogitation,  which  supplies  not  only  the  original  datum  from  which 
we  start,  but  the  sole  source  from  which  that  which  we  ought  to  think 
or  that  which  we  cannot  but  think  can  be  derived.  Descartes  himself 
points  out  that  even  the  Sceptic  in  his  doubt  or  in  his  denial  of  all 
knowledge,  by  that  very  act  confirms  the  fact  of  cogitation,  and  just 
because  it  is  associated  indifferently  with  all  true  knowledge,  and  with 
every  act  of  doubt,  and  with  every  kind  of  error,  it  cannot  possibly 
serve  to  distinguish  the  true  from  the  false. 

324.  Thus  a  fresh  starting-point  for  the  enquiry  into  human 
knowledge  was  unavoidable.  It  was  given  by  the  belief  in  the  truth 
of  innate  Ideas.  We  must  not  allow  the  expression  '  innate  Ideas/ 
which  has  introduced  a  long  controversy  into  the  history  of  the  theory 
of  knowledge,  to  excite  prejudices  in  our  minds  which  a  little  care 
and  consideration  may  certainly  allay.  Even  the  ancients  in  speaking 
of  that  quod  a  nalura  nolis  insitum  es/,  and  all  philosophers  who  have 
used  the  like  expressions,  were  certainly  very  far  from  assuming  that 
a  truth,  in  itself  foreign  to  the  mind,  was  stamped  in  upon  it  at  some 
particular  moment  when  its  life  was  beginning,  and  became  thence- 
forth a  permanent  object  of  its  conscious  thought.  What  they  meant 
was  no  more  than  this—the  mind  is  of  its  own  nature  so  constituted, 
that  under  certain  operative  conditions  it  necessarily  develops  certain 
habitual  modes  of  combining  its  ideas.  These  constitute,  to  begin 
with,  a  method  which  the  mind  follows  unawares,  but  finally  as  it 


CHAPTER  in.]  Innate  Ideas. 


455 


comes  to  reflect  upon  innumerable  acts  of  thought  performed  in 
accordance  with  them,  the  rules  of  its  procedure  hitherto  uncon- 
sciously followed  become  themselves  the  objects  of  its  conscious 
reflexion.  These  Ideas  were  called  innate  from  the  impression  that 
it  was  not  sufficient  to  represent  the  mind  in  which  they  were  sup- 
posed to  grow  up  as  merely  possessing  a  certain  formal  character,  or 
general  capacity  for  ideas,  in  such  a  way  that  given  the  same  con- 
ditions the  same  set  of  Ideas  would  necessarily  grow  up  in  every 
being  so  endowed  ;  it  was  held  essential  that  every  mind  should  have 
its  determinate  natural  capacity,  such  as  might  conceivably  distinguish 
it  from  other  thinking  beings,  dictating  the  form  which  its  thinking 
activity  should  take,  and  in  which  its  particular  acts  of  thought  should 
be  combined.  It  is  true  there  was  no  occasion  to  take  this  assump- 
tion of  a  possible  distinction  between  different  beings  endowed  with  a 
like  capacity  of  thought  for  anything  more  than  a  fiction,  which  served 
tg  illustrate  the  truth  that  no  adequate  basis  of  human  knowledge  is 
to  be  found  in  the  mere  abstract  fact  of  consciousness  (cogtiatid),  but 
only  in  definite  and  concrete  forms  of  it  which  at  the  same  time  are 
in  fact  shared  by  all  minds  in  common.  Nevertheless  when  once  the- 
conceivability  of  such  a  distinction  had  been .  admitted,  it  was  no 
longer  possible  to  resist  the  question  what  would  be  the  result  if  it 
were  accepted  as  real  ?  And  then  the  two  sides  of  the  Cartesian 
conception,  the  a  priori  character  of  the  Ideas  and  their  truth,  parted 
asunder.  To  each  individual  that  must  necessarily  appear  to  be 
truth  which  follows  from  the  laws  of  its  own  nature ;  and  so  if  each 
is  furnished  at  birth  with  a  stock  of  Ideas  in  the  way  supposed, 
then  it  is  a  mere  act  of  faith,  a  faith  quite  irrational  however 
firmly  held,  to  imagine  that  the  Ideas  which  are  allotted  to  man- 
kind contain  a  higher  measure  of  truth  than  those  which  it  may  be 
force  themselves  with  a  no  less  convincing  evidence  and  with  a 
divergent  message  upon  beings  of  a  different  constitution.  It  will 
be  seen  that  such  doubts  are  justifiable  not  only  when  we  con- 
trast the  general  sum  of  our  knowledge  with  an  objective  world  of 
existence  of  which  it  is  supposed  to  be  the  copy,  but  even  when— a 
thing  which  seems  still  more  unavoidable — we  insist  on  counting 
that  only  as  truth  which  appears  to  all  minds  equally  necessary,  as 
distinguished  from  that  which  presents  itself  differently  to  different 
minds.  This  is  the  point  from  which  the  modern  polemic  against 
the  Ideas  takes  its  start,  insisting  that  if  our  Ideas  are  innate  they 
have  no  claim  to  truth,  and  that  such  a  claim  can  only  be  allowed  if 
they  are  regarded  as  independent  of  the  possible  differences  between 


456     The  a  priori  and  the  Empirical  Methods.  [BOOK  IIL 

one  mind  and  another  and  dependent  only  on  the  nature  of  a  world 
of  objects  common  to  them  all. 

325.  Before  we  enter  upon  the  arguments  on  either  side  in  regard 
to  the  questions  which  are  here  raised,  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  realise 
that  we  have  now  arrived  at  a  point  at  which,  instead  of  the  un« 
avowed  assumptions  to  which  we  are  in  the  habit  of  surrendering  our- 
selves, it  becomes  necessary  to  make  one  express  assumption  which 
we  admit  in  plain  terms  to  be  such.  No  enquiry  of  this  nature  can 
establish  its  conclusions,  whatever  they  may  be,  without  making  some 
kind  of  assumption  by  the  way  as  to  the  mode  in  which  the  object  of 
knowledge  may  be  conceived  as  operating  upon  the  subject  which 
apprehends  it.  Let  us,  instead  of  thus  assuming  our  postulate  by  the 
way,  place  it  at  the  head  of  our  enquiry,  in  the  shape  in  which  the 
varied  experience  of  the  human  mind  has  taught  us  to  formulate  it. 
Wherever  between  two  elements  A  and  B  of  whatever  kind  any  event 
which  we  call  the  influence  of  A  upon  B  occurs,  such  influence  never 
consists  in  a  constituent  element,  or  predicate,  or  state  a  separating 
itself  from  A  to  which  it  belonged,  and  just  as  it  is,  and  without 
undergoing  any  change,  passing  over  to  B,  to  attach  itself  thenceforth 
to  this  new  object,  or  be  adopted  by  it,  or  become  one  of  its  states 
(however  we  like  to  phrase  it) ;  what  happens  is,  that  a,  the  property 
residing,  or  change  arising  in  A,  becomes  the  cause  by  reason  of 
which,  given  a  relation  C  already  established  or  coming  for  the  first 
time  into  play  between  A  and  JB,  B  also  is  necessitated  in  its  turn  to 
evolve  out  of  its  own  nature  and  as  a  part  of  itself  its  new  state  b. 

How  this  necessary  connexion  between  the  states  of  A  and  B  is 
brought  about,  how  it  happens  that  B  is  necessitated  to  follow  the 
changes  of  A,  what  again  the  relation  C,  which  may  be  constant  or 
may  vary  in  different  cases,  but  which  is  essential  to  the  production 
of  the  effect  in  question,  consists  in ;— all  these  questions,  as  well  as 
the  preliminary  one  whether  they  admit  of  an  answer  at  all,  may  be  left 
outside  our  present  enquiry;  for  us  the  abstract  principle  enunciated 
is  sufficient,  no  matter  what  the  mode  in  which  it  is  realised  in  fact. 
That  principle  however  gives  us  this  result,  that  the  form  of  the 
effect  b  can  never  be  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  object  B  which 
experiences  it ;  it  changes  with  that  object ;  and  the  same  relation  C 
which  obtained  between  A  and  B,  will  as  between  A  and  &,  produce 
in  &  a  new  effect  #  quite  distinct  from  b.  As  little  is  the  effect 
I  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  active  agency  A  or  of  the  relation 
C;  it  changes  with  both;  if  A1  instead  of  A  enters  with  B  into  the 
relation  C,  it  will  Become  ft  and  /31  if  B  and  A  enter  into  the  relation 


CHAPTER  in.]         Receptivity  and  Spontaneity.  45  7 

C1.  But  all  these  different  results  £,  31,  /3,  /31  will  make  up  in  them-- 
selves  a  complete  series  of  events  which  are  only  possible  in  .#,  and 
^4  and  C  are  only  to  be  regarded  as  exciting  causes,  determining 
which  of  the  many  effects  of  which  the  nature  of  B  is  susceptible  are 
to  be  realised  at  a  given  moment,  and  in  what  order  they  are  to  come 
about.  If  we  like  to  apply  here  the  favourite  designations,  recep- 
tivity and  spontaneity,  we  may  say  that  every  object  is  receptive  of 
various  kinds  of  stimuli  to  its  spontaneity,  and  never  operates  spon- 
taneously without  such  stimulus. 

826.  The  operation  of  objects  of  knowledge  upon  a  subject  appre- 
hending them  comes  under  this  general  principle.  Every  assumption, 
to  begin  with,  is  wholly  inadmissible  which  places  the  origin  of  our 
knowledge  exclusively  in  the  object :  a  very  little  attention  will  dis- 
cover to  us  that  even  in  the  '  tabula  rasa '  to  which  the  receptive  soul 
has  been  compared,  or  in  the  wax,  which  it  has  been  supposed  to 
memble  in  being  a  mere  recipient  of  impressions,  a  spontaneous  re- 
action of  the  recipient  subject  is  indispensable.  Only  because  the 
tablet  by  virtue  of  certain  modes  of  operation  peculiar  to  its  nature 
and  consistence  retains  the  coloured  points  and  prevents  them,  run- 
ning into  each  other,  only  because  the  wax  with  its  cohesive  elements 
presents  the  properties  of  an  unelastic  body  readily  receptive  of  the 
stamp  and  capable  of  retaining  it — only  by  virtue  of  this  peculiar  nature 
of  theirs  are  the  tablet  and  the  wax  adapted  to  receive  the  colours  or 
the  stamp  impressed  upon  them ;  an  object  which  presented  no  such 
qualities  of  its  own  to  meet  the  stimulus  from  without  would  not 
possess  so  much  as  the  character  of  pure  receptivity  ascribed  to  it. 

Further  it  is  necessary  clearly  to.  understand,  that  in  an  act  of 
knowledge  the  direct  contribution  from  the  side  of  the  object  may  be 
absent,  but  never  that  which  is  furnished  by  the  subject's  own  nature. 
For  it  is  conceivable  that  two  ideas  a  and  /3,  having  once  arisen  in  the 
soul  through  a  stimulus  from  without,  should  then  combine  in  obedience 
to  laws  having  their  source  in  the  constitution  of  the  mind  alone,  and 
without  any  renewal  of  the  external  stimulus,  in  a  new  result  y  •  but 
it  is  quite  inconceivable  that  we  could  receive  an  impression  from  the 
world  outside  with  the  shaping  of  which  our  own  nature  had  nothing 
to  do.  And  therefore  we  cannot  assent  to  the  distinction  between 
the  matter  and  form  of  knowledge  as  it  is  drawn  by  Kant.  The  idea 
is  indeed  perfectly  just,  but  he  formulates  it  inaccurately  when  he 
ascribes  the  entire  content  to  experience  and  the  form  alone  to  the 
innate  activity  of  the  mind.  Kant  was  well  aware  of  the  fact  which 
we  are  here  emphasising,  that  even  the  simplest  sensations,  which  in 


45  8     The  a  priori  and  the  Empirical  Methods,    c  BOOK  in. 

the  strictest  sense  furnish  the  original  content  of  all  our  perceptions, 
do  not  come  to  us  ready  made  from  outside,  but  on  the  contrary  (if 
we  are  to  hold  to  the  conception  of  an  external  world)  can  only  be 
considered  as  reactions  of  our  own  nature  of  combined  sense  and 
intellect  in  response  to  the  stimuli  coming  from  that  world.  They 
are  the  a  priori  capacities  of  experiencing  sensation  having  their  seat 
in  ourselves  which  the  external  forces  do  indeed  summon  into  actual 
existence  in  a  definite  order,  but  never  transmit  simply  to  us  ready 
made.  And  when  we  pass  to  the  composite  result  of  these  simple 
elements,  the  image  of  a  particular  form  presented  in  space,  the 
succession  in  time  of  the  notes  in  a  melody,  or  of  a  series  of  events, 
these  too,  in  every  particular  and  detail  of  the  picture,  are  no  whit  less 
the  product  of  the  thinking  subject,  no  whit  less  therefore  a  priori. 
For  even  if  we  assumed  that  things  exist  in  a  real  extended  space  or 
occur  in  a  real  order  of  time  in  the  same  positions  or  in  the  same 
order  in  which  we  thereupon  apprehend  them,  even  then  our  tejm™ 
poral  and  spatial  idea  of  them  would  be  something  quite  different 
from  their  temporal  and  spatial  existence  \  we  could  not  manage  to 
bring  our  ideas  a,  /3,  y,  into  the  same  order  as  obtains  among  their 
objective  causes  a,  b,  c,  unless  our  own  nature  and  the  laws  of  our 
mind  enabled  and  obliged  us  to  do  so, 

327.  Or  do  we  wish  to  delude  ourselves  with  words  and  to  reply 
that  this  trifling  business  of  copying  may  be  taken  as  a  matter  of  course 
and  requires  no  such  labour  of  re-creation  as  we  have  attributed  to 
the  mind  ?  But  what  do  we  mean  by  this  word  copy,  and  how  is  an 
image  or  a  picture  produced?  We  will  say  nothing  at  .present  of  the 
eye,/#r  which  alone  after  all  a  picture  is  a  picture,  and  we  will  ask  only 
what  are  the  conditions  which  make  it  possible  for  a  mirror  to  present 
to  the  eye  the  image  of  any  object?  It  can  only  so  present  it  by 
reflecting  the  rays  of  light  which  it  receives  from  the  object  in  a  fresh 
direction,  while  maintaining  their  original  arrangement  relatively  to 
one  another,  and  for  this  office  it  is  absolutely  dependent  on  the 
smoothness  and  the  shape  of  its  surface.  It  depends  on  these 
qualities  of  its  own  whether  it  scatters  the  rays  in  such  disorder  that 
no  eye  can  combine  them  into  a  picture,  or  whether  it  so  reflects 
them  that  although  they  diverge  they  can  still  be  collected  by  the 
eye,  or  so  that  by  converging  they  compose  a  real  image  which 
becomes  visible  to  the  eye  as  a  new  object. 

But  even  when  all  this  is  done  the  mirror  only  supplies  the  stimulus 
which  acts  upon  the  organ  of  sight  similarly  to  the  object  itself,  and 
can  be  taken  therefore  to  represent  it;  but  if  we  ask  how  it  is  brought 


CHAPTER  in.]  Spontaneity  in  perception.  459 

to  pass  as  a  result  of  this  stimulus  that  the  picture  reflected  can  be 
seen,  we  are  at  once  sensible  how  inapt  the  comparison  of  knowledge 
with  a  copy  is.  The  apprehending  consciousness  is  no  resisting 
surface,  curved  or  plane,  smooth  or  rough,  nor  would  it  gain  anything 
by  reflecting  rays  of  light  no  matter  in  what  direction ;  it  is  in  itself 
and  its  own  co-ordinating  unity,  which  is  not  a  space,  and  not  a 
surface,  but  an  activity,  that  it  has  to  combine  the  separate  ideas 
excited  in  it  into  the  perception  of  a  spatial  arrangement,  which  per- 
ception again  is  not  itself  an  order  in  space  but  only  the  idea  of  that 
order.  For  even  if,  as  some  persons  may  perhaps  imagine,  the  idea 
of  a  point  to  the  left  were  actually  placed  to  the  left  in  our  conscious- 
ness side  by  side  with  that  of  another  point  to  the  right,  and  the 
idea  of  an  upper  point  above  that  of  a  lower,  still  this  fact  would 
not  by  itself  give  us  the  perception  of  this  fact;  all  that  this  by 
itself  would  do  would  be  to  place  us  this  time  really  in  no  better 
cqndition  than  that  of  a  mirror  in  which  some  other  mind  might 
discover  the  disposition  of  the  points,  but  again  only  on  the  sup- 
position that  it  succeeded  in  accomplishing  that  which  our  own 
mind  had  not  done,  that  is  to  say  that  it  not  merely  received  and 
retained  the  impression  of  the  rays  with  their  order  of  arrangement 
as  reflected  from  our  mind,  but  also  turned  those  impressions  to 
account,  by  producing,  on  occasion  of  them,  a  co-ordinating  per- 
ception of  that  order. 

Nothing  is  left  therefore  of  this  inexact  comparison  except  the 
conviction  that  even  the  mere  perception  of  a  given  state  of  things 
as  it  really  is,  is  only  possible  on  the  assumption  that  the  perceiving 
subject  is  at  once  enabled  and  compelled  by  its  own  nature  to  combine 
the  excitations  which  reach  it  from  objects  into  those  forms  which  it 
is  to  perceive  in  the  objects  and  which  it  supposes  itself  simply  to 
receive  from  them. 

That  the  case  is  the  same  with  all  the  ideas  which  we  form  as  to 
the  inward  connexion  between  one  perception  and  another,  is  a  fact 
to  which  I  need  only  briefly  advert,  for  it  is  here  that  the  criticism  has 
been  most  generally  admitted.  It  is  allowed  on  all  hands -that  we  do 
not  see  the  causal  connexion  between  two  events,  but  that  on  the  con- 
trary the  idea  of  such  a  connexion  has  to  be  superadded  by  ourselves 
to  that  mere  succession  of  "events  in  time  which  is  alone  directly  per- 
ceived ;  and  the  admission  of  the  a  priori  origin  of  the  causal  nexus 
has  been  used  by  one  school  of  philosophy  to  establish  for  it  the 
superior  dignity  of  a  necessary  idea  of  universal  validity,  and  by 
another  to  deny  it  all  validity  whatever  in  relation  to  the  world  of 


460    The  a  priori  and  the  Empirical  Methods.    [  BOOK  in. 

things  in  our  perception  of  which  its  origin  is  not  to  be  found.  Both 
the  one  deduction  and  the  other  is  unsound.  In  regard  to  the  second 
I  recall  once  more  this  simple  consideration ;  even  if  a  causal  con- 
nexion does  exist  between  the  events. of  the  world  outside  us,  it  still 
could  not  possibly  be  presented  to  us  as  the  direct  object  of  a  purely 
receptive  faculty  of  perception;  the  mode  in  which  individual  im- 
pressions are  connected  can  never  do  more  than  afford  a  stimulus  to 
thought  to  introduce  the  conception  through  its  own  activity,  nor  can 
such  stimulus  actually  operate  unless  our  intellectual  nature  is  itself 
necessitated,  in  order  to  complete  and  account  for  the  observed  com- 
bination of  impressions,  to  supplement  it  by  that  conception. 

328.  The  a  priori  character  however,  which  we  thus  claim  in  so 
broad  a  sense  for  our  knowledge,  is  only  one  side  of  the  matter.  If 
we  regard  all  forms  of  sensible  perception,  our  intuition  of  space,  our 
conceptions  of  thing  and  quality,  of  cause  and  effect,  lastly  the  ethical 
ideas  of  good  and  evil,  as  modes  of  manifestation  innate  in  the  minjd, 
then  and  for  that  reason  the  ground  for  this  and  that  particular  appli- 
cation of  them,  one  necessarily  excluding  another,  cannot  possibly  be 
found  in  the  mind.  In  our  perception  of  space  there  are  innumerable 
figures  possible,  but  at  a  given  moment  we  only  observe  certain 
definite  ones ;  we  are  capable  of  seeing  many  different  colours  and 
hearing  very  various  successions  of  sounds,  but  we  cannot  alter  the 
red  which  we  have  before  us  here  and  now,  though  blue  or  yellow  in 
the  same  place  would  be  equally  perceptible  to  us,  nor  can  we  sub- 
stitute for  the  melody  to  which  we  are  now  listening  any  other  of  the 
countless  melodies  which  we  have  heard  at  other  moments;  events 
follow  one  another  independently  of  us,  now  forcing  us  to  recognise 
a  causal  connexion  between  them,  now  making  such  an  assumption 
impossible;  finally  this  grouping  of  the  incentives  which  are  offered 
us  to  the  exercise  of  our  a  priori  faculties  varies  as  between  one 
individual  and  another,  and  cannot  therefore  have  its  foundation  in 
the  common  nature  of  the  mind. 

To  what  it  is  that  we  are  to  attribute  them  is  here  indifferent.  It 
may  be  that  the  ordinary  opinion  in  which  we  all  acquiesce  in  practical 
life,  and  from  which  the  present  discussion  started,  is  the  true  one ; 
that  there  does  exist  a  world  of  things  outside  us,  in  which  we  have 
ourselves  our  assigned  places,  and  which  affects  us  in  varying  ways 
according  to  the  changes  which  take  place  in  itself  and  to  the  different 
and  varying  position's  which  we  occupy  in  it.  In  that  case  the  complex 
web  of  ideas  which  forms  itself  within  us,  cannot  indeed  claim  the 
name  of  truth  in  the  sense  of  presenting  to  us  a  real  likeness  of  that 


CHAPTER  in.]          Knowledge  and  External  World.         46 1 

which  exists  or  occurs  in  the  world  of  things;  still  each  several  con- 
junction or  separation  or  transformation  of  the  phenomena  which  float 
before  our  consciousness,  will  in  its  character  of  a  consequence  bear 
witness  to  a  definite  process  of  change,  though  it  may  be  of  a  different 
order,  in  the  relations  of  that  world  of  things  which  operates  upon  us. 
And  we  should  be  led  to  the  same  conclusion  by  the  rival  doctrine  of 
Idealism  which  never  becomes  natural  to  us  in  ordinary  life,  and  is 
recommended  solely  by  arguments  which  lie  purely  within  the  field  of 
philosophy.  It  may  be,  as  this  belief  supposes,  that  there  is  no  world 
of  things  or  events  outside  us,  but  only  the  appearance  of  such  a  world 
brought  about  in  all  minds  alike  by  a  single  unknown  power  which 
penetrates  them  all,  and  that  in  such  a  manner  that  the  pictures  of  the 
world  which  different  minds  seem  to  themselves  to  see  all  round  them, 
fit  in  one  with  another,  and  all  find  themselves  members,  each  in  its 
own  place,  of  one  and  the  same  universe.  This  theory,  like  the  other, 
hq^  necessarily  to  admit  that  the  stimulus  which  excites  any  individual 
mind  to  create  Us  particular  picture  of  the  world,  is  a  stimulus  foreign 
to  itself,  and  at  the  same  time  not  explicable  from  the  universal 
spiritual  nature  which  it  shares  with  all  other  minds,  Wherever  it 
may  come  from,  it  remains  an  empirical  or  a  posteriori  element  in  our 
knowledge.  And  again :  every  conjunction  or  separation  -or  diversi- 
fication of  the  phenomena  which  so  arise  in  us,  will  point  to  a  distinct 
occurrence  elsewhere,  to  changes  taking  place,  not  indeed  any  longer 
in  the  relations  of  manifold  external  objects,  but  in  the  action  of  that 
one  power  which  creates  within  us  this  dream  of  an  external  world. 
Here  finally  as  on  the  former  hypothesis  it  would  be  well  worth  while- 
to  establish  by  observation  and  comparison  of  the  phenomena  those 
unchanging  laws  which  they  follow  through  all  the  play  of  change; 
and  the  accomplishment  of  that  task  will  still  give  a  knowledge  of 
truth,  even  though  there  were  no  means  of  deciding  what  is  the 
nature  of  that  distinct  set  of  laws  obtaining  in  an  unknown  outer 
world  which  are  the  source  of  the  orderly  government  of  our  own 
world  within.  The  view  I  am  here  representing  is  in  essentials  that 
of  Kant,  and  is  one  which  German  philosophy  ought  never  to  have 
deserted.  But  in  so  doing  I  expressly  decline  to  give  any  answer  to* 
the  question  last  alluded  to.  Let  a  man  believe  himself  ever  so  much 
to  possess  an  immediate  certainty  of  the  existence  or  the  non-existence 
of  an  external  world  of  things ;  the  nature  and  the  manner  of  that 
existence  can  still  only  be  unriddled  by  conclusions  drawn  from 
phenomena.  Here  therefore  our  footing  must  be  secured  to  begin 
with ;  we  must  first  establish  those  certain  principles  which  are  to 


462     The  a  priori  and  the  Empirical  Methods.   [BOOK  in. 

determine  the  judgments  we  form  in  regard  to  the  system  of  this 
inner  world,  before  we  can  talk  of  applying  the  conclusions  so  ob- 
tained to  the  further  metaphysical  question. 

329.  But  now  supposing  that  we  assume  certain  truths  as  innate,  in 
the  previously  accepted  sense  of  the  word,  whence  do  we  arrive  at  the 
knowledge  of  them,  unless  it  be  by  discovering  them  within  us,  that  is 
to  say,  by  inward  experience  ?     So  that  after  all  experience  will  be  the 
sole  source  of  all  our  knowledge  ?    This  criticism  has  been  made,  and 
it  will  be  felt  prima  facie  to  be  as  barren  as  it  is  unanswerable.     For 
certainly  to  know  a  truth  we  must  be  conscious  of  it,  and  if  we  were 
not  conscious  of  it  before,  then  the  passage  to  the  knowledge  of  it  is 
an  event  which  we  must  necessarily  live  through  or  experience ;  in 
this  sense  of  the  word  our  whole  existence   is   a  fact  which  only 
experience  discovers  to  us.    This  objection  therefore  to  the  a  priori 
nature  of  innate  ideas  cannot  hold  ;  on  the  contrary,  supposing  there 
to  be  innate  ideas,  supposing  them  to  exist  even  in  the  sense^f 
being  unceasingly  present  to  consciousness,  still  the  mind  reflecting 
on  them  could,  to  begin  with,  only  be  aware  of  their  presence  as  a 
fact  given  in  its  experience  or  its  conscious  life.    Taken  then  in  this 
broad  acceptation  the  conception  of  experience  no  longer  offers  occa- 
sion for  a  difference  of  opinion ;  the  only  point  of  importance  is  as 
what  do  we  experience  the  thoughts  in  question  ?    Do  we  experience 
them  as  innate  truths,  or  as  matter  of  experience  in  that  narrower  sense, 
in  which  they  indicate  in  contradistinction  to  such  truths  that  their 
origin  is  foreign  to  the  mind  itself  ?    With  this  distinction  the  question 
about  experience  seems  at  first  sight  to  take  a  more  urgent  form ;  if, 
that  is,  we  go  on  to  ask  for  marks  which  may  distinguish  the  one  of 
these  cases  from  the  other.     We  then  find  that  the  impressions  which 
come  to  us  from  outside  are  forced  upon  us  and  we  cannot  alter 
them ;  but  the  a  priori  truths  also  present  themselves  as  unavoidable 
and  unalterable ;  that  the  compulsion  in  the  first  case  comes  from 
without,  and  in  the  second  is  that  of  our  own  nature,  we  may  indeed 
conjecture,  but  how  are  we  to  prove  it  ?     The  truth  however  is  that  if 
we  take  the  unsophisticated  intelligence  we  find  that  this  which  to  us 
In  the  course  of  our  methodological  investigation  was  the  most 
important  fact,  is  not  to  it  the  primary  one  at  all;   the  truths  in 
question  are  not  .matter  of  experience  in  respect  of  their  alleged 
quality  of  being  innate  in  us ;  what  first  strikes  us  is  that  as  a  matter 
of  fact  what  they  assert  is  self-evident,  so  that  when  once  we  have  had 
occasion  to  think  of  them  in  any  particular  instance,  we  see  them  to 
be  independent  of  any  further  confirmation  through  fresh  instances, 


CHAPTER  in.]  Universality  and  Necessity.  463 

and  thus  independent  of  experience  which  might  supply  such  in- 
stances. And  hence  universality  and  necessity  have  always  been  the 
two  characteristics  which  have  been  ascribed  to  a  priori  knowledge. 
We  understand  by  the  term  universality  that  invariably  as  soon  as  the 
subject  is  thought  of  the  predicate  which  belongs  to  it  appears  in  self- 
evident  conjunction  with  it ;  and  again  it  is  in  this  self-evidence  and 
in  nothing  else  that  necessity  or  necessary  validity  in  this  sense 
consists,  for  clearly  necessity  attaches  to  universal  truths  in  quite  a 
different  sense  from  that  in  which  it  belongs  to  those  conjunctions  of 
various  objects  which  our  changing  experience  brings  before  us, 
These  objects,  it  is  true,  are  also  presented  to  us  in  such  a  way  that 
at  the  moment  in  which  they  occur  we  cannot  dissolve  the  conjunction 
at  our  pleasure ;  but  though  the  content  of  experience  possesses 
necessity  in  the  sense  in  which  every  fact  which  cannot  be  denied 
does  so,  still  it  lacks  that  perfect  self-evidence  which  consists  in  an 
inherent  connexion  of  elements  which  are  unthinkable  apart  from 
each  other. 

But  after  all,  what  gives  us  the  right  to  affirm  that  that  which  may 
appear  to  us  self-evident  at  this  particular  moment  will  appear  so 
equally  at  every  other,  that  is  to  say,  to  ascribe  to  it  a  universality 
which  can  make  it  a  fixed  principle  of  judgment  in  face  of  a 
perpetually  changing  experience  ?  This  question  was  raised  by  the 
early  Sceptics  and  led  them  to  declare  all  general  propositions  in- 
admissible. And  in  point  of  fact,  whatever  principle  we  may  choose 
to  devise  to  justify  us  in  concluding  from  the  certainty  of  a  proposition 
at  the  present  moment  to  its  certainty  for  all  future  time,  must  itself 
be  subject,  as  a  universal  principle,  to  the  precise  suspicion  which  it 
was  intended  to  remove.  Thus  we  should  have  no  means  of  assuring 
ourselves  of  the  universal  validity  of  any  proposition  if  we  cannot  be 
satisfied  with  the  self-evidence  with  which  its  content,  once  thought, 
claims  for  itself  eternal  validity  in  anticipation  of  experience.  And  it 
would  have  to  be  a  matter  of  consideration  that  this  incapacity  for 
attaining  to  universal  truth  could  not  be  deplored  as  an  infirmity 
peculiar  to  the  human  intelligence  ;  it  would  be  shared  by  all  minds 
whose  experience  as  being  developed  in  time  at  all  resembles  ours ;  the? 
very  truest  truth  which  might  be  innate  in  such  a  mind  could  only  come 
into  its  consciousness  at  a  definite  moment,  and  all  the  self-evidence 
it  might  possess  for  it  at  that  moment  would  not  remove  the  un- 
certainty whether  it  would  remain  a  necessity  of  thought  in  the  next. 

380.  This  result  will  perhaps  be  eagerly  admitted,  and  it  will  be 
urged  that  it  proves  the  futility  of  our  defence  of  a  priori  truths ; 


464     The  a  priori  and  the  Empirical  Methods,   c  BOOK  m. 

even  when  the  mind  has  got  them  it  has  no  means  of  distinguishing 
them  from  the  results  of  experience.  Or  in  other  words  it  is  only  ex- 
perience which  teaches  us  that  they  have  universal  validity ;  that  is 
to  say,  when  we  find  their  self-evidence  confirmed  by  each  successive 
attempt  to  think  them,  we  have  not  indeed  strict  proof  but  we  have 
the  strongest  probability  that  they  are  valid  without  exception,  and  it 
is  to  this  gradually  increasing  empirical  probability  that  the  whole  of 
our  knowledge  is  in  fact  restricted. 

In  this  there  is  an  element  of  truth  which  I  shall  consider  presently; 
but  taken  as  a  whole  it  is  a  false  position.  If  we  assume,  as  this  view 
admits,  that  the  certainty  of  a  given  proposition  as  experienced 
at  one  moment  does  not  guarantee  the  experience  of  its  certainty  in 
the  next,  then  just  because  this  is  so  a  thousand  repetition?  will  not 
make  it  a  whit  more  probable  in  the  thousand  and  first  case  than 
it  was  in  the  second  or  third.  If  after  a  series  of  cases  of  the  con- 
nexion of  two  events  a  and  I  unbroken  by  any  instance  to  the 
contrary,  we  look  for  fresh  instances  with  constantly  increasing 
confidence,  we  do  so  on  the  strength  of  very  definite  assumptions. 
If  the  connexion  of  a  and  b  is  not  of  such  a  kind  as  to  make  it  self- 
evident  the  moment  it  is  presented  to  the  mind,  if  its  eternal  validity 
is  not  at  once  apparent,  then  we  explain  its  constant  occurrence  by 
the  fact  that  the  conditions  which  might  have  produced  a  different 
result  have  not  so  far  come  into  operation  ;  that  they  are  not  likely  to 
.  do  so  at  any  future  time  we  conclude  after  numerous  instances  of 
similar  experiences  on  the  strength  of  one  special  assumption  and  not 
otherwise,  the  assumption  that  the  course  of  the  universe  in  general 
and  of  this  part  of  it  to  which  the  events  in  question  belong  in  par- 
ticular, proceeds  in  a  fixed  order,  which  by  examination  of  a  sufficient 
number  of  instances,  becomes  discoverable.  Then,  starting  from  this 
assumption  that  a  particular  set  of  conditions  whenever  they  recur  in 
the  future  will  be  equivalent  to  what  they  were  when  observed  in  the 
past,  we  draw  our  conclusion :  given  like  conditions  a  like  result  must 
present  itself.  If  we  are  wrong  in  that  assumption  this  will  mean  that 
we  have  set  up  as  universal  a  false  generalisation  concerning  a  matter 
of  fact,  which  will  be  refuted  by  future  experience.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  our  universal  principle,  that  under  like  conditions  like  consequences 
follow,  is  no  longer  to  be  regarded  as  really  universal,  then  the  entire 
method  of  logical  procedure  by  which  we  expect  to  pass  from  par- 
ticular experiences  to  propositions  of  even  probable  universality,  is 
absolutely  baseless  and  vain.  For  every  time  we  argue  from  m  to 
1,  whether  we  are  undertaking  to  establish  a  strictly  universal  or  a 


CHAPTER  i ii.]     Real  and  Spurious  Self-evidence.  465 

merely  probable  conclusion,  In  either  case  we  assume  the  strict  uni- 
versality of  that  logical  principle. 

It  is  clear  therefore  that  the  attempt  to  derive  the  entire  body  of 
general  knowledge  from  experience,  that  is  to  say  from  a  mere 
summing  up  of  particular  perceptions,  breaks  down.  We  have  in- 
variably to  help  ourselves  out  by  assuming  at  one  point  or  another 
some  one  of  those  self-evident  principles;  some  principle  to  which 
when  once  its  content  has  been  thought  we  at  once  concede  with 
Intuitive  confidence  that  universal  validity  to  which  it  makes  claim. 

331.  Now  in  practice  as  a  matter  of  fact  there  has  never  been  any 
dispute  on  this  point.  Mathematical  demonstrations  have  often  been 
subjected  to  fresh  examination,  but  never  with  any  other  object  than 
to  establish  whether  each  one  of  the  several  propositions  which  made 
up  the  chain  of  reasoning  was  either  Itself  Self-evident  or  was  logically 
derived  from  others  which  were  so.  We  never  set  to  work  merely  to 
prove  over  again  the  self-evident  propositions  themselves,  to  see 
whether  some  moment  may  not  arrive  in  which  their  direct  contraries, 
the  equality  of  unequals  for  instance,  or  that  the  part  is  greater  than 
the  whole,  would  be  equally  self-evident ;  and  even  supposing  so 
unexpected  an  event  had  on  some  occasion  occurred,  no  one  would 
have  doubted  that  there  was  an  error  somewhere,  which  could  only  be 
attributed  to  an  oversight  in  the  calculation.  On  the  other  "hand 
much  difference  of  opinion  does  exist  as  to  the  extent  of  these 
universal  and  self-evident  truths,  and  here  we  are  brought  in  view  of 
that  element  of  truth  which  I  could  not  help  allowing  above,  in  the 
theory  just  combated.  I  by  no  means  intend  however  to  imply  that 
experience  as  such  could  help  us  to  establish  what  holds  universally 
not  merely  as  a  universal  fact,  but  as  a  self-evident  and  necessary 
truth ;  on  the  contrary  it  is  precisely  experience  with  its  repeatedly 
recurring  uniformities  which  at  last  deludes  us  into  taking  for  necessary 
and  self-evident  truth,  that  which  is  merely  matter  of  fact,  or  not  even 
that. 

I  have  spoken  before  of  the  delusive  certainty  which  many  prin- 
ciples assume,  merely  because  our  limited  experience  has  constantly 
presented  them  to  us  without  any  instance  to  the  contrary.  The 
psychological  association  which  establishes  itself  under  such  con- 
ditions between  the  ideas  a  and  6t  representing  two  events  which  have 
constantly  followed  each  other,  very  soon  assumes  the  appearance  of 
a  self-evident  connexion  in  fact  between  the  contents  of  the  ideas  so 
presented.  I  observed  then  that  the  attempt  to  think  the  direct  con- 
tradictory of  a  proposition  which  has  come  to  be  thus  self-evident 

Hh 


466    The  a  priori  'and  the  Empirical  Methods.    [BOOK  in. 

may  serve  sometimes  to  dispel  the  illusion,  and  we  then  find  to  our 
astonishment  that   a  hypothesis   which   contradicts   our   apparently 
self-evident  proposition  presents  no  difficulty  to  thought,  that  it  is  just 
as  much  thinkable  as  the  other,  and  that  accordingly  the  certainty 
which  we  ascribed  to  our  belief  cannot  depend  upon  any  universal 
self-evident  connexion  in  its  content.     I  was  obliged  however  even 
then  to  add  that  this  attempt  to  think  the   contradictory  will   not 
always  be  a  decisive  test;    the  influences  of  previous   experience 
which  nullify  its  value  are  in  fact  very  various.    If  we  could   be 
certain,  in  applying  it  to  any  proposition,  that  we  have  not  only  deter- 
mined with  perfect  exactness,  with  nothing  lacking  and  nothing  over, 
the  meaning  of  the  subject  a,  and  the  predicate  b,  and  also  of  the 
copula  c  or  whatever  the  connexion  may  be  which  we   wish  to 
establish  between  them,  but  also  that  in  the  final  decision  as  to 
whether  that  relation  c  which  we  have  established  is  self-evident  or  not, 
we  have  been  guided  by  no  sort  of  consideration  save  the  fixed  mean- 
ing of  the  three  conceptions ;  then  undoubtedly  we  should  all  agree 
in  our  conclusions,  positive  and  negative  alike.     And  wherever  these 
conditions  are  susceptible  of  fulfilment,  as  is  the  case  in  mathematics, 
such  agreement  is  in  fact  found.    The  complex  notions  on  the  con- 
trary of  real  objects  are  very  far  from  admitting  the  same  exactness 
of  analysis,  and  every  reasonable  man  looks  for  results  in  this  sphere 
only  from  experience  or  rather  from  the  accurate  manipulation  of 
our  experiences.    Finally  those   simplest  and   most  universal  con- 
ceptions and  principles  to  which  we  should  desire  to  subordinate  that 
manipulation,  would  unquestionably  admit  of  the  highest  degree  of  such 
accuracy,  did  not  the  influence  of  past  experiences  come  in  the  way, 
We  certainly  intend  something  very  simple  and  definite  when  we  use 
the  words,  being,  thing,  cause,  force,  effect,  matter ;  but  in  our  use  of 
any  one  of  them  we  are  commonly  determined  by  our  limited  circle 
of  experience  or  our  favourite  study  or  pursuit.     Thus  we  are  led  on 
the  one  hand  to  apply  them  only  to  a  fraction  of  the  subject-matter 
which  we  in  fact  hold  that  they  ought  entirely  to  dominate,  and  yet 
on  the  other  hand  to  bring  them  into  a  variety  of  connexions  which 
are  not  indeed  impossible  to  them  but  still  do  not  essentially  belong 
to  them.     Thus  we  might  perhaps  if  we  were  required  to  define  one 
of  these  conceptions  agree  in  our  definitions,  yet  the  ways  in  which  we 
actually  look  at  its  meaning  might  be  different  enough,  as  different 
at  all  events  as  in  the  case  of  the  same  objects  seen  in  different 
lights.    Now  all  these  unanalysed  side-thoughts,  the  emotional  sug- 
gestions   and  the  wishes  which  thus  attach  themselves  unawares 


CHAPTER  mi         Use  of  Psychology  in  Logic.  467 

to  the  object  of  thought,  and  give  it  its  characteristic  colouring, 
dispose  us  to  find  the  certainty  of  self-evidence  in  predicates 
which  we  should  not  be  warranted  from  the  nature  of  the  object 
alone  in  applying  to  it  at  all.  This  is  at  once  the  value  and  the 
danger  of  experience ;  except  as  suggested  by  experience  the  uni- 
versal principles  of  our  judgment  cannot  be  presented  to  con- 
sciousness at  all ;  but  as  thus  occasioned  they  are  at  the  same  time 
subject  to  one-sidedness,  deficiencies  in  one  direction,  superfluities  in 
another,  from  which  later  reflexion  has  much  ado  to  purify  them. 
Here  begins  a  work  of  criticism  which  has  to  be  unremittingly  pur- 
sued ;  the  useful  labour  of  investigating  the  psychological  origin  of 
the  particular  form  which  these  conceptions  have  come  to  assume 
In  our  consciousness  ;  the  object  being  not  so  much  to  show  how 
all  certainty  and  truth  arises  little  by  little  out  of  the  deliverances  of 
experience,  as,  on  the  contrary,  to  make  it  clear  how  much  foreign 
matter  due  merely  to  the  peculiarities  of  the  instances  observed, 
has  Incrusted  itself  upon  the  substance  of  those  original  truths, 
truths  which,  if  once  they  were  seen  in  their  simplicity  and  purity, 
would  be  not  only  recognised  as  necessary  and  self-evident  but  would 
prove  so  in  all  their  applications. 

332.  Such  a  criticism  of  prejudices,  as  I  may  shortly  call  it,  can- 
not I  conceive  be  conducted  otherwise  than  piece  by  piece  in  con- 
nexion with  definite  problems  which  offer  themselves  for  solution  ; 
for  it  is  only  difficulties  which  rise  upon  us  in  working  out  individual 
problems,  which  lead  us  to  suspect  the  soundness  of  our  principles 
and  to  cast  about  for  the  sources  of  the  errors  we  have  fallen  into.  I 
refrain  therefore  from  entering  into  the  subject  here  in  detail ;  on  the 
other  hand  it  is  necessary  that  I  should  vindicate  the  method  I  have 
thus  far  pursued  as  against  the  opposite  theory,  which  not  content 
with  freeing  the  primary  truths  by  this  process  of  psychological 
analysis  from  the  erroneous  side-thoughts  which  have  grown  up  about 
them,  aims  further  at  giving  a  systematic  explanation  of  the  nature  of 
thought  and  demonstrating  the  validity  of  its  first  principles.  I  have 
maintained  the  opinion  throughout  my  work  that  Logic  cannot  de- 
rive any  serious  advantage  from  a  discussion  of  the  conditions  under 
which  thought  as  a  psychical  process  comes  about.  The  signifi- 
cance of  logical  forms  is  to  be  found  in  the  meaning  and  purport  of 
the  connexions  into  which  the  content  of  our  world  of  ideas  ought  to 
be  brought ;  that  is  to  say  in  the  utterances  of  thought  or  the  laws 
which  it  imposes,  after  or  during  the  act  of  thinking,  not  in  those 
productive  conditions  of  thought  itself  which  lie  behind.  Conditions 

H  h  2 


468     The  a  priori  and  the  Empirical  Methods,   c  BOOK  in, 

of  this  kind  there  must  certainly  be,  not  only  those  conditions  of  a 
psychical  mechanism  which  determine  at  every  single  moment  every 
single  one  of  its  motions,  just  as  every  feature  in  an  event  of  external 
nature  is  determined  by  the  physical  conditions  which  are  given  at  the 
moment  of  its  occurrence, — but  more  than  this,  the  necessity  with 
which,  speaking  generally,  thought  follows  unawares  those  logical 
rales  of  its  procedure  which  later  reflexion  formulates  into  con- 
sciously apprehended  principles,  must  be  an  unavoidable  consequence 
of  the  nature  of  the  mind  itself,  which  it  belongs  to  Psychology  to 
investigate.  But  if  we  knew  all  that  we  could  desire  to  know  on  the 
subject,  it  would  still  be  a  delusion  to  suppose  that  we  should  be 
thereby  any  the  better  able  to  judge  of  the  truth  of  our  logical  prin- 
ciples ;  on  the  contrary  the  validity  of  those  principles  themselves 
would  still  be  the  necessary  postulate  without  which  the  successful 
enquiry  into  their  psychological  history  could  not  have  been  under- 
taken at  all. 

*** 

To  touch  here  for  the  last  time  upon  this  logical  circle  which  has 
wearied  us  so  often  already;  it  must  be  clear  enough  that  no  sen- 
sational or  empirical  theory  of  the  origin  of  thought  and  knowledge 
can  possibly  either  prove  or  disprove  the  principle  of  identity  or 
excluded  middle ;  in  every  step  of  the  argument  it  needs  them  both. 
As  little  can  it  be  left  to  such  a  theory  either  to  establish  or  to 
destroy  the  validity  of  the  law  of  causation.  For  every  attempt  to 
reduce  our  application  of  it  in  the  field  of  experience  to  the  asso- 
ciation and  reproduction  of  ideas  presupposes  its  validity  in  another 
form  in  relation  to  the  interaction  of  psychical  states ;  so  that  it  can 
neither  be  accepted  nor  rejected  unless  its  validity  be  established  to 
begin  with — a  premiss  from  which  certainly  the  rejection  of  it  could 
only  be  arrived  at  by  a  very  curious  sort  of  logical  suicide.  Nothing 
tUen  remains  but  to  restrict  this  psychological  analysis  to  the  task  of 
showing  how  truths  which  have  their  own  validity  in  themselves  find 
realisation  in  thought  and  for  thought,  regarded  as  a  psychical  pro- 
cess, as  rules  of  its  procedure  which  it  follows  unawares. 

333.  And  now  I  should  like  to  make  clear  that  of  all  that  we 
might  wish  to  know  in  this  direction  we  in  fact  know  nothing  at  all, 
and  that  Logic  would  have  to  renounce  for  a  long  time  yet  any  pro- 
founder  understanding  of  the  operations  of  thought  if  she  had  to  look 
for  it  in  the  psychological  analysis  of  their  origin.  In  the  works  of 
the  sensational  school,  which  have  been  produced  in  such  numbers 
and  such  variety  on  the  model  of  Locke's  Essay— which  is  here 
unrivalled — and  of  Condillac's  bold  venture3  I  can  find  nothing 


CHAPTER  in.]     Limits  even  of  modern  Psychology.        469 

that  answers  in  a  general  sense  to  this  requirement  Regarded  as  a 
criticism  of  the  prejudices  of  human  thought,  Locke's  work  has  en- 
joyed the  full  measure  of  influence  in  the  development  of  modern 
philosophy  to  which  the  wide  horizon  which  it  opened  and  the  keen- 
ness of  its  analysis  entitled  it.  But  in  dealing  with  all  the  variety  of 
those  inner  processes  of  the  mind,  which  he  undertakes  to  criticise, 
Locke  has  no  other  instrument  to  apply  but  '  common  sense/  a 
faculty  which,  versed  in  the  criticism  of  the  course  of  events  In  the 
outward  world,  imagines  that  the  very  respectable  and  probable  but 
quite  unsystematic  maxims  there  acquired  are  sufficient  to  meet  all 
emergencies.  It  is  more  to  my  purpose  at  present  to  consider  the 
attempts  which  have  been  made  in  this  direction  in  German  philo- 
sophy. When  we  speak  of  explaining  any  set  of  processes,  and 
regret  its  non-accomplishment,  we  think,  as  the  type  of  the  wished 
for  ideal,  of  the  body  of  the  natural  sciences.  By  the  strict  obser- 
^anee  of  the  laws  of  thought  and  the  careful  application  of  them  to 
the  results  of  exact  observation,  natural  science  has  succeeded  in 
arriving  at  a  small  number  of  original  facts  from  the  interaction  of 
which  exceedingly  various  phenomena  can  be  shown  to  follow  with 
logical  necessity.  A  series  of  happy  inspirations *  have  within  quite 
recent  times  added  to  this  domain  a  portion  of  the  inner  life  of  the 
soul,  at  least  in  regard  to  the  dependence  of  sensations  upon  external 
stimuli.  And  this  result  was  due  not  to  attempts  to  construct  the 
entirely  peculiar  set  of  events  which  we  call  psychical  out  of  physical 
processes,  which  can  never  be  brought  into  any  comparison  with 
them ;  but  of  investigations  of  which  the  aim  has  been  simply  to 
apply  exact  quantitative  determinations  to  the  members  of  the  two 
series  which  the  order  of  nature  does  actually  unite  together,  though 
in  a  manner  unknown  to  us,  and  from  the  pairs  of  correlated  values 
thus  ascertained  to  develop  the  laws  of  their  correspondence.  And  pre- 
viously to  these  enquiries  a  valuable  attempt  had  been  already  made2, 
not  indeed  resting  on  the  exact  observation  of  special  facts,  but  upon 
hypotheses  suggested  by  experience  generally,  to  bring  the  purely  in- 
ward phenomena  of  mental  life  under  a  mechanical  theory  of  their 
origin.  At  the  same  time  all  these  achievements  which  have  given  the 
psychology  of  the  present  day  a  very  great  superiority  over  the  views 
of  earlier  times,  do  not  reach  those  obscure  regions  of  enquiry,  the 
illumination  of  which  might  open  new  paths  to  Logic.  They  merely 

1  [For  an  account  of  these  investigations,  see  '  Metaphysic,'  §  258.] 
*  [An  allusion  to  Herbart,  see  'Metaphysic,'  §§  269,  270.] 


4  7O     The  a  priori  and  the  Empirical  Methods,   c  BOOK  in. 

instruct  us  concerning  the  interaction  of  different  psychical  states  to 
which  measurement  has  been  applied,  in  regard  to  the  changes  they 
severally  undergo  when  brought  into  connexion  with  each  other,  and 
thus  in  regard  also  to  the  total  state  of  the  soul  at  any  moment,  con- 
sidered simply  as  the  mechanical  result  of  all  these  reciprocal  influences. 
But  they  do  not  equally  explain  the  fresh  reactions  to  which  the  soul  is 
stimulated  by  each  one  of  these  states  of  itself  as  they  thus  arise,  and 
which  are  not  calculable  consequences  of  certain  quantitative  relations 
in  the  co-operating  conditions,  but  depend,  in  obedience  to  a  ne- 
cessity of  a  wholly  different  order,  shall  we  say  a  dialectical  or  ideo- 
logical necessity,  upon  the  meaning  or  the  idea  which  the  soul  is 
destined  to.  realise. 

The  investigation  of  external  nature  leaves  questions  of  this  sort 
behind,  but  for  its  purposes  it  does  not  need  to  answer  them.     In 
what  way  it  happens,  by  what  means  it  is  brought  about,  or  to  what 
purpose  it  tends,  that  particles  of  matter  attract  each  other  witjjr 
a  force  determined  by  their  distance,  are  questions  which  may  be 
left  undecided.     When  once  the  law  of  this  reciprocal  influence  is 
ascertained,  it  can  be  reckoned  as  a  constant  element  in  the  course  of 
nature,  that  is  to  say  in  the  present  case  as  an  element  into  the 
determination  of  whose  variations  in  each  several  instance  the  given 
circumstances  enter.     The  more  we  succeed  in  reducing  all  natural 
processes  to   homogeneous  motive  forces  of  this   kind,   the   more 
possible  will  it  become  to  construct  even  the  form  of  every  single 
natural  event  out  of  the  conditions  which  occasion  it.     This  would 
all  be  altered  if  the  natural  sciences  had  cause  to  suppose  .that  the 
material  elements  which  had  hitherto  been  regarded  as  unchangeable, 
experienced  under  the  operation  of  forces  of  this  kind  certain  inner 
changes  which  had  the  effect  of  stimulating  them  to  wholly  new 
modes  of  reaction,  giving  them  a  new  influence  in  the  play  of  events. 
No  doubt  those  new  influences  so  far  as  they  operated  to  bring  about 
changes  in  the  physical  surroundings  could  still  be  directly  connected 
with  the  ascertainable  outward  conditions  under  which  they  arise,  or, 
to  express  it  in  general  terms,  they  could  be  regarded  as  functions  of 
the  conditions ;  and  thus  there  would  be  apparently  no  interruption 
in  the  continuity  of  the  scientific  construction,   only  an  increased 
difficulty  in  carrying  it  out.     But  in  point  of  fact  a  breach  of  con- 
tinuity would  certainly  have  taken  place.     For  the  simple  fact  that 
given  a  certain  set  of  physical  conditions  m  a  new  mode  of  operation 
ft  will  make  its  appearance  and  given  another  set  n  a  second  new 
result  v,  would  remain  after  all  a  new  datum,  a  fact  known  indeed 


CHAPTER  in.]    Thotigkt  and  the  Psychical  Mechanism,    47 1 

from  experience,  but  not  to  be  derived  analytically  as  a  necessary  and 
self-evident  consequence  from  the  physical  conditions  given. 

Now  the  case  in  which  we  rind  ourselves  in  regard  to  the  present 
question  is  analogous  to  this.  All  the  mental  processes  which 
psychology  teaches  us  are  necessary  presuppositions  for  the  realisation 
of  any  act  of  thought,  are  merely  the  conditions  m  or  n  which  give 
occasion  to  the  logical  reactions  JJL  and  v  to  present  themselves. 
They  cannot  explain  the  fact  that  ^  and  v  do  thus  appear  upon  the 
scene,  nor  again  do  we  find  in  this  fact  in  itself  the  least  explanation 
of  the  further  relations  of  constantly  increasing  complexity  which 
thought  establishes  between  its  p,  and  v  or  other  of  the  elementary 
products  of  its  activity. 

I  should  dwell  upon  this  point  further  were  it  not  that  the  sub- 
ject of  the  following  section  'will  oblige  me  in  any  case  to  call 
attention  later  on  in  detail  to  the  deep  gulf  which  remains  unfilled 
%tween  the  psychical  mechanism  and  thought;  I  content  myself 
here  with  the  expression  of  my  conviction  that  all  logical  reactions  of 
the  mind  have  to  be  conceived  as  a  connected  whole,  as  expressions 
of  a  single  tendency  whose  separate  utterances  can  in  so  far  as  their 
meaning  is  concerned  be  apprehended  and  arranged  in  an  intelli- 
gible series,  but  in  their  origin  as  psychical  processes  remain  wholly 
incomprehensible.  It  is  an  illusion  in  psychology  and  a  corruption 
of  logic  to  take  the  conditions  which  occasion  the  logical  operations 
of  thought  for  the  operations  themselves.  "  There  is  only  one  delusion 
more  desperate  still, — to  imagine  that  a  complete  physical  theory  of 
the  nervous  system  will  explain  that  which  is  itself  the  condition  of 
any  theory  being  possible  at  all. 


CHAPTER   IV. 
Real  and  Formal  Significance  of  Logical  Acts. 

334.  FACTS  of  perception  we  acknowledge  without  question ;  our 
misgivings  begin  with  the  interpretations  of  those  facts  by  discursive 
thought,  more  especially  when  we  consider  the  protracted  and  in- 
tricate web  of  ideas  which  thought  spins  in  abstraction  from  the  facts 
of  sense,  yet  always  with  the  expectation  of  reaching  a  final  result 
which  perception  will  confirm.     Thought  as  an  activity  or  movement 
of  the  soul  follows  laws  of  the  souPs  own  nature ;  will  these  laws 
which  it  necessarily  follows  in  the  connexion  of  its  ideas,  lead  to  the 
same  result  as  that  which  the  real  chain  of  events  brings  rouml£ 
Will  the  outcome  of  the  process  of  thought,  when  at  the  close  of  it 
we  turn  once  more  to  the  facts,  be  found  in  agreement  with  the 
actual  results  which  the  course  of  nature  has  produced  ?     And  if  on 
the  whole  we  consider  it  improbable  that  thought  and  being,  which  it 
is  natural  for  us  to  regard  as  made  for  one  another,  should  be  en- 
tirely divorced,  are  we  also  to  suppose  that  every  single  step  taken  by 
thought  answers  to  some  aspect  of  that  which  actually  takes  place  in  the 
development  of  the  things  thought  about  ?   Such  are  the  doubts  which 
give  rise  to  the  theory  of  the  purely  formal  or  subjective  validity  of 
thought.    That  theory  is  perfectly  clear  in  what  it  affirms ;  the  logical 
forms  and  the  laws  of  their  application  are  the  conditions  through  the 
fulfilment  of  which  thought  satisfies  its  own  requirements,  and  brings 
the  connexion  of  its  ideas  with  one  another  into  that  form,  which  for 
it,  for  thought  itself,  is  truth ;    but  it  is  not  at  all  clear  what  is  the 
relation — though  some  such  relation  cannot  be  dispensed  with — in 
which  these  forms  and  laws  stand  to  the  content  which  they  do  not 
create  but  find,  and  from  the  manipulation  of  which  alone  after  all 
that  which  is  truth  for  thought  draws  its  material. 

Can  an  object,  we  ask,  be  brought  into  forms  to  which  it  is  not 
adapted  ?  Or  even  supposing  that  we  are  able  to  force  our  material 
into  a  form  which  it  does  not  naturally  assume,  still  must  there  not  be 
some  quality  in  the  material  which  at  all  events  makes  such  an 
operation  possible?  Must  not  every  given  subject-matter  therefore, 
which  thought  casts  into  its  own  forms,  possess  some  relation  and 
affinity  to  those  forms,  of  which  the  most  we  can  say  is  that  it  may  be 


Form  not  independent  of  Matter*  .473 

misused?  Finally,  must  not  this  assumption  hold  as  regards  every 
single  logical  operation  ?  Not  one  of  these  could  be  carried  out  even 
as  a  mere  subjective  process  of  thought,  unless  the  object  upon  which 
it  is  exercised  contained  in  itself  some  characteristic  which  invited  or 
at  least  allowed  it.  Now  we  know  that  the  distrust  of  thought  spoken 
of  above,  does  not  find  confirmation  in  experience  in  the  universal 
sense  we  dreaded.  However  wrong  we  may  go  in  protracted  chains 
of  reasoning,  daily  life  shows  how  well  our  conclusions  taken  in  the 
average  agree  with  the  actual  course  of  events.  Why  should  we  not 
hold  fast  to  that  confidence  in  the  veracity  of  thought  which  is  the 
natural  attitude  of  our  minds  before  scepticism  disturbs  them  ?  Why 
not  mount  a  step  higher  still,  and  regard  the  objective 1  content  of 
our  world  of  ideas  as  bound  by  no  other  laws  than  those  which 
thought  imposes  on  it?  Then  we  should  need  nothing  more  than 
careful  attention  to  the  subtle  and  intricate  logical  processes  of  the 
mi-md,  to  find  reflected  there  as  in  a  mirror  the  real  or  objective  forms 
in  which  all  existence  appropriately  developes. 

In  this  way  the  belief  grows  up  in  a  Real  significance  of  thought, 
a  belief  which  in  its  more  general  features  appears  in  the  history  of 
the  human  mind  earlier  than  its  opponent,  but  which  stated  in  these 
explicit  terms  and  in  this  thorough-going  form,  is-  a  product  of  recent 
times.  Between  this  and  the  opposite  theory  the  history  of  philo- 
sophy has  a  long  controversy  to  recount.  We  cannot  decide  it  by 
placing  the  logical  forms  and  laws  side  by  side  with  those  of  real 
existences  and  events  and  comparing  the  one  with  the  other,  for  we 
have  no  knowledge  of  the  latter  in  which  thought  is  not  already 
present  and  operative.  But  we  can  ask  what  is  the  judgment  of 
thought  itself  on  its  own  operations,  and  how  far  it  pronounces  the 
forms  which  as  a  psychical  movement  of  the  thinking  subject  it  is 
constrained  to  assume,  to  be  a  determination  belonging  to  the  object- 
matter  upon  which  it  operates. 

335.  To  whatever  act  of  thought  we  direct  our  attention  we  never 
find  that  it  consists  in  the  mere  presence  of  two  ideas  a  and  b  in  the 
same  consciousness  but  always  in  what  we  call  a  Relation  of  one 
idea  to  the  other.  After  this  relation  has  been  established,  it  can  in 
its  turn  be  conceived  as  a  third  idea  C9  but  in  such  case  C  is  neither 
on  the  one  hand  homogeneous  with  a  and  3,  nor  is  it  a  mere 
mechanical  effect  of  interactions  which  in  accordance  with  some 
definite  law  have  taken  place  between  the  two  as  psychical  processes 
with  definite  magnitudes  and  definitely  various  natures.  We  may 
1  [/Der  sachlicke  Inhalt  cles  Vorstellens.*] 


4 74    Re&l  &nd  -Formal  Value  of  Logical  Acts.    [BOOK  in. 

take  as  the  simplest  examples  of  what  I  mean  the  identification  and 
the  distinction  of  two  ideal  contents,  If  we  assume  a  and  a  identical ! 
with  each  other,  then  unquestionably  the  idea  a  is  present  twice  over 
in  our  mind,  but  the  only  result  to  which  this  circumstance  can  lead 
us  on  mechanical  analogies .  will  be  either  that  the  two  ideas  must 
count  as  one  because  they  exactly  cover  each  other,  or  that  as 
similar  affections  of  the  soul  they  will  become  fused  into  a  third  idea 
of  greater  strength,  or  that  they  simply  remain  apart  without  any 
result  at  all  But  that  which  we  call  the  comparison 2  of  them,  which 
leads  to  the  idea  of  their  identity  Cf  consists  neither  in  the  mere  fact 
of  their  co-existence,  nor  In  their  fusion;  it  is  a  new  and  essentially 
single  act  of  the  soul,  in  which  the  soul  holds  the  two  ideas  side  by 
side,  passes  from  one  to  the  other,  and  is  conscious  of  experiencing 
no  change  in  its  condition  or  in  the  mode  of  its  action  during  or  by 
reason  of  that  passage  from  the  one  idea  to  the  other. 

Again :  let  us  compare  two  different  ideas  a  and  b,  red  and  yellow. 
Two  external  stimuli,  which  acting  by  themselves  would  have  awakened 
severally  one  of  the  two  sensations,  might  acting  simultaneously 
coalesce  in  the  nerve,  through  which  they  propagate  themselves  still 
as  physical  states,  into  a  third  excitation  intermediate  between  the 
two  so  as  to  occasion  in  the  soul  only  a  third  simple  sensation.  But 
two  ideas  which  have  once  arisen  as  ideas  in  the  soul,  never  expe- 
rience this  sort  of  fusion.  If  it  were  to  occur,  if  the  distinctive  ex- 
istence of  the  two  ideas  were  to  vanish,  all  opportunity  and  possibility 
of  comparison,  and  therewith  as  a  remoter  consequence,  all  possibility 
of  thought  and  knowledge,  would  vanish  also.  For  clearly  all  rela- 
tion depends  upon  the  preservation  in  consciousness  of  the  different 
contents  unfalsified  by  any  interactions  of  one  upon  the  other;  the 
single  undivided  energy  of  thought  which  is  to  comprehend  them 
must  find  them  as  they  are  in  themselves,  so  that  passing  to  and  fro 
between  them  it  may  be  conscious  of  the  change  which  arises  in  its 
own  condition  in  the  transition. 

In  using  this  language  I  am  fully  aware  that  it  may  be  fairly  ob- 
jected that  my  designation  of  the  energy  in  question  contains  mere 
descriptions  which  cannot  be  embodied  in  a  construction.  But  this 
is  exactly  the  point  upon  which  a  clear  understanding  is  essential, — 
that  the  intellectual  processes  upon  which  all  thought  depends  do 

1  [<  Gleich,'  i.  e.  the  same  both  in  quantity  and  quality.    Neither  « equal J  nor 
'  like '  fully  render  this  meaning.     Cp.  '  Metaphysic,'  p.  47,  note.] 

2  ['  Vergleichung,'     The  emphasis  on  the  connexion  of  <  Vergleichung '  with 
'gleich*  cannot  be  rendered.] 


CHAPTER  iv.j      Process  and  Result  of 'Thought.  475 

bear  no  sort  of  resemblance  to  those  physical  events  on  the  analogy 
of  which  such  an  objection  would  like  to  see  them  modelled.  An 
activity  which  cannot  be  said  simply  to  be  a  movement  but  which 
executes  a  movement,  which  relates  itself  to  two  objects  without  in- 
troducing any  change  into  them,  which  finally  becomes  conscious  of 
the  direction  and  the  length  of  the  path  it  has  travelled  by  the 
differences  which  it  experiences  in  its  own  states, — such  an  activity 
cannot  be  brought  under  the  ordinary  category  of  unchanging  ele- 
ments with  changing  relations,  or  of  the  equality  of  action  and  re- 
action ;  and  yet  at  the  same  time  it  is  something  whose  reality  we  all 
feel ;  it  in  fact  and  nothing  else  is  the  instrument  by  means  of  which 
we  accomplish  those  much  admired  constructions  which  we  would 
fain  apply  to  it.  These  characteristic  peculiarities  we  have  simply  to 
acknowledge,  and  to  look  for  a  new  set  of  conceptions  which  may 
enable  us  to  formulate  them  without  falsifying  their  nature,  an  order  of 
conceptions  which  are  still  a  desideratum  in  philosophy,  and  which  I  by 
no  means  consider  my  own  very  incomplete  formulae  to  have  supplied. 

336.  In  the  instances  taken  above,  a  and  £,  red  and  red,  or  red 
and  yellow,  were  objects  directly  given  in  perception.  The  ideas  of 
identity  or  difference  C  which  we  obtained  as  the  result  of  the  act  of 
relation  introduced  by  the  mind,  are  no  longer  of  this  character.  As 
a  relation  of  one  to  the  other,  the  identity  of  a  with  a,  or  the  diffe- 
rence between  a  and  b,  they  cannot  be  really  thought  without  at  the 
same  time  recalling  on  the  one  hand  the  ideas  of  a  and  b,  which  form 
the  terms  in  the  relation,  and  on  the  other  that  movement  of  thought 
which  carried  us  over  from  the  one  to  the  other,  Thus  every  time  we 
use  the  term  identity  or  difference  we  are  called  on  to  renew  once 
more  all  those  operations  of  thought  through  which  alone  it  is  pos- 
sible to  use  them  with  a  meaning;  but  when  we  express  the  final 
result  which  we  wish  to  produce  by  the  process  of  thought,  by 
saying  that  a  is  the  same  as  a,  or  a  is  different  from  3,  we  are  im- 
plying that  the  objective  knowledge  which  it  was  our  object  to  arrive 
at  lies  entirely  and  exclusively  in  this  final  step  of  the  completed 
comparison.  It  is  not  to  a  and  b  that  we  ascribe  the  movement 
backwards  and  forwards  between  them  through  which  we  discovered 
their  relation  to  each  other;  this  movement  is  merely  a  psychical 
process,  without  which  indeed  our  result  could  neither  be  obtained  in 
the  first  instance  nor  repeated  afterwards  in  memory,  but  which  has 
nevertheless  to  be  abstracted  from  the  real  significance  of  the  act  of 
thought  to  which  it  ministered,  as  a  scaffolding  is  withdrawn  when 
the  building  is  completed.  Thus  we  see  at  once  in  an  example  of 


4 76    Real  and  Formal  Value  of  Logical  Acts.    [BOOK  in. 

the  simplest  possible  kind  the  antithesis  between  the  merely  formal 
significance  of  an  act  of  thought  and  the  real  significance  of  its 
product.  Before  I  follow  up  this  line  of  thought  further  I  wish  to 
advert  to  two  sets  of  processes  which  add  a  confirmation  on  a  large 
scale  to  the  conclusions  which  we  have  seen  suggested  by  a  particular 
instance. 

In  the  first  place  we  receive  the  sensible  perceptions  from  which 
thought  starts  almost  without  exception  under  the  form  of  space, — in 
spatial  shape,  arrangement  or  relations  ;  hence  we  come  to  apply 
terms  of  space  symbolically  to  every  sort  of  complex  relation  in 
order  to  give  it  that  vividness  to  the  imagination  in  which  it 
would  otherwise  be  deficient.  We  represent  ideas  of  difference  by 
terms  of  distance,  distance  long  and  short,  in  this  direction  and  that ; 
the  multiplicity  of  what  is  the  same  by  distribution  at  different  points 
of  space ;  the  self-identity  of  unity *  by  the  notion  of  an  unchanging 
place  which  we  assign  to  the  idea  in  question  whenever  we  thinl^Jt ; 
lastly  we  find  it  difficult  to  make  our  conceptions  clear,  wherever  the 
manifold  orders  of  relation  which  present  themselves  to  thought  are 
such  as  the  formulae  derived  from  space  are  inadequate  to  express. 
And  yet  for  all  this  we  are  conscious  that  these  formulae  do  not 
reach  the  heart  of  the  matter ;  all  these  symbols  are,  we  are  aware, 
mere  subjective  aids  to  the  understanding,  convenient  paths  for 
thought  which  has  to  travel  up  and  down  to  reach  its  goal  C,  which 
is  in  itself  wholly  distinct  from  them ;  what  we  mean  is  independent 
of  the  mode  in  which  we  figure  it. 

Secondly  we  are  accustomed  to  clothe  our  thoughts  in  speech,  and 
even  in  the  silent  processes  of  thought  it  has  long  become  habitual  to 
us  to  call  up  the  appropriate  words  before  the  mind;  perception, 
recollection,  expectation,  hardly  reach  perfect  clearness  until  we  have 
found  adequate  expressions  for  them  in  spoken  propositions.  The 
advantage  thus  gained  is  not  in  its  own  nature  dependent  on  speech 
and  its  sounds,  but  rather  on  an  inward  act  of  analysis  and  combina- 
tion which  would  remain  the  same  if  it  employed  other  forms  of 
communication  ;  siill  in  point  of  fact,  now  that  speech  is  there  for  the 
purpose,  it  is  undoubtedly  the  case  that  the  forms  which  the  processes 
of  thought  assume  and  the  facility  with  which  they  are  conducted  are 
dependent  upon  the  means  which  speech  provides,  and  thus  present 
even  national  differences,  when  many  and  various  causes  have  combined 
to  render  the  formation  and  syntax  of  different  languages  dissimilar. 
Thus  the  logical  meaning  of  a  given  proposition  is  indeed  in  itself 
1  ['Identitat  des  Einen  mit  sich  selbst.*] 


CHAPTER  iv.]          The  Presentation  of  Ideas.  477 

independent  of  the  form  in  which  language  expresses  it ;  but  in 
practice  all  human  thought  is  compelled  to  represent  its  meaning  by 
separations,  combinations,  and  readjustments  of  those  ideas  which  the 
growth  of  language  has  attached  to  single  words.  It  is  only  in  this 
its  discursive  character,  in  contradistinction  to  Perception,  that  thought 
is  a  psychical  fact.  It  is  in  this  character  also  that  it  has  been  the 
subject  of  our  logical  treatise.  Logic  has  never  concerned  itself  with 
a  thought  which  did  not  make  its  various  ideas,  one  after  another,  the 
object  of  its  attention,  which  did  not  move  amongst  them  comparing 
and  relating  them  to  each  other,  which  did  not  symbolise  abstract 
ideas  by  spatial  images,  which  finally  did  not  express  its  thoughts  in 
the  forms  and  constructions  of  a  language.  We  must  expect  there- 
fore to  find  in  what  we  call  logical  operations,  logical  forms  and  laws, 
a  considerable  amount  of  purely  formal  apparatus  which  although  in- 
dispensable to  the  exercise  of  thought,  yet  lacks  that  Real  significance 
which  for  the  ultimate  results  of  its  activity  thought  does  undoubtedly 
claim. 

337.  Let  us  now  return  to  consider  this  result.     When  in  com- 
paring a  and  b  we  are  conscious  of  a  change  C  which  we  experience 
in  passing  from  one  to  the  other,  there  is  no  doubt  that  C  must 
depend  upon  the  nature  of  the  two  terms  of  the  relation,  for  it  would 
alter  and  become  C1  if  they  were  replaced  by  c  and  d.     At  the  same 
time  the  connexion  of  C  with  that  objective  relation  seems  to  be  one 
of  dependence  merely,  and  not  to  consist  in  being  an  identical  copy 
of  it ;  as  a  subjective  excitation  in  us  it  falls  short  of  the  objective 
reality  towards  which  knowledge  is  directed.     I  should  not  advert  to  ' 
so  subtle  a  refinement  of  criticism  were  it  not  that  it  gives  rne  an 
opportunity  to  return  once  more  to  the  difficult  subject  of  the  nature 
of  the  act  which  presents  ideas.     The  act  of  presentation  is  not  that 
which  it  presents,  the  idea  is  not  that  which  it  means.    And  this  not 
merely  in  the  obvious  sense  that  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  is  the 
fact  presented:  but  I  mean  that  even  the  very  simplest  ideas,  the 
content  of  which  can  only  exist  in  thought  and  is  not  a  thing,  have  not 
their  content  as  their  own  predicate ;  the  idea  of  yellow  is  not  yeltow, 
the  idea  of  triangularity  is  not  itself  triangular, '  or  the  idea  of  timidity 
timid,  or  the  idea  of  a  half  half  as  large  as  that  of  the  whole.     At  the 
same  time  the  act  of  presentation  is  not  so  completely  separable 
from  its  content,  that  it  could  be,  or  occur,  or  experience  change  by 
itself;  it  is  only  in  as  far  as  it  presents  that  which,  itself,  it  is  not;  it 
changes  only  in  exchanging  one  of  these  contents  for  another.    Thus 
even  the  change  of  which  it  becomes  conscious  in  its  own  condition 


Real  and  Formal  Value  of  Logical  Acts.     \  BOOK  in. 

can  only  consist  in  a  change  In  the  contents  presented,  which  with 
its  single  activity  it  comprehends  and  compares ;  it  cannot  be  sought 
in  an  affection  of  a  wholly  different  character  which  the  mind  ex- 
periences merely  as  an  after  remit  of  the  stimulus  given  it  by  those 
contents,  and  which  becomes  observable  to  consciousness  apart  from 
those  contents  as  an  idea  C  having  no  resemblance  to  their  own 
relation.  He  who  finds  red  and  yellow  to  a  certain  extent  different 
yet  akin,  becomes  conscious  no  doubt  of  those  two  relations  only 
by  help  of  the  changes  which  he  himself  as  a  subject  of  ideas 
experiences  in  the  transition  from  the  idea  of  the  one  to  that  of 
the  other,  but  at  the  same  time  he  never  entertains  the  apprehension 
that  the  relation  of  red  and  yellow  may  be  something  quite  different 
in  itself  from  that  of  the  affections  which  they  occasion  in  him,  that 
red  for  instance  may  be  in  itself  exactly  like  yellow  and  only  appear 
to  us  different  from  it,  or  again  that  in  reality  there  is  a  greater 
difference  between  them  than  we  know  and  that  their  apparent  affinity 
is  an  appearance  only.  Such  scepticism  might  not  be  groundless  if 
the  question  was  one  concerning  the  relation  of  our  world  of  thought 
to  a  world  of  things  assumed  to  be  external  to  it,  but  so  long  as  we  are 
considering  not  this  external  world,  but  our  own  ideas,  we  never  doubt 
that  the  relations  of  likeness  and  difference  which  we  experience  in 
the  comparison  of  them,  on  the  part  of  our  presentative  susceptibility, 
signify  at  the  same  time  an  objective  relation  on  the  part  of  those 
contents  which  our  ideas  present  to  us. 

338.  But  now  after  all  how  is  this  in  strictness  possible?  How 
can  the  propositions  '  a  is  the  same  as  a?  and  '  a  is  different  from  £,' 
express  an  objective  relation,  which,  as  objective,  would  subsist  in- 
dependently of  our  thought,  and  which  thought  could  only  discover 
or  recognise  ?  We  may  suppose  ourselves  to  know  what  we  mean 
by  a  self-existent  identity  of  a  with  0,  but  what  are  we  to  make  of 
a  self-existent  distinction  between  a  and  6  ?  And  what  objective  rela- 
tion can  correspond  to  this  'between/  to  which  we  only  attach  a 
meaning  so  long  as  it  suggests  to  us  the  distance  in  space  which  we, 
in  -comparing  a  with  b9  interpolated  by  way  of  metaphor  for  the 
•  purpose  of  holding  the  two  apart,  and  at  the  same  time  as  a  connect- 
ing path  on  which  our  mind  might  be  able  to  travel  from  one  to  the 
other?  Or  otherwise  expressed:  difference  being  neither  the  pre- 
dicate of  a  taken  by  itself  nor  of  b  taken  by  itself,  of  what  is  it 
the  predicate  ?  And  if  it  has  a  meaning  only  so  far  as  a  and  b  have 
been  brought  into  relation  to  each  other,  what  objective  connexion, 
.we  must  then  ask,  obtains  between  them,  if  we  consider  the  relating 


CHAPTER  iv.j  *  Existence '  of  Refatiotts.  479 

activity  through  which  we  have  conjoined  them  in  our  consciousness 
as  not  being  exercised?  Many  errors  in  ancient  Dialectic  were 
occasioned  by  the  fact  that  these  questions  were  ignored.  Attributes 
which  can  only  belong  to  things  in  the  reciprocal  relation  which  our 
combining  thought  establishes  between  them,  were  predicated  of  them, 
not  without  violence  to  the  logical  imagination,  singly  and  by  them- 
selves. In  order  that  a  and  b  might  be  represented  as  different,  with- 
out thought  being  required  to  establish  the  difference,  the  attribute  was 
ascribed  to  each  separately  of  being  in  itself  a  Irepo^,  and  the  act  of 
comparison  with  a  second  thing,  which  alone  gives  any  meaning-  to  the 
term,  was  to  be  left  wholly  out  of  account.  The  negation  which  thought, 
comparing  and  distinguishing,  expresses  in  the  proposition  'a  is  not  tf 
was  then  treated  as  a  positive  predicate  of  a  as  such,  the  negatived  term 
b  being  dropped  out.  That  is  to  say  it  was  treated  as  a  not-being 
which  yet  is,  and  became  thus  credited  with  a  reality  of  Its  own ;  and 
this  confusion  was  reckoned  an  important  and  profound  discovery. 
If  "3  Is  less  than  a  and  greater  than  c,  it  was  a  riddle  which  much 
vexed  philosophers,  how  the  two  predicates,  less  and  greater,,  which, 
once  separated  from  the  terms  of  the  relation  to  which  they  belonged, 
stood  in  direct  opposition  to  each  other,  could  be  associated  in  the 
same  b. 

It  would  be  a  task  not  without  interest  from  many  points  of  view 
to  follow  up  these  erroneous  conceptions  in  detail,  but  it  would  lead 
us  too  far  afield  for  the  purposes  of  the  present  discussion,  which 
I  may  be  content  to  close  with  the  following  remarks.  If  a  and  b  are 
as  we  have  thus  far  been  regarding  them,  not  things  belonging  to  a 
reality  outside  and  independent  of  our  thought,  but  simply  contents 
of  possible  ideas,  like  red  and  yellow,  straight  and  curved,  it  will 
follow  that  a  relation  between  them  can  exist  only  so  far  as  we  think 
it,  and  by  the  act  of  our  thinking  it.  Only  such  is  the  constitution 
of  our  soul  and  such  do  we  assume  that  of  every  other  soul  to  be 
which  inwardly  resembles  ours,  that  whenever  and  by  whomsoever 
they  may  be  thought,  they  must  always  produce  for  thought  the  same 
relation,  a  relation  which  has  its  being  only  in  thought  and  by  means 
of  thought.  This  relation  therefore  is  independent  of  the  individual 
thinking  subject,  and  independent  of  the  several  phases  of  his 
thought ;  this  is  all  that  we  mean  when  we  regard  it  as  subsisting 
in  itself  as  between  a  and  b,  as  an  object  having  a  permanent 
existence  of  its  own,  which  our  thought  discovers.  It  has  in  fact 
this  permanent  and  assured  character,  but  only  in  the  sense  of 
being  an  occurrence  which  will  always  repeat  itself  in  our  thinking 


4.80   Real  and  Formal  Value  of  Logical  Acts*    [  BOOK  m, 

in  the  same  way  under  the  same  conditions.  And  this  holds  not 
only  of  difference  but  of  every  relation  whatever  which  we  may  dis- 
cover between  a  and  b.  Every  time  that  any  mind  forms  the  idea 
of  a  perfect  circle  it  will  be  found,  in  this  case,  it  is  true,  only  through 
a  chain  of  intermediate  ideas,  that  the  ratio  i :  TT  obtains  between  the 
diameter  and  the  circumference ;  this  proportion  therefore  is  valid  in 
itself;  but  although  thus  possessing  objective  Validity,  it  possesses 
Being  only  in  the  form  of  the  thought  which  apprehends  it. 

The  case  is  different  if  a  and  b  are  taken  expressly  to  signify 
realities,  things,  beings,  which  we  do  not  create  by  thought  but 
recognise  as  objects  outside  thought.  In  that  case  the  name  Relation 
expresses  less  than  we  have  to  suppose  as  really  obtaining  between  the 
related  things.  Only  so  long  as  we  are  merely  placing  the  thinkable 
contents  of  this  a  and  b  by  a  voluntary  act  side  by  side  for  comparison, 
would  a  proposition  affirming  a  relation  between  a  and  b,  or  more 
properly  in  this  case  between  the  ideas  or  thought-pictures  of  them, 
adequately  express  our  meaning.  If  on  the  other  hand  we  are  le£T  in 
order  to  explain  some  connexion  between  these  ideas  which  per- 
ception has  thrust  upon  us,  to  have  recourse  to  a  relation  6*  such  as  to 
subsist  not  between  the  ideas  but  between  the  things  a  and  b  them- 
selves, of  which  the  ideas  are  the  thought-pictures,  then  we  must 
recognise  that  this  C  which  we  have  invoked  cannot  be  a  relation 
between  a  and  3,  cannot  any  longer  therefore  be  a  relation  in  the 
ordinary  sense  of  the  word  at  all  For  it  is  thought  and  thought  only 
which,  passing  from  the  idea  a  to  the  idea  <5,  and  becoming  conscious  of 
the  transition,  creates  that  which  we  call  here  a  '  between/  and  presents 
it  as  a  mental  picture  which  thought  finds  intelligible;  accordingly  it 
must  always  be  a  vain  endeavour  to  attempt  to  ascribe  to  this  relation, 
which  at  once  separates  a  and  b  and  brings  them  together,  and  which  is 
nothing  more  than  the  recollection  of  an  act  of  thought  performable 
only  by  the  unity  of  our  consciousness, — to  ascribe,  I  say,  to  this  rela- 
tion a  real  validity  in  the  sense  of  being  something  in  itself  apart  from 
the  consciousness  which  thinks  it.  This  supposed  'relation'  can  only 
subsist  independently  of  our  consciousness,  or  objectively,  if  it  is  some- 
thing more  than  relation,  and  then  it  subsists  not  between  a  and  b  (for 
this  'between'  has  no  existence  except  in  us),  but  rather  in  them,  as  an 
influence  which  they  reciprocally  exert  upon  and  receive  from  each* 
other.  It  is  merely  for  us  when  we  think  it  that  such  influence  takes 
logical  shape  in  the  weakened  form  of  a  relation,  which  no  longer 
expresses  its  full  significance.  I  must  leave  it  to  the  Metaphysic *  to 
1  [Cp. '  Metaphysic/  p.  141  ff.  and  Book  III.  ch.  3.] 


CHAPTER  iv.]     How  Universals  come  before  the  mind.     481 

show  what  are  the  conclusions  to  which  this  observation  leads;  to  cer- 
tain questions  nearly  connected  with  it  I  shall  return  directly. 

339.  The  comparison  of  a  and  b  does  not  lead  merely  to   the 
affirmation  of  identity  or  difference;  we  also  try  to  present  identity 
in  difference  under  the  form   of  a  universal  as   the  content  of  a 
separate  idea  C.     It  is  a  criticism  frequently  made  in  Logic  that  our 
general   conceptions  do  not  possess  the  fixity  with  which  ordinary 
thought  credits  them ;   their  content  is  formed  and  their  structure 
developed  little   by  little,  and  the  same  conception  means  different 
things  at  different  stages  in  the  evolution  of  our  growing  know- 
ledge, as  fresh  experiences  continually  enrich  it.   This  is  very  evidently 
true  of  those  conceptions  whose  content  is  drawn  purely  from  ex- 
perience, and  therefore  can  only  become  gradually  known  to  us ;  on 
the  other  hand  the  conceptions  of  an  integer  or  a  fraction,  a  line  or 
a  figure,  will  not  be  found  necessarily  imperfect  in  the  same  way. 
The   conception   of  a  triangle  as   such  contains  in  it  no  more  to 
the  geometrician  than  It  does  to  the  scholar  who  follows  him ;  the 
difference  is  that  to  the  geometrician  it  suggests  numerous  relations 
which  the  scholar  is  as  yet  unacquainted  with,  and  in  this  way  the 
conception  of  the  triangle  as  such  appears  to  be  richer  in  content  to 
the  one  than  it  is  to  the  other,  whereas  the  truth  is  that  it  is  only  his 
knowledge  about  it  which  is  more  extensive.     But  leaving  this,  the 
point  I  wish  to  emphasise  is  that  a  general  conception,  even  if  we 
consider  merely  its  content  at  any  one  moment,  indicates   a  task 
which  no  actual  idea,  that  can  be  presented  to  the  mind,  can  fulfil 
A  specific  red  or  blue  colour  we  can  see,  colour  in  general  can  neither 
be  seen  nor  yet  presented  in  the  same  sort  of  imaginative  embodi- 
ment as  the  images  of  red  and  green  recalled  in  memory.     He  who 
speaks  of  colour  in  general  reckons  on  his  hearer  first  of  all  summon- 
ing up  the  mental  picture  of  some  definite  colour,  red  perhaps,  which 
however  is  accompanied  at  the  same  time  by  a  negation  by  which  it  is 
made  to  stand  not  for  itself,  but  as  an  exapiple  of  colour  in  general. 
To  this  negation  however,  if  it  is  not  to  deprive  the  idea  of  all  content 
whatsoever,  he  can  only  give  effect  by  calling  up  at  the  same  time  the 
ideas  of  other  definite  colours  to  his  imagination,  and  becoming  aware 
in  passing  from  one  to  the  other  of  the  common  element  which  re- 
mains constant  throughout  the  changes  of  his  conscious  states. 

It  is  a  series  of  psychical  operations  of  this  nature  which  is  the 
task  prescribed  to  us,  when  we  hear  the  name  of  any  universal ;  but 
that  towards  which  those  operations  are  directed  can  never  be 
presented  as  an  actual  idea  ;  we  can  never  separate  that  which  makes 

xi 


482    Real  and  Formal  Value  of  Logical  Acts.    (BOOK  in. 

red  and  green  colours  from  that  which  makes  red  red  and  green 
green.  It  is  commonly  admitted  as  a  self-evident  truth,  that  the  class 
to  which  a  real  object  belongs  is  not  itself  real ;  this  individual  horse 
we  see,  horse  in  general  is  nowhere  to  be  found;  but  it  has  to  be 
understood  that  in  thought  too  the  universal  is  never  more  than  an 
idea  strained  after  but  always  unrealised,  floating  over  the  forms 
of  the  individual  instances  of  it  which  are  imaged  in  the  mind.  To 
these  purely  inward  operations  of  thought  no  objective  significance 
can  attach ;  they  remain  subjective  efforts  of  our  mind,  and  the  very 
form  in  which  we  express  the  result  to  which  they  lead  us,  '  in  in- 
tension the  universal  is  included  in  the  particular,  in  extension  the 
particular  in  the  universal/  merely  indicates  in  the  symbolism  of  space 
those  operations  of  thought  through  which  the  mind  endeavours  to 
represent  as  an  idea  tRe  objective  relation  between  them.  And  now 
inasmuch  as,  more  than  this,  we  never  find  the  object  of  our  search, 
our  universal,  in  actual  presentation  at  all,  we  are  led  to  ask  whether 
it  really  has  any  objective  significance  ?  Or  are  we  to  approve  an 
opinion  widely  current,  that  it  is  merely  the  mechanism  of  the  mind 
which  misleads  us  into  grouping  similar  impressions  under  general 
names  by  blurring  the  real  distinctions  between  them  to  the  prejudice  of 
accurate  thought?  This  theory  however  in  fact  acknowledges  that 
which  it  sets  itself  to  deny.  In  order  to  make  the  fact  intelligible  that 
not  all  but  only  similar  ideas  are  thus  drawn  together  under  a  common 
name  it  presupposes  the  fact  of  that  similarity,  and  clearly,  with  it,  only 
in  another  form,  the  objective  validity  of  our  assumption  of  a  univer- 
sal, which,  however  inseparably,  is  contained  in  them.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  we  could  merely  point  to  an  innate  tendency  f  thought  to 
search  for  a  universal,  such  tendency  might  very  well  be  without  any 
objective  significance,  but  the  fact  that  the  object  of  the  search  \s>  found 
gives  it  such  a  significance  at  once. 

This  is  only  an  apparent  contradiction  to  what  I  was  saying  "just 
now,  for  although  the  universal  cannot  be  held  before  the  imagination , 
the  effort  to  think  it  is  still  ii>t  without  result.  We  could  not  so  much 
as  bring  red  and  blue  under  the  general  name  of  colour,  did  not  that 
common  element  exist  in  them,  to  our  consciousness  of  which  we 
testify  in  framing  the  name ;  we  could  form  no  class  notions  of  animals 
and  plants  if  the  marks  of  individual  plants  or  animals,  and  the  modes 
in  which  those  marks  are  conjoined,  did  not  really  possess  such  points 
of  comparison  as  allow  us  to  arrange  them  under  general  marks  and 
forms,  and  thus  by  setting  these  in  the  place  of  the  merely  individual, 
to  construct  the  thought-form  of  the  class,  however  impossible  it  may 


CHAPTER  iv.i  Nominalism  and  Realism.  483 

be  to  picture  it  to  the  mind.  Thus  in  the  fact  that  we  are  able  to  think 
a  universal,  there  is  undoubtedly  contained  a  truth  of  real  and  objective 
validity ;  the  contents  of  the  world  of  ideas  which  thought  does  not  create 
but  finds  do  not  fall  into  mere  individual  and  atomic  elements,  each  one 
admitting  of  no  comparison  with  the  other,  but  on  the  contrary  resem- 
blances, affinities,  and  relations  exist  between  them,  in  such  wise  that 
thought  as  it  constructs  its  universals  and  subordinates  and  co-ordinates 
the  particulars  under  them,  comes  through  these  purely  formal  and  sub- 
jective operations,  to  coincide  with  the  nature  of  that  objective  world. 

34O.  If  we  pass  from  these  more  simple  instances  to  the  main 
forms  of  logical  thought,  and  enquire  into  the  significance  of  universal 
notions,  we  are  met  by  the  controversy  between  Nominalism  and 
Realism,  which  excited  such  passionate  agitation  in  the  middle  ages. 
To  both  parties  the  question  at  issue  had  other  than  a  purely  logical 
importance ;  the  metaphysical  interest  predominated,  leading  them  to 
think  of  the  world  of  ideas  mainly  in  its  relation  to  the  world  of  things. 
Thus  Realism  first  misunderstanding  and  then  exaggerating  the  inde- 
pendence of  the  Platonic  Ideas,  came  to  look  upon  the  general  notion 
-as  the  only  real  existence  in  things,  all  distinctively  individual  cha- 
racteristics being  relegated  to  the  position  of  merely  transient  and 
subordinate  though  mysterious  appendages  to  the  eternal  substance  of 
the  universal  Nominalism  starting  from  the  sound  Aristotelian  doc- 
trine, that  reality  of  Existence  belongs  only  to  the  individual  thing, 
found  no  way  of  reconciling  this  with  the  Validity  of  the  universal. 
Thus  the  Nominalist  carne  to  regard  general  notions  as  at  the  best 
mere  aids  to  the  mind  in  the  arrangement  of  its  ideas,  possessing  no 
significance  whatever  in  relation  to  the  things  which  the  ideas  repre- 
sent. They  even  erred  so  far  as  to  deny  them  so  much  value  as  this, 
and  to  declare  them  to  be  mere  sounds  which  may  be  uttered  and 
heard,  but  are  wholly  devoid  of  content  or  meaning. 

I  am  desirous  in  the  first  place  to  avoid  dealing  with  the  subject 
thus  exclusively  in  relation  to  the  question  of  existence,  which  involves 
an  undue  limitation  of  the  issue.  In  Mathematics  where  we  find  our- 
selves dealing  not  with  existing  things  and  their  essence  at  all,  in 
Moral  Philosophy  and  Jurisprudence  where  we  speak  of  virtues  and 
crimes,  which  ought  or  ought  not  to  exist,  more  than  this,  when  in 
actual  life  we  endeavour  to  arrive  at  a  decision  in  a  matter  of  importance 
by  bringing  the  given  case  under  a  general  notion : — in  all  these  in- 
stances we  meet  with  the  universal  and  its  laws,  in  dealing  with  objects 
which  are  given  us  as  matter  of  knowledge  although  they  are  not  things 1. 
1  ['  Sachlich,  aber  doch.  nicht  dinghaft.'] 
I  i  2 


484    Real  and  Formal  Value  of  Logical  Acts.    [BOOK  IIL 

341.  If  we  can  get  out  of  the  habit  of  always  thinking  exclusively  of 
class  notions  in  natural  history  as  examples  of  the  universal,  if  we 
recollect  that  we  also  frame  general  notions  of  figures  and  numbers, 
events  and  relations,  truths  and  errors,  the  wild  ambition  to  ascribe 
to  general  notions  as  such  a  reality  like  that  of  things,  or  at  any  rate 
of  some  actual  existences,  vanishes  at  once.  To  the  original  forms  of 
substantial  existences,  of  the  plant,  the  animal,  the  human  being,  our 
imagination  may  if  it  pleases  attribute  an  independent  and  eternal 
existence  in  a  hypostasized  world  of  ideas,  as  objects  of  intuition  to 
souls  which  are  yet  unfettered  by  the  limitations  of  an  earthly  existence. 
But  the  general  notions  of  rest  and  motion,  resemblance  and  contrariety,, 
activity  and  passivity,  could  not  possibly  exist  side  by  side  with  the 
former  even  in  a  world  of  ideas,  they  could  only  possess  'validity  as 
predicates  of  the  ideas.  This  fact,  from  which  it  is  easy  to  see  that 
there  is  no  escape,  we  do  indeed  sometimes  forget.  We  are  tempted 
to  treat  qualities,  relations,  or  occurrences,  to  which  some  prominent 
interest  attaches,  objects  of  our  reverence  or  of  our  dread,  as  universals 
with  a  reality  like  that  of  an  actual  existence,  misapprehending  their 
purely  predicative  nature.  We  speak  for  instance  of  cthe  beautiful'- 
as  of  a  being  which  is  merely  to  us  unapproachable,  but  in  itself  an 
object  of  possible  intuition;  we  speak  of '  sin'  not  merely  as  of  an  act 
which  becomes  real  when  we  commit  it,  but  as  if  it  were  a  substantial 
force  which  operated  upon  us  with  an  independent  reality  of  its  own. 
We  confound  the  importance  which  belongs  to  the  content  of  such 
conceptions  in  the  entire  system  of  the  world  with  a  form  of  reality 
which  it  cannot  possess,  and  in  attributing  which  to  them  we  are 
merely  expressing  in  the  most  emphatic  terms  at  our  command  their 
independence  of  our  recognition  of  them.  This  mistaken  habit  of 
thought,  which  is  not  altogether  harmless,  is  however  here  easily  re- 
nounced ;  it  is  only  from  that  class  of  general  conceptions  the  nature 
of  whose  content  necessitates  its  being  apprehended  from  the  first  in  a 
substantive  form,  that  this  hypostasizing  tendency  continues  to  draw 
support.  Here  too  however  it  has  to  give  way  before  a  very  simple 
consideration.  We  are  not  content  to  frame,  starting  from  the  parti- 
cular of  perception,  a  single  universal  <2,  but  we  go  on  to  combine  this 
with  others  like  it  in  a  higher  universal  P,  and  as  we  proceed  with 
this  operation,  it  rests  within  wide  limits  with  our  own  logical  good 
pleasure  to  determine  through  how  many  such  links  in  the  chain  of 
universals  we  may  choose  to  connect  our  Q  with  the  highest  universal 
A,  at  which  the  process  of  abstraction  will  be  arrested.  Each  one  of 
these  universals  would  have  an  equal  right  to  such  substantial  exist- 


CHAPTER  iv.]   Structure  of  Notion  not  that  of  Things.    485 


;  side  by  side  with  animal  in  general  would  appear  vertebrate  in 
general,  mammal  in  itself,  one-toed  animal  in  general,  horse  in  itself,  . 
black  horse  in  general,  all  equally  real.  I  say  deliberately  side  by  side 
with  each  other,  for  in  fact  our  imagination  is  totally  unable  to  transfer 
that  relation  of  subordination  through  which  in  our  thought  one  such 
general  notion  includes  another,  to  beings  such  as  these,  which  are 
conceived  as  possessing  all  alike  actual  existence.  Placed  thus  how- 
ever side  by  side  with  one  another  they  could  no  longer  have  the 
meaning  which  they  purport  to  have.  Thus  we  find  ourselves  con- 
firmed in  our  conviction  that  this  Reality  which  we  desire  to  recognise 
in  the  general  notions  which  are  created  by  our  thought  is  a  reality 
which  is  wholly  dissimilar  to  Existence,  and  which  can  only  consist  in 
what  we  have  called  Validity  or  in  being  predicate  of  the  Existent. 
But  how  much  of  the  full  meaning  of  a  general  notion  possesses  this 
validity,  and  what  is  the  meaning  of  possessing  '  validity'  at  all,  are 
questions  which  need  some  further  discussion. 

§42.  I  remind  my  readers  to  begin  with  that  we  are  not  concerned 
with  the  question  of  the  objective  value  which  may  attach  to  one  or 
another  of  the  general  notions  evolved  by  thought  in  virtue  of  its 
content  being  correctly  constructed;    the   question  relates   to   the 
general  significance  of  the  logical  form  as  such.     That  this  like  every 
other  of  the  forms  which  logic  prescribes  as  ideals  may  be  given  a 
content  which  is  not  adapted  to  it,  needs  no  special  mention,  but  a 
critical  review  of  the  countless  modes  in  which  the  form  of  tbe  notion 
niay  be  applied  is  not  our  business  here.     To  proceed  then  :  we  saw 
that  any  content  of  thought  S  is  conceived  under  the  form  of  the 
notion,  when  we  do  not  merely  grasp  its  manifold  constituents  as 
some  sort  of  whole,  but  present  to  ourselves  at  the  same  time  a 
universal  M  whose  general  characteristics  P,  Q  .  .  .  standing  in  deter- 
minate   relations  to   one  another,   become   severally  modified  and 
defined  in  S  in  the  specific  forms  p8,  <f.     This  constitution  of  the 
logical  notion  does  not  correspond  to  anything  which  takes  place  in 
things  or  external  objects  l  themselves  ;  and  neither  does  it  answer  to 
the  actual  nature  of  a  content  which  is  presented  to  us  as  matter  of 
knowledge  but  not  as  a  substantial  thing.    There  is  no  moment  in  the 
life  of  a  plant  in  which  it  is  merely  plant  in  general  or  conifer  in  itself, 
awaiting  some  subsequent  influences  answering  to  the  subsequent 
logical  determinations  in  our  thought,  to  settle  the  question  what 
particular  tree  it  is  to  grow  up  into.    It  is  true  that  the  plant  is  not 

1  [<  Ernes  Binges  oder  Gegenstandes,'  contrasted  with  'lahalt'  (content)  arid 
4  sacMich  '  (matter  of  knowledge)  in  the  following  clause.] 


486    Real  and  Formal  Value  of  Logical  Acts.  [BOOK  in. 

while  still  in  the  germ  its  future  self  in  perfect  miniature ;  still  its 
manner  of  development  is  not  that  certain  conditions  superadded 
from  without  produce  a  special  determination  of  characteristics  which 
were  present  in  a  general  and  indeterminate  shape  ;  on  the  contrary 
its  characteristics  are  already  fully  determined  when  the  conditions 
enter  in.  From  the  two  in  conjunction  new  results  are  produced  of 
which  it  is  misleading  to  say  that  they  were  contained  in  the  earlier 
and  more  general  properties  as  mere  potential  species  and  are  now  for 
the  first  time  actualised  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  alternatives.  An 
ellipse  has  no  natural  existence  and  development  like  a  plant;  still 
here  too  it  is  not  the  only  way  of  arriving  at  a  true  apprehension  of  its 
nature  to  think  of  it  first  as  a  curve  possessing  the  general  properties 
of  all  curved  lines,  and  then  to  define  these  properties  further  till  we 
reach  the  particular  form  of  them  which  belongs  to  this  particular  curve. 
We  may  indeed  arrive  at  the  conception  of  it  in  that  way — supposing 
for  instance  an  unpractised  memory  only  allows  us  at  first  to  recall 
the  general  outlines  of  the  figure  required,  and  we  need  subsequent 
reflexion  to  draw  it  exactly ;  but  in  the  mathematical  equations,  whe- 
ther they  refer  the  shape  of  the  line  to  arbitrary  points  of  origin,  or 
take  account  of  some  graphical  method  by  which  it  maybe  generated, 
the  curvature  itself  is  not  directly  expressed  at  all ;  it  only  appears 
as  a  consequence  which  may  be  deduced  from  the  definite  ratios  of 
the  co-ordinates.  These  considerations  hold  equally  as  concerns  the 
subordination  of  notions  to  one  another  in  classification ;  it  has  no 
real  significance  in  relation  to  the  actual  structure  and  development 
of  things  themselves.  This  horse  was  not  to  begin  with  animal  in 
general,  then  vertebrate  in  general,  later  on  mammal,  and  only  at  the 
last  stage  of  all  horse ;  nor  can  we  by  any  means  at  any  moment  of 
its  life  separate  off  as  an  independent  set  of  qualities  the  more  fully 
defined  group  of  properties  which  make  it  a  horse,  from  the  more 
general  and  less  determinate  which  would  make  it  a  vertebrate,  or 
from  those  most  indeterminate  of  all  which  would  merely  constitute  it 
an  animal  as  such.  Add  to  this  that  not  only  do  different  classifica- 
tions of  the  same  objects  conflict  owing  to  imperfect  knowledge  and 
observation,  and  thus  introduce  various  and  diverse  ladders  of  uni- 
versals  between  the  highest  universal  and  the  objects,  but  the  logical 
right  of  thought  is  incontestable  to  start  from  any  point  of  view  it 
pleases,  and  so  to  subsume  the  same  object  £  under  diiferent  general 
notions,  or  to  construct  its  conception  of  the  object  by  means  of 
several  widely  divergent  series  of  successive  determinations.  In  such 
a  case  we  are  at  liberty  to  ask  with  a  view  to  the  particular  purpose 


CHAPTER  iv.]      Value  of  the  Notion  for  Knowledge*        487 

of  any  enquiry,  which  of  these  various  constructions  is  to  be  pre- 
ferred, as  presenting  the  object  in  the  form  in  which  it  can  be  brought 
most  conveniently  under  the  principles  which  happen  on  the  parti- 
cular occasion  to  be  our  guiding  principles ;  and  if  we  knew  ourselves 
to  possess  a  knowledge  of  the  supreme  principles  of  the  universe, 
such  as  would  contain  within  them  the  key  to  all  problems  which 
could  arise,  then  we  might  go  on  to  select  out  of  the  various  possible 
conceptions  of  an  object  that  highest  or  best  conception,  which  would 
indicate  its  place  in  this  supreme  classification,  and  in  which  all  the 
other  conceptions  of  it  would  be  contained  as  logical  consequences. 
Still  greatly  as  the  value  of  this  conception  for  knowledge  would  be 
enhanced  if  this  ideal  were  attained,  from  the  importance  which  would 
then  attach  to  its  content  and  to  the  mode  in  which  this  content 
would  be  internally  connected,  for  all  this  the  Logical  structure  which 
belongs  to  it  as  a  conception  would  still  represent  no  Real  structure 
corresponding  to  it  hi  the  object  itself. 

"This  value  for  knowledge  however,  which  we  do  not  dispute,  gives 
us  the  other  side  of  the  question,  that  which  we  mean  when  we  all 
insist  in  spite  of  everything,  that  the  general  notion  and  that  classifica- 
tion do  at  all  events  contain  something  which  has  to  do  with  the  thing 
itself.  We  shall  perhaps  be  disposed  to  express  it  by  saying  that  the 
whole  series  of  intersubordinated  universals  are  contained  not  aciu  but 
poientid  in  the  essence  of  the  thing  itself;  and  this  proposition  will  be 
extended  to  other  and  different  ways  in  which  a  given  content  is  con- 
structed or  conceived:  not  really  but  potentially  is  every  mark  of 
division  contained  in  the  continuous  magnitude  which  we  break  up  by 
means  of  it ;  potentially  all  simple  motion  in  a  straight  line  contains 
in  it  the  two  component  motions  into  which  we  may  choose  to  resolve 
it ;  7  is  not  4  +  3,  but  certainly  it  admits  of  those  figures  being  substi- 
tuted for  it  for  purposes  of  calculation.  We  may  interpret  these 
phrases  into  more  definite  language ;  all  the  processes  which  we  go 
through  in  the  framing  of  conceptions,  in  classification,  in  our  logical 
constructions,  are  subjective  movements  of  our  thought  and  not 
processes  which  take  place  in  things  ;  but  at  the  same  time  the  nature 
of  those  things,  of  the  given  thinkable  contents,  is  so  constituted,  that 
thought  by  surrendering  itself  to  the  logical  laws  of  these  movements 
of  its  own,  finds  itself  at  the  end  of  its  journey  if  pursued  in  obedience 
to  those  laws,  coinciding  with  the  actual  course  of  the  things  them- 
selves. The  paths  however  which  it  can  pursue  with  equal  prospect 
of  success  in  passing  from  one  element  of  its  content  to  another,  are 
many  and  not  one ;  in  countless  directions  the  world  of  possible  ideas 


488    Real  and  Formal  Value  of  Logical  Acts,    c  BOOK  m,  " 

extends  and  is  knit  together,  a  diversely  articulated  system  of  coherent 
connected  series,  and  thought  when  it  moves  from  one  member  in 
the  system  to  another,  choosing  its  path  at  pleasure  but  always 
observing  its  own  laws,  resembles  in  some  sense  a  melody  whose 
course  we  cannot  predict  yet  which  strikes  always  definite  intervals  in 
the  scale  each  with  its  determinate  harmonic  relations, 

343.  When  we  come  to  the  judgment  we  find  that  not  only  its 
logical  form  but  its  content  for  knowledge  which  is  expressed  through 
that  form  has  in  itself  no  direct  Real  significance.  We  give  utterance 
to  the  categorical  propositions  'This  tree  blossoms/  'Atmospheric 
air  is  a  permanent  gas/  *  Every  triangle  has  its  angles  equal  to  two 
right  angles.'  In  the  first  case  it  is  merely  thanks  to  the  subject- 
matter  of  the  proposition  that  we  are  able  to  ascribe  to  the  tree  an 
existence  which  really  is  independent  of  the  temporary  condition  of 
blossoming,  that  is  to  say  that  the  subject  and  the  predicate  are 
actually  related  and  separated  as  we  divide  and  connect  them  in  the 
form  of  the  judgment.  In  the  two  other  cases  this  separation  is  not 
to  be  found  in  the  thing  itself,  it  is  a  purely  subjective  movement  of 
thought  arbitrarily  selecting  one  particular  constituent  in  a  whole 
which  is  really  a  unity,  to  be  made  the  object  of  separate  attention. 
The  differences  in  the  copula  again  in  the  three  propositions  are  clue 
merely  to  the  imagination,  which  adapts  itself  to  the  peculiarities  of 
each  separate  subject-matter,  and  finds  an  expression  for  them  in 
language ;  logic  itself  testifies  by  representing  all  judgments  under  the 
symbolic  form  S  is  jP,  that  in  the  uniform  copula  '  is '  all  objective 
distinctions  in  the  connexion  between  S  and  P  are  obliterated. 
They  may  be  related  as  whole  and  part,  as  a  thing  to  its  transient 
states,  or  as  cause  to  effect ;  in  the  form  of  the  judgment  they  appear 
solely  as  subject  and  predicate,  two  terms  which  denote  merely  the 
relative  positions  which  the  ideas  of  them  assume  in  the  subjective 
movement  of  our  thought,  and  tell  us  nothing  as  to  the  objective 
relation  in  itself  which  tfit  becomes  an  object  of  thought  compels  the 
ideas  to  assume  those  positions  in  our  thoughts.  Once  more,  in 
Hypothetical  judgments  we  do  indeed  appeal  to  an  objective  relation 
of  this  sort,  but  in  the  form  of  the  judgment  we  neither  express  it 
nor  make  it  intelligible.  The  conjunction  of  antecedent  and  conse- 
quent in  the  form,  'If  B  is  true  F  is  true,'  in  itself  affirms  no  more 
than  the  proposition  that  B  and  F  belong  both  together  and  in  some 
way  not  defined  to  a  single  notion  M.  The  fact  that  we  notwith- 
standing divide  this  coherent  unity  and  place  one  part  of  the  notion  in 
front  of  the  other,  so  that  by  reason  of  the  inseparable  connexion 


CHAPTER  iv.]      Value  of  the  Hypothetical  Judgment.       489 

between  the  two,  the  one  becomes  antecedent,  the  other  consequent,— 
all  this  is  once  more  simply  one  of  those  subjective  movements  of 
thought  which  do  not  take  place  in  the  content  of  the  notion.  And 
this  subjective  character  of  the  movement  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  we 
have  it  in  our  power  to  reverse  its  direction.  We  say,  c  Every  equi- 
lateral triangle  is  equiangular/  or  'If  a  triangle  is  equilateral  it  is 
equiangular/  but  we  might  say  equally  well  c  If  it  is  equiangular  it  is 
equilateral'  That  which  constitutes  the  objective  content  here  is  the 
undivided  thought  or  the  intuition  of  the  equilateral  and  equiangular 
triangle ;  the  two  constitutive  elements,  equality  of  sides  and  equality 
of  angles,  are  simultaneously  present  in  it,  but  thought  taking  an 
arbitrary  starting-point  at  one  or  the  other  moves  up  and  down 
between  them  dividing  and  uniting  in  its  own  fashion.  This  holds  of 
all  judgments  which  like  those  of  mathematics  are  occupied  with  the 
ideal  and  not  with  the  actual.  They  would  all  admit  of  simple 
conversion,  if  their  expressions  in  language  through  the  medium  of 
propositions  allowed  of  all  the  conceptions  which  occur  in  them  being 
as  precisely  defined  as  is  the  case  in  the  form  of  the  equation. 

If  on  the  other  hand  our  hypothetical  judgments  relate  to  data 
of  reality,  in  such  cases  our  intention  is  certainly  that  the  ante- 
cedent and  the  consequent  are  to  be  taken  as  not  interchange- 
able, but  the  hypothetical  form  of  the  judgment  does  not  in  itself 
express  the  condition  which  makes  that  assumption  true.  For  given 
the  antecedent  B  there  is  logically  no  interval  left  which  sepa- 
rates its  validity  from  that  of  the  consequent  F\  the  two  together 
constitute,  in  perfect  accord  with  that  which  the  hypothetical  form  of 
judgment  itself  affirms  as  its  result,  a  single  process  M  which  can  be 
expressed  in  a  judgment  And  further  inasmuch  as  if  we  take  our 
conception  accurately,  leaving  nothing  out  and  adding  nothing  to  it, 
no  Fl  can  be  connected  with  our  B  but  F  only,  and  no  J3l  with  F 
but  B  only,  it  follows  that  we  pass  in  thought  with  equal  right  and 
necessity  from  either  of  the  two  starting-points  taken  at  pleasure,  to 
the  other,  from  B  to  F  just  as  much  as  from  F  to  B;  we  know  the 
consequent  from  the  antecedent  and  the  antecedent  from  the  con- 
sequent. That  in  actual  fact  there  is  here  some  circumstance  which 
makes  B  and  B  alone  the  Antecedent,  and  F  and  F  alone  the  Conse- 
quent, we  are  very  well  aware,  because  we  are  acquainted  with  the 
subject-matter  under  consideration,  but  it  receives  no  expression 
through  the  form  of  our  logical  act.  For  that  form  depends  upon 
nothing  more  than  the  abstract  notion  that  F  is  in  a  general  sense 
conditioned  by  J*?;  but  this,  a  mere  abstract  relation,  is  as  shown 


490    Real  and  Formal  Value  of  Logical  Acts.    \  BOOK  in. 

already,  something  less  than  anything  that  we  obtain  in  reality  between 
B  and  F  as  things  or  events.  A  relation  through  which  B  and  B 
only  is  to  be  the  antecedent,  and  to  be  a  real  antecedent,  can  only 
actually  obtain  if  B  is  cause  and  F  effect ;  but  in  the  hypothetical 
judgment  instead  of  this  real  and  specific  relation  of  causality  we  have 
nothing  but  the  vague  and  general  relation  of  conditioning  in  the 
abstract,  which  thus  has  no  significance  for  reality  whatever. 

Finally  Disjunctive  judgments  do  not  even  purport  to  express  any 
reality  at  all;  the  process  of  wavering  undecided  between  several 
mutually  exclusive  predicates  can  answer  to  no  process  in  the  real 
world ;  it  remains  a  state  of  our  thinkingj  to  which  the  adequate  data 
for  the  knowledge  of  reality  are  lacking. 

844.  A  brief  consideration  of  the  various  forms  of  Syllogism  leads 
us  to  similar  results.  We  shall  be  most  readily  disposed  to  ascribe  a 
Real  significance  to  those  Figures  of  Subsumption  which  arrive  at 
their  conclusions  by  bringing  the  particular  under  the  universal,  for 
this  subordination  we  do  certainly  regard  in  the  sense  already  suffi- 
ciently explained  as  a  notion  which  possesses  an  objective  validity 
in  relation  to  everything  that  can  be  presented  to  the  mind  as  an  idea. 
Still  here  also  the  logical  form  of  the  argument  does  not  correspond 
to  anything  that  takes  place.  In  mathematical  syllogisms  the  uni- 
versal major  premiss,  from  which  we  derive  our  more  particular 
conclusion,  has  no  priority  of  truth  as  compared  with  the  conclusion 
or  with  the  minor  premiss ;  all  three  are  parts  of  one  eternal  truth, 
•  all  possess  a  simultaneous  validity.  The  priority  of  greater  simplicity 
or  more  immediate  evidence  the  major  premiss  may  indeed  possess, 
but  both  the  one  predicate  and  the  other  would  belong  to  it  in  relation 
to  our  thought  only,  without  giving  it  any  superiority  in  itself  over 
other  propositions  of  equal  certainty.  Lastly  there  is  nothing  in  the 
form  of  inference  by  Subsumption  which  obliges  it  to  start  from  a 
major  premiss  of  this  simple  character  at  all;  on  the  contrary  the 
simultaneity  of  the  connexion  which  obtains  between  the  entire  body 
of  mathematical  truths  allows  the  simpler  among  them  to  be  derived 
as  limiting  cases  from  a  logical  connexion  of  less  simple,  no  less  than 
the  other  way,  and  always  in  this  figure  of  Subsumption. 

This  purely  subjective  significance  of  the  form  of  the  syllogism  we 
sometimes  forget  in  applying  it  to  matters  of  fact.  So  long  indeed  as 
the  universal  major  expresses  a  highly  concrete  and  specific  truth, 
when  for  instance  we  say  *  All  animals  breathe/  we  never  question  that 
such  a  major  premiss  cannot  designate  any  reality  which  is  prior 
to  the  validity  of  the  conclusion  fi  Fishes  breathe/  anywhere  but  in  our 


CHAPTER  iv.  ]  Value  of  Inference.  491 

thought  Yet  when  we  turn  to  the  most  universal  principles  of  the 
system  of  things,  the  impulse  comes  back  upon  us  to  give  to  the  ex- 
pression of  those  principles,  the  most  universal  laws  of  nature,  which 
present  themselves  as  major  premises  in  our  enquiries  into  the  order 
of  the  world,  a  real  priority,  which  is  in  fact  wholly  inconceivable,, 
to  the  processes  in  which  they  are  to  hold  good.  This  impulse  is 
not  without  danger  to  the  soundness  and  consistency  of  our  meta- 
physical theories;  it  leads  to  a  superstition  which  has  far  reaching 
consequences,  that  the  reality  of  the  world  may  be  derived  from 
something  which  is  unreal  and  which  is  yet  essential  and  possessed 
of  a  regulative  power,  whereas  on  the  contrary  we  have  thoroughly  to 
convince  ourselves  that  all  necessary  truths,  to  which  we  imagine  that 
we  can  subordinate  the  existent  as  if  it  were  something  merely 
secondary  and  additional,  are  simply  the  nature  and  self-consistency 
of  the  existent  itself,  and  are  only  disengaged  from  it  by  a  reflective 
act  of  thought  and  credited  accordingly  with  a  prior  and  regulative 
character  to  which  they  have  no  claim. 

Inferences  by  Induction  do  not  give  occasion  to  this  sort  of  mis- 
understanding;  no  one  fails  to  see  that  the  synthesis  of  particular 
facts  in  a  general,  not  merely  a  universal  *,  proposition  is  not  the  real 
ground  of  the  validity  of  the  general  proposition  but  only  of  our 
apprehension  of  that  validity.  Still  more  convincingly  does  the  variety 
of  forms,  which  a  Proof  may  assume,  witness  to  the  merely  subjective 
significance  of  the  several  inferences  of  which  it  is  made  up.  How 
many  different  proofs,  direct  and  indirect,  progressive  and  retrogressive, 
all  equally  adequate,  may  be  given  for  one  and  the  same  proposition  ! 
How  many  even  in  the  form  of  direct  progressive  argument  alone ! 
And  supposing  that  in  fact  one  out  of  the  many  could  possess  the 
prerogative  of  alone  exhibiting  the  essence  and  actual  structure  of  the 
thing,  still  the  mere  fact  that  other  forms  of  proof  are  possible  would 
always  show  that  it  is  not  the  logical  Form  by  itself  which  occasions 
.or  expresses  the  Real  validity  of  this  particular  form  of  proof,  but 
that  its  superiority  over  other  forms  of  proof  lies  in  the  content  which 
we  have  taken  and  conjoined  in  this  form.  Lastly  in  regard  to  the 
jinal  operations  of  thought  with  the  account  of  which  the  doctrine  of 
pure  Logic  concluded,  we  saw  there  that  Logic  does  in  those  opera- 
tions strive  to  discover  some  Forms  in  which  the  proper  essence  of 
the  thing,  as  distinguished  from  our  mere  subjective  and  haphazard 
notions  about  it,  may  be  exhibited.  But  there  too  we  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  those  Forms  turn  out  to  be  far  wider  than  that  which 

1  [See  p.  73,  sup.] 


49  2   Real  and  Formal  Value  of  Logical  Acts.     [BOOK  in. 

they  purport  to  contain.  If  the  proper  essence  of  the  thing  does 
make  its  way  into  our  thought,  it  can  only  be  apprehended  under 
these  Forms,  but  the  Forms  do  not  create  it  and  do  not  fully  express 
it;  they  admit  always  of  fresh  applications  which  issue  as  we  are 
ourselves  conscious  in  merely  subjective  notions,  and  from  among 
which  the  selection  of  the  more  trustworthy  in  relation  to  reality 
cannot  be  made  by  the  help  of  Logic  but  only  through  knowledge  of 
the  subject-matter,  if  such  knowledge  is  forthcoming. 

345.  It  is  now  time  to  determine  more  exactly  the  meaning  of 
certain  expressions  in  the  use  of  which  I  have  hitherto  been  some- 
what less  precise.  We  have  spoken  of  Subjective  and  Objective,  of 
Formal  and  Material1,  of  Formal  and  Real  significance,  as  applied 
to  the  Forms  of  Thought.  The  three  pairs  of  antitheses  do  not 
coincide.  If  we  distinguish,  as  we  have  done,  between  the  logical 
act  of  thinking,  and  the  thought  which  it  creates  as  its  product,  the 
former  can  claim  only  a  Subjective  significance;  it  is  purely  and 
simply  an  inner  movement  of  our  own  minds,  which  is  made  necessary 
to  us  by  reason  of  the  constitution  of  our  nature  and  of  our  place  in 
the  world,  and  through  which  we  make  that  Thought,  for  instance 
the  distinction  which  exists  between  a  and  £,  or  the  universal  C  which 
is  contained  in  them  both,  an  object  for  our  own  consciousness. 
In  the  same  way  every  one  who  desires  to  enjoy  the  prospect  from  a 
hilltop  has  to  traverse  some  particular  straight  or  winding  path  from 
the  point  at  which  he  starts  up  to  the  summit  which  discloses  the 
view;  this  path  itself  is  not  part  of  the  view  which  he  wishes  to 
obtain.  The  Thought  itself  on  the  other  hand  in  which  the  process 
of  thinking  issues,  the  prospect  obtained,  has  Objective  validity;  the 
various  paths  followed  by  various  travellers  once  traversed  and  left 
behind,  the  scene  which  opens  before  them  is  the  same  to  all  alike,  an 
object  independent  of  the  subjectivity  of  the  individual;  it  is  not 
merely  one  more  affection  of  his  consciousness  which  he  experiences, 
but  an  object  presented  to  his  thought  which  also  presents  itself  as 
the  same  self-identical  object  to  the  consciousness  of  others. 

The  second  antithesis2  throws  light  on  the  same  state  of  facts 
from  another  side.  It  would  not  be  sufficient  to  call  the  operations 
of  our  thought  Subjective  and  nothing  more.  The  term  would  simply 
separate  them  from  that  which  actually  goes  on  in  the  subject-matter 8 
with  which  they  deal,  leaving  it  quite  obscure  what  the  relation  is  in 
which  they  stand  to  it ;  yet  after  all  some  such  relation  there  must  be, 

1  ['Sacblich,'  opp.  to  'formal.']  2  ['Formal*  and  'sachlich.'] 

8  ['  Von  dem  Verhalten  der  Sachen.1] 


CHAPTER iv.j    Antitheses  to  'Subjective  and  ( Formal"     493 

if  the  Logical  Thought  in  which  they  issue,  is  to  possess  an  Objective 
validity  which  does  not  belong  to  the  thinking  act  which  issues  in  it. 
Accordingly  we  call  the  logical  operations  not  Subjective  merely  but 
Formal  because  their  characteristics  though  not  the  actual  determina- 
tions of  the  matter  they  deal  with  \  yet  on  the  other  hand  are  Forms 
of  procedure  the  very  purpose  of  which  is  to  apprehend  the  nature 
of  that  subject-matter,  and  which  therefore  cannot  stand  altogether 
out  of  connexion  with  that  which  there  has  place. 

Upon  this  point  the  illustrations  adduced  above  will  remove  all 
uncertainty.  The  limitation  to  a  merely  Formal  validity  showed  itself 
in  the  fact  that  there  may  be  several  processes  of  thought  equally 
successful  in  view  of  the  result  arrived  at,  all,  that  is,  leading  to  the 
same  final  thought-product,  or  the  same  material  result.  No  one  of 
them  therefore  can  have  an  exclusive  significance  as  regards  that 
determinate  matter  and  content  with  which  all  are  equally  concerned ; 
all  alike  are  merely  forms  of  procedure,  employed  to  reach  a  certain 
-result  which  once  obtained  is  valid  independently  of  the  path  which 
led  to  it.  But  clearly  it  would  be  impossible  to  arrive  by  all  these 
different  paths  at  the  summit  from  which  this  prospect  opens,  if  they 
were  not  all  included  with  their  determinate  positions  and  relations 
the  one  to  the  other  within  that  same  geographical  territory,  the 
remaining  part  of  which  is  what  constitutes  the  landscape  which  is 
commanded  from  the  summit.  Herein  consists  the  positive  element 
which  this  second  antithesis  affirms  of  the  processes  of  thought2; 
each  is  one  among  the  various  ways  in  which  the  variously  rami- 
fying systems  of  the  world  of  fact  makes  it  possible  for  us,  by  reason 
of  its  universal  interconnexion,  to  arrive  by  a  process  of  movement 
from  point  to  point  within  that  world,  at  a  determinate  objective 
relation,  although  the  particular  movement  chosen  neither  is  nor  yet 
copies  the  way  in  which  this  relation  itself  arose  or  now  obtains. 

The  third  antithesis 3  is  not  merely  another  way  of  expressing  the 
second ;  it  relates  to  a  specific  question.  We  regard  every  content  of 
thought  as  having  a  material  value 4  if  it  has  a  fixed  Objective  signifi- 
cance in  the  sense  above  explained — ideas  of  the  non-existent  no  less 
than  of  the  existent;  by  the  term  JReal6  we  should  have  to  understand 
only  things  and  events  in  so  far  as  they  exist  and  occur  in  an  actual 
world  of  their  own  beyond  thought.  Now  it  is  out  of  the  question 
that  this  kind  of  Reality  should  move  and  have  its  being  in  the  forms 

1  [« Der  Sachen.']  2  [They  are  not  merely  <  subjective '  but  also  '  formal.*] 

3  [In  German  <  Formal '  and  '  Real.']  *  ['  Sachlich  gegeben.'] 

5  [German  '  Real/] 


494      Rtbl  and  Formal  Value  of  Logical  Acts. 

of  the  Concept,  of  the  Judgment  or  of  the  Syllogism,  which  our  thought 
assumes  in  its  own  subjective  efforts  towards  the  knowledge  of  that 
reality.  But  even  the  logical  thoughts  which  are  the  issue  of  those  oper- 
ations have  not  in  relation  to  Reality  in  this  sense  the  immediate  and 
material  validity  which  belonged  to  them  in  relation  to  every  content  of 
thought  as  such.  It  will  be  better  to  reserve  for  the  Metaphysic1  the 
fuller  discussion  of  this  important  point ;  a  reference  to  the  illustrations 
already  adduced  will  suffice  in  the  way  of  a  preliminary  elucidation. 

We  saw  that  the  notion  of  a  condition  is  inadequate  to  denote  that 
which  we  mean  by  a  relation  which  subsists  in  actual  fact  between 
two  real  elements ;  so  to  subsist,  it  would  have  to  be  more  than  a 
relation,  it  would  have  to  be  nothing  less  than  interaction.  This 
being  so,  it  was  in  that  Real  connexion  between  the  Real  elements 
that  the  cause  resided  which  brought  their  phenomenal  appearances 
for  us  into  that  particular  formal  relation  which  we  now,  employing  a 
merely  logical  term,  call  a  conditioning  of  one  by  the  other.  «. 

The  same  is  true  of  all  logical  Forms.  No  real  S  can  be  subject 
and  nothing  more  to  a  real  P,  which  is  its  predicate  and  nothing 
more;  in  actual  fact  P  can  only  attach  to  S  either  as  a  state  which  it 
passes  through,  or  as  an  influence  which  it  exerts,  or  finally  as  a  per- 
manent quality  which  belongs  to  it  in  the  sense  (a  sense  it  is  true  at 
present  somewhat  obscure)  in  which  we  contrast  the  metaphysical 
notion  of  a  Quality  with  the  merely  logical  notion  of  a  Mark.  It  is 
not  till  one  of  these  three  relations  has  been  affirmed  that  we  under- 
stand what  the  meaning  is  realiter  of  the  logical  conception  of  S  as 
subject  and  P  as  predicate.  It  is  not  till  then  that  we  have  an  actual 
state  of  things  answering  to  the  logical  copula,  which  in  itself  leaves 
it  quite  undetermined  what  precisely  we  are  affirming  to  have  occurred 
to  the  real  things  in  question,  when  we  feel  ourselves  necessitated  thus 
to  connect  the  ideas  of  them.  When  then  we  employ  such  ex- 
pressions as  unity,  multiplicity,  equality,  contrariety,  relation,  condi- 
tion, so  long  as  we  use  those  terms  by  themselves,  we  have  said 
absolutely  nothing  about  the  existent.  We  have  still  to  show  how  it 
is  brought  about  that  the  unity  of  the  One  is  proved  to  be  an  actual 
reality,  not  merely  a  barren  logical  title  j  how  it  is  that  what  are  many 
but  identical,  although  in  thought  they  simply  are  identical,  never- 
theless in  real  existence  break  up  and  become  many ;  what  is  the  one 
kind  of  reciprocal  influence  in  which  the  opposition,  what  is  the  other 
kind  of  reciprocal  influence  in  which  the  relation,  of  different  existing 
things,  shows  itself  to  be  real. 

1  [See  '  Metaphysic,'  p.  143  ff.] 


CHAPTER   V. 

The  a  priori  truths. 

340.  LET  us  put  together  once  more  the  conclusions  to  whic 
have  been  brought.  Neither  in  the  content  of  our  ideas  nor  i 
the  reality  which  we  regard  as  its  source  outside,  was  there  anj 
to  correspond  to  the  logical  processes  of  thought,  which  chc 
their  path  at  will,  connected  or  separated  the  several  const 
elements  of  which  that  content  was  composed.  On  the  other 
at  least  in  relation  to  this  content,  without  regard  to  that  reality  ^ 
may  be  its  cause  in  the  world  outside,  the  Thought-product,  in  •< 
it  was  the  aim  of  the  Thought-processes  to  issue,  had,  we  sa^ 
objective  significance.  The  differences,  the  resemblances,  the 
trasts,  the  subordinations,  of  which  we  could  only  possess  our 
in  consciousness  by  help  of  the  discursive  activity  of  Thought,  ps 
backwards  and  forwards  from  point  to  point,  had  we  saw  an  \ 
validity  as  applied  to  the  apprehended  content,  although  the  cc 
itself  in  no  way  participated  in  such  movements.  They  subs 
we  saw,  independently  and  objectively  in  the  sense  in  whicl 
other  relation  may  subsist  between  the  terms  related.  Real 
ence,  that  is  to  say,  they  can  never  claim  except  at  the  mome: 
which  they  are  thought ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  such  is  the  coi 
constitution  of  all  minds,  that  whenever  the  given  terms  of  the 
tion  a  and  I  are  thought,  one  and  the  same  judgment  C  am: 
this  relation  between  them  is  immediately  and  invariably  pronou 

We  are  here  brought  back  to  the  Platonic  world  of  Ideas, 
contents  of  possible  ideas  stand  in  fixed  and  unalterable  refc 
and  by  whatever  processes  or  movements  of  thought,  as  oui 
pleasure  or  as  chance  determines,  we  may  carry  our  attention 
one  to  another,  or  in  whatever  order  they  may  be  one  after  ai 
brought  to  our  perception  by  occasioning  causes  even  unkno 
ourselves, — we  shall  invariably  find  the  same  relations  obt 
amongst  them  which  are  given  us  once  for  all  in  the  objecti\ 


49 6  The  a  priori  truths.  c BOOK  in. 

endlessly  complex  structure  of  the  world  of  Ideas. — So  often  as  this 
proposition  is  insisted  on  it  will  be  regarded  as  an  entirely  superfluous 
affirmation  of  that  which  is  perfectly  self-evident,  and  just  as  often  I 
must  repeat  that  the  very  existence  of  this  self-evidence  is  the  most 
astonishing  thing  in  the  world.  Although  an  indispensable  founda- 
tion of  all  thought,  and  just  on  that  account  passed  over  by  us  in  our 
presumption  as  a  mere  matter  of  course,  it  is  not  even,  as  I  observed 
before,  a  necessity  of  thought  in  the  sense  in  which  that  character 
may  be  claimed  for  the  particular  relations  which  it  includes  within  it. 
We  cannot  indeed  fully  realise  in  thought  what  the  state  of  things 
would  be  if  this  fact  were  wanting,  but  still  we  can  imagine  a  world 
in  which  it  did  not  obtain;  in  which  countless  contents  presented 
themselves  for  our  minds  to  form  ideas  of,  but  each  one  standing  in 
no  relation  to  the  rest,  all  so  entirely  disparate  in  nature  that  no  two  of 
them  could  be  combined  as  allied  species  under  any  common 
universal,  nor  any  two  of  them  be  pronounced  to  differ  from  each 
other  more  or  less  or  otherwise  than  any  other  two.  One  postulate 
alone,  in  such  case,  Thought  would  be  in  a  position  to  make,  in 
obedience  to  its  own  law  of  Identity,  namely,  that  each  one  of  the 
contents  must  be  identical  with  itself.  This  postulate  would  be  the 
condition  of  their  being  presented  to  thought  at  all,  and  it  might  be 
fulfilled  by  such  a  world  as  I  am  supposing.  But  beyond  this  we 
cannot  go.  Thought  may  wish,  in  order  to  the  possibility  of  its 
further  operations,  but  it  cannot  demand  as  a  necessity  of  thought, 
that  between  the  different  objects  there  should  be  found  that  gradu- 
ated scale  of  affinities  which  alone  enable  it  to  accomplish  the  ends 
after  which  it  strives, — it  is  not  a  necessity  of  thought  that  thought 
itself  should  be  possible.  And  even  supposing  that  by  its  own  intrinsic 
power  it  could  postulate  those  affinities,  still  it  could  not  make  them  ; 
it  would  always  have  to  trust  to  their  being  given  it  by  the  grace 
of  facts,  ordered  and  arranged  on  principles  which  it  could  never  have 
itself  contrived,  as  series  of  tones  or  colours,  or  as  differences  in 
degree  among  things  qualitatively  the  same,  or  in  any  other  way, 

But  strange  and  important  as  is  the  fact  that  such  affinities  in  the 
world  of  experience  are  actually  found,  it  is  not  in  this  fact  or  in  the 
consequences  which  follow  from  it,  that  the  final  goal  of  our  enquiries 
lies.  All  that  it  guarantees  us  is  the  security  with  which  thought  is 
able  to  move  within  the  world  of  ideas  as  such,  to  investigate  the 
systematic  and  invariable  connexions  obtaining  among  the  elements 
of  that  world,  and  by  conjoining  them  one  with  another  to  construct 
new  forms  which  will  be  found  without  fail  in  another  and  a  pre~ 


CHAPTER  v.]         Actual  Reality  and  Tkoiight.  497 

dictable  place  in  the  world  of  ideas,  so  connected,  finally,  one  and  all 
together  in  various  directions  and  at  fixed  distances,  that  the  most 
diverse  and  the  most  roundabout  tracks  of  thought  may  lead  to  the 
certain  discovery  of  any  one  of  them.  This  however  by  itself  is  not 
all  that  we  are  concerned  to  know.  What  we  want  to  arrive  at  is  the 
significance  which  is  to  be  attached  to  this  systematic  arrangement  of 
the  world  of  knowledge  in  relation  to  that  empirical  and  unsystematic 
order  of  events,  in  which  a  causal  reality  independent  of  thought 
presents  contents  of  possible  ideas  to  our  perception.  "What  we  wish 
to  understand  is  not  only  the  classification  of  things  which  is  eternal, 
but  also  the  course  of  things  which  is  in  change. 

347.  The  two  are  completely  distinct.  Perception  does  not  pre- 
sent those  objects  to  us  in  connexion  which  stand  side  by  side  as 
akin  in  the  system  of  knowledge,  nor  is  its  entire  history  a  periodically 
recurring  procession  of  orders,  genera,  and  species,  following  one 
upon  the  other  in  a  descending  scale  as  they  do  in  the  order  of 
classification.  Contemporaneous  in  different  points  in  space,  suc- 
ceeding one  another  at  different  points  of  time,  we  find  the  most 
heterogeneous  elements  of  that  realm  of  contents  phenomenally  con- 
nected ;  if  laws  in  this  scene  of  change  there  are,  they  are  of  a  dif- 
ferent kind  altogether  from  the  logical  laws  which  have  hitherto  been 
engaging  our  attention.  If  we  agree  henceforth  to  designate  the 
empirical  course  of  phenomena  as  it  is  thus  presented  to  us,  Actual 
Reality ',  then  the  question  is  as  to  the  significance  which  our  thought 
.can  claim  in  relation  to  it,  since  its  affirmations  even  though  retain- 
ing their  validity,  seem  nevertheless  to  be  incapable  of  controlling  the 
order  of  connexion  which  the  reality  presents.  For  even  supposing 
it  to  be  true  that  a  and  b  will  exhibit,  when  given  in  actual  perception, 
the  same  distinction  and  the  same  affinity  which  belong  to  them  in 
our  thought,  still  this  tells  us  nothing  as  to  whether  they  will  actually 
be  found  in  conjunction  in  perception,  or  whether  that  conjunction 
may  not  be  an  impossibility.  Admitting  the  law  of  identity  to  hold 
without  exception,  still  it  does  not  profess  to  do  more  than  affirm  that 
BOW  and  always  every  a  =  a,  and  every  d  =  £,  whenever  and  wherever 
they  may  be  found.  But  here  at  once  the  last  clause  is  no  longer 
part  of  the  law  of  identity  itself;  we  append  it  because  we  know  on 
other  grounds  that  possible  objects  of  thought  are  susceptible,  over  and 
above  their  eternal  validity  in  the  world  of  ideas,  of  an  alternation  of 
temporal  reality  and  unreality  in  the  world  of  phenomena.  Of  this 
the  law  in  question  contains  no  indication,  and  cannot  therefore  in 
*  ['RealeWirklichkeit.1] 
sik 


408  The  a  priori  truths.  c BOOK  in. 

the  least  determine  the  order  in  which  in  that  world  whether  in  the 
way  of  simultaneity  or  succession,  the  two  phenomena  necessarily 
introduce  or  necessarily  exclude  one  another.  Again,  the  classifica- 
tions by  which  we  range  our  conceptions  one  under  the  other  will  be 
valid  equally  of  our  perceptions  and  of  the  timeless  content  of  our 
ideas;  but  when  we  bring  a  perceived  object  *S  under  the  general 
conception  M,  although  all  the  higher  universal  conceptions  N L  K 
which  are  contained  in  M  are  now  valid  of  S  too,  still  this  deduction 
gives  us  no  new  objective  knowledge,  but  only  a  logical  analysis  of 
what  was  already  implied  in  bringing  S  under  Mt — correct  if  this  was 
correct,  incorrect  if  the  contrary,  but  in  neither  case  enabling  us  to 
combine  the  S  given  in  the  perception  with  a  P  which  has  not  been 
so  given. 

Hypothetical  judgments  seem  better  adapted  to  an  extension  of 
knowledge.  In  so  far  as  they  apply  to  a  subject  S  a  condition  x, 
and  derive  from  the  two  together  a  predicate  P,  which  was  not 
already  contained  either  in  S  or  in  x  by  themselves,  they  make"  at 
least  a  formal  approach  to  that  which  we  conceive  to  take  place  in 
reality.  In  the  problematic  antecedent  they  express  the  connexion  of 
S  and  x  as  a  possibility,  and  accordingly  distinguish  the  thought 
content  of  it  from  the  realisation  which  may  be  in  store  for  that  con- 
tent in  the  actual  course  of  events,  and  as  to  which  they  abstain  from 
affirming  anything.  On  the  other  hand,  that  condition  once  given, 
they  do  seem  to  anticipate  the  after  perception  and  to  define  the  new 
result  which  will  necessarily  follow  in  this  perception.  But  now  what 
Is  it  that  justifies  us  in  subjoining  to,  or  equating  with  a  determinate 
S+x  a  determinate  P?  In  thought  it  can  rest  only  on  this,  that  by 
means  of  a  logical  determination  X  we  transform  the  notion  S,  which 
previously  did  not  contain  P,  in  such  wise  that  now  it  does  contain  it ; 
and  now  it  is  of  this  new  subject,  not  of  the  one  we  began  with,  that 
we  affirm  the  predicate  P,  which  in  fact  we  have  already  taken  into  it. 
But  that  which  is  directly  presented  to  us  in  perception  is  something 
different  from  this.  When  in  actual  perception  a  new  phenomenon  x 
enters  into  relation  to  a  previous  phenomenon  St  what  happens  as  a 
rule  is  not  that  from  the  conjunction  of  the  two  in  thought  there 
results  the  subject  S+x,  from  which  thereupon  the  resultant  pheno- 
menon P  would  follow  as  a  matter  of  course  as  if  they  were  equivalent 
expressions.  On  the  contrary  the  question  has  still  to  be  solved,  how 
it.  is  possible  for  x  so  to  transform  S,  that  there  may  spring  from  it 
the  conditions  for  the  realisation  of  P  which  were  before  wanting. 
Thus,  wherever  we  apply  hypothetical  judgments  to  questions  of  the 


CHAPTER v.i  The  *  Ontologtcal'  aliment*  499 

real  world,  they  are  always  found  to  rest  in  the  last  resort  upon  cer- 
tain presuppositions.  They  always  assume  the  validity  of  certain 
propositions  affirming  the  connexion  of  a  particular  condition  with  a 
particular  consequence — a  connexion  which  cannot  be  deduced  from 
conceptions — to  be  a  universal  fact.  If  it  is  really  universal,  then 
thought  can  draw  it  out  into  its  particular  instances  by  a  purely  ana- 
lytic procedure,  but  its  real  content  appears,  to  begin  with,  as  a 
synthetical  judgment,  which  binds  together  as  subject  and  predicate 
two  conceptions,  the  contents  of  which  mere  logical  analysis  cam 
never  prove  to  be  identical. 

848.  Our  hope  then  of  mastering  by  thought  the  course  of  events 
in  the  real  world,  rests  on  three  points.  First,  to  no  single  constituent 
b  of  the  ideal  world  can  thought  ascribe,  over  and  above  the  eternal 
validity  which  within  that  world  belongs  to  it,  a  necessity  of  realisation 
in  the  order  of  events  in  time ;  it  is  only  if  this  reality  belongs  as  -a 
matter  of  fact  to  a  second  such  element  #,  with  which  b  stands  in 
necessary  connexion,  that  it  can  then  pass  over  to  b  also.  All  our 
knowledge  therefore  is  in  this  respect  hypothetical ;  it  strikes  in  at  a 
particular  point  in  a  reality  which  it  finds  as  a  matter  of  fact  given  to 
it,  in  order  to  deduce  from  this  real  premiss  as  themselves  real  the 
consequences  which  attached  to  the  thought  premiss  as  necessary  \  but 
it  is  never  possible,  starting  from  mere  conceptions  of  thought,  to  prove 
the  actual  reality  of  that  which  is  contained  in  them.  And  in  fact  the 
attempt  has  never  been  ventured  upon  except  in  the  single  instance 
of  the  ontological  argument  for  the  being  of  God.  The  temptation  in 
this  case  was  very  intelligible.  The  conception  of  God  as  a  necessary 
consequence  'b  following  from  a  reality  a  other  than  Himself,  and  given 
in  perception,  contradicted  our  necessary  idea  of  Him,  for  this  very 
idea  demanded  that  He  should  be  conceived  as  the  ground  of  all  con- 
sequences. Hence,  it  seemed,  nothing  remained  but  to  seek  the  reality 
of  God  in  the  idea  itself  of  Him.  True  all  that  could  really  be  found 
was  the  claim  to  reality  which  the  idea  carried  with  it  Beyond 
question  the  idea  of  God  includes  the  idea  of  Being,  and  more  than 
this,  the  idea  of  living  Being;  for  all  other  predicates  by  which  we 
think  of  God  as  God,  can  only  be  unified,  or  even  thought,  when  they 
are  conceived  as  belonging  to  a  real  Being  who  fills  time,  and  is 
capable  of  undergoing  a  change  of  states.  But  in  this  sense  the  idea 
of  any  being  whatever  includes  the  thought  of  that  particular  kind  of 
•reality  which  the  nature  and  the  mode  of  combination  of  its  content 
require.  The  very  notion  of  an  organism  is  unthinkable  without  this 
assumption  j  the  properties  of  nutrition,  growth,  propagation  of  its, 

Kk  2 


500  The  a  priori  truths.  c  BOOK  in. 

kind,  have  no  meaning  when  applied  to  a  subject  which  does  not  exist? 
and  just  as  little  when  applied  to  one  which  exists  merely  and  has  no 
faculty  of  development.  If  therefore  the  objects  of  our  conception 
are  to  have  reality  at  all,  they  must  have  that  kind  of  reality  which 
answers  to  their  nature,  Beings  that  of  existence  not  of  occurrence, 
Events  that  of  occurrence  not  of  existence,  Relations  neither  the  one 
nor  the  other,  but  a  reality  which  consists  in  being  valid  of  reality.  It 
was  a  mere  illusion  to  suppose  that  the  case  was  different  with  the 
idea  of  God,  and  that  it  was  allowable  to  look  upon  that  notion  of  the 
highest  reality  which  is  necessarily  included  in  that  idea  as  equivalent 
to  the  reality  of  the  whole  content  which  included  it. 

A  class  of  arguments  nearly  allied  to  this,  which  pass  from  the  in- 
contestable "value  of  an  object  of  thought  to  the  belief  in  its  reality, 
have  an  appearance  of  committing  a  fallacy  of  the  same  kinds  but  in 
this  case  it  is  an  appearance  only.  It  is  not  altogether  just  to  main- 
tain that  we  believe  in  a  supreme  Good,  in  a  life  beyond  the  earth,  in 
eternal  blessedness,  merely  because  we  desire  them.  In  reality  such 
beliefs  rest  upon  an  extremely  broad,  though  an  unanalysed  founda- 
tion of  perception.  They  start  from  the  fact  of  this  actual  world  as 
it  is  given  us  in  experience,  in  which  we  find  certain  intolerable 
contradictions  threatening  us  if  we  refuse  to  acknowledge  that  these 
ways  in  which  the  structure  of  the  world  extends  beyond  our  per- 
ception are  real  complements  of  that  which  we  perceive.  In  form, 
therefore,  this  class  of  inferences  is  quite  legitimate ;  starting  from  the 
reality  of  a  as  given  in  experience,  they  connect  with  it  the  reality  of 
b  which  is  not  so  given,  but  which  appears  to  follow  from  a  as  a 
necessity  of  thought. 

349.  The  second  point  alluded  to  is  tacitly  assumed  in  every 
argument,  but  seldom  explicitly  acknowledged  as  a  necessary  logical 
assumption.  Clearly  we  could  never  hope  to  work  upon  reality 
through  the  medium  of  thought,  if  we  were  not  in  a  position  to 
assume  in  the  empirical  order  of  things  the  presence  of  universal  law, 
which  alone  makes  it  possible  for  us  to  turn  the  formal  laws  of  our 
thought  to  positive  use.  We  saw  that  the  real  causes  which  deter- 
mine the  succession  of  our  perceptions  of  possible  contents  of  thought 
are  wholly  independent  of  the  systematic  relations  which  we  find 
between  those  contents  when  regarded  as  objects  of  thought  simply. 
Whence  then  do  we  derive  our  assurance  that  there  are  reasons  of 
universal  validity  at  all  determining  this  order  of  succession,  and  that 
the  unknown  cause  of  the  experienced  series  of  our  perceptions  is 
not  simply  playing  with  the  elements  of  our  Ideal  world  and  its 


CHAPTER v.]       The  nature  of  our  Belief  in  Law.  501 

systematic  classifications,  Itself  void  of  all  principle,  bringing  before  us 
like  a  self-acting  kaleidoscope  now  one  arrangement  of  the  picture 
and  now  another,  but  observing  no  law  or  order  in  its  combinations  ? 

We  have  no  ground  whatever  for  representing  the  wild  disorder 
which  this  supposition  implies  as  unimaginable  ;  there  is  a  very  great 
deal  in  the  empirical  world  which  we  do  not  yet  understand,  that 
actually  does  still  so  appear  to  us  ;  if  throughout  the  world  of  reality 
all  regular  law  and  regular  relations  were  altogether  absent,  all  we  can 
say  is  that  the  same  spectacle  would  then  be  presented  to  us  every- 
where which  meets  us  now  in  cases  where  the  laws  are  concealed  from 
us.  The  laws  of  our  thought  would  still  hold  good,  but  in  the  sense 
of  an  empty  postulate,  to  which  reality  would  offer  no  counterpart, 
just  as  there  are  many  events  even  now  to  which  we  seek  in  vain  to 
apply  them,  events  which  seem  with  their  like  conditions  and  un- 
like results  to  mock  at  our  principle  of  identity.  Nevertheless  this 
assumption  of  an  independence  of  law  in  the  real  world  is  maintained 
by  no  one ;  in  every  case  where  observed  phenomena  might  seem  to 
force  it  upon  us,  we  regard  the  state  of  facts  so  presented  as  simply  a 
problem  which  awaits  solution,  and  we  never  doubt  that  a  wider 
experience  will  furnish  links  of  connexion  hitherto  unobserved  to 
restore  order  and  regularity  to  the  observed  parts  in  which  at  present 
they  are  not  to  be  found. 

Now  on  what  does  this  confidence  rest  ?  The  universality  of  laws 
in  the  real  world  is  neither  in  itself  a  "necessity  of  thought,  nor  can  it 
be  deduced  as  a  necessary  consequence  from  given  facts.  We  might 
have  the  right  to  say  that  the  laws  of  space,  even  supposing  space  to 
exist  only  as  an  innate  intuition  in  us,  still  must  of  necessity  hold  good 
of  all  objects  of  our  experience,  for  nothing  will  ever  make  its  way 
into  experience  without  having  been  already  moulded  in  that  form  of 
space  through  which  alone  it  becomes  an  object  for  us  at  all  But  we 
cannot  attempt  to  prove  in  the  same  way  that  unless  there  was  a  con- 
nexion according  to  law  in  the  real  world  the  experience  which  we 
possess  would  be  impossible.  That  which  we  actually  possess  is 
merely  a  succession  of  ideas ;  that  this  succession  constitutes  an  un- 
broken connexion  in  accordance  with  universal  laws,  that  is  to  say 
that  experience  in  this  heightened  sense,  as  distinguished  from  mere 
perception,  is  also  actually  given  us, — to  affirm  this  is  to  confuse  that 
which  we  know  as  a  fact  with  preconceptions  of  our  own  which  we 
bring  to  the  facts.  For  our  actual  knowledge  amounts  to  no  more 
than  this,  that  a  large  number  of  occurrences  admit  of  being  regarded 
as  if  they  were  conditioned  by  universal  laws;  there  remains  always  a, 


The  a  priori  truths.  [  BOOK  in. 

far  larger  number  which  we  have  not  yet  succeeded  in  thus  reducing 
to  order.  A  reign  of  law  embracing  all  reality,  and  admitting  of  no 
exception  to  its  rules,  is  therefore  neither  an  actual  nor  a  possible 
outcome  of  experience,  but  only  an  assumption  with  which  every 
enlargement  of  our  experience  is  accompanied. 

We  have  therefore  only  two  alternatives.  Either  we  may  acknow- 
ledge this  assumption  as  an  assumption  and  trust  it,  and  thus  credit 
ourselves  with  this  one  piece  of  certain  knowledge,  by  the  help  of 
which  our  thought,  crossing  the  boundary  of  its  own  domain,  reaches 
one  certain  result  as  to  the  nature  of  reality;  or  we  may  look  upon  it 
equally  as  a  mere  assumption,  and  on  that  account  distrust  it, 
accepting  thankfully  such  instances  as  confirm  it,  but  always  bearing 
in  mind  the  possibility  of  finding  ourselves  stumbling  at  any  moment 
upon  ground  where  it  no  longer  holds  good.  Whenever  human 
reflexion  has  reached  the  point  of  a  scientific  view  of  the  external 
world,  it  has  without  exception  preferred  the  first  of  these  two 
alternatives.  Even  those  who  are  most  careful  to  resist  any  undue 
encroachments  of  reason,  and  pride  themselves  on  interrogating  nature 
and  nature  only  as  to  her  own  laws,  never  question  the  fact  that  such 
laws  do  universally  obtain,  they  only  insist  that  we  know  nothing 
about  them.  Only  they  do  not  observe,  that  in  thus  affirming  the 
universality  of  law  they  are  passing  beyond  the  data  of  reality,  and 
are  making  in  one  clause  an  a  priori  assertion  about  it  which  the  next 
declares  to  be  illegitimate. 

The  alternative  theory  may  be  thought  to  be  discoverable  in  one 
particular  instance,  the  belief  in  the  freedom  of  the  human  will.  As 
to  the  material  rights  and  wrongs  of  this  hypothesis,  I  am  not  here 
called  upon  to  decide.  But  with  regard  to  its  form,  it  is  only  in 
appearance  that  it  comes  under  the  point  of  View  in  question.  It 
does  not  assert  that  the  same  thing  is  free  at  one  time  and  con- 
ditioned at  another  without  any  reason.  On  the  contrary,  subjecting 
as  it  does  one  sphere  of  reality  permanently  and  without  exception 
to  determination  by  fixed  laws,  and  connecting  the  fact  of  freedom 
exclusively  with  the  presence  of  a  particular  spiritual  nature  in  the 
subject  which  wills,  it  does  in  fact  assume  that  the  system  of  the 
world  is  throughout  a  system  of  law,  and  merely  ascribes  to  it  the 
peculiar  property  of  admitting  at  particular  points  in  its  course  of 
the  entrance  of  unconditioned  elements,  which  once  admitted  into 
the  world  of  reality  thenceforth  produce  results  which  are  con- 
ditioned by  law.  This  theory  also  then,  and  more  clearly  still  any 
theory  which,  denying  freedom,  brings  the  inner  world  as  well  as  the 


CHAPTER  v. ]          Empiricism  pure  and  simple.  503 

outer  under  a  system  of  determinate  laws,  permits  itself  in  so  doing 
to  make  an  a  priori  affirmation  concerning  the  real  world,  the 
universal  validity  of  which  experience  as  such  can  never  prove. 
Whether  it  is  justified  in  so  doing,  can  never  be  decided  by  strict 
logical  argument,  for  every  attempt  to  prove  this  affirmation  a 
necessity  of  thought,  would  leave  the  question  of  its  validity  as  applied 
to  the  real  world  undecided.  On  the  other  hand,  to  attempt  to 
exhibit  it  as  agreeing  with  the  nature  of  reality,  would  only  be  to 
repeat  in  a  new  form  the  old  claim  which  it  is  desired  to  establish,  the 
claim  to  be  able  to  make  a  priori,  that  is  to  say  universal  statements 
on  the  authority  of  thought  alone,  about  that  real  world,  of  which 
experience  can  never  give  us  universal  knowledge.  We  have  therefore 
the  right  to  say  that  all  our  conclusions  concerning  the  real  world 
rest  upon  the  immediate  confidence  or  the  faith  which  we  repose  in 
the  universal  validity  of  a  certain  postulate  of  thought,  which  over- 
steps the  limits  of  the  special  world  of  thought.  In  point  of  fact  this 
confidence  which  logic  can  never  justify  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all 
logic,  as  it  does  also  of  that  formula  in  which  we  described  it  as  the 
universal  tendency  of  thought  to  turn  the  observed  fact  of  co-existence 
into  coherent  connexion.  The  methods  of  applied  logic  one  and  all 
have  a  meaning  only  on  the  assumption  that  that  inward  coherence 
and  connectedness  which  this  tendency  ascribes  to  the  real  world  does 
actually  belong  to  it.  To  suppose  it  otherwise  would  be  to  cut  away 
the  logical  standing-ground  on  which  induction  relies  whenever  it 
pronounces  one  inference  drawn  from  experience  to  be  even  more 
probable  than  another ;  it  would  have  to  be  content  with  rehearsing  the 
premises,  the  conclusion  would  be  wanting. 

350.  There  remains  the  third  question.  The  assumption  of  a  con- 
nected system  of  uniform  laws  embracing  all  reality  does  not  by  itself 
teach  us  what  the  particular  laws  are,  in  accordance  with*which  a 
definite  event  b  is  conjoined  with  another  event  a.  Further  we  have 
already  satisfied  ourselves  that  the  mere  analysis  of  the  contents  of  the 
notions  of  a  and  b  as  such  could  never  enable  us  to  affirm  that  the 
realisation  of  the  one  must  necessarily  be  followed  by  that  of  the 
other.  Two  courses  remain  open  to  us :  either  to  lay  claim  to  an 
immediate  certainty  of  the  universal  and  necessary  validity  of  synthetic 
judgments  which  nevertheless  demand  such  a  connexion,  or  else  to 
content  ourselves  with  extracting  all  the  particular  laws  of  reality  one 
by  one  from  the  evidence  of  experience  by  the  help  of  the  methods 
expounded  in  the  last  book.  At  this  parting  of  the  ways  I  wish  by 
one  general  formula  of  ready  worship  to  purchase  a  dispensation  from 


The  a  priori  truths.  [BOOK  in. 

any  further  glorification  of  the  second  of  these  two  alternatives.  It 
becomes  in  time  wearisome  to  be  told  over  and  over  again  in  endless 
iteration,  how  reason  is  to  come  to  nature  in  a  spirit  of  self-renuncia- 
tion, how  indeed  from  her  own  resources  alone  she  cannot  possibly 
decide  a  single  question  and  how  she  at  once  wanders  off  into  a 
world  of  brain-spun  phantasies  if  she  does  not  at  every  step  apply  to 
experience  for  her  data.  Unhappily  we  cannot  affirm  that  such 
warnings  are  superfluous,  or  that  they  are  nowhere  applicable,  for 
errors  enough  have  been  due  to  the  neglect  of  them.  Still  any  moral 
sermon  becomes  intolerable  if  it  goes  on  for  ever,  and  at  last  its  only 
effect  is  that  it  moves  us,  as  we  are  moved  here,  to  ask  the  question 
whether  the  claims  which  the  doctrine  advocated  holds  up  for  our 
acceptance  are  not  just  as  one-sided  as  confessedly  those  are  which  it 
undertakes  to  disprove.  Can  then,  we  ask,  the  purely  empirical 
investigation  of  the  laws  of  the  actual  world  really  solve  its  problem 
entirely  from  its  own  resources,  calling  in  perhaps  the  aid  of  the  law 
of  identity,  but  otherwise  without  making  assumption  of  any  synthetic 
judgments  a  prior 7  ?  That  it  cannot  do  this,  was  the  doctrine  of 
Kant ;  if  we  arrive  at  a  similar  conclusion,  we  shall  be  championing  a 
characteristic  tenet  of  German  philosophy,  which  has  brought  on  us 
assaults  from  all  nations. 

351.  English  scepticism  in  the  person  of  Hume  endeavoured  to  restrict 
us  on  the  one  hand  to  the  expression  of  mathematical  truths,  which 
appeared  to  Hume  to  rest  simply  upon  the  principle  of  identity,  and 
on  the  other  to  the  narration  of  the  facts  of  history,  which  having  once 
occurred  are  thenceforth  matter  of  actual  experience,  and  can  be  ex- 
pressed in  synthetic  judgments  a  posteriori.  No  scientific  inference  was 
possible,  he  thought,  which  should  predict  the  occurrence  of  a  b  in  the 
future  on  the  strength  of  a  given  a  which  was  not  identical  with  it. 

Before  I  go  on  to  discuss  the  last-named  contention,  it  may  be  useful 
to  point  out,  that  if  it  is  valid,  then  the  previous  contentions  made  with 
regard  to  mathematical  and  to  historical  truths  cannot  be.  The 
possibility  of  synthetic  judgments  a  posteriori  is  a  point  which  does 
not  sufficiently  arouse  our  suspicions,  because  they  are  taken  for  simple 
expressions  of  experience,  into  which  no  admixture  of  too  forward 
thought  has  made  its  way.  But  so  long  as  they  are  judgments  at  all, 
no  matter  whether  expressed  in  language  or  not,  they  are  still  not  the 
facts  given  simply,  but  a  preparation  of  the  facts,  made  by  reading 
into  them  an  inner  connexion  which  in  immediate  observation  is  not 
to  be  found.  No  narration  of  an  event  is  possible  except  by  com- 
bining together  as  subject  and  predicate  one  portion  of  the  sensuous 


CHAPTER  v.]        Impressions  and  Interpretation*        1C  505 

images  which  arose  in  us  when  we  witnessed  it,  with 
then  going  on  to  think  in  between  the  contents  of  these  two 
tions  a  relation  of  action  exerted  on  one  side  and  received  on  the 
other,  or  again  of  mutual  alteration  of  states,  none  of  which  relations 
are  in  the  least  degree  given  in  the  perceptions  as  such, 

It  may  be  contended  that  the  proposition  Caesar  crossed  the 
Rubicon,  means  no  more  than  that  a  certain  partially  changeable,  hut 
still  coherent  group  of  sensible  impressions,  which  for  shortness  we  call 
Caesar,  changed  its  position  in  space  in  relation  to  a  second  group  of 
sensible  impressions,  which  we  call  the  Rubicon,  in  such  wise  as  to  be 
perceived  by  one  and  the  same  spectator  first  to  the  right  of  the  latter 
group  and  then  to  its  left.  I  answer  with  no  less  obstinacy :  that  this 
group  was  the  same  group  on  the  left  as  on  the  right,  that  is  to  say 
that  it  has  changed  its  position, — this  does  not  lie  in  the  simple  data 
of  observation,  but  is  a  hypothesis  which  covertly  introduces  under  a 
connected  and  continuous  alteration  of  the  appearance  a  permanent 
substratum  with  merely  changing  relations.  Whenever  in  recounting 
an  event  we  speak  of  any  sort  of  movement  in  space,  we  are  giving 
not  our  perception,  but  a  hypothesis  about  it.  That  one  and  the  same 
real  a l  passed  through  one  after  the  other  the  places  m,  n,  />,  is  not  a 
fact  we  have  seen ;  the  fact  perceived  is  only  that  in  successive  points 
of  time  similar  appearances  a  were  observable  in  successive  points  of 
space.  One  who  was  under  no  necessity  to  explain  this  fact  to  him- 
self by  the  hypothesis  of  a  permanent  subject,  could  not  venture  to 
affirm  the  proposition  a  has  moved,  as  a  description  of  the  facts,  but 
merely  as  a  convenient  mode  of  expression,  having  in  relation  to  fact 
no  significance  whatever.  If  he  denies  himself  this  introduction  of  certain 
points  of  view  into  the  interpretation  of  the  content  of  perception,  then 
he  must  acknowledge  all  synthetic  judgments  a  posteriori,  all  judgments 
in  fact  of  whatever  kind,  to  be  inadmissible,  and  instead  of  a  recounting 
of  past  facts  there  remains  in  fact  merely  the  possibility  of  recalling  in 
memory  a  series  of  perceptions,  a  reproduction  of  the  raw  material, 
out  of  which  judgments  might  be  formed,  if  only  such  a  proceeding 
were  allowable. 

352.  Turning  to  the  question  of  the  discovery  of  mathematical 
truth,  we  shall  not  dispute  the  validity  nor  yet  the  importance  of  the 
principle  of  Identity,  but  we  must  dispute  its  fruitfulness ;  we  must 
insist  that  if  it  were  the  only  principle  we  had  to  start  from,  mathe- 
matical truth  could  never  be  discovered  at  all.  It  is  no  doubt  true 
that  in  any  proposition  affirming  equality  or  inequality,  a  =  b  or  a^  &> 
1  ['Dasselbe  reale  #.*J 


5 06  *The  a  priori  truths.  ,    [  BOOK  in. 

we  have  always  to  assume  the  validity  of  the  principle  of  identity, 
according  to  which  0  =  0,  and  b  =  b,  in  other  words  that  every 
quantity  which  we  desire  to  bring  into  any  relation  with  other  quan- 
tities, is  identical  with  itself,  for  obviously  every  such  comparison  of 
different  quantities  loses  its  meaning  if  the  quantities  compared  may 
have  an  unlimited  variety  of  meanings.  Here  the  principle  of  Identity 
has  a  validity  which  is  manifest  enough  and  is  the  necessary  security 
for  truths  of  whatever  kind.  But  it  is  precisely  from  this  point  of 
view  that  least  attention  has  In  fact  been  paid  to  it ;  that  which  has 
been  more  especially  emphasised  is  that  very  different  application  of 
the  principle,  by  which  the  two  quantities  compared  are  pronounced 
equal  to  each  other.  It  is  in  this  application  of  the  maxim  of  identity 
that  philosophers  have  found  not  only  the  guarantee  of  truth,  but 
when  repeated  in  frequent  succession  through  a  long  chain  of  such 
equations,  a  fruitful  method  for  its  discovery. 

I  cannot  think  that  either  the  one  of  these  contentions  or  the  other 
precisely  expresses  that  which  is  intended.  Equations  either  as  in 
x/4  =  2  express  simply  the  definite  quantitative  value  which  is  arrived 
at  by  an  act  of  calculation  as  applied  Jo  a  given  quantity,  or  else  they 
express  the  fact  as  in  Vab  =  Va  -  V&,  that  certain  operations,  different 
in  form,  applied  in  a  prescribed  order  of  succession  or  of  connexion 
to  any  given  quantities  within  defined  limits  will  give  identical  results, 
Now  in  both  these  cases  the  value  of  the  entire  mathematical  process 
depends  not  solely  upon  the  discovered  equality  of  the  result  but 
rather  upon  the  fact  that  different  paths  have  led  to  the  same  goal, 
that  is  to  say  that  it  has  been  found  possible  to  affirm  the  equality  of 
different  things,  If  I  am  answered  that  the  quantitative  values  of  the 
two  different  terms  in  the  comparison  have  not  been  made  identical 
as  an  after  result  of  that  operation  but  were  so  always,  and  that  the 
.  identity  was  merely  concealed  under  the  different  forms  in  which  the 
two  were  originally  presented,  or  that  the  one  form  of  expression 
merely  sets  the  problem  of  which  the  other  gives  the  solution, — such  a 
reply  expresses  precisely  my  own  view,  only  that  it  takes  as  self- 
evident  that  which  I  cannot  regard  as  being  such. 

For  whence  do  we  derive  our  confidence  in  the  possibility  of  one 
and  the  same  self-identical  value  being  presented  under  different 
forms  ?  Certainly  not  from  the  law  of  identity  alone  ;  for  it  contains 
not  the  slightest  hint  of  an  antithesis  between  Form  and  Content  or 
Form  and  Value ;  nor  supposing  that  we  derived  our  idea  of  such  an 
antithesis  from  some  other  source,  could  the  law  of  identity  even  then 
tell  us  anything  whatever  about  it.  It  could  only  tell  us  over  again, 


CHAPTER v.]     Mathematical  Truth  not  bare  Identity.      507 

every  Form  is  identical  with  itself  and  every  Value  with  itself.  That 
one  and  the  same  Value  can  be  present  under  different  forms,  it  could 
never  affirm,  because  it  could  never  fix  any  limit  to  the  validity  of 
such  a  proposition  except  one  which  would  reduce  it  to  a  barren 
tautology.  For  to  the  question  what  different  forms  of  expression 
designate  identical  values,  it  could  only  answer,  those  in  which  one 
and  the  same  identical  value  is  contained. 

I  need  not  here  enlarge  on  the  fact,  that  it  is  in  this  possibility  of 
affirming  the  equality 'of  the  different,  and  not  in  the  bare  application 
of  the  logical  law  of  identity  as  such,  that  the  motive  force  of  all 
fruitful  reasoning  in  mathematical  science  is  to  be  found.  We  should 
never  get  any  further,  if  we  could  never  subsume  under  the  subject  of 
a  given  major  premiss  anything  but  a  term  absolutely  identical  with  it ; 
we  do  make  progress  just  because  by  means  of  innumerable  substitu- 
tions, by  a  process  of  analysis  on  the  one  side  and  recombination  on 
the  other  we  are  able  to  bring  a  quantity  given  us  in  the  form  a  into 
the  form  35  and  thus  to  subsume  it  on  any  occasion  under  such  a 
major  term,  as  then  enables  us  further  by  known  methods  of  calcula- 
tion to  give  it  a  predicate  which  was  not  deducible  from  it  in  its  original 
form.  Everything  turns  therefore  on  our  right  to  affirm  identity  of 
the  different,  and  this  right  does  not  follow,  at  all  events  as  an  imme- 
diate consequence,  from  the  purport  of  the  law  of  identity. 

353.  The  remainder  of  my  argument  here  must  be  taken  in  con- 
nexion with  the  considerations  which  I  urged  when  dealing  with  the 
subject  of  pure  Logic  as  to  the  nature  of  judgments  synthetic  in  form 
but  identical  in  content.  I  there  made  allusions  to  Kant,  who  in 
endeavouring  to  prove  the  presence  of  synthetic  judgments  a  priori  \& 
all  branches  of  reasoning  included  under  that  category  the  arithmetical 
judgment  7  +  5  =  12.  My  object  at  that  point  was  to  insist  on  the 
identity  of  content  which  must  necessarily  obtain  in  any  true  proposi- 
tion between  the  subject  and  the  predicate  taken  in  their  entirety.  I 
was  dissatisfied  that  this  point  should  not  have  been  more  expressly 
insisted  on  by  Kant,  but  I  then  reserved  the  right  to  revert  again  to 
the  truth  which  his  doctrine  contains  (§  58).  Kant  held  that  we  could 
not  possibly  recognise  in  the  predicate  12  the  solution  of  the  problem 
expressed  in  the  subject  7-4-5,  without  an  act  of  Perception  *.  Per- 
ception alone,  that  is,  he  insisted,  can  establish  for  us  that  the  identity 
required  between  the  two  sides  in  order  to  the  correctness  of  the  equa- 
tion is  actually  the  fact.  Considered  for  purposes  of  illustration,  indeed, 
I  think  that  Kant's  example  was  not  happily  chosen,  because  it  does  not 
1  ['Anschauung,'] 


508    '  The  a  priori  truths.  i  BOOK  in. 

bring  the  formal  difference  which  exists  between  the  subject  and  the 
predicate,  and  upon  which  stress  ought  to  be  laid,  into  sufficiently  clear 
prominence.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  1 2  is  not  merely  another  name  for 
7  +  5,  but  expresses  something  quite  distinct,  viz.  that  the  same  quantity 
which  is  produced  by  the  addition  of  7  and  5  also  occupies  a  place  as 
a  definite  term  in  the  numerical  series  between  n  and  13.  But  then 
the  simplest  idea  which  we  can  form  of  that  series  itself  is  to  conceive 
it  as  arising  out  of  repeated  additions  of  the  unit,  that  is  to  say  out  of 
the  very  same  operation  through  which  7  and  5  themselves  were  put 
together.  So  that  we  conceive  the  left  side  and  the  right  side  of  the 
equation  equally  as*a  sum  of  units  and  we  merely  analyse,  on  the  left 
side,  into  two  steps,  as  the  idea  of  a  sum  allows  us  to  do,  that  which 
on  the  right  we  take  as  a  whole. 

On  the  other  hand  such  a  formula  as  7  +  5  =  42— 22,  though  not  in 
fact  expressing  any  more  completely  than  the  other  that  which  is 
essential  in  Kant's  thought,  yet  would  have  better  illustrated  the  $oint 
that  there  are  various  ways  by  which  we  may  arrive  at  one  and  the 
same  quantitative  value.  For  that  which  all  turns  upon  is  in  fact 
nothing  more  than  the  assertion  which  is  contained  in  the  sign  of 
addition, — viz.  that  quantities  can  be  summed  so  as  to  compose  another 
and  a  homogeneous  quantity ;  a  proposition  the  importance  of  which 
we  may  once  more  be  tempted  to  ignore,  because  it  seems  to  us  self- 
evident  and  a  mere  identical  proposition  defining  the  nature  of  nume- 
rical quantity  as  such.  And  so  it  undoubtedly  is,  but  how  do  we 
arrive  at  this  piece  of  self-evident  knowledge  ?  Not  every  ideal 
content  will  submit  to  the  same  operations ;  we  cannot  add  red  and 
green  together  and  produce  blue ;  the  notes  c  and  d  do  not  admit  of 
being  summed  so  as  to  produce  a  third  note  x,  such  as  to  stand 
higher  than  d  in  the  musical  scale  by  the  interval  c,  just  as  1 2  stands 
higher  than  5  in  the  series  of  numbers  by  7. 

But  here  the  question  may  be  asked  in  surprise,  what  does  this  last 
remark  lead  to  ?  Of  course,  it  may  be  said,  mathematical  operations 
can  only  be  applied  to  quantities,  whose  nature  it  is  to  admit  of  them, 
and  not,  or  at  all  events  not  immediately,  to  impressions  which  are 
qualitatively  different.  But  this  is  really  to  be  blind  to  what  lies  under 
our  very  eyes.  This  very  fact,  that  there  t's  such  a  thing  as  quantity 
to  be  found  in  the  world  of  ideas,  while  yet  our  thought  itself  is  no . 
bound,  on  pain  of  not  taking  place  at  all,  to  be  the  thought  of  just 
these  comparable  quantities— this  very  fact  is  a  fact  of  immediate 
perception,  which  if  it  were  lacking  to  us,  could  be  as  little  supplied 
through  logical  operations  working  on  a  different  set  of  ideas,  as  could 


CHAPTER  v.]          Synthetic  Propositions  a  priori*  509 

the  conception  of  qualitative  resemblance  if  the  world  of  Ideas  presented 
no  comparable  impressions  of  sense  such  as  colours  or  sounds.  The 
proposition  therefore  that  quantities  can  be  summed  is  undoubtedly  an 
identical  proposition;  but  that  the  subject  and  predicate  of  that  pro- 
position appear  as  valid  in  the  world  of  ideas,  and  that  it  has  quite  a 
different  value  from  the  equally  identical  proposition,  ail  wooden  iron 
is  wooden  iron, — this  does  not  follow  from  the  principle  of  Identity.  It 
is  not  then  the  bare  logical  principle  of  Identity,  but  the  perception  of 
quantity,  the  peculiar  nature  of  which  makes  it  possible  to  frame  a 
countless  number  of  propositions  in  content  identical  yet  in  form 
synthetic,  which  at  once  guarantees  the  truth  of  arithmetical  reasoning 
and  is  the  source  of  its  fruitfulness. 

That  which  might  here  be  added  in  the  interest  of  mathematics,  I 
must  pass  over ;  with  regard  to  the  logical  question  I  confess  myself  in 
entire  agreement  with  Kant  in  a  further  point,  namely  in  maintaining 
the  pure  or  a  priori  perception  of  numerical  quantity  in  the  sense  of  the 
word  a  priori  explained  above.  It  is  true  that  neither  the  idea  of 
quantity  as  such,  nor  the  more  defined  conception  of  its  capability  of 
being  summed,  nor  finally  any  one  arithmetical  proposition,  ever  enters 
into  our  consciousness  without  being  occasioned,  and  the  occasion  can 
always  be  traced  in  the  last  resort  to  an  external  stimulus.  We  think 
them  only  when  we  are  led  in  one  way  or  another  to  frame  the  idea  of 
numerable  objects.  But,  when  the  occasion  arises,  we  do  not  learn 
that  7  +  5=  12  from  the  content  of  this  perception,  in  such  away 
that  our  knowledge  of  the  truth  in  question  would  gain  in  certainty 
with  every  fresh  confirmation  by  subsequent  experience;  but  as  a 
matter  of -fact  the  single  presentation  of  the  iiiea  74-5,  no  matter 
whether  mediated  through  external  perception  or  not,  is  sufficient  to 
teach  us  its  identity  with  the  term  12  once  for  all  and  as  a  fact 
of  universal  validity.  And  supposing  that  we  found  when  we  came 
actually  to  count  external  objects  in  a  variety  of  further  instances  that 
our  arithmetical  proposition  was  in  some  cases  confirmed  and  in 
others  not,  we  should  certainly  all  of  us,  even  the  most  decided 
adherents  of  empirical  theories,  agree  to  correct  not  our  arithmetical 
proposition  by  our  countings  but  them  by  it. 

354.  The  case  is  perhaps  still  clearer  if  we  turn  to  geometry.  As 
to  Kant's  particular  instance  of  a  synthetic  geometrical  proposition,  a 
straight  line  is  the  shortest  line  between  two  points,  I  have  alleged 
similar  scruples  as  in  the  case  of  his  arithmetical  example  just  discussed, 
Here  again  the  example  is  not  happily  chosen,  because  we  have  no 
other  direct  standard  of  measurement  for  the  conception  of  distance 


r  i  o  The  a  priori  trutks.  i  BOOK  nr. 

which  Is  contained  in  the  predicate  f  shortness '  but  the  straight  line 
itself,  and  thus  the  proposition  suggests  before  everything  else  the 
complete  identity  of  its  subject  with  its  predicate.  And  such  identity 
does  undoubtedly,  in  respect  of  their  content,  exist ;  the  proposition 
would  not  otherwise  be  true  at  all ;  but  once  more,  how  do  we  establish 
that  identity?  By  connecting  the  two  points  through  a  something 
which  we  say  is  '  between '  them.  Now  it  is  clear  that  this  expression 
does  not  mean  merely  that  the  two  points  are  logically  designated  as 
not  identical  or  as  merely  in  some  way  or  other  different,  for  that  is 
equally  the  case  with  green  and  acid,  out  of  which  a  proposition  of  this 
kind  could  never  be  formed.  Nor  again  is  it  merely  that  they  can  be 
compared,  for  so — again  with  no  such  consequence  following — can 
green  and  red.  What  it  means  is  that  they  are  connected  in  a  manner 
completely  sui  generis^  which  is  thinkable  and  has  a  meaning  to  us 
through  an  original  faculty  of  spatial  perception  and  so  only,  and 
which  in  the  absence  of  such  perception  could  never  be  made  intelli- 
gible to  us  through  any  logical  operations  working  on  a  content  *bf  a 
different  kind,  and  of  which,  finally,  even  now  when  it  is  familiar  to  us 
all,  no  form  of  words,  unless  tacitly  implying  such  spatial  perception, 
can  by  any  possibility  give  us  a  clear  idea. 

Other  instances  of  Kant's  are  more  expressive.  Take,  he  says, 
the  proposition  that  two  straight  lines  cannot  enclose  a  space,  or, 
therefore,  make  up  a  figure,  and  try  to  derive  it  from  the  conception 
of  straight  lines  and  the  number  two ;  or  again  the  proposition  that 
out  of  three  straight  lines  a  figure  can  be  formed,  and  try  to  deduce 
this  in  the  same  way  from  the  conceptions  it  contains.  Your  labour 
is  all  in  vain,  you  find  yourself  driven  to  have  recourse  to  Perception, 
as  Geometry  in  fact  always  does.  These  words  remain  true,  even 
though  a  slight  inexactness  in  the  form  of  expression  may  offer  a 
handle  to  controversy.  The  complete  subject,  in  the  second  ex- 
ample, to  which  the  predicate  of '  forming  a  triangle '  belongs,  is  not 
simply  'three  straight  lines';  the  lines  must  be  in  the  same  plane, 
they  must  not  be  parallel,  they  must  admit  of  being  produced  at 
pleasure.  Again  in  the  first  of  the  two  examples,  we  have  no  right 
to  require  the  impossibility  of  the  closed  figure  to  be  deduced  from 
the  isolated  conceptions  of  the  number  two  on  the  one  hand  and  of 
the  straight  line  on  the  other ;  we  must  begin  by  representing  '  two ' 
as  the  number  of  the  lines,  and  the  lines  themselves  as  included  in 
the  same  world  of  space.  If  we  add  these  fresh  points,  the  predicate 
will  be  seen  in  both  cases,  though  not  in  both  with  equal  obviousness, 
to  follow  identically  from  the  subject  when  taken  in  its  full  meaning, 


CHAPTER  v.i     Illustration  from  Geometrical  Truth.        511 

and  so  the  identity  of  their  contents,  which  is  essential  to  the  truth  of 
the  proposition,  will  be  established. 

But  this  mere  matter  of  statement  does  not  alter  the  question  at 

issue.     All.  these  conditions,  that  the  lines  must  belong  to  the  same 

plane,  must  not  .be  parallel,  must  be   capable  of  being  produced, 

have  absolutely  no  meaning  whatever,  unless  we  assume  the  spatial 

perception  to  begin  with.     It  is  this  and  nothing  else  which  is  our 

evidence  that  anything  answering  to  those  expressions  is  to  be  met 

with  in  the  world  of  ideas,  and  which  alone  assigning  a  thinkable 

meaning  to  the  complete  subjects  of  the   propositions  in  question, 

gives  a  reason  in  so  doing  for  the   predicates  identical  with  their 

subject,  which  in  each  case  they  contain.     These  propositions  then 

are  undoubtedly  identical  propositions,  although  under  a  synthetic 

form  ;  but  that  their  full  content  and  the  manifold  relations  contained 

in  it  exist,  is  not  due  to  the  principle  of  Identity.     That  is  to  say,  it  is 

not  by  means  of  the  principle  of  Identity  that  we  can  pass  from  one 

fora?  of  expressing  a  geometrical  fact  to  another  equivalent  to  it  ; 

rather  it  is  the  peculiar  nature  of  space  which  makes  it  possible  for 

identical  facts  to  be  variously  expressed.     It  is  upon  this  fact,  and 

more  especially  upon  the  unlimited  power  we  possess  of  bringing 

any  given  figure  in  space  by  the  help  of  artificial  combinations  under 

fresh  mathematical  points  of  view  or  fresh  general  ideas,  and  thus 

constructing  predicates   for   it,  which   were  not  contained   in  our 

original  conceptions  of  the  figure, — it  is  upon  this  fact,  and  not  upon 

the  mere  application  of  the  bare  principle  of  Identity  as  such,  that 

the  fruitfulness  of  geometrical  procedure  depends. 

355.  At  this  point  I  may  expect  the  criticism  that  my  argument 
has  brought  me  to  a*  different  conclusion  from  that  which  it  was 
aiming  at.  I  began  I  shall  be  told  by  maintaining  the  necessity,  in 
order  to  any  extension  of  knowledge,  or  to  the  discdvery  of  the  laws 
of  nature,  of  synthetic  principles  a  priori.  And  now  I  am  invoking 
the  aid  of  Perceptions  to  supply  both  subject,  predicate,  and  copula  of 
the  judgments  in  which  we  express  those  principles,  a  proceeding 
which  seems  after  all  to  amount  to  no  more  than  the  not  very 
helpful  proposition,  that  we  cannot  think  without  having  some 
idea  of  that  which  is  to  be  the  content  of  our  thought;  the  fact 
still  remains  that  the  object  in  question  is  given  not  by  thought 
but  to  thought,  in  a  manner  not  essentially  different  from  that  in 
which  every  other  object  of  consciousness  is  given,  namely  through 
experience. 

In  regard  to  this  last  point  I  repeat  once  more  in  one  word  what 


The  a  priori  truths*  \  BOOK  in, 

I  have  said  already,  that  all  knowledge  whatever,  whether  innate  or 
not,  which  as  a  matter  of  fact  whether  constantly  or  upon  occasion 
makes  its  appearance  in  the  consciousness  of  any  one,  is  for  him  in 
the  broader  sense  of  the  word,  an  object  of  experience.  And  further 
we  have  admitted  from  the  first  that  no  one  of  the  principles  which 
we  regard  as  innate,  can  be  operative  in  us  even  in  the  sense  of  a 
major  premiss  unconsciously  followed  in  our  judgments,  until  an  in- 
citation  so  to  follow  it  comes  to  us  in  experience,  while  it  can  only 
become  in  the  full  sense  an  object  for  our  consciousness  through  a 
definite  act  of  reflexion  upon  those  applications  of  it  which  have 
already  been  made  unconsciously.  In  this  sense  then  I  have  no 
objection  to  offer  if  any  one  insists  on  calling  the  apprehension  of 
a  priori  principles  itself  an  inner  experience;  I  only  regard  it  as  a 
perfectly  barren  contention.  Nor  can  the  controversy  between  the 
a  priori  and  the  empirical  view  turn  on  the  further  point  that  the 
latter  ascribes  to  outward  that  which  we  would  rather  attribute  to 
inner  experience.  For  this  antithesis  simply  does  not  exist ;  What- 
ever notions  we  may  form  about  a  supposed  external  world,  our 
experiences  can  only  be  of  the  representations  of  it  in  our  own  minds, 
of  the  order  and  connexion  of  our  own  ideas.  Upon  this  point 
I  may  be  allowed  to  be  brief.  In  Germany  at  all  events  the  fallacy 
which  has  been  imported  from  abroad  does  not  yet  find  favour,  that 
by  measuring  the  solid  and  superficial  angles  of  material  forms  we 
can  confirm  the  propositions  of  geometry,  or  discover  any  others 
than  those  which  we  can  develope  with  our  eyes  shut  from  relations 
assumed  to  exist  between  mere  points  of  space.  We  are  still  aware 
that  such  measurements,  supposing  that  we  make  them,  relate  directly 
not  to  the  nature  of  the  bodies  which  fill  the  space  in  question  but  to 
properties  of  the  space  which  they  fill ;  finally  that  they  can  only  be 
made  at  all  by  the  aid  of  contrivances  and  methods  which  are  all 
founded  to  begin  with  upon  the  essential  order  and  regularity  of  our 
spatial  perception,  and  that  we  can  never  therefore  employ  the  pro- 
cess of  measurement  to  test  this  our  geometrical  knowledge  by  the 
standard  of  a  knowledge  which  has  a  different  and  independent 
source,  but  that  so  far  as  we  do  employ  it  we  are  merely  bringing 
a  particular  case  of  spatial  Perception  under  the  laws  of  geometrical 
Perception  in  general. 

Thus  the  difference  between  us  and  our  opponents  comes  back 
merely  to  this,  that  to  us  the  simple  principles  of  geometry,  that 
every  straight  line  may  be  produced  to  infinity,  that  the  opposite 
angles  of  two  straight  lines  intersecting  one  another  are  equal,  that 


CHAPTER  v.]  Nature  of  self-evidence.  513 

the  sums  of  any  two  adjacent  angles  are  equal,' — such  principles 
are  to  us  truths  which  once  presented  to  thought  are  valid  always ; 
whereas  in  the  view  of  empirical  philosophy  each  particular  apprehen- 
sion of  them  must  in  consistency  be  regarded  as  a  psychical  fact  and 
nothing  more,  as  to  which  there  is  no  certainty  whether  it  will  recur 
in  a  similar  case  or  not,  and  of  which  therefore  universal  validity  can 
never  be  established  as  true,  and  can  only  be  established  as  probable 
on  the  strength  of  the  agreement  of  a  very  large  number  of  instances 
in  which  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  has  so  recurred. 

356.  I  must  once  more  summarise  my  position  in  relation  to  this 
point  of  view.  In  the  first  place  the  contention  that  every  truth  of 
whatever  kind  requires  this  test  of  experience  in  order  to  be  received 
as  universally  valid,  would  contradict  itself.  For  on  the  one  hand  It 
must  itself  come  under  Its  own  rule  and  by  consequence  cease  to  be 
universal ;  on  the  other  hand,  as  we  have  already  seen,  without  the 
assumption  of  the  unconditional  validity  of  some  absolutely  certain 
principles  not  drawn  from  experience  the  very  deliverances  of  ex- 
perience itself  could  be  no  one  more  probable  than  another  \ 

On  the  possibility  of  an  immediate  knowledge  therefore  of  some 
universal  truth  all  certain  belief  depends,  that  of  our  opponents  no  less 
than  our  own  ;  the  difference  between  us  can  only  be  as  to  what  the 
truths  are  which  we  hold  to  be  accessible  to  this  form  of  knowledge. 
But  it  is  self-evident  that  in  the  case  of  truths  which  are  to  be 
recognised  immediately  as  universally  valid,  their  sole  credentials 
must  be  the  clearness  and  strength  with  which  they  force  themselves 
upon  consciousness  and  at  once  claim  recognition  without  constrain- 
ing it  by  any  process  of  proof.  Now  any  one  has  perfect  liberty  to 
allow  this  claim  or  to  resist  it ;  it  Is  open  to  every  one  whether  in  all 
honesty  to  distrust  the  self-evidence  with  which  this  or  that  object  of 
knowledge  presents  itself  to  his  consciousness,  or  to  Insist  (at  all 
events  for  sophistical  purposes)  that  no  self-evidence  in  the  world 
affords  a  proof  of  the  truth  of  the  thing  evidenced ;  only  in  the  latter 
case  he  must  allow  that  a  like  vein  of  sophistry  may  contest  the 
validity  of  any  process  of  proof  whatever  and  of  his  own  contention 
along  with  the  rest. 

This  sort  of  idle  disputation  for  disputation's  sake  we  may  leave  to 
itself ;  the  former  more  honest  variety  of  scepticism  on  the  other  hand 
is  not  without  its  justification,  for  undoubtedly  that  state 'of  repose  and 
peaceful  equilibrium  of  the  mind,  in  which  the  self-evidence  of  know- 
ledge, regarded  as  a  psychical  fact,  consists  in  the  last  resort,  may 

1  [P-  464-] 

Ll 


514  The  a  priori  truths,  [BOOKIII. 

also  be  produced  by  conjunctions  of  ideas  of  by  no  means  universal 
validity.  These  false  forms  of  self-evidence  we  have  admitted  to  exist, 
and  the  logical  processes  have  been  given  through  which  we  seek  to 
free  ourselves  from  such  illusions.  These  processes  all  resolve  them- 
selves into  this — by  shaping  our  investigations  in  various  ways, 
adopting  various  starting-points  and  various  methods,  we  arrive  at 
separating  from  a  subject  S  to  which  it  is  our  object  to  ascribe  a 
predicate  P,  all  associated  ideas  x,  not  really  contained  in  S  but 
secretly  affecting  our  conception  of  it,  which  might  create  in  us  the 
impression  that  our  P  which  in  fact  belongs  only  to  S  +  x  is  an 
invariable  attribute  of  S  as  such.  Our  method  does  not  always 
assume  the  form  of  a  direct  proof;  the  proposition  that  a  straight  line 
may  be  produced  to  infinity  is  too  simple  to  admit  of  any  argument 
except  one  which  brings  us  back  by  a  complete  tautology  to  immediate 
Perception ;  "in  other  cases  again  proof  will  take  the  apagogic  form  of  a 
reduciio  ad  absurdum^  a  form  of  argument  which  does  not  deduce  the 
truth  of  the  given  proposition  from  some  other  acknowledged  prin- 
ciple but  merely  establishes  the  impossibility  of  denying  it.  When 
this  has  once  been  accomplished  we  regard  the  proposition  in  question 
as  a  truth  of  universal  validity,  needing  no  empirical  confirmation 
from  particular  instances  in  which  it  is  found  to  hold,  but  on  the 
contrary  standing  over  against  all  particular  instances  as  certain 
a  priori.  We  do  not  deny  the  possibility  that  this  trust  in  reason 
may  now  and  again  deceive  us;  but  we  should  not  surrender  the 
presumption  in  favour  of  a  principle  thus  arrived  at  being  true  merely 
because  it  is  possible  to  distrust  it ;  we  shall  hold  fast  to  it  until  either 
the  results  to  which  it  leads  involve  us  in  contradictions,  or  until  some 
other  truth  becomes  plain  to  us,  from  which  we  are  able  to  under- 
stand how  a  proposition  now  seen  to  be  false  came  to  present  the 
appearance  of  a  self-evident  truth. 

357.  There  are  various  points  here  which  still  need  elucidation. 
The  terms  in  which  in  the  Kantian  school  pure  Intuition *  has  been 
spoken  of  in  contradiction  to  Thought,  have  led  to  its  becoming  asso- 
ciated with  the  idea  of  a  peculiar  and  somewhat  mysterious  form  of 
procedure  through  which  the  apprehending  mind  accomplishes  some- 
thing which  is  impossible  to  its  discursive  thought.  The  obscurity 
which  attaches  in  consequence  to  this  idea  is  due  to  this,  that  in  fact 
it  is  just  in  the  case  of  Intuition  that  no  sort  of  procedure  consisting  of 
the  connecting  of  various  single  acts  is  describable,  whereas  there  is  one 

1  [« Anschauting.'  ( Perception '  is  usually  a  better  rendering  of  this  word  than 
'Intuition';  but  the  latter  is  preferred  in  this  passage  for  obvious  reasons.] 


CHAPTER  v.i     Spatial  Intuitions  how  far  a  priori.          515 

in  the  case  of  Thought.  The  attitude  of  Intuition  towards  its  content 
is  that  of  passive  receptivity,  and  its  work  is  done  so  completely  at  a 
single  stroke,  that  no  steps  or  stages  in  it  can  tie  distinguished  or 
could  be  described.  This  must  not  be  misunderstood. 

When  geometrical  intuition  teaches  us  that  two  straight  lines  inter- 
secting each  other  can  only  have  one  point  common  to  both,  there 
does  undoubtedly  take  place,  regarding  the  act  as  a  psychical  event, 
a  certain  succession  of  ideas,  which  we  might  describe  if  in  any 
particular  case  it  were  exactly  known  to  us.  We  might  explain 
how  we  first  think  each  of  the  two  straight  lines  in  itself,  then  place 
them  in  the  same  plane,  make  them  from  a  parallel  posiJioE  converge, 
follow  each  to  the  point  of  section  and  then  beyond  it,— all  this  we 
can  describe,  but  this  is  not  the  geometrical  intuition  itself:  so  far 
we  have  only  brought  into  consciousness  all  the  different  points  which 
go  to  make  up  the  relation  in  question,  and  now  intuition  pronounces 
on  these  points  of  relation,  as  by  a  single  instantaneous  revelation,— 
the  two  straight  lines  can  only  have  one  point  in  common.  How  this 
final  step  is  accomplished,  the  immediate  apprehension  of  the  neces- 
sary truth  which  is  implied  when  once  all  the  members  of  the  relation 
are  completely  given,  is  a  point  upon  which  certainly  at  present,  and 
in  my  judgment  no  less  certainly  for  ever,  any  further  psychological 
analysis  is  impossible.  It  is  only  in  this  sense  of  absolutely  immediate 
apprehension  that  I  have  here  employed  the  term  intuition,  and  it 
•leads  me  to  a  further  observation  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  expression 
a  priori  as  applied  by  us  to  intuition. 

I  have  explained  before  why  it  is  that  knowledge  must  necessarily 
consist  not  in  the  mere  passive  reception  of  impressions  but  in  a 
reaction,  the  form  of  which  reaction  will  depend  on  the  nature  of  the 
mind  which  is  stirred  to  it.  I  did  not  conceal  my  agreement  with 
Kant  in  accounting  Spatial  Intuition  as  a  form  of  such  reaction,  and 
therefore  as  a  priori  or  innate  in  the  sense  in  which  that  term  may 
legitimately  be  used.  For  the  question  before  us  however  this  point 
is  of  no  importance.  It  is  not  because  the  idea  of  space  is  innate  in  us, 
that  we  are  in  a  position  to  frame  universal  propositions  in  geometry, 
which  once  thought  are  valid  always  ;  if  it  were  at  all  intelligible  without 
any  such  hypothesis  how  the  idea  of  a  particular  combination  of  spatial 
points  of  relation  could  arise  in  us  purely  through  external  impressions* 
still,  in  presence  of  such  an  idea,  the  immediate  apprehension  of  the 
universal  truth  contained  in  those  relations,  which  is  the  service  of 
intuition,  would  be  not  more  inexplicable  (though  it  would  be  equally 
inexplicable)  and  not  less  possible  than  if  those  same  points  of  relation 

Ll  2 


516  The  a  priori  truths.  [BOOK  in. 

could  only  be  brought  into  our  consciousness  by  the  help  of  an 
innate  mode  of  reaction  and  spontaneity  in  the  mind  itself.  I  there- 
fore reserve  the  question  of  the  a  priori^  in  the  sense  of  the  innate 
character  of  spatial  Intuition,  with  any  further  question  which  may  arise 
out  of  it,  for  the  Metaphysic,  and  apply  the  term  a  priori  to  spatial 
intuitions  in  a  restricted  sense  only,  viz.  to  indicate  that  they  are  not 
derived  by  a  process  of  induction  or  summation  from  particular 
instances  which  exhibit  them,  but  are  thought  to  begin  with  as  truths 
of  universal  validity,  and  are  thus  prior  to  the  particular  instances 
in  the  sense  of  being  rules  by  which  they  are  determined. 

358.  This  brings  us  to  the  last  point  which  we  have  here  to  con- 
sider. Philosophers  have  spoken  of  pure  Intuitions  as  an  innate 
possession  of  the  mind,  in  terms  which  could  not  but  lead  as  a  natural 
deduction  to  the  idea  that  all  truth  which  rests  upon  any  such  in- 
tuition is  also  an  intellectual  treasure  always  at  hand,  which  we  take 
with  us  to  experience,  and  through  which  we  judge  it.  And  in  fact 
Locke  made  use  of  this  deduction  as  an  argument  against  the  doc- 
trine of  innate  Ideas.  It  needs  however  only  a  brief  consideration  to 
see  that  such  a  deduction  is  illegitimate.  Every  one  who  speaks  of 
innate  knowledge  includes  in  it  most  certainly  mathematical  truth,  but 
mathematical  truths  had  all  to  be  discovered  before  they  were  known, 
and  the  universally  innate  possession  of  a  spatial  intuition  was  not 
the  same  thing  as  the  possession  of  a  knowledge  of  geometry.  But 
the  most  elementary  of  these  truths  were  discovered  as  soon  as  ever 
the  mind  was  drawn  to  turn  its  attention  away  from  the  infinite  variety 
of  figures  presented  by  bodies  in  space  which  surround  us  in  the 
world  of  perception,  to  the  simplest  relations  which  are  contained 
in  all  of  them  alike.  Then  at  once  the  truth  of  each  several  principle 
one  by  one  sprang  to  light  self-evident  and  self-proved,  just  as  Plato 
so  admirably  represents  it  in  the  Meno,  only  that  it  was  superfluous 
to  refer  us  to  a  previous  state  of  existence  from  the  memory  of  which 
this  sudden  emergence  of  knowledge  was  supposed  to  come,  in- 
asmuch as  there  also  the  conviction  of  the  certainty  and  necessity  of 
the  truths  which  there  were  given  to  intuition  in  a  universal  form  could 
only  have  arisen  in  the  mind  through  the  same  immediate  act  of  appre- 
hension by  which  in  our  life  here  we  recognise  it  in  particular  instances. 

It  is  still  easier  to  understand  how  it  is  that  the  more  complicated 
mathematical  relations  should  have  had  to  wait  for  their  discovery, 
and  that  an  immense  tract  of  ground  should  always  remain  before  us, 
in  which  new  discoveries  are  to  be  made.  The  consequences  which 
follow  from  simple  mathematical  principles  become  science  only  by 


CHAPTER  v.j  The  self-evident  not  obvious.  5 1  j 

being  deduced  from  them  by  reflexion,  and  this  operation  involves  a 
labour  of  a  most  extended  and  constantly  progressive  character,  the 
application  of  processes  of  exact  definition,  of  analysis  into  varied 
elements,  of  synthesis  into  well-defined  forms,  to  abstractions  made 
by  the  mind  itself,  and  this  in  order  to  establish  even  the  subjects 
of  the  propositions  required,  the  predicates  being  obtained,  it  may 
be,  by  processes  no  less  elaborate. 

Paradoxical  therefore  as  it  may  seem  we  must  disabuse  ourselves  of 
the  false  idea  that  the  world  of  the  self-evident  lies  of  itself  plain  in 
its  self-evidence  before  us,  and  that  all  we  have  to  do  is  by  the  help 
of  this  comfortable  possession  of  a  self-evident  truth  to  go  on  to 
subdue  the  intractable  world  of  our  perceptions.  The  fact  is  that 
even  universal  truths,  for  the  apprehension  of  which  the  mind  requires 
nothing  outside  itself,  have  yet  to  be  found  by  searching,  have  to  be 
abstracted  and  separated  off  from  among  the  measureless  host  of 
ideas  which  form  the  world  of  consciousness.  Nor  can  we  even 
expect  that  the  very  simplest  of  innate  truths,  the  highest  principles  of 
all,  will  be  revealed  to  consciousness  first  of  all  by  this  process  of  self- 
reflexion.  On  the  contrary,  their  first  appearance  is  invariably 
occasioned  by  some  particular  instance  which  exemplifies  them,  or 
some  particular  case  presented  by  perception  or  by  imagination  that 
the  mind  may  pass  judgment  on  it.  But  it  may  happen  that  our 
perceptions  may  be  of  such  kind  as  never  to  present  to  us  the  case  re- 
quired in  its  purity,  and  in  the  same  way  to  debar  the  imagination  from 
conceiving  the  idea  of  it,  and  this  though  if  once  it  were  presented  to 
consciousness,  the  mind  would  at  once  feel  the  conviction  awakened 
of  a  truth  of  the  most  universal  and  fundamental  kind,  and  would 
judge  accordingly.  Thus  then  it  may  be  an  extremely  difficult  task 
for  knowledge,  to  remove  all  the  obstacles  which  the  actual  con- 
nexion of  our  ideas,  imposed  upon  us  by  experience,  plants  in  our  path, 
and  to  fight  its  way  through  to  the  knowledge  of  the  self-evident. 

350.  In  mathematics,  where  the  matter  of  investigation  can  most 
easily  be  separated  from  the  real  objects  to  which  it  is  attached  in 
experience,  it  has  speaking  generally  been  possible  to  advance  from  the 
simplest  truths  to  their  derivative  consequences,  although,  in  spite  of  this, 
the  fresh  knowledge  has  afforded  new  and  more  comprehensive  expres- 
sion even  for  the  principles  which  were  known  -before.  It  has  been 
otherwise  in  the  science  of  mechanics,  which  applying  itself  directly  to 
actual  occurrences,  seeks  to  prescribe  laws  to  the  interactions  which 
obtain  between  real  things.  I  use  this  much  criticised  expression1  of 
1  £'  Vorzeichnen '  (to  prescribe).] 


The  a  priori  truths.  [BOOK in. 

Kant,  in  order  to  reduce  the  objections  which  have  been  made  to  it 
within  their  proper  limits.  No  one  could  have  intended  it  to  mean  that 
human  reason  can  invent  laws  at  its  own  good  pleasure  which  nature  is 
bound  to  follow.  But  supposing  the  idea  of  a  relation  between  different 
elements  to  be  presented  to  us  in  so  simple  a  way  as  to  exhibit  an 
instance  of  the  perfect  purity  required,  in  which  true  laws  of  nature 
are  seen  producing  their  simplest  result,  with  no  multiplicity  of  ex- 
traneous conditions  to  obscure  it,  why  should  it  not  be  possible  in 
such  a  case  for  reason,  itself  a  member  in  the  system  of  the  world 
in  which  these  operations  take  place,  to  have  an  immediate  ap- 
prehension of  the  result  in  which  the  relation  supposed  must  neces- 
sarily issue?  This  is  not  to  thrust  its  own  subjective  laws  upon 
nature,  but  to  detect  the  real  laws  of  nature  herself,  which  become  to 
it  binding  rules  which  it  brings  with  it  to  the  confused  tangle  of 
separate  events  wherewith  to  estimate  and  interpret  them. 

In  this  sense  pure  mechanics  is  an  a  priori  science ;  it  is  quite  true 
that  many  of  its  principles  may  have  been  first  suggested  and  the 
enquiry  after  them  occasioned  by  experience,  but  it  was  not  by  the 
testimony  of  repeated  perceptions  that  they  were  discovered  and 
reduced  to  the  exact  form  of  a  law,  it  was  by  an  operation  of  thought, 
apprehending  with  the  clearness  of  immediate  vision  the  self-evident 
law  in  an  instance  where  it  is  presented  in  its  purity,  and  in  compli- 
cated cases  finding-  means  to  reduce  them  to  a  similar  simplicity. 
This  is  commonly  expressed  by  saying  that  within  its  own  province 
mechanics  is  an  absolutely  demonstrative  science,  which  from  pre- 
suppositions of  its  own  creation  evolves  necessary  conclusions  with 
irresistible  logic ;  but  that,  to  compensate  for  this  it  has  in  relation  to 
experience  only  a  hj'pothetical  validity,  that  is  to  say  it  is  valid  only 
on  the  assumption  that  real  things  exist  which  admit  of  being  sub- 
sumed with  perfect  exactness  under  the  conceptions  from  which  its 
conclusions  are  drawn. 

But  such  language  allows  too  much  to  an  unjustifiable  scepticism 
as  to  the  tenableness  of  the  hypothesis,  and  does  not  really  answer 
to  the  facts.  For  the  science  of  mechanics  did  not  spring  up  in  some 
meditative  consciousness,  playing  with  possibilities  before  experience 
existed,  it  arose  under  the  persistent  pressure  of  experience  which 
called  for  explanation.  The  abstract  universal  conditions,  from  which 
in  mechanics  we  derive  definite  consequences,  are  not  Problematic 
schemes  of  something  which  might  perhaps  be  found  in  reality,  but 
reductions  of  that  which  is  Assertorically  given  in  experience  to  a 
form  in  which  its  validity  is  universal. 


CHAPTER  v.]  6  P?/;^  Cases  *  in  Mechanics.  519 

But  that  reduction  to  a  universal  form  was  necessary  by  reason  cf 
the  one  actual  postulate  with  which  the  science  of  mechanics  stands 
and  falls,  that  a  uniformity  of  law  does  hold  good  in  the  world  of 
events.  If  this  assumption  is  justified,  and  if  there  are  many  elements 
ABC...  operating  together  in  the  order  of  nature,  each  under  various 
forms  a  a1  a2 . . .  /3  /31  ft2 . . .,  finally  all  of  them  in  varying  relations 
M N . . .  each  of  which  again  may  assume  different  values  p,  ft1 . .  v  vl . ., 
— then  any  single  event  must  be  the  joint  effect  of  many  single  laws, 
each  law  concerning  two  elements  A  B  only  and  their  relation  Mt 
and  determining  the  particular  operation  E  which  results  from  these 
data,  and  which  in  turn  will  change  to  e  el . . . ,  as  A  B  and  M  pass 
through  their  several  changes  in  form  or  in  value. 

It  may  be  that  experience  never  affords  a  perfectly  pure  instance  of 
one  such  single  law ;  still  it  would  be  folly  to  find  fault  with  mechanics 
for  speaking  of  motion  in  the  first  instance  without  taking  account  of 
resistance  which  nevertheless  invariably  attends  it ;  or  of  a  homo- 
geneous mass  which  is  nowhere  to  be  found,  or  finally  of  a  perfectly 
rigid  body,  whereas  perception  presents  us  only  with  bodies  which 
are  elastic,  yielding,  of  various  degrees  of  hardness.  It  will  be 
time  enough  to  take  account  of  the  influence  of  these  secondary 
conditions  when  we  have  learnt  the  universal  laws  upon  whose  con- 
sequences they  exert  their  modifying  operation ;  but  even  supposing 
that  the  theory  of  the  resisting  mediums,  of  the  specific  qualities  of 
matter  and  its  molecular  properties,  were  never  to  reach  the  simple 
clearness  of  the  other  departments  of  mechanical  science,  it  is  certain 
that  a  philosophy  of  nature  which  was  not  even  acquainted  with  the 
laws  of  the  simple  and  pure  cases  from  which  every  individual  mixed  case 
varies  by  a  determinate  amount,  would  be  attended  by  still  less  success. 
For  it  is  by  no  means  for  the  mere  convenience  of  shortening  our 
procedure  at  the  cost  of  its  exactness,  that  we  ignore  the"  special 
peculiarities  of  the  concrete  instance,  and  begin  by  looking  for  the  law 
of  a  universal  and  abstract  instance ;  our  assumption  of  the  presence 
of  law  in  actual  events  involves  as  a  necessary  and  objective  con- 
sequence that  the  joint  operation  of  many  elements  is  made  up  of 
the  several  operations,  which  each  pair  of  elements,  combining  in 
a  specific  relation,  generate  on  their  own  account,  and  which  they 
a^r  in  accordance  with  a  fixed  law  as  this  relation  alters. 

36O.  The  empirical  content  and  course  of  our  perceptions  has 
rendered  it  by  no  means  an  easy  task  for  mechanical  enquiry  even  to 
form  the  ideas  of  the  simple  and  pure  cases,  upon  which  an  imme- 
diate intuition  of  the  truth  could  at  once  pronounce  a  judgment  self- 


The  a  priori  truths. 

evident  and  universal;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  here  more  than  any- 
where else  that  experience  has  exerted  the  injurious  influence  already- 
alluded  to,  drawing  the  mind  away  from  the  apprehension  of  the 
universal  and  the  unconditioned,  by  constantly  introducing  to  it  the 
particular  and  that  whose  validity  is  conditional. 

The  entire  period  of  antiquity  passed  away  without  the  conception 
of  motion,  the  central  point  in  mechanics,  having  been  reduced  to  a 
form  simple  enough  to  be  immediately  apprehended  by  the  mind  in 
its  abstract  character.  Three  great  examples  of  motion  were  pre- 
sented by  experience  to  the  imagination,  the  perpetual  motion  of  the 
heavenly  bodies,  the  rapidly  ceasing  motion  of  terrestrial  bodies 
caused  by  external  impulse,  finally  the  energy  of  living  beings,  originat- 
ing within  but  after  a  while  wearying.  The  mind  of  antiquity  never 
succeeded  in  separating  the  simple  process  in  which  all  motion  con- 
sists, continuous  change  of  place,  from  the  conflicting  peculiarities  of 
these  different  classes  of  instances  in  which  it  occurs.  The  pheno- 
menon was  never  disentangled  from  certain  assumed  causes  of  it ; 
the  course  of  the  stars  was  represented  as  a  divine  motion  exalted 
above  the  general  laws  of  nature,  or  else  the  motions  of  terrestrial 
bodies  were  attributed  to  an  extraneous  necessity  and  thus  degraded 
to  a  position  below  the  due  and  natural  order  of  things.  Add  to  this 
that  the  analogy  of  the  wearying  of  human  activity  led  men  to  regard 
cessation  of  all  motion  as  such  as  the  natural  and  self-evident  law,  its 
eternal  continuance  as  a  divine  exception. 

It  was  reserved  for  a  much  later  epoch  to  conceive  the  essential 
features  of  all  motion  of  whatever  kind,  as  consisting  simply  in  a  rela- 
tion between  the  three  elements  of  velocity,  duration  of  time,  and  space 
traversed,  and  by  the  modest  formula  s  =  vt  to  lay  the  foundation  of  a 
scientific  theory  of  motion.  That  formula  once  given,  the  law  of  the 
persistence  of  motion  followed  of  itself:  for  although  the  discovery 
of  the  law  was  due  to  a  generalisation  from  particular  results  obtained 
by  experiment,  showing  that  motion  always  lasted  for  a  longer 
time  in  proportion  as  all  external  hindrances  were  removed,  still  no 
one  doubts  that  directly  it  was  discovered  it  expressed  a  tardily  ap- 
prehended necessity  of  thought  That  there  is  such  a  thing  as  motion 
had  to  be  learnt  from  experience,  but  if  it  exists  or  is  to  exist  at  all, 
the  idea  of  its  persistence  becomes  a  necessary  postulate  in  order  to 
make  it  even  a  possible  object  of  intuition 1. 

Similar  difficulties  had  to  be  encountered  in  forming  the  conception 
of  mass.  The  bodies  with  which  we  most  ordinarily  deal,  whether 
1  [See  sect.  247.] 


CHAPTER  v.i  The  Conception  of  Mass.  521 

solid  or  fluid,  were  observed  to  follow  the  downward  tendency  "of  weight, 
whereas  vapours  and  fire  tended  upwards  ;  thus  the  Idea  arose  of  two 
opposite  impulses,  both  belonging  essentially  to  the  nature  of  bodies, 
but  leading  away  from  one  another  in  two  opposite  directions,  di- 
rections which  might  indeed  have  been  correctly  distinguished  by  a 
qualitative  distinction  of  the  ultimate  points  towards  which  they  tend, 
but  which  were  in  fact  confounded  with  the  unintelligible  antithesis  of 
an  above  and  below  in  an  absolute  space.  It  took  a  long  time  before 
the  combination  of  more  extended  observations  was  able  to  compen- 
sate for  the  one-sided  character  of  the  facts  as  experience  at  first 
presents  them,  and  to  show  that  neither  the  direction  nor  the  intensity 
of  weight-pressure  was  everywhere  uniform.  Not  till  then  did  the 
natural  idea  -make  its  way  that  the  beginning  of  any  new  motion 
whatever  must  necessarily  require  something  to  determine  its  direction 
a  fronte  or  a  /ergo,  in  the  way  of  attraction  or  repulsion  along  a 
straight  line,  that  is  to  say,  that  it  takes  its  origin  always  from  an 
interaction  of  different  elements  in  space,  and  that  the  amount  of  such 
interaction  depends  on  the  quantities  of  a  homogeneous  real  existence 
which  are  united  in  each  one  of  the  elements  in  question.  The  idea 
of  mass,  again,  which  was  thus  arrived  at,  in  which  regard  is  had  only 
to  the  amount  of  the  resistance  of  inertia  on  the  one  hand  which  real 
existence  in  space  offers  to  any  motion  which  is  demanded  from  it, 
and  to  the  magnitude  of  the  power  with  which  it  enforces  every 
motion  of  other  elements  which  originates  from  itself, — this  me- 
chanical conception  may  very  well  stir  new  questions  to  which 
philosophy  would  have  to  find  an  answer ;  still  when  once  a  regular 
order  of  natural  events  is  given  or  is  assumed,  in  which  each  single 
event  is  taken  as  the  condition  determining  the  definite  degree  of 
another  event  following  upon  it,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  such  a  con- 
ception involves  as  a  self-evident  postulate  the  commensurability  of 
all  real  elements  in  regard  to  the  magnitude  of  the  effects  they  may 
be  expected  to  produce,  a  principle  which  is  expressed  in  the  con- 
ception of  Mass.  But  how  great  the  power  in  which  one-sided  and 
partial  observation  exerts  over  our  conceptions,  is  attested  by  the 
difficulty  which  the  common  imagination  finds  even  in  the  present 
day  in  believing  in  the  possibility  of  the  Antipodes,  and  again  by  the 
errors  of  certain  schools  of  natural  philosophy,  to  which  not  indeed 
the  eternal  downward  motion  of  the  philosophy  of  antiquity,  but  still 
the  concentric  pressure  of  gravity,  formed  so  essential  a  part  of  the 
general  notion  of  material  substance  that  the  idea  of  mass  without 
weight  always  seemed  to  them  a  contradiction. 


The  a  priori  truths.  EBOOKIII. 

Here  I  must  break  off;  but  any  one  undertaking  to  write  the  his- 
tory of  the  development  of  mechanical  conceptions  would  find  it  a 
suggestive  task,  instead  of  being  content  perpetually  to  repeat  how  we 
have  come  simply  through  the  connexion  of  particular  experiences  to 
our  knowledge  of  natural  law,  to  go  on  to  trace  and  explain  how  at 
first  the  partial  and  one-sided  character  of  those  experiences  forced 
upon  men's  minds  a  number  of  false  ideas,  and  hindered  them  from 
arriving  at  an  earlier  apprehension  of  self-evident  truths, 

361.  There  are  conflicting  opinions  as  to  the  logical  character  of 
the  simplest  mechanical  principles.  Just  because  they  concern  in  the 
first  instance  not  actual  bodies  but  a  certain  postulated  subject-matter 
whose  nature  is  wholly  determined  by  our  definitions  of  it,  we  either 
consider  ourselves  bound  to  look  upon  them  as  analytical  judgments  the 
truth  of  which  is  guaranteed  by  the  law  of  Identity,  or  else  we  regard 
them,  even  as  taken  in  their  purest  and  most  abstract  form,  as  still 
synthetic  and  therefore  mere  probable  hypotheses,  whose  truth  can 
only  be  established  by  their  agreement  with  experience  and  the 
complete  internal  harmony  of  the  conclusions  to  which  they  lead. 

My  own  judgment  in  this  controversy  can  be  no  other  than  that 
already  given  in  reference  to  the  kindred  problems  in  Arithmetic  and 
Geometry,  but  I  must  content  myself  with  briefly  indicating  my  point 
of  view  without  developing  it  in  all  the  detail  which  might  be  desir- 
able. In  general  I  might  express  my  position  thus  :  the  two  given 
data  A  and  JB}  as  to  whose  connexion  a  mechanical  judgment  is  to  be 
affirmed,  are  not  given  to  us  merely  one  by  one ;  our  ideas  of  them 
are  only  intelligible  and  are  only  understood  in  and  through  a  single 
Intuition,  which  embraces  both  together  and  which  determines  also 
in  one  and  the  same  act  the  relation  between  them. 

Let  us,  to  begin  with,  turn  once  more  to  an  example  from  arith- 
metic. The  proposition  3  #  —  3  #  =  o,  we  shall  be  disposed  to  refer 
immediately  to  the  principle  of  Identity;  nevertheless  all  that  that 
principle  tells  us,  taken  simply  by  itself,  is  that  3 a  =3  a,  —  3^=  —  3*2, 
and  finally  30  —  3<z=3<2  —  30;  that  this  last  expression  =  o,  we  can 
only  maintain  on  the  strength  of  a  direct  intuition  of  the  fact  that 
there  are  two  operations  lying  within  our  power,  the  addition  of 
a  to  a  and  then  the  subtraction  of  a  from  2  a,  which  exactly  cancel 
each  other,  and  in  the  repetition  of  which  an  equal  number  of  times 
the  subtraction  will  annihilate  whatever  quantity  the  addition  may 
generate.  For  in  fact  in  the  expression  +  a  —  a  the  sign  —  represents 
not  merely  an  opposite  to  -f ,  it  indicates  at  the  same  time  the  mode 
in  which  this  opposition  is  able  to  operate  and  is  to  operate,  namely 


CHAPTER v.i      Synthetic  Jvidgments  in  Mechanics.  523 

by  subtraction.  If  we  knew  nothing  of  the  possibility  of  such  an 
operation,  or  if  it  could  not  be  carried  out,  then  we  could  as  little 
evolve  the  result  o  from  a  —  a,  as  we  could  arrive  at  a  result  from  the 
mere  combination  in  thought  of  the  contradictory  notions  of  possi- 
bility and  impossibility;  in  their  character  of  opposites  these  two 
notions  can  equally  well  be  represented  by  a  and  —  a,  but  this  can- 
not *be  interpreted  by  a  subtraction. 

We  see  therefore  that  the  proposition  a  — •  a  =  o  may  be  regarded 
with  equal  truth  as  at  once  identical  and  synthetic.  It  is  an  identical 
proposition  because  it  would  be  actually  false  if  the  two  sides  of  the 
equation  did  not  represent  precisely  the  same  content ;  but  that  the 
identity  is  there,  no  mere  logical  analysis  of  our  <z,  —  a,  and  —  signs, 
can  •  possibly  inform  us ;  we  learn  this  solely  through  the  immediate 
intuition  of  the  meaning  which  the  sign  —  is  in  this  particular  case 
capable  of  bearing,  because  it  is  related  to  the  increasing  or  the 
diminution  of  quantities.  Hence  the  proposition  is  a  synthetic  judg- 
ment of  identity  between  two  contents  different  in  form,  between  a 
problem  and  its  solution. 

A  similar  instance  is  presented  in  the  field  of  mechanics  by  the 
determination  of  the  resultant  of  two  motions  the  lines  of  which  include 
an  angle.  I  confine  myself  here  to  the  postulate  from  which  the  ordinary 
attempts  at  demonstration  start,  namely  that  where  two  such  forces  are 
equal  the  resultant  bisects  the  angle  between  them.  This  proposition  is 
commonly  regarded  as  self-evident,  and  we  suppose  ourselves  to  possess 
in  this  simplest  possible  instance  an  immediate  certainty  of  a  con- 
clusion to  which  any  more  complicated  problems  would  have  to  be 
reduced.  And  undoubtedly  the  most  cautious  mind  will  agree  to 
recognise  in  it  not  merely  a  probable  hypothesis  but  a  truth  which 
only  cannot  be  proved,  because  it  is  too  simple  to  admit  of  being 
proved  from  anything  simpler.  But  the  observation  which  is  com- 
monly added  by  way  of  elucidation,  that  there  is  no  reason  why  the 
resultant  should  approach  more  nearly  to  the  line  of  the  one  force 
than  of  the  other,  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  logical  character  of 
the  proposition  in  question.  For  it  cannot  in  itself  be  a  positive 
ground  for  the  necessity  of  the  assumed  direction  of  the  resultant, 
that  grounds  are  absent  for  two  other  classes  of  directions,  unless  we 
start  with  the  position  that  some  direction  must  necessarily  be  taken, 
and  that  it  cannot  coincide  with  either  of  the  two  forces.  But 
now  it  is  precisely  this  that  we  know  from  Intuition;  a  merely 
logical  analysis  would  only  teach  us  that  under  the  condition  a  the 
element  M  moves  in  the  direction  a9  under  the  condition  b  in  the 


524  The  a  priori  truths.  [BOOK in. 

direction  /3,  Supposing  both  conditions  operating-  together,  then 
M  can  neither  move  in  the  direction  a  nor  in  the  direction  /3,  be- 
cause either  one  or  the  other  would  suppose  one  of  the  two  con- 
ditions entirely  inoperative.  What  then  would  happen?  The  two 
conditions  being  supposed  of  equal  strength,  it  follows  that  either 
both  the  one  and  the  other  must  be  inoperative  and  M  remain  at 
rest,  or  else  both  must  act  and  be  counteracted  in  equal-  measure, — 
supposing  always  that  there  are  ways  and  means  by  which  that  result 
can  be  brought  about.  But  this  last  is  the  important  question ;  that 
there  are  such  ways  and  means,  and  what  they  consist  in,  this  is 
what  no  method  which  thought  can  provide  is  able  to  inform  us.  But 
when  we  turn  on  the  one  hand  to  the  Intuition  or  Perception  of  space 
which  gives  us  the  connexion  between  the  different  directions  which  are 
possible  in  it,  and  on  the  other  to  the  Intuition  of  motion,  there 
it  lies  all  clear  before  us ;  there  we  find  that  M  can  satisfy  completely 
both  the  two  conditions  at  once,  by  so  moving  as  at  the  expiration  of 
the  unit  of  time  /  to  arrive  at  the  same  point  (being  the  end  of  the 
diagonal  of  the  parallelogram)  at  which  it  would  have  arrived  in  two  such 
units  of  time  taken  ia  succession,  had  it  pursued  first  the  direction  a  or 
/3  simply  during  the  one,  and  then  the  direction  Q  or  a  simply  during 
the  other ;  that  the  path  finally  by  which  it  reaches  that  point  is  the 
diagonal  itself,  follows  from  the  fact  that  for  any  small  fraction  di  of 
the  time  precisely  the  same  principle  holds;  the  diagonal  is  the 
geometric  locus  of  all  the  points  at  which  M  must  necessarily  arrive 
at  the  ends  of  the  times  df,  zdt>  -$dt  and  the  rest.  Here  again, 
then,  and  this  time  in  a  proposition  of  Mechanics,  we  have  a  synthetic 
judgment,  which  establishes  the  identity  between  a  given  problem 
and  its  solution  through  the  instrumentality  of  immediate  Intuition. 

382.  This  for  the  present  must  suffice ;  I  glance  at  the  more  ad- 
vanced part  of  mechanics  for  a  different  purpose.  Whereas  its  first 
beginnings  by  their  very  simplicity  render  formal  methods  of  demon- 
stration impossible,  the  problems  later  on  become  so  complicated, 
that  the  solutions,  although  strictly  following  from  those  fundamental 
principles,  do  nevertheless,  owing  to  the  large  variety  of  the  points  of 
relation  which  have  to  be  kept  in  sight,  necessitate  very  lengthy  and 
circuitous  processes  of  abstraction  and  calculation.  Now  indisputable 
as  are  the  conclusions  which  are  thus  arrived  at,  yet  nowhere  has  the 
desire  been  more  keenly  felt  than  in  this  exact  science,  to  dispense 
with  the  scaffolding  of  the  Calculus  and  reduce  the  results  obtained  to 
simple  conceptions  which  only  need  the  help  of  computation  so  far  as 
is  involved  in  their  application  to  the  conditions,  determinate  in  respect 


CHAPTER  V.]  The    *  FatlO    legIS/  52$ 

of  quantity,  which  particular  cases  present.  I  would  only  remind 
my  readers  of  Gauss'  principle  of  least  constraint,  which  expresses 
in  the  most  universal  form  the  law  of  all  motion  as  follows  :  a  system 
of  material  points,  however  connected  with  each  other  and  whatever 
may  be  the  external  limitations  by  which  they  are  controlled,  moves 
at  every  instant  in  the  greatest  possible  accordance  with  the  free 
movement  of  the  points,  or  under  the  least .  possible  constraint ; 
taking  as  measure  of  the  constraint  which  the  whole  system  endures 
in  every  minute  portion  of  time  the  sum  of  the  products  obtained  by 
multiplying  the  square  of  the  deviation  of  each  point  from  its  free 
movement  into  the  mass  of  that  point. 

The  second  clause  in  this  law  supplies  the  general  conception 
•  which  is  expressed  in  the  first  with  the  mathematical  form  by  help  of 
which,  for  every  individual  case,  the  purport  of  what  the  conception 
requires  is  precisely  defined  and  made  applicable  to  the  given  quan- 
titative relations  of  that  case ;  but  in  the  first  clause  we  are  convinced 
thaf  we  possess  not  merely  a  general  rale  which  is  found  as  a  matter 
of  fact  to  hold  good,  but  the  veritable  ratio  legis*  from  which  all  the 
special  laws  of  the  various  kinds  of  motion  are  derived.  Applying  it 
to  the  simplest  case  of  all,  the  case  of  the  resultant  of  two  lines  of 
motion,  we  have  seen  (§232  seq.)  that  various  chains  of  reasoning 
will^lead  us  with  equal  certainty  to  our  conclusion.  These  forms 
of  proof  however  serve  only  with  greater  or  less  cogency  to  con- 
strain belief;  on  the  other  hand  the  reflexion  that  the  motion  in 
the  line  of  the  diagonal  is  that  by  which  both  motive  impulses 
are  completely  satisfied,  and  in  which  no  part  of  either  is  lost,' 
presents  itself  to  us,  when  once  we  comprehend  it  and  find  ex- 
perience to  confirm  it,  as  a  ground  of  judgment  of  an ...  entirely 
different  order,  and  of  quite  peculiar  significance,  which  arouses  in  us 
at  once  the  conviction  that  in  it  we  possess  not  merely  one  of  the 
rales  by  the  light  of  which  it  is  admissible  to  regard  the  order  of 
events  observed,  but  the  supreme  principle  by  which  they  are  actually 
governed. 

I  added  advisedly  that  we  are  obliged  to  presuppose  the  pre- 
liminary corroboration  of  our  principle  in  experience ;  and  in  fact 
ijpwever  convincing  the  proposition  might  be  in  itself,  that  the  con- 
flict of  all  motions  is  always  so  ordered  that  in  the  final  result 
no  element  in  the  effects  aimed  at  by  the  constituent  is  lost,  still 
without  such  corroboration  it  would  be  of  very  doubtful  validity.  It 
would  represent  a  principle  after  which  we  ourselves  perhaps  should 
order  the  world,  if  the  task  could  be  set  us,  and  provided  always 


526  The  a  priori  truths.  [BOOKIII 

it  was  possible  and  that  we  had  found  the  means  really  to  carry  out 
in  every  individual  case  the  universal  postulate  which  the  principle 
contains.  But  that  the  actual  world  of  reality  or  even  that  the  world 
of  thought  does  possess  the  particular  content,  form  and  constitu- 
tion, and  the  particular  combination  of  elements  which  renders  it 
possible  to  unite  under  this  single  supreme  principle  all  the  particular 
events  which  take  place  in  it,  or  even  the  several  laws  which  abstract 
reasoning  has  presented  to  us  as  necessities  of  thought — this  we  learn 
only  at  the  end  of  our  journey. 

We  know  how  often  in  the  history  of  mechanics  attempts  have 
been  made  to  connect  the  entire  course  of  the  physical  universe  with 
some  such  supreme  philosophical  law;  we  have  heard  of  the  constant 
sum  of  motion  in  the  universe,  of  the  indestructibility  of  force,  of  a 
principle  of  least  action,  and  of  a  law  of  Parsimony.  All  these 
attempts  did  not  merely  express  the  aspiration  after  a  fundamental 
and  self-evident  idea  from  which  the  individual  laws,  mathematically 
determinable,  which  govern  events,  might  be  derived;  they  tell  us 
something  also  of  the  direction  in  which  the  desired  end  is  to  be 
looked  for.  But  it  has  never  been  found  possible  to  determine  dis- 
tinctly and  precisely,  without  superfluity  or  omission,  of  what  subjects 
of  relations  so  universal  a  conception  could  be  enunciated  as  no  less 
universally  valid. 

How  far  up  to  the  present  time  any  advances  have  been  made  in 
this  direction,  I  have  not  now  to  enquire;  all  that  I  desired  to 
emphasise  was  the  fact  of  the  eager  ambition  displayed  by  the  mincl 
to  perfect  the  circle  of  its  knowledge  by  the  aid  of  principles  of  the 
most  comprehensive  order — principles  once  again  which  affirm  in  the 
form  of  synthetic  judgments,  which  are  nevertheless  self-evident  and 
universally  valid,  a  connexion  between  two  terms  of  a  relation  whose 
connexion  no  process  of  logical  demonstration  can  show  to  be  of  an 
analytical  or  identical  nature. 

863.  The  final  goal  of  knowledge  is  usually  represented  in  different 
terms  from  this.  What  is  aimed  at  is  the  reduction  of  all  connexions 

which   appear   synthetic   in   character  to   an  analytic  form more 

properly  expressed  to  the  form  of  identity — and  we  are  even  believed 
to  be  actually  on  the  way  to  the  consummation  of  that  end. 

•  At  the  commencement  of  our  knowledge,  we  are  told,  a  conception 
.S  is  made  up  at  first  of  the  small  number  of  marks  P  Q  R  which  we 
have  already  found  to  be  connected  together ;  then  supposing  that 
fresh  experience  presents  in  a  particular  instance  a  further  character- 
istic Z  conjoined  with  St  the  proposition  S  is  Z  which  gives  ex- 


•CHAPTER  v.]    Even  ultimate  truth  not  analytical,  527 

pression  to  the  observation  made,  is  considered  to  be  a  synthetic 
judgment.  If  however  this  new  fact  of  experience  becomes  established 
as  obtaining  in  all  cases  of  S  without  exception,  Z  is  adopted  forth- 
with into  S,  and  the  proposition  S  is  Z  has  now  with  the  enlarged 
signification  of  S  become  analytical  This  in  fact,  it  is- said  finally,  Is 
the  goal  towards  which  all  knowledge  is  striving  to  reduce  those  con- 
nexions of  subject  and  predicate  which  at  first  appear  so  completely 
synthetic  to  this  analytic  fornij  that  is  to  say,  to  resolve  coexistence 
into  coherence.  And  this  is  a  perfectly  correct  description  of  the 
origin  and  growth  of  knowledge — for  it  must,  alas !  be  confessed 
that  beyond  this  point  it  seldom  advances — yet  it  has  to  be  remarked 
that  this  ideal  described  in  the  last  words  of  the  sentence  is  one  which 
is  attained  only  to  a  very  modest  extent,  and  that  in  the  sense  of  the  initial 
appearance  of  mere  coexistence  giving  place  to  an  intelligent  appre- 
hension of  a  self-evident  law  of  connexion  It  is  never  attained  at  all 

If  we  had  formed  the  conception  of  body  to  begin  with  out  of  the 
qualities  of  extension,  impenetrability,  and  inertia  alone,  characteristics 
from  which  the  necessity  of  mutual  attraction  does  not  follow,  the 
proposition  '  Body  is  heavy'  would  undoubtedly  have  been  a  synthetic 
proposition ;  but  the  same  proposition  does  not  become  analytic,  even 
if  we  take  into  the  conception  of  body  the  universally  observed  fact  of 
gravitation  ;  this  last  property  is  just  as  little  to  be  derived  from  the 
others  as  it  was  before,  and  therefore  just  as  much  synthetically  con- 
nected with  them  as  it  was  in  the  first  judgment  which  expressed  that 
association  as  a  constant  fact.  Undoubtedly  we  are  able,  taking  this 
synthetic  conjunction  of  all  the  different  marks  of 'S  as  our  datum,  to 
submit  them  to  the  analytic  method,  and  bring  them  one  after  another 
before  the  mind  as  separate  objects  of  thought ;  but  this  recognition 
of  the  mere  fact  of  constant  coexistence  where  the  coherence  is  not 
understood  is  in  fact  the  renunciation  of  knowledge ;  the  mind  could 
only  rest  satisfied  if  the  conjunction  of  any  two  such  properties  of  S 
were  a  sure  guarantee  of  the  necessary  presence  of  any  third.  And 
such  demonstrations  we  are  able  to  some  extent  to  establish,  and 
whenever  we  succeed  in  doing  so  it  means  that  an  advance  in  know- 
ledge has  been  accomplished ;  but  it  is  clear  that  no  such  result  is 
possible,  unless  in  the  last  resort  we  assume  at  some  point  or  other  a 
premiss  of  the  form  A  H-  B  ~  C,  that  is  to  say,  a  premiss  which  does 
not  merely  affirm  identity  of  what  is  the  same L  by  the  bare  principle  of 
Identity2,  but  affirms  identity  of  the  different  wbere  no  reduction  to  the 
principle  of  Identity  is  possible.  Thus  the  supposed  transformation 
1  ['Gleiches  einander  gleich  setzt.']  2  ['Princip  der  Identitat.*] 


528  The  a  priori  truths.  [BOOK  in. 

of  all  synthetic  knowledge  into  analytical  resolves  itself  after  all  into 
the  enquiry,  what  are  the  simplest  forms  of  synthetic  truth  ? 

364.  This  contention,  though  it  may  perhaps  be  said  to  amount  to 
nothing  more  than  a  needless  change  of  phraseology,  will  nevertheless 
be  in  the  end  admitted,  But  it  will  be  urged  in  addition  that  this  very 
necessity  of  allowing  certain  synthetic  combinations  to  start  with, 
proves  the  inability  of  human  knowledge  really  to  come  to  a  final 
resting-place,  and  to  obtain  insight  into  the  inner  connexion  of  the 
coexistent ;  everywhere  there  remains  a  residue  of  mere  facts,  of 
which  the  connexion  of  one  with  another  is  unintelligible,  and  vouched 
for  only  by  experience.  I  cannot  agree  with  this  opinion,  according 
to  which  we  attain  to  knowledge  only  where  we  can  affirm  exact 
identity  of  what  is  exactly  identical  For  after  all  whence  comes  the 
confidence  with  which  we  hold  the  proposition  A  =  A  to  be  an 
intelligible  truth,  except  from  the  immediate  self-evidence  with  which 
it  forces  itself  upon  us,  and  which  leaves  us  no  room  to  wish  for  any 
mediate  demonstration  of  its  certainty  besides  ?  But  how  it  happens, 
by  what  means  it  is  brought  about,  or  from  what  inner  coherence  in 
the  nature  of  things  it  follows  that  A  is  identically  like  itself,  we  do 
not  know,  nor  will  anyone  believe  that  there  is  any  meaning  in  asking 
such  a  question  at  all 

If  then  a  perfectly  simple  synthetic  proposition  of  the  form 
A  4-  B  =  C  presents  itself  to  us  with  a  like  degree  of  self-evidence  to 
recommend  it,  why  should  a  question  be  raised  in  this  instance  which 
was  meaningless  in  the  previous  one  ?  Why  should  the  latter  act  of 
equation  only  be  allowed  to  be  valid  by  the  help  of  some  intermediary 
process,  to  show  us  how  C  can  —A+lt,  when  in  the  former, our 
intelligence  was  satisfied  to  know  the  fact  that  A  =.  A?  I  will  not 
again  insist  on  the  point  that  in  the  processes  of  our  thought  no  such 
mediation  could  come  from  the  mere  law  of  Identity,  that  it  would 
always  have  to  begin  with  a  proposition  Al  +  Bl  =  C1,  analogous  in 
character  to  the  one  to  be  proved — for  this  reflexion  would  certainly 
not  meet  the  complaints  of  the  incompleteness  of  a  knowledge  which 
is  said  to  be  incapable  of  attaining  to  any  supreme  self-evident 
principle.  But  how  are  we  to  understand  the  requirement  that  we 
should  accept  some  such  synthetic  connexion  as  given,  as  valid  in 
itself,  and  only  not  accessible  to  our  intelligence  ?  Are  we  prepared 
to  assume  that  as  a  matter  of  fact  M  and  N  are  always  conjoined 
in  reality  without  affecting  one  another  in  any  way?  But  if  this  is  im- 
possible, and  if  it  is  at  the  same  time  impossible  that  out  of  one  and 
the  same  self-identical  A  two  different  results  M  and  A7"  should  arise, 


CHAPTER  v.j  AestJtetic  self -evidence *  529 

what  else  is_  left  to  us  "but  to  suppose  that  there  do  exist  in  the  real 
world  certain  natural  and  original  connetions  between  things  different, 
original  syntheses  the  members  of  which  are  not  joined  together  by 
any  intermediate  links,  so  that  the  tie  between  them  could  appear  as 
even  the  most  distant  consequence  of  the  law  of  Identity,  yet  are  none 
the  less  immediately  and  really  connected  ?  If  then  in  the  world  of 
Being  this  must  necessarily  be  the  case,  how  can  It  be  demanded  of 
knowledge  that  it  should  exhibit  the  certainty  and  the  intelligibility  of 
a  given  relation  through  a  process  of  mediation  which  does  not  exist 
in  that  relation  itself? 

Thus  then  there  may  certainly  be  synthetic  truths  of  an  ultimate  and 
absolutely  simple  nature,  which  as  conceived  in  their  purest  and  most 
simple  form  possess  a  validity  guaranteed  not  merely  by  fact  but  by 
their  own  self-evidence?  a  self-evidence  however  which  if  we  insist 
on  grounding  all  logical  truth  on  the  principle  of  Identity,  must  no 
longer  be  called  logical  but  aesthetic,  and  which  accordingly  will  find 
the* touchstone  of  its  validity  no  longer  in  the  unthinkableness  but  in 
the  plain  absurdity  of  its  contradictory.  To  this  class  of  truths 
belong  the  simplest  principles  of  mechanics;  that  we  regard  them 
together  with  all  truths  of  like  kind  with  them  not  as  the  earliest 
constituents  of  our  knowledge  which  have  been  there  from  the  begin- 
ning, but  as  its  final  results,  to  be  won  only  with  difficulty  and 
labour,  has  been  explained  above  in  terms  sufficiently  clear  to  make 
the  repetition  of  it  here  superfluous. 

365.  Special  lines  of  enquiry  lead  in  the  first  instance  to  single 
truths  of  this  nature,  each  one  its  own  evidence  and  standing  in  no 
need  of  support  from  others.     At  the  same  time  nothing  prevents 
us  from  bringing  them  as  members  of  one  and  the  same  world 
into  connexion  with  each  other  and  searching  for  a  single  supreme 
principle  in  which  they  may  find  their  unity,  just  as  each  one  of  them 
had  already  supplied  a  centre  of  unity  for  a  body  of  connected  facts. 
It  is  possible  that  many  such  truths  may  lose  in  consequence  their 
independent  value,  and  that  even  logical  analysis  may  reduce  them 
to  particular  cases  of  a  more  general  law,  which  we  have  found 
conceptions  of  a  sufficiently  comprehensive   and   exalted  order  of 
abstraction  to  express.     It  is  just  as  possible  and  more  likely  that 
the  self-evidence  with  which    the  coherence   of  the  many  single 
elements  of  truth  enables  them  to  be  ranged  under  a  single  funda- 
mental idea,  may  rest  upon  that  very  same  kind  of  aesthetic  propriety 
on  the  strength  of  which  the  single  laws  themselves  were  formulated, 
affirming  connexions  which  logic  could  not  prove. 

M  m 


530  The  a  priori  truths. 

Such  a  development  of  synthetic  truths  out  of  a  single  supreme 
principle — a  development  itself  synthetic  and  yet  at  each  step  neces- 
sary— was  perhaps  the  problem  of  the  Platonic  Dialectic,  though 
as  yet  but  dimly  presaged;  it  may  be  truly  regarded  as  the  end 
towards  which  the  Hegelian  revival  of  the  Platonic  scheme  was 
directed.  From  these  ambitions  by  which  Germany  was  once  in- 
spired, our  own  age  has  passed  with  much  sobriety  to  the  order  of  the 
day,  to  that  unremitting  labour  of  empirical  enquiry,  the  incomplete- 
ness of  which  paralysed  the  audacious  flight  of  the  Hegelian  idealism. 
Nor  was  this  the  only  defect  of  that  idealism :  unquestionably  it  was 
also  wrong  in  regarding  that  which  can  only  be  the  ultimate  goal  of 
a  knowledge  approaching  towards  completion,  as  already  attained 
or  attainable.  But  in  view  of  the  universal  idolatry  of  experience 
which  prevails  at  present,  and  which  is  all  the  cheaper  and  all  the  safer 
now  that  the  importance  and  indispensableness  of  its  object  are  visible 
to  all  mankind,  I  will  at  least  close  with  the  avowal  that  I  hold  that 
much  reviled  ideal  of  speculative  intuition  to  be  the  supreme  and 
not  wholly  unattainable  goal  of  science,  and  with  the  expression  of 
my  hope  that  German  philosophy  will  always  arouse  itself  afresh, 
with  more  of  moderation  and  reserve,  yet  with  no  less  enthusiasm, 
to  the  endeavour,  not  merely  to  calculate  the  course  of  the  world,  but 
to  understand  it. 


APPENDIX1, 


237.  IN  the  case  we  have  just  considered,  a  very  plausible  supposi- 
tion, viz.,  the  resolution  of  a  motion,  led  to  a  correct  result,  though 
the  conditions  of  that  result  really  lay  in  quite  another  field ;  there  are 
other  cases  in  which  a  correct  though  not  quite  complete  supposition 
leads  to  results  which  are  apparently  wrong  but  which  can  be  made 
right  by  interpretation.  Let  a  heavy  rod  whose  length  is  2  a  and 
weight  IF  lean  against  a  perfectly  smooth  vertical  wall  and  make  with 
the  perfectly  smooth  horizontal  plane  on  which  it  stands  the  angle  $. 
It  will  necessarily  slip  down  unless  the  foot  which  tends  to  move 
away  from  the  wall  encounters  some  lateral  check.  The  amount 
of  this  resistance,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  of  the  thrust  $ 
exerted  against  it  by  the  sliding  rod,  is  expressed  by  the  equation 

IF 
S  =  ~~  cot  <|>.      If   the   rod    stand    upright,   (f>  =  90%   cot   $  =  o, 

and  therefore  S  =  o ;  the  rod  balances  itself  freely  upon  its 
foot,  exerts  no  horizontal  pressure  at  all,  and  needs  no  lateral 
check,  and  can  dispense  with  the  vertical  wall.  As  <p  diminishes, 
i.e.  as  the  rod  slopes,  cot  $  increases,  and  with  it  the  thrust; 
but  when  <f>  becomes  o,  and  the  rod  lies  horizontally  upon  the 
ground,  the  thrust  according  to  the  formula  is  infinitely  great,  while 
a  glance  at  the  facts  show  us  that  it  must  be  nothing.  This  apparent 
contradiction  is  easily  removed.  When  we  propounded  the  problem 
we  thought  of  course  of  a  continuous  horizontal  plane  capable  of 
resistance  stretching  from  the  foot  of  the  rod  to  the  vertical  wall; 
but  this  part  of  the  supposition  did  not  enter  at  all  into  the  small 

W 
calculation  by  which  we  arrived  at  the  formula  S  =  — -  cot  <£ ;  here  we 

thought  only  of  the  single  point   at  the   foot  which  had  to  carry 

the  weight  of  the  rod ;  between  this  point  and  the  wall  lay  nothing 

that  this   calculation  took  count  of.     In  other  words  the  general 

1  [See  Editor's  Preface.] 

M  HI  2 


532  Appendix. 

formula  treats  the  two  walls  simply  as  geometrical  loci,  of  which 
in  calculating  each  particular  case  we  consider  only  the  two  points 
at  a  distance  of  2  a  from  each  other  upon  which  the  forces  in 
question  act  in  this  case.  Now,  if  we  do  not  go  beyond  what  is 
involved  in  this  calculation,  at  the  moment  when  <j>  becomes  equal 
to  o  there  is  a  gap  between  the  foot  of  the  rod  and  the  vertical  wall, 
equal  to  the  length  of  the  rod,  and  through  which  it  would  fall  when 
there  is  no  perpendicular  force  to  support  its  weight.  It  can  now  no 
longer  be  said  to  exert  a  thrust  S;  but  S  signified  not  only  this  thrust 
but  also  the  horizontal  force,  which  in  the  first  place  counteracts  this 
thrust,  but  which  also  forms  the  only  obstacle  that  prevents  the  rod 
from  slipping  down  into  the  horizontal  position  in  which  its  weight 
no  longer  meets  any  resistance.  Now  that  S  becomes  infinite  when 
$  becomes  equal  to  o  means  that  a  force  acting  horizontally  towards 
the  vertical  wall  would  have  to  be  infinitely  great  in  order  to  prevent 
the  rod  from  falling  through  the  gap;  in  other  words,  as  infinite 
forces  are  never  found,  there  is  no  horizontal  force  that  could  produce 
that  result.  We  must  not  be  misled  by  the  fact  that  in  practice 
this  result  is  often  attained  by  squeezing  bodies  together  in  a 
horizontal  direction;  for  this  result  is  then  due  to  the  roughness 
of  the  surfaces  with  which  the  squeezing  and  the  squeezed  bodies 
come  into  contact,  and  to  the  compressibility  of  the  latter"  which 
by  slight  alterations  in  its  shape  'furnishes  points  of  support  which 
before  were  wanting* 


INDEX. 


Abstraction,  31,  154, 
Accident  and  Substance,  58. 

*  Actual  Reality5  (Reals  WirklicliMi}\ 

see  Reality,  497. 
Adjective,  12-13. 
' Ad contradict&riam?  Si, 
<  Ad  subalternantem?  8o?  303. 

*  Ad  subaltcrnataml  Si. 

*  Ad^ubcontrariam?  8 1 . 
Affirmative  Judgments,  47. 
Analogy,  102  ff.,  237,  241-9. 

—  '  strict,'  245. 

—  incomplete,  303. 

—  and  Induction,  cpd.,  306. 

—  and  Hypothesis,  353. 
Analytical  Judgments,  61,  97. 
Analysis,  opp.  Synthesis,  407. 
'Anders-sein  *  explained,  198-9. 
Anschammg  (' Intuition'  or   'Percep- 
tion1), note,  514. 

* An-sich-sein '  explained,  198-9. 
Apagogic  (indirect)  proof,  230. 
Apodeictic  Judgments,  48. 
Apodosis,  92. 

*  A  posteriori^  Synth.  Judgments,  61. 
'A  priori '  Synth.  Judgments,  61,  504  fF. 

—  Ideas,  455. 

—  meaning  of,  515  ff. 
Apprehension  (Synthesis  of),  28. 

—  Immediate ;  see  Intuition. 
Archimedes,  239. 

Aristotle,  38,  40/57,  85,  90,  100,  189- 
192,  223. 

—  (on  Platonic  Ideas),  443  ff. 
Aristotelian  Sorites,  95. 
Assertorial  Judgments,  48. 
Augustine,  452. 

Axioms,  226. 


•Begrffi;  see  Concept. 

'Being  for  itself  (Fur-sick-sein\  199. 

*  Being  in  itself*  (an~sich-sein\  198. 

Bernoulli's  method,  237, 

Boole,  208  ff. 

Calculus  of  Chances,  364  ff. 

—  Logical,  208  ff. 
Categorical  Judgment,  56,  309. 
Categorical  character  of  Classification, 

141- 
Cause,  opp.  Conditions,  93, 

—  opp.  Ground,  309-10. 
'Cessante  causa — ,'  313. 
Chains  of  Inference,  95. 

Circle,  the  proper  definition  of,  162-4. 
Circuhis  in  defniendo,  161. 
Circulus  in  demomtrando,  283. 
Clara  perception  167. 
Classification,  I2off. 

—  by  combination,  1 20,  cp.  209. 

—  natural,  127. 

—  by  development,  132  fF. 
'Cogito,  ergo  sum]  452. 

Coherence  of  world  of  Thought,  68,  71, 
Coherent  (Ideas),  i. 
Coincident  (Ideas),  i. 
Collective  proof,  236. 
Colours  (names  of),  21-22. 
Combinatory  classification,  1 2 1  fF. 
Comparison,  20-21. 
Compensation  in  Abstraction,  31 
Concept,  H7ff. 

—  (prior  to  Judgment),  17-18*  cp.  301,, 

—  Imperfect,  29. 

—  ('«*&'),  33- 

—  Singular,  34. 

—  Logical,  35. 


534 


Index. 


Concept,  Universal,  39,  481. 
Conditions,  66. 

—  opp.  Cause,  93. 
Conjunctions,  16-17. 
Consequence,  69. 

—  opp.  Effect,  309-10. 
Constitutive  Concept,  115,  125. 
Construction,  156,  228. 

Content  (of  a  concept,  materza),  33,  and 
see  pp.  11-12. 

—  (presentation  of  to  mind),  477. 

—  has  '  Validity,'  440,  484-5. 
Contradiction,  76. 

—  principle  of,  59. 
Contradictory  opposition,  81. 
Contraposition,  84. 
Contrariety,  76. 
Contraries,  107.. 
Contrary  opposition,  8 1. 

'  Conmrsio  pttra}  82ff. 

—  'inipuraj  82. 
Coordinated,  33. 
Coordinated  cases,  365. 
Copula,  43. 

—  of  Categorical  Judgment,  56,  59,. 
Copulative  Judgment,  74, 

—  Premisses,  94. 
Current  of  Ideas,  i. 

Darwin,  186. 

De  die  to  simp  licit er,  285. 

De  dicta  secundum  quid,  285. 

Deductio  ad  absurdum,  239. 

Deductive  proof,  230  ff. 

1 '  Definiendo  angustior?  161. 

—  *  latior?  162. 
Definitio,  159. 
Definition,  157. 

—  Nominal  and  Real,  160  ff. 

—  Genetic,  167. 
Descartes,  417,  452. 
Description,  157. 
Descriptive  Definition,  166". 
Sevr^pa  ovcria,  445. 
Dialectic,  Plato's,  449,  530. 

—  Hegel's,  197  ff.;  530- 
$ia<j)op&t  40. 

Dictum  de  omm,  75,  247. 
Differentiae  specificae,  40,  157. 


Ding  (see  Thing  and  Sacke),  has  exist- 
ence, 439. 

—  opp. '  Content '  and  *  objective'  (sack- 
lich\  but  =  ' external  object'  (Gegen- 
stand),  485. 

Direct  Proof,  230. 
Disjunction,  Incomplete,  290. 

—  and  Probability,  364. 
Disjunctive  Judgment,  50,  74,  76. 

—  Law  of  Thought,  247. 

—  Premisses,  94. 
Disparates,  78,  107,  113-4,  I7I» 
Distinct  a  perceptio,  167. 
Distinction,  19-20. 

Duality,  the  Principle  of,  214. 

Effect,  opp.  Consequence,  93,  310. 

* Effectuum  naturaliumj  317. 

e&oj,  38. 

Eleatic  dialectic,  434. 

Ellipse,  equation  of,  128. 

Episyllogism,  95. 

Equal;  see  'Like.' 

Equation  of  the  Ellipse,  128  ff. 

Equations,  constitutive,  115-6, 

Equilibrium,  problem  of  conditions  of, 

252  ff. 

Essential  marks,  1 20. 
Evidence,  transmission  of,  370. 
Excluded  Middle,  principle  of,  75,  77. 
Existence,  Judgment  of,  56. 

—  opp.  Validity,  439,  483. 
Expectation,  mathematical,  374  ff. 

—  moral,  376. 
Experiment,  311, 

Explanation,  opp.  Classification,  140, 

—  Incomplete,  289. 
Explanatory  theory,  140. 

Extent  (of  a  concept,  'ambitus '),  33,  39. 

Fact ;  see  Sacke. 

— •  and  Law,  341. 

— knowledge  ot(Erkenntnissder  Sacke) , 

422. 

Fallacia  fahi  medii,  284. 
False  premisses,  282. 
Fichte's  Zeitschrift  quoted,  75. 
Fiction,  dist.  Hypothesis,  351. 
Figures  of  Syllogism,  86  ff.,  93. 


Index. 


535 


Figure,  second,  100. 

—  third,  1 02. 

f  Fiir-sich-sein '  explained,  198-9, 

Galen,  figure  of,  86,  90. 

Gauss  (principle  of  least  constraint), 
525- 

'General'  (Generic)  opp.  Universal  Judg- 
ment, 73. 

General  term  (mathematical),  341-2, 

76Fos,  38. 

Genus,  33,  37. 

Gemts  proximum,  157. 

'GescMchtcderAesthetikinDeutscManif 
(Author's),  197. 

Goklenius,  Goklenian  Sorites,  96. 

Grammar  cpd,  with  Logic,  15. 

Gravity,  67. 

Ground  and  Consequence,  309-10, 

Ground,  314. 

Hegel,  40,  i97ff. 

Hegelian  Dialectic,  I97ff.9  530. 

Heraclitus,  433. 

Herbart,  70.  * 

Hnme,  504  IF. 

virorvir&a'fis,  Pyrrhonian,  429. 

Hypothetical  Judgment,  49, 66,  74, 309, 

*333- 

—  Syllogism,  92-3. 

—  character  of  Explanation,  141. 
Hypotheses,  subsidiary,  356. 
Hypothesis,  dist.  Postulate,  350. 
Hysteron  Proteron,  283. 

Idea  (fldee?  see  p.  435  note),  125, 435  ff. 

—  (' VorstelZung'\  meaning  of,  23-24, 
Ideas,  Coherent  and  Coincident,  i. 

—  opp.  Impressions,  lo. 

—  (opp.  Begriff),  481, 
Ideal,  134. 

Identical  ('ghick »),  474. 
Identity  ('  Identitat  ')>  principle  of,  59, 
504  ff.,  529. 

—  (sGleichJieit*\  478,  and  &g  note,  p.474- 
Jf&or,  40. 

Immediate  Inference,  79  & 
Imperfect  concepts,  29. 
Impersonal  Judgment,  54. 


Impressions  (opp.  '  Ideas '),  10. 
Incommensurables,Infcrence  concerning , 

in. 

Indirect  (apagogie)  proof,  230. 
Induction,  cpd.  w.  Analogy,,  xoofE.,  306, 

—  Complete,  236. 

—  Imperfect,  305. 
'Inductive,'  230. 

1  Inductive  Logic/  298. 
Inference  and  Disjunction,  79, 

—  Immediate,  79. 

Innate  Ideas  ('/<&*#'),  454  ff.,  516  ff. 
Intuition  (Ansc/iauung),  5148", 
Inverse  Ratio  of  Extent  and  Content, 

33.  39- 
*  Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought  * 

(Boole's),  208  ff. 
lonians,  philosophy  of,  189, 

Jevons,  222. 

Judgment  (and  Concept),  17-18,  43. 

—  (Real  significance  of),  488  ff. 
'Justification'  of  a  conception,  228. 

Kant,  Classification  of  Judgments,  46  ff. 

—  on  Categorical  Judgment,  58. 

— Analytical  and  Synthetical  Judgments, 
61. 

—  Synthetical  Judgments,  64. 

—  Synthetical  Judgments,  apriori^  504?. 

—  his  Categories,  448. 

—  Matter  and  Form,  457. 
Kanjyopuv,  57. 
Kepler,  333. 

Language,  a  logical,  204. 

Laplace,  380. 

Law,  meanings  of,  333. 

—  and  Rule,  335. 

—  of  Nature,  33S-& 

—  and  Facts,  341. 

—  Faith  in,  501-2. 
Leibnitz,  204. 

like  ('gleick ') ;  see  mfe*  p.  245,  and 

note,  p.  474. 

Limitative  Judgments,  47. 
line  without  mass?  264  tL 
Limsaean  classification,  124. 
Locke  on  Innate  Ideas,  516. 


536  Index. 


Logical ;  a  logical  language,  204. 

—  the  calculus,  208  ff. 

Major  premiss,  99, 
Mark,  meaning  of  the  term,  35. 
Marks,  essential  and  unessential,  1 20. 
Material  (« sachlich!  opp.  'formal*)*  49  2« 
Mathematical  symbols  in  Logic,  104. 
Mathematical  Truth  and  Law  of  Iden- 
tity, 505  ^ 

Mathematics  and  Logic,  26,  no. 
Mean,  arithmetical,  389. 
Measurements,  correction  of,  389. 
Mechanical  Physics,  67. 
Metaphysics  (Aristotle's),  444. 
Method  of  least  squares,  391. 
Middle  concept,  85. 
Middle  term,  ambiguity  of,  284, 
Minor  premiss,  99. 

Minority,  the  'winning  minority/  395. 
Modality  of  Judgments,  48,  84. 

—  True,  49. 

*  Modus  ponendo  ponens?  &c.,  92-3. 
Moods,  87-90,  93. 

Naming,  19. 

Natural  Classification,  127. 
Negative  Judgments,  47. 
Newton,  317  ff. 

VOr)T&S  TOKOS,  443. 

Nominal  Definition,  160. 
Nominalism,  483. 

Numbers    and    Things    (Pythagorean 
doctrines),  192, 

Objectification,  n,  105. 
Objective  (' '  objectiv^),  Objectivity  (l ob~ 
jectimtcit'\  11-12,  cp.  p.  435. 

—  (' objectiv^  opp.  ' subjectiv^},  492. 

—  (sachlich\  473,  478. 
Observation,  310. 

Occurrence,  opp.  Existence,  439,  500. 
{  Operatiomkreis      des     Logikcalculs  J 

(Schroder),  208  ff. 
Opposition  of  Judgments,  80-1. 

*  Orcler  of  the  day,'  403. 
vpiffnos,  159. 

*  Other  being  *  (« Anders-sein '),  199. 
ovcia,  441  f£. 


Parallelogram  offerees,  proofs  of>  266- 

273- 

Paralogisms,  291. 
Part  of  a  concept,,  35. 
Particular  Judgments,  46,  52,  62. 
Pendulum's  swing,  time  of,  348. 
Perception  (synthesis  of),  28. 

—  and  the  Impersonal  Judgment,  55. 
Personal  error,  337. 

Petit io  prindpii,  283. 

Philosophical  calculus  (Leibnitz),  204. 

Picture  in  the  mind,  opp.  Conception, 

301,  cp.  481. 
Plato,  42,  57- 

—  (the  Meno),  516. 

—  (the  Theaetetus),  434, 
Platonic  '  Ideas,'  435  ff. 

—  'Dialectic/  530. 
Polylemmas,  95. 
Porphyrius,  41. 
Position,  19. 

Postulate,  dist.  Hypothesis,  348. 
Predicate,  43,  57. 
Premisses,  85. 

—  Hypothetical,  93. 

—  Establishment  of,  99. 
Prepositions,  16-17. 
Presentation,  the  act  of,  477. 
Prindpium  exclusi  tertii,  75. 
Principles  of  Analogy  discussed,  241-9. 
*  Principles  of  Science'  (Jevons1),  222. 
Probability,  364  ff. 

Problematic  Judgments,  48,  51  ff. 

Progressive  proof,  230. 

Projections,  339.  . 

Proof,  forms  of,  230  ff. 

Proofs  by  exclusion  and  by  limitation, 

238. 
Property,  40. 

—  and  Thing,  58. 
Proportion,  Inference  by,  112  ff. 
Prosyllogism,  95. 
Protagoras,  434. 

Protasis,  92. 
irp&ri]  ovcria,  445. 
Proving  too  much,  289. 
Proving  too  little,  289. 
'  Pseudommos*  293. 
Psychology,  4.67  ff. 


Index. 


537 


'Pure  case/  309,  332. 
Pythagoras,  188  ff. 


Quality  of  Judgments,  47. 
Quantification  of  the  Predicate,  222. 
Quantitative  variations  of  Causes  and 

of  Effects,  327ff. 
Quantitative  Ideas,  25. 
Quantitative  Judgments,  62. 
Quantity  of  Judgments,  46. 
'  Quatermo  terminoritm?  86,  284. 

Real,  Reality;  see  Actual  (IVirUich, 
Wirklichkeif),  439,  cp.  pp.  11-12. 

—  (of  external  world,  e  real '),  422,  497. 

—  (^  rcaly  opp.  *formaV}i  492. 
Real  Definition,  160. 
Realism,  483. 

*  Reason'  and  "Condition ;'  see { Ground/ 

6* 

Receptivity  of  Thought,  27. 
— -  and  Spontaneity,  457. 
Reduction,  91. 

—  to  impossibility,  91. 
Refutation,  235. 
Regressive  proof,  230  ff. 
Rehnisch,  75. 
Relations,  reality  of,  4/8  ff. 
Remotive  Judgment,  74. 

—  Premisses,  94. 

Resolution  of  forces  into  components, 

273. 

Rotatory  forces,  255,  261. 
Rule,  335. 

Sache}  see  Ding,  '  of  those  things  (Sa~ 
chcri},  the  given  thinkable  contents/ 

4s7. 

Sachlich,  see  '  Material/  *  Objective/ 
'  matter  of  knowledge  (sachlicli),  al- 
though not  things  (dinghaft}?  483, 
see  note>  485. 

Schroder,  '  Operationskreis  des  Logik- 
cahiils?  208  ff. 

Self  evidence,  may  be  spurious,  226. 

Sensations,  disparate  groups  of,  171  ff. 

Sextus  Empiricus,  427  ff. 

Similar,  Similarity  (f  Aehnlic'h?  '  Aehh- 
lichkeit'1},  defined,  245. 

Singular  Concepts,  34. 


Singular  Judgments,  46,  52, 

Socrates  (in  Plato),  168,  434. 

Sophisms,  291.    „ 

Sophists,  434. 

Sorites,  95. 

Space,  of  more  than  three  dimensions, 

173. 

Spatial  Intuition,  515  ff. 
Species,  33,  37. 

—  Perfect  and  Imperfect,  1 26  ff, 

—  of  two  genera,  129. 
Specific  difference,  40. 
Spectrum  analysis,  319. 
Speculative  Thought,  147. 
State,  41. 

Statistics,  345,  387. 
Subject,  43. 

—  Grammatical  and  Logical,  45. 
Subalternation,  So. 
Subcontrary  opposition,  81. 
Subordination,  33,  37. 
Substitution,  Inference  by,  107. 
Substance  and  Accident,  58. 
Substantive,  12-13. 
Subsumed,  33. 
Subsumption,  37. 

—  Inference  by,  96. 
Sufficient  Reason,  Law  of,  68. 
cru/ejSgjSTjtfJ:?,  41. 
Syllogism,  85  ff. 

—  Subsumptive,  96  ff. 

—  Aristotelian,  criticised,  ior. 

—  Real  significance  of,  490  ff. 
Symbols,  109. 

Synthetical  Judgments,  61,  64,  97. 

—  (a  priori},  503  ff. 
Synthesis  of  Apprehension,  28. 

—  of  Perception,  28. 

—  opp.  Analysis,  406, 


Tabula  rasa,  457. 

Taylorian  Theorem,  275-81. 

Things,  the  peculiar  l  reality  'of,  I  r  ff,, 

cp.  p.  439. 

Thing  and  Property,  58. 
Thought  (opp.  e  current  of  ideas  \  5. 
TpoTToi,  sceptical,  428  ff, 
Type,  134. 


538 


Index. 


Ultimate  Concepts,  41. 

Universal  ('first  Universal'),  22-3. 

—  Judgments,  46. 

—  Laws,  J  39. 

—  conception,  481. 

Universals  which,  are  not  concepts,  39. 


Universality  and  Necessity,  463. 

Validity,  439  ff.,  483  ff. 

Verb,  12-13. 

•  Vorstelhmg?  see  Idea. 

Zeno,  on  motion,  291. 


THE   END, 


