LUCRETIUS 



W. H. MALLOCK 




WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS 

EDINBURGH AND LONDON 

1878. REPRINT, 1887 



^Ancient Classics for English Readers 



EDITED BY THE 

..^ REV. W. LUCAS COLLINS, M.A. 

(SUPPLEMENTAL Y SERIES. ) 



LUCRETIUS 




NOTE. 



THE prose translations from Lucretius are taken in 
the main, with but very slight alterations, from the 
version of Mr Munro. The verse translations are 
my own. 

W. EL M. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAP. PAGE 

I. INTRODUCTORY, 1 

II. THE DAWN" OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE, . . 12 

III. THE SCIENTIFIC SYSTEM OF LUCRETIUS, 

SECT. I. THE ANALYSIS OP MATTER, . ." .24 
SECT. II. THE FORMATION OF THE UNIVERSE, . 31 
SECT. III. THE INTERACTION OF MATERIAL SUB- 
STANCES, ..... 42 
SECT. IV. THE ORIGIN OF LIFE AND SPECIES, . 45 
SECT. V. THE NATURE OF LIFE AND CONSCIOUSNESS, 50 

ECT. vi. LUCRETIUS'S THEORY OF VISION, . . 55 

SECT. VII. THE MIND AND SENSE, ... 62 

SECT. VIII. THE MORTALITY OF MIND AND SOUL, . 68 
SECT. IX. THE IMPERFECTION AND MORTALITY OF 

THE UNIVERSE, .... 71 

SECT. X. THE HISTORY OF HUMAN PROGRESS, . 75 



Vlll 



CONTENTS. 



IV. THE POEM OF LUCRETIUS, 

BOOK I. 

BOOK II. ..... 

BOOK III. ..... 

BOOK IV 


BOOK V. ..... 

BOOK VI. ..... 

V. LUCRETIUS AS A POET, . 
VI. LUCRETIUS AND MODERN THOUGHT, 



83 
94 
107 
117 
126 
138 

144 
152 



LUCBETIUS. 



CHAPTEE I 

INTRODUCTORY. 

As we look "back upon the works of the great writers 
of the past works and writers with which, in a certain 
sense, we are quite familiar, and which in a certain 
sense are as famous now as ever it will sometimes give 
us a strange, and almost painful shock, if we realise how 
very few of these can he still said to live. They have 
their immortality, it is true ; but they have passed to 
it through the grave and gate of death. Their forms 
are still heroic ; Jbut they are heroes without blood, and 
shadowy ; and we seem to meet them in a dim Elysium, 
not in the world around us. Or else we may compare 
them tt$ bodies embalmed with spices, hidden away 
underground, and to be studied only at intervals, in 
the crypts of literature. A few, a few only, such as 
Horace and Shakespeare, still keep their fleshly life in 
them, are able to push their way towards us through 
the distractions and cares surrounding us, to parley 
A.O.S.S. vol. vii. A 



2 ZUCRJBTIU& 

with these, and to show us how to meet thorn, and, 
standing close beside us, assail us with living voices. 

Amongst this small minority Lucretius certainly can 
claim no place. When his own language was still 
living, when men in the extent of their knowledge and 
their ways of thought were still the same as he him- 
self knew them, not even then does he seem to have 
been popular or influential. And men, since he knew 
them, have grown and changed. Knowledge lias 
widened in ways he never dreamed of ; new tones 
have grown into human sentiment ; all the lights and 
shadows of life have shifted; and its whole surface 
has been dyed with different colours. Naturally, wo 
then we of the modern world as far as any direct 
influence goes, are quite beyond his reach. His voice 
is not as our voice ; it is of a different substance. We 
can make no direct response to it. At his note our 
minds and feelings rouse to no movement. It comes 
to us like a " horn of elf-land faintly blowing," and 
we know that it was meant for other ears than ours. 

But the case of Lucretius is in some ways a singular 
one ; and this very remoteness may give him, in thco 
days, a sharp and vivid interest for its, that Las long 
gone from poetry to which in many ways we are far 
nearer. How this is, we shall see readily when we 
consider the work he did. We shall see why"he had 
as little interest as he had for his own epoch, and why 
he has as much as he has for ours. Of his life next to 
nothing is known for certain, beyond the fact that he 
was a Eoman of probably noble family, that lie died 
in the prime of his manhood, about half a century 



INTRODUCTORY. 3 

"before the birth, of Christ, and that a legend ascribes 
his death to the effects of a maddening love-philtre. 
What his fame rests on, "what makes his name known 
to us, is a single poem or, speaking of it as a whole, 
it may be perhaps more just to say, a single treatise in 
verse. Por the main subject of this poem is not poeti- 
cal ; nor, in composing it, was poetry the author's first 
object. Primarily, and before all things, the work is 
a scientific treatise as strictly scientific (at least in 
the author's intention) as a modern treatise on optics, 
or geology, or the origin of species ; and, except as far 
as metre goes, it has in many places as little of poetry 
as these have. Poetry, it is true, there is in it poetry 
in abundance ; and some of this is the loftiest in all 
Koman literature. Continually, too, when we do not 
get poetry, we are still conscious that we are listening 
to a poet. All this we shall come to see by-and-by. 
But it will be well first to consider the work only in 
its primary character, that of a book of science; for 
here is. the foundation of its special interest for our- 
selves ; and our interest in it, under its other aspects, 
is largely based on this. 

Lucretius callSd his book c An Essay on the Nature 
of Things. 7 And he designed it to be a complete 
scientific explanation of the universe, and the relation 
of man to it, as a part of itself. He applies the same 
method to the investigation of mind and matter; of 
human and animal life; of organic and inorganic 
nature ; and he describes the way in which the latter 
has risen out of the former. He traces the evolution 
of the present universe out of its original elements; 



r 



LUCRETIUS. 



he tells us how the earth, became fit gradually to sun- I 

tain life on its surface ; he explains the origin of the 
existing species of animals, man included, together 
with the nature of consciousness, and the grounds of 
knowledge. And, finally, he gives us a history of j 

human progress and civilisation, from the rudest to | 

the most advanced stages, explaining the origin of j 

language, of the state, of law, and the development j 

of the various arts. And he does not do this as a 
poet might have been expected to do it. This is the 
thing of all others that he most seeks to avoid. He j 

wishes to deal in no broad effective generalities, no | 

picturesque metaphor. He seeks to drown no homely 
details by devices of artistic chiaroscuro. He bids 
all poetic imagination, as a tempter, get behind him. j 

One by one, with all the method he can master, ho 
\\ goes into the questions that are before him, confusing j 

I the matter with no ornamental metaphors. He, is a 

* ! strict utilitarian in his choice of language. Ho cures | 

not how prosaic he is. His great aim is to explain 
facts, and to show convincingly that his explanations I 

are the true ones. I 

Judged of as an exposition of wlfat really is, the 
science of Lucretius is of course completely valueless. 
And yet there are two things about it which, for the J 

present generation, must give it a peculiar Interest. j 

O* 16 of these things is that very valuelessness, that 
strange, grotesque difference to all our modern teach- 
ing. But such a difference by itself would not create 
an interest. There is a second point about it, just as 
noticeable as the first, and which, indeed, alone makes 



. INTRODUCTORY. 5 

tine first worth, noticing and this is the strange like- 
ness to our modern teaching that runs through all this 
difference. Couched under other forms, arrived at "by 
other courses, the, first principles of Lucretius, and 
many of his last conclusions, are the same, or are all 
"but the same, as those which are now startling the 
world as new revelations revelations so new and so 
startling that we can as yet only half accept them. 
In the first place, his mission and his attitude, to view 
the matter "broadly, are entirely analogous to those of 
our modern physicists. He comes forward just as 
they do, as the champion of natural science, claiming 
that by it, and by it alone, we are to understand man's 
life, and to explain the universe. It is his doctrine, 
just as it is theirs, that no event can occur either in the 
outer world about us, or in the inner world of our own 
consciousness, that is not connected with some mate- 
rial change, and is not conceivably explicable in terms 
of matter. And he makes this claim for science, just 
as it is made now, against all theology, and against all 
religion. To these he ascribes, just as is done by some 
modern thinkers, a large part of the ills men suffer 
from. To a certain extent, too, he professes the belief, 
so often now held out to us, that when once religion, 
with its blighting influence, is exterminated, there are 
prospects of " a better, and, above all, a happier state 
of existence," for the human race. Indeed, so like is 
much of his general language to what we hear con- 
tinually in our own day, so inspired does it seem to be 
with just the same animus, that we might at times 
almost fancy he was Professor Tyndall, or one of the 



6 LUCRETIUS. r 

two Mills, confuting tlie arguments of Paley or qf 
Butler, or deriding the narratives of tlie "book of 
Genesis. 

But it is not in his general attitude only that ho 
is so like the moderns. With less exactness, "but in 
\ perhaps a far more singular manner, he seems to 

'' anticipate many of their most special individual doc- 

trines. The evolution of the present universe, the 
indestructibility of matter, the struggle for existence, 
the survival of the fittest, the origin of language, of 
religion, of the state, of law, and the progress of society 
generally on these, as well as on numerous other 
'", points, the teachings of Lucretius are in strange ae- 

* cordance with much of what we are being taught now. 

,j', To us these things are being told as entirely fresh 

' ! ! tidings, as facts and theories that have now for the 

'^ first time dawned on the human spirit. And to a 

*' certain extent there is a truth in this ; but to a certain 

f 4l ' extent only. The same thoughts and the same theories 

| ( were the property of Lucretius or of his teacher; and 

j r they have now come back to the world, not as diilerent 

i> ', things, but as the same things changed. 

l' . Here is that double fact about Lucretius which 

L gi Yes kirn his special interest for us the likeness of 

i his thoughts to much of the thought now, and also 

i ' * n difference. When we study him, we are Brought 

\ face to face with two combatants science and the- 

ology. When we look about us now, we are brought 
^ face to face with two combatants also science and 

theology. At first these two pairs seem so unlike 
each other, that we hardly class, them together, or 



m INTRODUCTORY. 7 

make any comparison "between them, or their modes of 
warfare. If we look at them a little longer, we shall 
see that they are the same ; and then for the first time 
. shall we fully realise their unlikeness, just as we first 
see fully what the years have done for a man's face, 
when we connect it with what it once was when a 
"boy's. In the clays of Lucretius, materialism and 
theism were each, as it were, in their boyhood; 
and, armed with simple weapons, they fought a boyish 
battle. If we look back a little on what they then 
were, it may help us better to realise what they now 
are, how each has been changed by the knowledge 
of new perplexities how each, armed now with wea- 
pons so far more formidable, and so far more skilful 
in the use of them, seems less confident of a final 
victory how the faces of each have lost their old 
rash confidence, and are marked by deeper lines of 
thought and of anxiety 

In making this comparison, the form of Lucretius's 
work will itself be of some assistance to us. Were a 
similar work to be written in our time in a similar 
form, it might create much surprise, but could not 
command muclt attention; and even that of Lucre- 
tius, when first given to the world, seems, as has been 
already said, never to have been really popular. We 
may perhaps gain some notion of the general literary 
effect of it, if we conceive Mr Tennyson, instead of 
writing his "Arthurian Idylls," to have devoted Ms 
talents to versifying Mr Darwin's ' Origin of Species ' 
and 'Descent of Man; 7 using the views of that phil- 
osopher as a text for a passionate invective against 



8 LUCRETIUS. 

Anglican orthodoxy and the doctrine of original si, 
and a passionate protest that when we were once free 
of these superstitions, the complexion of our whole 
life would change, and human society become a nobler 
thing. In such a composition there could not fail 
to be passages of powerful and lofty poetry; and 
touches of a poet's hand we should be sure to trace 
everywhere. But however clearly it might be the 
work of a poet, it would very certainly not be a suc- 
cessful poem. Our admiration for the author's power 
might be great ; but our regret for his waste of it would 
be greater. But as regards Lucretius, our feelings are 
somewhat different. The scientific system ho under- 
took to expound was to comprise the whole circle of 
the sciences, and was to unravel the whole riddle of 
existence with a rapidity and completeness that no 
one now so much as dreams of. From a poet's stand- 
point, therefore, his subject, judged as a whole, pos- 
sessed a sort of epic grandeur, that to him seemed 
compatible with the strictest scientific accuracy. At 
the same time, in its details, and in the sort of reason- 
ings they were founded on and supported by, there was 
|t'' a simplicity that made them less unnTthan wo should 

' *' ' imagine to be expressed in verse. In fact, the form 

in which Lucretius gave the world his system is itself 
singularly typical of how far ancient science is removed 
from ours, and is the liveliest illustration possible of 
the sort of gulf that is between them. 

Bui the form that Lucretius gave his work is valu- 
able and instructive for another reason than this. The 
poem has a secondary character, with which its form 



r INTRODUCTORY. 9 

i$ in more natural keeping, and of which it is a yet 
more special expression. Primarily, as has been said, 
Lucretius wrote as a man of science. To indoctrinate 
men with science, with accurate science, was his main 
object. But it was not with science for its own sake. 
It was for the sake of the effect it was to have upon 
their lives, upon their hopes, their joys, their practical 
conduct, their happiness. What this effect was to be, 
he seems to think in a large measure self-evident. At 
any rate it did not need the same elaborate exposition 
as the reasoning which led up to it. But still at the 
same time he is perpetually referring to it, perpetu- 
ally calling the attention of his readers to it ; showing 
them that it it alone is, though not the main sub- 
ject of his work, at any rate the main object of it. 
"What is man? why is he here 1 ? what hope has ho 
in. this world] what are the sources of his joys and 
sorrows'? how shall he choose the first of those, and 
avoid the latter? what things are here worth living 
for? and, what worth is there in oven the Ixjst of 
these? These arc the ultimate questions that really 
concern men j and science has no general value,, save 
as preparing our minds to meet them. And, JIH Lucre- 
tius views it, science gives us this preparation in o.uo 
single way. Its work is to isolate) life ; to show us that 
life is self-centred, self-bounded, and, in so far an it is 
sufficient at all, self-sufficient. Till lifo is thun isolated, 
it is the earnest, the fierce belief of Lucretius, that 
we shall never have it at its best ; it will bo full of 
miseries and solicitudes which need not exist, but 
which we through our folly and headstrong ignoruneo 



10 



LUCRETIUS. 



Ifc 

i ; ! * 



create ourselves, for our own torment. What manner 
of possession lie regarded life when thus isolated, what 
happiness or pleasure he thought it would "be able to 
yield us, is a question of equal interest for us as the 
character of his physical science, and suggests an 
equally significant comparison with the thought of 
our own time. Much of his views upon this point 
his poetical treatment of his subject will enable us 
to gather, though he has not reduced these opinions to 
a formal system; and the fact that he was a poet, 
and looked at life with a great poet's vision, will give 
to these opinions a special value and meaning. 

In examining his work, then, though it is a work 
that no longer speaks directly to us, or can directly 
influence any of our ways of thinking, or impart to 
us any new fragment of knowledge, we shall be ex- 
amining something that has more interest for us than 
belongs to a mere curious antiquity. We shall bo 
examining a distant landmark, to which the atmos- 
phere of our own day is giving a new distinctness, and 
which shows us how far in twenty centuries men's 
minds have travelled travelled along two courses. 
One course is their explanation of life by natural or 
by supernatural theories ; the other is their Kentmumts 
and their practical teaching with regard to life when 
explained. * 

Thus, in attempting to understand the work or 
Lucretius, our task will be simplified by dividing it 
into two parts. Let us first, therefore, without refer- 
ence to the literary form he gave it, try to understand 
accurately his scientific system, his methods of obser- 



INTRODUCTORY. 11 

and reasoning, and the conclusions, general 
and particular, that lie arrived at. We shall thus see 
what the main message was that he wished to deliver 
to the world. Let us then go on to examine the 
poem itself, and see how, as a poet, he handled so 
refractory a subject; and how, in proclaiming and il- 
lustrating its relations to human life, and to human 
passion, he made it lead up to and suggest poetry. 
We shall so be brought to understand what his teach- 
ing was, and what he himself seemed to feel were the 
results of it. Then we may be led on to dwell briefly 
on the chief points of difference between him and us, 
though in making such a comparison we must each 
of us do much for ourselves. And further, we may 
consider briefly though this is the matter that will 
have least interest for us the c Essay on the Nature 
of Things/ not as science, not as philosophy, but 
simply as a literary production, as a poem, as a work 
of art in language, that is distinguished as such by 
certain technical defects and excellences. 

What then we shall now begin with considering is 
the scientific system that Lucretius aims at expounding 
to us what itwas, and how he came to master it. 
To understand this, however, it will be necessary to 
go a little farther back in history, and try to realise 
as best we may the nature of the scientific systems that 
had gone before it, and that it at once grew out of and 
superseded. 



CHAPTER IT. 



THE DAWN OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 

"THE impregnable position of Science," says one of 
our latest and most celebrated scientific teachers, " may 
"be stated in a few words, We claim and we shall 
wrest from theology the entire domain of cosmologieal 
theory." The earliest claim and the earliest aim of 
science was identical with this, its latest. The sumo 
words are true of it, in its birth and in its maturity. 

The "birth of science, using the word in the sense 
now popularly and specially attached to it, is not 
an event so vague as one might expect to find it. 
It is an event which, so far as wo know, wo can give 
with accuracy both a date and place to. In the Greek 
city of Miletus, about six hundred years "before Christ, 
there flourished a certain thoughtful man named Thalca. 
He it was who, so far as we know, was the first man 
of science. He caught the first distinct gliilmor of 
a scientific conception of things, and revealed as best 
he could this new light to others. This event was a 
momentous one. The details of it are far remote: 
we have but few and scanty records of it. But let 
us do our best to realise what its nature was. 



THE DAWN OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 13 

-.The race that Thales came of, and amongst whose 
ideas he was nurtured, was a race singularly keen, in- 
quiring, intellectual, and imaginative. They felt, there- 
fore, the wonder of the world, and the need for an ex- 
planation of it. But for a long time they were con- 
tented with a very simple answer. In one point, we 
must remember, they were very unlike ourselves. One 
of the ideas which weighs most heavily on the modern 
consciousness is the sense of our own separation from 
nature, often of our antagonism to it. But the Greeks, 
amongst whom natural science took its rise, were con- 
scious of no such separation. They felt they were 
a part of nature, akin to it, in harmony with it. 
They were indeed themselves hut one of nature's 
forces. Now, of many of nature's phenomena, they 
felt that they were themselves the causes and the 
controllers. But besides these, there were others 
which they could neither cause nor control. Here 
was their first problem: how should they explain 
these 1 ? The answer was obvious. These were the 
workings of beings like themselves, only indefinitely 
wiser and indefinitely more powerful. All the phe- 
nomena of natift'o they at once- accounted for, so far as 
they realised that any account was required of them, 
by an anthropomorphic polytheism; or in other 
words, as Mr Matthew Arnold might express it, all 
that was done in the world, that was not done by 
ourselves, was done and conducted by a race of " mag- 
nified and non-natural men." 

As, however, this system of theology became more 
definite, and more burdened with detail, it began to 




14 LUCRETIUS. * 

jar at length upon finer and more reflecting minds 
And such Thales being the first of them sought 
to find an escape from it in some simpler and more 
sedate conception. The first transition to this the 
first beginning of the change from theology to science 
is a very curious one. It took this form. Thales was 
discontented with the theory that represented all the 
changes and facts of the universe as due to the manip- 
ulation of a race of divine animals. It was a theory 
that was arbitrary,' grotesque, and inharmonious. It 
needed to be simplified- Accordingly, discarding the 
divine animals altogether, he supposed the universe to 
be a divine animal itself, living, moving, breathing as 
men do, and as the gods were supposed to do. Thus 
one of the philosophers of the school of Thales taught 
that the stars were the world's breathing-holes. This 
conception seems strange and quaint to us now, but 
still it was a true step in the direction of science. 
And it did not end here. This theory was not 
allowed to remain as a mere abstract statement. At- 
tempts were at once made to connect it with the 
observed facts of things. The material world, or in 
other words matter, being conceived of as itself alive, 
and as a single living thing, the variety of the shapes 
it took had to be conceived of as apparent only, not 
real or, at any rate, all equally reducible to somo 
common unity. Observation of facts supplied many 
cases that seemed to show that this was so. Vapours 
condensed themselves into water; ice melted into 
water ; snow melted into water ; and conversely water, 
or moisture, which seemed near akin to it, was absorbed 



THE DAWN OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 15 

plants and animals, and sustained their life. 
Life, again, -was seen to depend on respiration; and 
thus life and living "beings seemed, from one point of 

view, to be a mode of air. Similarly, fire seemed to 
i be possessed of a like protean power. Heat, fire's 
! primary quality, was seen to be associated with life ; 
i nearly every substance could be burnt, and reduced 

to fire; and* so all things, it was argued, had origi- 
nally been composed out of it. Such were the natural 
observations of the first physicists, one confining his 
attention to 'one set of phenomena, another to another, 
being guided in this choice by no assignable reason. 

Thus one of them taught that everything was really 
water ; another that ' everything was really air ; an- 
other that everything was really fire; another that 
everything was really some unqualified substance, that 
had the power of giving itself a number of contrary 
qualities. 

These various speculators form together the first 
scientific school ; and in spite of their various differ- 
ences, they agree in one" fundamental point. They 
agree in substituting for an explanation of the uni- 
verse that was Complicated and unverifiable, one that 
was simple, and was at least in some degree capable of 
verification, and in some degree founded upon observa- 
tion, ifhey made the power of nature a single power, 
contained within herself, and immanent everywhere ; 
; ^ # . they taught that this power was material and acces- 
<,!*./'- sible to observation, and they tried to analyse it into 

its simplest form. 

Science remained in this stage for about a hundred 



r 



16 

years-thai is thinkers for about that time tr 
matter as though it were endowed with life, and 
to explain the universe by ascribin* to if 



a. 



real substance of all 
substance, living, but 
*>7 virtue of its life 

-ffitent parts of 

Hientary contraries, 

were first separated 

have thought 

After thishe 

teat .its movements 

-cessitv. p rom th e 

teaches, there arose 
the present uni" 
^ -d gods also, 

natural 



, 

' m lst and 
P oint ^ "em. to 



T f ^ and to 
; ^ and *d 
theSe contl S , he 



i 

the 






THE DAWN OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 17 

vej.oped on its surface through, the interaction of heat 
and moisture, and at first existed only in the water, 
"which at a former epoch covered everything. Gradu- 
ally much of these waters dried up, and a number of 
living creatures were left on land. These organisms 
slowly adapted themselves to their environments, and 
the land animals acquired their present form. 

In these doctrines we see certainly the germ at least 
of a more advanced conception of things. The first 
scientific conception has already given birth to a new 
and antagonistic one. A little later on this antagonism 
becomes yet more marked; and it grows quite plain 
that this early school of science is divided against 
itself. 

We see this very clearly in the cases of Heracleitus* 
and Empedocles. Both of these still look for the 
first cause of things as they are, in a certain living 
will, in a certain personal character that inheres in 
matter. It is this that in the first place sets things 
in motion; but when once the motion has begun, 
J they seek to explain the direction of it by essentially 

; inanimate and impersonal causes. Thus Empedocles, 

| ! as his principles* of movement, postulates two quasi 
4 personal forces, Strife and Love. But having started 
f with these, he at once ceases to be personal; and analys- 
ing all stfostances, not into water, air, or fire, or a vague 
L and illimitable matter, but into a combination of all 

t* of these into what, in fact, we still are accustomed 

|/ * Heracleitus has received much attention in Germany as a 

f metaphysician, as well as a man of science. It is only in this 

- last character that he is here alluded to. 
\ ' A.C.S.S. vol. vii. B 



18 



LUCRETIUS. 



to caH the four elements lie tries to show how things 
of necessity evolved' themselves out of manifold and 
long-continued combinations of these, 

As a specimen of the way in which Empcdocles 
worked out his theories, it may be mentioned that his 
account of the origin of species is to a great extent 
the same as that of Mr Darwin. All sorts of living 
creatures, he taught, first appeared on the earth, many 
of them unable to defend or to reproduce themselves, 
and thus perished in the inevitable struggle for exist- 
ence. The fittest alone survived by this process of 
natural selection, and these are the races of men and 
animals that are now living. Here, then, is a pictur- 
esque illustration of the growing inconsistency with 
itself of the first school of science. Wo have Strife 
and Love to explain the beginning of motion, and a 
crude Darwinism to explain tho results of it. 

The inconsistency thus indicated was duo to the 
growing distinctness of two separate ideas, which men 
still tried to identify, and only ended by confusing 
them. This confusion was first reduced to order by 
Anaxagoras, another thinker of the same period, who 
may be said to have been the precursor of the second 
school of science, by expressing the double idea that 
was implicit in the first. He no longer treats the 
world as an animal, or matter as living, and leavened 
with such affections as love and hate. Tho matter 
there was to be moved, and the force there was to move 
it, he first expressly teaches, are two distinct things. 
" Matter," he said, as an epitome of this teaching, " was 
originally without form and voidall its parts wero 



THE DAWN OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 19 

contused together : then Mind came, and wrought it 
into form and order." But not only was this general 
principle an advance on what had been before; he 
made a great step also in the working out of it, through 
his new analysis of matter. This, he taught, consists 
of an infinite number of minute elementary particles, 
of a vast variety of kinds, such as would be produced 
could we turn all the wood in the world to sawdust, 
grind all the stone in the world to powder, file all the 
metals in the world into the same condition, and treat 
all the other substances we see about us in a like man- 
ner. And the present order of things was produced 
by the gradual cohering together of like particles, the 
elementary stone-dust becoming stone, wood-dust wood, 
iron-dust iron, and so on. This process, he taught, as 
has been said before, was not initiated by the particles 
themselves, or any principle immanent in them, but 
by an intelligent and designing Mind, independent of 
and external to them. But in his application of this 
theory, Anaxagoras uses his Mind only to account 
for the beginning of a mechanical movement of the 
particles, and he then leaves these to do all the rest 
for" themselves. That mechanical movement began as 
a revolution of the particles at a single point. Then 
gradually ever- increasing masses were drawn into 
this vortex, which is still extending farther and farther 
into the infinite realm of matter; and out of this 
movement, without any succeeding intervention of 
Mind, the universe as we know it has evolved itself. 

Anaxagoras flourished only a century after Thales. 
Let us see how far, in this short time, the mind had 



20 LUCRETIUS. r 

wandered away from, and advanced beyond, its original 
crude theological explanation of tilings. First, as we 
have seen already, men regarded the universe as worked 
and ordered by a race of divine animals, who were 
themselves an essential part of it. Next they regarded 
the universe as a single divine animal in itself. Next, 
from reflecting more systematically on this animal's 
ways, they came insensibly to change their conception 
of it, and to ascribe to its movements, in a great mea- 
sure, a certain blind and essentially impersonal neces- 
sity. Next they came to realise that they were really 
entertaining the idea of two principles, and consciously 
and explicitly they learnt to distinguish between and 
to separate them. The universe was once more not 
a living thing for them- its phenomena were now 
caused no longer by a set of beings of like passions 
with ourselves, and of like ways of acting, but by a 
single supreme intelligence, passionless and bodiless, 
which, though the original cause of all we see around 
us, did not cause or interfere with anything of this 
directly. All it was supposed to have done was to 
have given matter, in the first place, a shove, and after 
that, as Goethe says, "to sit apart, and watch the 
world gcV' 

This stage formed a new point of departure. The 
conception now arrived at is this, of the universe on 
the one hand, as a machine in motion, and of an activo 
intelligence on the other, to whom in some way the 
motion is attributable. But there is this important 
point to notice. Mind, according to this theory, did 
not itself form the universe into the machine it is, still 



THE DAWN OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 21 

les^ is it at the present time turning the handle. All 
it did was to give matter an original impetus, by which 
matter was itself enabled to form itself into a machine, 
and a machine retaining within itself thenceforward 
its own principle of motion. Mind and matter being 
thus distinctly separated, and the connection between 
the two being made so vague, and to all appearance so 
temporary, the next step in scientific thought was to 
discard this Mind altogether, and to endow matter 
with the power of starting its own movement, as well 
as of continuing it. Thus Mind, Design, and Life, as 
principles of things, disappeared altogether, and came 
back in an entirely changed position. The case in- 
deed was simply reversed, Henceforward, instead of 
the motion of matter being looked upon as the effect 
of a self-dependent life, life was looked upon as the 
product of the self-dependent motion of matter. 

The conception of this general theory formed a new 
epoch in science. Eor was it only as a general theory 
that it was in advance of what had gone before. Its 
exponents at once began to work it out in a more 
exact way. They reduced these various doctrines to 
a complete system. \ and not only this, but they did 
their best to test them, and to raise them from the 
state of assumptions to that of verified facts. 

The father of this new school was Democritus, who 
flourished a generation later than Anaxagoras, and 
about a century and a half after the death of Thales. 
A century later still, this system of science was pro- 
pounded afresh, and given fresh currency to, by Epi- 
curus, who also introduced into it some slight modifi- 



22 



LUCRETIUS. 



cations. And it is tins system that Lucretius learned 
from Epicurus, and that we are about to consider at 
length, as set forth "by him. 

Before going on to do this, there are one or two 
points to remember. All the scientific progress we 
have just been speaking of was confined to the Greek 
world, and not even amongst the Greeks were its 
teachings universally accepted. With the general 
public, theology and polytheism continued to hold 
its own, and the allegiance of the world of thought 
was divided between it and metaphysical systems, 
which, though equally opposed to the popular theo- 
logy, can yet not be called science at all. Outside 
the Greek world, this advanced thought had for a 
long while little influence. Eome for centuries felt 
nothing of it, but lay buried in what to the eyes of 
a great philosopher would have seemed savage and 
debasing superstition. By the time of Lueretms, 
Greek culture was extending, and with it there was 
beginning a gradual dawn of scepticism over tho 
Eoman world. But the mass of men a lie found 
them were still under the dominion of the old errors 
still had their minds darkened by a faith more or 
less fervent in the old supernatural theory of things. 
The aim of Lucretius was to preach to them a now 
gospel, which should once and for all clear their men- 
tal vision, and give them a new and a healthier view of 
life. Such a gospel he conceived himself to have found 
in the scientific system of Epicurus, and in his prac- 
tical deductions from it. It was this that he set him- 
self to preach to the Eoman people, for their liberation 



* THE DAWN OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 23 

an/1 their new birth, to liberty ; and he was confident 
in the power of it, not because it was plausible, or 
because it was pleasing, but first, and before all things, 
because he held it to be in demonstrable accordance 
with fact ; because it was based upon observation and 
experiment, not on fancy; and because from first to 
last its hypotheses were capable of verification. It is 
this scientific system we are now about to consider ; 
and that it was conceived by Lucretius and his master 
to possess these characteristics that have just been 
mentioned, will become plain when we see how they 
criticised the systems which they designed theirs to 
replace. 

In our examination of this system, it will be as well 
to treat it as though it were the real property of Lu- 
cretius ; and this mainly for the sake of convenience. 
But we must at the same time remember that though 
he was, and professed to be, in the main, expounding 
the discoveries of another, he had to some extent 
really made them his own, by careful attempts at veri- 
fying all their details, and that he had probably also 
added to them, and perhaps modified them, himself. 



CHAPTEE III 



THE SCIENTIFIC SYSTEM OF LUCRETIUS. 



SECTION I. 

THE ANALYSIS OF MATTER, 

THE problem Lucretius set himself to solve was a 
double one. First, "What was the original, nature- of 
matter 2 secondly, By what process has it iu the course 
of time arrived at its present state? And tho .solution 
he offered was the joint product of certain d priori, 
assumptions and reflections, and a keen and extensive 
observation of natural facts. 

His first great assumption, and his' first great obser- 
vation, were as follows : He assumed that nil our 
knowledge was derived from sense, that tho semen* 
were the only channels and the only tests of truth ; 
he observed that the order of things revealed to him 
by his senses, and whose secrets ho had set himself to 
explain, was something not capricious, but acting in 
a fixed way, and therefore really constant under all 
apparent change. " Without fixed seasons of rain," 



ANALYSIS OF MATTER. 25 

L.$ says, "the earth is unable to put forth, its gladden- 
ing produce ; nor, again, if kept from food, could the 
nature of living things continue its kind and sustain 
life." "Or again," he asks, "why should not some 
men outlive many generations, if it were not that an 
unchanging matter had been assigned for begetting 
things, and what can arise out of this matter, is 
fixed 1 ?" He observes, further, another set of facts. 
" Bains die, but goodly crops spring up, and boughs 
are green with leaves upon the trees. Trees them- 
selves are laden with fruit; by them in turn our 
race and the race of wild beasts are fed ; by them we 
see glad towns teem with children, and the leafy 
forests ring on all sides with the song of new birds." 
And from this Lucretius arrives at another general 
conclusion, " Nature," he says, "dissolves everything 
back into its first bodies, and does not annihilate 
things." 

Here, then, he has two broad generalisations to 
start with. Nature is uniform; and nothing in 
nature can come out of or return to nothing. The 
first of these conclusions he thinks can stand by itself. 
He seeks to verify the last one thus : If it be not so 
if things can come from nothing then anything 
might come out of anything. Men might spring out 
of the sea, fish out of the earth, birds out of the air. 
In a word, there could be no such uniformity in the 
world as there very certainly is. Again, for a like reason, 
it is plain that nothing can turn into nothing ; for in 
that case objects might suddenly disappear, without 
any external force destroying them. But this, it is 



2Q LUCRETIUS. 

very certain, they never do. And again, if things could 
ever turn into nothing, everything would by this time 
have vanished, " eaten up by the infinite time gone 
by." And " any amount of force must of course undo 
the texture of things in which no parts at all were 
of an everlasting body," 

He has thus settled that the universe he has to 
account for is made up of a matter that, in obedience 
to fixed laws, is perpetually changing its appearance, 
and yet is never destroyed. To what is this matter 
reducible in its last analysis'? Lucretius answers, to 
two things empty space, and atoms. These atoms 
are particles of an inconceivable minuteness, and are 
alike in the absence of all attributes or qualities, 
except solidity, indestructibility, weight, and figure. 
They are far too small for sight to take any account 
of; but this need not make us doubtful of their 
material reality. "We can neither see the wind, or 
smells, or sounds, or heat, or cold ; and " yet," says 
Lucretius, " all these things must be material, because 
they touch the senses." Equally necessary, too, is the 
existence of empty space. 3For if it were not for this 
there could be no motion; everything would be a 
single solid mass. But as a matter of fact we may see 
that even things that seem solid are not solid really 
stones, for instance, through which water often oozes. 
Further, bodies of equal bulk weigh differently, from 
which it is plain that some have more void than others. 
But though empty space seems thus to enter into every- 
thing, there are some bodies that are absolutely solid; 
and such are the atoms themselves, the first beginnings 



ANALYSIS OF MATTER. 27 

of things. For unless these were solid/ there would 
be no matter at all. The universe would be empty 
space. Equally necessary, too, is it that the atoms 
should be indivisible ; because, Lucretius aptly argues, 
if ^Nature had set no limits to the breaking of things, 
bodies of matter would have been by this time so 
pulverised that nothing could within a fixed time be 
conceived out of them, and " reach its utmost growth 
of being." 

Lucretius contrasts this analysis of matter with 
those of the former speculators, of whom we have 
already spoken, and shows how inadequate these were 
to explain the facts of the case. Fire he asks, how 
can it possibly be true to analyse all things into fire, 
and say that they were formed out of if? " How," he 
asks, "can things be so various if they are formed out 
of fire, one and unmixed 1 It would avail nothing for 
hot fire to be condensed and rarefied. The heat would 
only become more intense by the compression of parts, 
more faint by their dispersion." "No diversity of things 
could arise in this way ; in addition to which, fires can 
be condensed and rarefied only if there be void, the 
existence of whfch those who held that everything was 
fire necessarily denied. Indeed, says Lucretius, it 
needs but little exertion of thought to show us that, if 
we take void away, everything must become solid. 
Supposing, however, he goes on, that these* philo- 
sophers think that fire generates various bodies in 
some other way, not by condensation and rarefaction. 
This, for other reasons, is equally impossible. For 
fire, if it ceases altogether to be fiery, ceases to exist. 



28 



LUCRETIUS. 



Fire, according to the hypothesis now in question, As 
the essence of all matter is matter in its simplest 
state. To say, then, that matter, in this its simplest 
state, is robbed of all its properties, is just the same 
as saying that it ceases to exist. And in the majority 
of things about us there are none of the properties 
of fire. If, therefore, fire was the primal element, it 
must have first been turned to nothing; and out of 
that nothing all these other things must have emerged. 
"Again," Lucretius goes on, "to say that all things 
are fire, and no real thing but fire exists, appears sheer 
dotage. For those who maintain this take their stand 
on the senses to fight against the senses, which appears 
to me to be as false as it is foolish., For what surer 
test can we have than the senses of truth and falsehood'* 
It would be just as wise to deny the reality of fire, and 
affirm the reality of all other things." 

For similar reasons they are wrong who take for a 
first principle water, or earth, or air ; or air and fire ; 
or earth and water together ; or, as did Empedocles, 
fire, water, earth, and air. These speculators were all 
alike wrong, because they denied the existence of void, 
and because they supposed matter to be infinitely 
divisible. 

Again, if all things are produced from f ou things, 
and again broken up into four things, there is no 
more meaning in this statement than there would 
be in its converse viz., that the various objects and 
substances about us were the first beginnings of these 
elements, not these elements the first beginnings of 
them. Whilst if, to escape this, it be supposed that 



ANALYSIS OF MATTER. 29 

t^ese four elements meet in such a way that none of 
them in the union changes its nature, nothing what- 
ever will "be able to he produced out of them. 

The first beginnings of things must be of a kind 
quite different from these. They must be of them- 
selves below the reach of sense their nature must bo 
unseen and latent, and thus capable of infinite conver- 
sion and change by means of various combinations. 
Anaxagoras made a step in the right direction; but 
then he too denied the existence of void, and he too 
taught matter was infinitely divisible. His system 
was therefore as radically faulty as the others. The 
sort of approach to atomism which he made is likewise 
evidently unsuccessful, and will not explain the facts 
of nature. For, according to Anaxagoras, our bodies 
are made up of an aggregate of flesh-particles, blood- 
particles, bone-particles, and so on. If this were the 
case, food could not nourish them, unless it contained 
in itself small bodies of blood, bone, and flesh. Then, 
too, if all bodies grow out of the earth, or are nourished 
by what does so, earth itself must be an aggregate of 
all these bodies. Wood, when ignited, yields smoke, 
flame, and ash* On the hypothesis of Anaxagoras, 
therefore, it must be composed of particles that are 
foreign to itself. Anaxagoras felt this difficulty, and 
tried to escape it by saying that all things to some ex- 
tent are latent in all things, and that each thing is what 
it is in virtue of those particles of which it has the 
largest number. But this, says Lucretius, is plainly not 
the case ; for if it were so, we should get blood out of 
stones, milk out of grass, and fire out of wood without 



igniting it. People say that the rubbing of boughs jn 
a forest produces fire ; and this, Lucretius admits, is 
quite true. But that is not because fire, ready made, 
is latent in the wood, but because the arrangement of 
atoms is changed, and, like the rearrangement of the 
letters of a word, produces a new result. 

Atoms and void, then to these two things every- 
thing that is, is reducible. These are the substance of 
everything, the only things that really exist. What- 
ever can be named, is either a property or an accident 
of these two things. The properties of atoms are such 
things as their shape and weight, which they cannot 
lose unless they lose their own existence. All things 
else, such as "slavery, poverty, riches, war, concord," 
-these are but accidents, one and all, of atoms and of 
void. " Time, also," adds Lucretius, " exists not by 
itself ; but simply from the things which happen, the 
sense apprehends what has been done in time past, as 
well as what is present, and what is to follow after." 

Further, atoms and void are both infinite in. quantity; 
because, in the first place, it is inconceivable that they 
should not be so ; and, in the second place, unless they 
were so, it is plain for many reasons that they would 
not have produced the results they have done. The 
first of these arguments is simple enough. Let us 
make the bounds of things as vast as we wfll, there 
must still be something or other outside them. The 
second set of arguments will appear presently. 



FORMATION OF THE VXIVERSE. 31 

% 

SECTION II. 

THE FORMATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 

The original state of tilings was, according to 
Lucretius, not unlike an infinite snowstorm. Infinite 
atoms were continually falling and falling through an 
infinite space- They fell thus in virtue of one of 
their inalienable properties, namely weight, which for 
ever hears them downwards. Though of different 
sizes, the velocity of their downward motion was still 
the same, for they fell through an unresisting medium. 
With us heavy things fell faster than very light ones, 
simply "because of the resistance of the air, which they 
have to overcome. The universe was formed "by the 
collision and coherence of these falling "bodies. But 
how did this collision first take place ? All the bodies 
were falling at an equal velocity, and so they could 
not overtake each other; and if they fell straight 
downwards i.e., in parallel courses they could not 
jostle against each other. Evidently therefore, in 
their downward course, says Lucretius, they must 
tend at uncertain times, and at uncertain points, to 
swerve a little, but only a very little not enough to 
be called a lateral movement. It was owing to this 
slight and incalculable swerving that the first collision 
of atoms took place. This collision at once produced 
a rebound, and this rebound again produced fresh 
collisions ; and there was thus begun an ever-extend- 
ing clashing and confusion amongst them, like that of 



32 



LUCRETIUS. 



motes in sunbeams, -which we may see, says Lucretius, 
" in never-ending conflict, skirmish and give battle, 
contending in troops, and never halting, driven about 
in frequent meetings and partings; so that you may 
gness from this what it is for first beginnings of 
things to be ever tossing about in the, great void." 
In this war of atoms, some, when they clashed, 
bounded off each other, so as to leave large spaces 
between them ; others bounded off so as only to leave 
small spaces, the former kind producing such things 
as air and sunlight, the latter such things as stone 
and iron. 

This different behaviour of the different atoms is due 
to their various shapes, some being round and smooth, 
some round and rough, some forked or pointed, and 
so on. The denser substances are formed of forked 
atoms, which cannot touch without becoming entan- 
gled with each other, and are so unable to bound back 
to any great distance. The rarer and more subtle 
substances are formed of smooth and fine atoms. 

And this same atomic movement which was the 
beginning of things, still continues to keep them what 
they are. It is a movement that has gone on from 
everlasting, and will always continue. Every object 
about us is in motion within itself, though we see 
it as a whole to be entirely still; for tliis atomic 
movement is infinitely far beneath the ken of the 
senses. "We may conceive its nature, however, and 
its possibility, by the analogy of a distant flock of 
sheep, or the evolutions of two distant armies. The 
sheep, though in reality frisking, and butting each 



% ' FORMATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 33 

other, seem to us but a stationary spot of -whiteness ; 
the two armies, though engaged in combat, appear to 
us but a stationary glitter. The tendency, too, of every- 
thing is still downwards, ever downwards; and the 
upward tendency of certain things arises only, in some 
cases, from a rebound ; in others, as in the case of flame, 
from the substance in question being squeezed upwards 
by the pressure of other substances. 

It will now be apparent yet farther, that matter and 
empty space must both be infinite. For if space were 
not infinite, the atoms, always falling, would be by 
this time lying in a solid mass on the floor of space ; 
and if matter were not infinite, that infinity of combi- 
nations could not have been produced, of which the 
existing order of things is a survival of the fittest. 

And it is partly from this conclusion that Lucretius 
disproves a doctrine that was current amongst some 
thinkers in his time, a doctrine which nearly ap- 
proaches the modern theory of gravitation, and was 
allied also with a conception of the sphericity of the 
earth, and the existence -of life all round it. " Some 
teach," Lucretius says, " that all things press to the 
centre of the SUM ; that heavy bodies under the earth 
press upwards and are at rest on the earth, turned 
topsy-turvy, like the images of things in water ; and 
that living things walk head downwards, and cannot 
tumble out of the earth into those parts of heaven 
below them." This theory of things he thus dismisses. 
The universe being infinite, there can be no centre to 
it. Secondly, even were there a centre, still space 
everywhere would yield to heavy bodies, and they 

A.C.S.S. vol. vii. c 



34 -" "" LUCRETIUS. 

could never come to rest upon void, be that void centre 
or no centre. 

* We have already seen that the atoms are conceived 
of as having different shapes. It is further demon- 
strable, according to Lucretius, that the number of 
I their shapes is finite. For if there were an infinite 

; r j variety of shapes, some atoms would have to be of an 

infinite bulk, since limited bodies do not afford room 
for an infinite variety of detail in their form. Also, 
were the number of shapes of atoms infinite, there 
could be no fixed order in nature, but it would go on 
either infinitely improving or infinitely degenerating. 
But though the difference of forms is finite, of atoms 
of each form there is an infinite number; for the 
sum being infinite, and the number of parts finite, 
there must be an infinite variety of each kind, else 
the sum would be finite. 

Here then we have an infinity of atoms of a finite 
variety of shapes ; which, though they are thus far 
qualified, and are possessed also of gravity, have yet 
no properties individually that can appeal to the 
human sense. They have, for instance, no colour; 
and this statement Lucretius takeg* great pains to 
verify. Objects, he says, change their colour, but 
none of the properties of atoms changes; therefore 
colour cannot belong to the atoms. ISTor can such 
colours as change into others be the product of a 
number of atoms of various colours. Look at blue 
bright sea-water, he says, and you will see that its 
changes of colour are evidently not such as could be 
produced by any mixture of variously-coloured particles. 



FORMATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 35 

Further and lie here comes to a deeper kind of reason- 
ing colours cannot exist without light, nay, colours 
change with the way in which ligjit falls on them., 
as in the case of the down on a dove's neck. He 
then goes on to analyse colour into a particular kind 
of "blow given to the pupil of the eye, the nature of 
which varied with the shapes of the atoms that com- 
posed the coloured objects. Thus the sense of colour 
is but a particular form of the sense of touch, and is 
no quality in the atoms themselves, but is an accident 
of their shape. It is curious to find that Lucretius 
having given this explanation, in which there is really 
implied a profound truth, supplements it by the shal- 
low and untrue observation that colour can be further 
proved not to reside in atoms, because the more you 
tear up a thing the fainter does the colour appear. At 
any rate, having thus established the fact that atoms 
have no colour, he goes on more summarily to show 
that they are without all other sensible qualities as 
well. All bodies are not vocal, all bodies are not 
odorous, all bodies do not possess cold or heat; and 
therefore atoms can have in themselves neither sound 
nor smell nor temperature. It is only by a series 
of infinitely complex combinations that the primal 
materials o^f things "step by step issue forth to the 
senses." 

The exact stages in this evolution of the universe 
Lucretius does not profess to describe accurately, but 
he gives a general sketch of them which, in some 
points, is very like what is given us by the most 
advanced modern speculators. It was a long time, 



36 LUCRETIUS. 

he says, "before the war of atoms produced anything 
like what we see now. As imagination penetrates 
back to the first conceivably visible state of things, 
it discerns nothing but a " strange and stormy med- 
ley" the cosmic vapour of our modern theorists 
in perpetual movement, massing itself together now 
in some parts, now in others, and leaving and filling 
up various shifting interspaces. At last "the parts 
began to fly asunder, and like to join to like, and 
mark off the members of the world, and every one of 
its mighty parts i.e., to separate high heaven from 
earth, and let the sea spread itself out apart, and 
also let the fires of the ether spread apart, pure and 
unmixed." 

This process began as soon as the heavy bodies of 
earth " first met together, and took up the lowest posi- 
tions." Having thus met, in virtue of their special 
shape they went on binding themselves together in a 
closer union, and forming a denser mass. In this pro- 
cess a large quantity of smoother particles were squeezed 
out of the earth, and these formed the sea, the sun, 
the stars, and the vault of heaven. Eirst of all there 
issued out a fiery ether, which went up as we see 
mists going up now, and this formed itself into a 
vast cohering film, which encompasses and bounds 
our universe, and which we call the heavens. After 
this, squeezed out in like manner from the solidify- 
ing earth, followed the rudiments of the sun and 
I j moon, which gradually formed themselves into their 

present shapes, and turn round in air, midway between 
earth and heaven, because "they were neither heavy 



FORMATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 



37 



enough to sink, nor light enough to glide along 
to the uppermost "borders." Considering Lucretius's 
notions of the inherent weight, and consequent down- 
ward tendency, of all atoms, this at first sounds a 
little strange. He apparently means, however, that 
they were of such weight that the squeezing power of 
the earth could only avail to project them to a certain 
height. 

"When the material of the heavens and the heavenly 
bodies was thus withdrawn, an immediate change 
took place upon the earth's surface, which was at this 
time completely covered with water. In consequence 
of the amount of matter that had gone from it, there 
was in. various places a sudden subsidence of the 
ground. In the hollows and depressions thus formed, 
the waters were at once collected, and the dry land 
appeared: The same sort of process still continued, 
but now with an added agency. " The heat of ether, 
and the rays of the sun, ever more and more by 
repeated blows compressed and buffeted the earth " 
its softer parts were beaten down into plains, and 
its harder parts, which could not be thus beaten 
down, remained as hills ; and thus the earth's surface 
assumed its present form. 

Lucretius, it will thus be seen, conceived our uni- 
verse as a kind of azure bubble, thrown off by the 
earth, and beaded with stars, the earth itself being the 
centre, and occupying probably far the larger part of 
the space enclosed by it; whilst the sun and moon 
swam, as it were, in the air, which filled all the inter- 
vening space between the earth and heaven. It is this 



38 LUCRETIUS. r 

entire system which Lucretius called the world. He, 
conceived the number of such worlds to be infinite, 
and he held that they were all falling for ever down- 
wards, in much the same way as the atoms did in the 
beginning. 

His knowledge of a large part of this universe he 
confesses to be far from exact. Of the movements of 
the heavenly bodies, especially, he can only give con- 
jectural explanations; but one or other of those he 
offers, he feels certain must be the true one for prac- 
tical purposes, it does not much matter which. On 
one point, however, he professes that he has attained 
exactitude. His science has revealed to him the true 
size of the heavenly bodies. This, he says, is almost 
identical with that which it appears to us to be. This 
statement, absurd and indeed unmeaning as it is, if we 
were to consider it seriously, Lucretius yet arrived at by 
what may be called a shadow of true scientific method. 
He could not measure the size of the heavenly bodies 
directly, but there were other bright bodies whose 
size he could measure. He observed a variety of 
flames, noticing their size close at hand; he then 
retired to various distances, and noted them from 
thence ; and the result of these observations, he 
fancied, was, that however far he retired from a lumi- 
nous object its size never seemed to diminish. Thus, 
to produce the effect they do upon us, the actual size 
of the sun and moon need be no greater than what we 
see it to be. At the same time, however, he seems to 
think that extreme distance may have some very small 
effect in such cases ; and thus, with respect to the size 



* FORMATION OF TEE UNIVERSE. 39 

of the stars, our vision may mislead us somewhat, 
"but only to a very small degree." 

The sun, small as it is, may give the light and heat 
it does, from being, as it were, a well-head, whence 
light and heat gush out or the heat may not dwell 
directly in itself, but it may inflame the air when in 
a susceptible state, as branches make a conflagration ; 
or the sun may have about him a quantity of invisible 
heat, unaccompanied by fire, and this heat may increase 
the stroke of his rays. 

Mght is caused either by the sun, "when he 
strikes the uttermost part of heaven," having " blown 
out all his fires," or because "the same force which 
has carried his orb above the earth, compels it to pass 
below the earth." 

Morning is caused either by the reappearance of 
the same sun, or "because fires meet together, and 
many seeds of heat are accustomed to stream together 
at a fixed time, which cause new sunlight to be born 
every day." Strange to say, he seems to think this 
singular theory, if anything, more probable than the 
former one. He gravely says that "from the sum- 
mits of Ida it*is reported that scattered fires arc 
seen to appear at daybreak, and gradually collect 
themselves into an orb." And if, he adds, this is 
really what does happen, it is only in strict analogy 
with many of the most familiar phenomena of nature. 
Trees blossom at fixed times j rain and lightning are 
, not very irregular; and at fixed times boys change 
their teeth. 

In the same way, a new moon may be born every 



40 LUCRJGT1US. r 

day, figured according to its various phases. Or^he 
moon may revolve like a spherical "ball, of which, one 
half is self-luminous and one half dark. Or it may 
he luminous all over, either of itself or hy the light of 
the sun ; and its phases may he caused by its carrying 
with it an invisible satellite that is perpetually eclips- 
ing it. The eclipses of the sun, too, may be accounted 
for in the same way ; or " the sun may be able, quite 
exhausted, to lose his fires at certain fixed times." 

Such in broad outline is the Lucretian universe the 
outcome of atoms that have in themselves no sensible 
qualities. Let us see now, more in detail, how Lucre- 
tius accounts for all the variety of substances into 
which we find they have combined themselves. 

This variety, and the results of it, are due to the 
various shapes and sizes of the atoms, and their various 
ways of mixing. " There is nothing," says Lucretius, 
" which is apparent to sense that consists of one kind 
of first beginnings. There is nothing which is not 
formed by a mixing of seed." -As an obvious instance 
and proof of this, we have the earth, which must con- 
tain within itself the seeds of all the things that 
spring out of it, such as water, fire* and vegetation. 
For each thing is what it is in virtue of being a com- 
bination, a mixture, a clinging together of^, atoms of 
certain various shapes, in certain various proportions. 
It is these various combinations of various atoms that 
give to things their different textures and properties ; 
for " since seeds differ, there must be a difference in 
the spaces between the passages, the connections, the 
weights, the blows." 



IOI85G 



FORMATION OF THE UNIVERSE. 41 

Jliis hypothesis, says Lucretius, will explain all the 
facts of nature, and will be verified by them. Light, 
for instance, passes through horn ; but rain is thrown 
off. Why 1 The atoms comprising horn leave in that 
substance spaces of a certain size and shape. The 
atoms that compose light are very small, and can pass 
through these spaces. The atoms that compose water 
are larger, and cannot. Again, wines flow through a 
strainer, but oil will not. This is because the elements 
of oil are larger, or more hooked and tangled, and so 
cannot be so easily separated. To put the matter 
generally, hard substances, such as diamonds and iron, 
are composed mainly of atoms that have many hooks, 
by which, the instant they touch each other, they are 
held together ; fluid substances, such as water, are 
composed mainly of atoms without hooks, which can 
move with more or less freedom abcmt each other and 
gaseous substances are composed entirely of atoms of 
a finer and smaller nature still. 

The various tastes, smells, sounds, and temperatures 
of things are due, too, to the various shapes of the 
atoms that compose them. Harsh tastes come from 
substances made* up of rough, pointed, or hooked 
atoms; pleasant tastes, from substances made up of 
smooth adorns. The atoms of honey and milk, for 
instance, are smooth ; those of wormwood rough. The 
creaking of a saw is made of rough atoms; beauti- 
ful music of small atoms ; and so on. 

More light will bo thrown on this conception of 
things, when we come to see farther what is Lucretius's 
theory of sensation, and how he reduces all our percep- 



42 LUCRETIUS. 

tions to modes of touch. In the foregoing analysis 
of matter, the inconsistencies and incompleteness "are 
of course obvious. It will be enough, in passing, to 
mention the two most striking of these. One is, that 
though it is one of his great points that the atoms are 
far "below the reach of sense, he seems continually to 
speak of them as though they could individually by 
their shape affect, or be detected, by the senses. The 
other is, that this application of the atomic theory 
quite fails to explain one of the chief phenomena of 
nature that is, the change of qualities that takes place 
in a single substance, hot things becoming cold, sweet 
things rancid, and gaseous and fluid things solid. 
This, however, by the way. What we have now to 
do is to examine the theory of Lucretius, not to 
criticise it. 



SECTION III. 



THE INTERACTION OF MATERIAL SUBSTANCES. 

* 

We have thus far seen how the universe as it is, was 
evolved out of its original elements, and the$ew simple 
laws of which this evolution was the result. We have 
next to consider the more complex question of how it 
is maintained in its present state, with all its various 
movements and innumerable changes, and the constant 
uniform relation of its larger parts. 
- We ^have seen how atoms behaved in forming sub- 



INTERACTION OF MATERIAL SUBSTANCES. 43 

stances ; we must now see why substances behave as 
they do when formed. Lucretius explains this by a 
doctrine we have already mentioned, that nothing, 
however much appearances may say the contrary to us, 
is really at rest. "We are to conceive of everything in 
constant motion solids, fluids, and gases, in motion 
within themselves, even when they are at rest rela- 
tively to other objects. It is in this way that the 
heavens are sustained above us from falling on the 
earth, and the earth sustained from falling on the 
heavens below ; for the entire space between the two 
is pervaded by air in ceaseless motion, the particles of 
which are perpetually bounding and rebounding, strik- 
ing against the earth on the one hand and the heavens 
on the other, and thus keeping the whole in place. 

It might, Lucretius seems to think, appear doubtful 
how, according to his theory of the downward ten- 
dency of everything, air could sustain the earth. He 
therefore takes pains to emphasise especially the power 
that is in air, fine though its atoms be. Life, which, as 
we shall see soon, he considers to be atomic, can hold 
the body together, he says ; and the living body does 
not feel the weiglfb of its separate members. Our feet, 
for instance, are conscious of no pressure from above. 
In the same way air prevents the earth from having 
any weight with reference to the universe. 

But we must not only conceive of all bodies as 
having within themselves this perpetual motion of their 
particles ; we must also conceive all substances as being, 
as it were, in a perpetual state of evaporation. Minute 
particles of themselves .are for ever streaming off their 



44 LUCRETIUS. 

surface. That this is so, we can tell in many cases by 
practical experiments; and we may thus infer thac it 
is so in every case. We can tell that water is per- 
petually giving off a certain part of its own elements, 
by observing how clothes, stretched out to dry on the 
sea-shore, get saturated with a salt moisture. As we 
walk by the sea, too, a salt taste comes into our 
mouths. Scents, likewise, are instances of the same 
perpetual streaming off of atoms ; and so also is colour, 
as we may see plainly where the sun shines through 
red or blue canvas, and shows us those colours pro- 
jected on whatever objects the light falls on. 

Thus there is throughout nature a variety of wholly 
unperceived agencies at work, secretly affecting what- 
ever we can observe to happen, and, as we shall see 
presently, enabling us to observe and be conscious of 
it. An illustration of what Lucretius means by this 
doctrine, and of the use he made of it in explaining 
nature, is to be found in. his account of the magnet, 
which he says attracts iron for this reason. Prom the 
magnet there proceeds perpetually a stream of atoms 
stronger and more violent than from most other 
bodies. This stream is perpetually treating a vacuum 
about the magnet. As soon as iron is placed in the 
neighbourhood of this vacuum, the air which is in 
the pores of the iron tries to rush to the vacuum, 
and fill it up. The iron, however, is of so tough and 
hard a nature, that the air cannot escape from it, and 
therefore carries the iron into the vacuum along with 
it. The magnet does not attract gold, because gold is 
too heavy for the air to move it 3 nor again does it 



ORIGIN OF LIFE AND SPECIES. 



45 



attract wood, because wood is so porous that the air 
rusning to the vacuum can escape of itself, without 
taking the wood with it. 

Thus the whole universe is what it is, in virtue of 
this occult movement of everything. All matter is 
more or less porous, and every substance is ever being 
permeated and filtered through by emanations from 
other substances. " One thing," says Lucretius, " is 
seen to stream through stones, another through gold, 
another still to go out through silver and brass. 
Form is seen to stream through this passage, heat 
through that ; and one thing is seen to pass through 
by the same way more quickly than other things. 
The nature of the passages compels it to be so, vary- 
ing in manifold wise, owing to the unlike natures and 
textures of things." 



SECTION IV. 



THE ORIGIN OF LIFE AND SPECIES. 

s we have considered it thus far, has been 
simply inorganic unconscious nature. We must now 
see the relation that life bears to this. Life and 
consciousness, according to Lucretius, are the products 
of a certain combination of substances, interacting on 
each other by a certain infinitely complex process of 
atomic movement. " Whatever things we perceive 



46 LUCRETIUS. " 

to have' sense," he says, "you must admit to he all 
composed of senseless first beginnings." This fact he 
seems to consider evident on the very face of things. 
"We can see instances of it daily before our eyes. 
" Living worms .spring out of dung. Rivers, leaves, 
and glad pastures change into cattle, cattle change their 
substance into our bodies, and often our bodies are 
converted into the energy of wild beasts and vultures. 
Therefore, by a process similar to that by which dry 
woods are dissolved into flames, does nature change 
all foods into living bodies, and engender out of them 
all the senses of living creatures." 

But this change of inorganic into organic substances 
does not take place suddenly. It has to be brought 
about through "a number of advancing stages, and it is 
only certain substances that are capable of this change. 
And yet Lucretius seems to think, on the whole, that 
under favourable circumstances almost everything 
might develop the qualities of protoplasm. These 
qualities depend on the minuteness and the shape of the 
atoms, and also on their motions, their arrangements, 
and their positions. " None of which requisites," he 
says, " we find in woods and clods, and yet even these 
things, when they have become rotten" with rain, bring 
forth worms, because, bodies of matter driven from 
their ancient arrangements by a new condition are 
combined in the same way as when living creatures 
are to be begotten." Further, if this observation of 
the facts of nature be not sufficient to convince us 
that life is evolved out of things that are not living, 
the following argument will put the matter beyond a 



OPJGIN OF LIFE AND SPECIES. 



47 



doubt. If the atoms that compose conscious bodies 
were themselves conscious, then the atoms that men 
are made of would have the qualities of men, and 
would, amongst their other capabilities, be able to 
laugh, and to prosecute scientific inquiries, which is 
manifestly absurd. It is therefore perfectly evident, 
even in starting, that life is merely a mode of matter ; 
and when we come to consider the nature of life more 
in detail, it will be more apparent still. 

Such, then, being the nature of life, what was the 
history of its gradual appearance upon the earth ? The 
answer of Lucretius to this is curious in two ways 
in its anticipation of the most modern views, and in 
the unconscious survival in it of the most ancient. 
Lucretius in this connection seems to conceive of the 
earth in something the same way as Thales did as 
a large animal. !No sooner, he says, had the earth 
assumed its present shape, with its seas and lands, 
its level plains and its mountains, than there began 
to grow out of its surface herbage, flowers, and trees, 
in the same way as feathers and bristles grow out of 
the skins of birds and beasts. Then though why the 
events followed Cach other in this order is not ex- 
plained the earth put forth substances which de- 
veloped into living beings. First came eggs, which, 
lying in various places all over the ground, were 
hatched by the growing warmth of spring. Then, 
under the joint action of heat and moisture, the earth 
developed wombs, which lay on its surface, as the eggs 
did, and were attached to the soil by roots. Within 
these how is not stated infants developed them- 



48 



LUCRETIUS. 



} 

i 



selves; "and when," says Lucretius, " the warmth, of 
these infants, flying the wet and craving the air, mad 
opened them in the fulness of time, nature would turn 
to that spot the pores of the earth, and constrain it to 
yield from its open veins a liquid most like to milk." 
Such were the first beginnings of animal life. All 
kinds of creatures, without any act of sexual genera- 
tion, sprang direct from the earth; and so, indeed, 
says Lucretius, they still continue to do, but not in 
such numbers as formerly. For the earth grows old 
as a woman does; and, like a woman's, her bearing 
powers get gradually worn out. Once the earth of 
herself produced "the huge bodies of wild beasts," 
complete and ready-made. ISTow, of herself, she can 
only bring forth such little creatures as worms and 
the like. 

Once, too, of herself, she brought forth corn- 
crops, and vines, and fruit-trees, which we can now 
only get by sowing the ground aiid tilling it ; and 
as far as the earth's productions go, things get 
worse and worse every year, and to wring tho 
same results out of her requires year by year more 
toilsome labour. 

To return to the question of animal life : the 
earth in her prime, in her early period of exuberant 
fecundity, gave birth at random to every conceivable 
kind of creature, perfect and imperfect. Some were 
blind, some were dumb, some were mere trunks without 
limbs, some were sexless. A large number of these, for 
a variety of reasons, could not propagate themselves. 
Single or few specimens were produced, and forthwith 



ORIGIN OF LIFE AND SPECIES. 49 

perished. Amongst those that were able to propagate 
themselves, a struggle for existence set in as they in- 
creased and multiplied; and in this struggle those 
animals were eliminated that were not able to defend 
themselves. "For," says Lucretius, "in the case of 
all things which go on breathing the breath of life, 
either craft or courage, or else speed, has from the 
beginning of its existence protected and preserved 
each particular race. 5 ' The only exception is in the 
case of domestic animals, which, though they may 
in some ways be weakly themselves, have survived 
through man's protection. 

This theory of the origin of species, it will be seen, 
is in one of its main features identical with the Dar- 
winian. It attributes exactly the same results to the 
struggle for existence. But in another point it is en- 
tirely and expressly opposed to it. According to the 
Darwinian theory, all life began in a single simple 
form, which slowly differentiated itself, through an 
unexplained tendency of each organism, not only to 
reproduce its own likeness in its offspring, but also to 
reproduce this likeness with slight incalculable varia- 
tions. In this way varieties of organisms kept in- 
creasing, all having sprung from the same parent stem, 
and spreading out into separate branches, which would, 
if left to themselves, be for ever branching out anew. 
The rigours of climate, the difficulty of obtaining food, 
and so on, acted like a force that stripped from such 
a tree all its weakly twigs, and broke its unsound 
branches, leaving those only growing that were strong 
enough to withstand it. In various places this force 

A.C.S.S. vol. vii. B 



50 



LUCRETIUS. 



varied, and various textures and forms of branches 
were thus in various places left growing, and destroyed 
"by it. The innate tendency to variation in animals, 
which the Darwinian theory thus postulates, was con- 
ceived of dimly by some of the earliest Greek philoso- 
phers, who held that animals only developed legs, and 
various other parts of their bodies, when the waters 
dried up that originally covered the earth, and they 
were thus forced to adapt themselves to a life on land. 
But all tendency to variation in species is what Lucre- 
tius expressly denies. " All living things," he says, " go 
on after their own fashion, and all preserve their dis- 
tinctive differences according to a fixed law of nature." 
It will thus be seen that the Darwinian theory is 
an advance on, and differs from, the Lucretiaii mainly 
and essentially in this^ the way in which the variety 
is produced which is the subject of the selecting pro- 
cess common to both systems. 



SECTION Y. * 

THE NATURE OF LIFE AND CONSCIOUSNESS. 

The vital principle, though not identical with the body, 
is dernonstrably itself as truly material as the body. 
The close connection of the two is a proof of this. For 
the mind moves the limbs, rouses the body from sleep, 
and alters the countenance. The mind, too, suffers 



i 

* NATURE OF LIFE AND CONSCIOUSNESS. 51 

wify the body. A wound will often cause loss of 
j i consciousness, for instance and that thing must be 

material which is thus affected by material blows. 
The vital principle, according to Lucretius, consists of 
two kinds of ether of surpassing subtlety, diffused 
through the entire body, and closely connected with 
each other. Considering how quick are all our 
thoughts and impulses, the atoms of which these 
ethers are composed must be perfectly spherical and 
smooth, and exceedingly small. The entire volume 
of it must also weigh very little, as after life has left 
the body, the body does not perceptibly weigh less, 
any more than wine does when it has lost its flavour 
or its bouquet. 

We are not, however, to suppose that the nature of 
this ether is single, says Lucretius. It can, on the 
contrary, be readily analysed into four parts. " Eor " 
so his words run "a certain subtle spirit mixed 
with heat quits men at death, and then the heat 
draws air along with it, there being no heat which 
has not air too mixed with it; for since the nature 
of heat is rare, many first beginnings of air must 
move about thrdugh it. ;j Thus the natxire of the 
vital principle is found to be threefold (i. e., there is 
the cert ain^' subtle spirit/ heat, and air). And yet 
these things all together are not sufficient to produce 
sense, since the fact of the case does not admit that any 
of these can produce sense -giving motions, and the 
thoughts which a man turns over in his mind. Thus . 
some fourth nature must be added to these. This is 
altogether without a name. There is nothing .exists 



52 LUCP^ETIUS. f 

more nimble or more fine, or of smaller or smoother 
elements. It first transmits the sense-giving moons 
through, the frame, for it is first stirred, made up as it 
is of small particles. Next, the heat, and the unseen 
force of the spirit, receive the motions ; then the air ; 
then all things are set in motion, the blood is stirred, 
and every part of the flesh is filled with sensation. 

The mutual connection of these four elements of 
the vital principle, Lucretius admits that it is very 
hard to explain. All he says he can do is to illustrate 
it by an analogy. "As in the flesh of any living 
creature there is a smell and a heat and a savour, 
and yet out of these there is made up one single 
bulk of body, so the heat and the air, and the unseen 
forces of the spirit, mixed together, produce a single 
nature, together with that nimble force, which trans- 
mits to them from, itself the origin of motion, by 
means of which sense -giving motion first takes its 
rise through the fleshy frame." 

The effects of these various elements are perpetually 
being visible in the actions and the characters of living 
things. An angry fire flashes from the eyes in virtue 
of the elements of heat. Fear is Clue to the opera- 
tion of a spirit, which is of a low temperature. A 
calm cheerfulness is due to a preponderance of the 
element of still air. Thus passionate animals, such 
as lions, have in them more of the heat principle. 
Shuddering, fearful animals, like stags, have more of 
the chilly principle. Oxen have more of still air. 
Men have all these elements more equally mixed in 
them. It is true that they inherit various tendencies 



NATURE OF LIFE AND CONSCIOUSNESS. . 53 

which they cannot utterly eradicate; but the bent 
giv^n us by our parents is so small, that practically 
we may overcome it. 

Such is the vital principle, and though dwelling in the 
body and permeating the body, it is not, says- Lucretius, 
as some contend, a mere harmonious working together 
of the body. For the body is often sick, whilst the 
mind is enjoying pleasure : often the reverse is the case. 
Then, too, whilst the body is lying senseless in sleep, 
our mind is often awake, and is feeling joy and sorrow. 
Farther, life still stays in the body when many limbs 
have been lopped off; "and yet the same life, when 
a few bodies of heat have been dispersed abroad, and 
some air has been forced out through the mouth, 
abandons at once the veins, and quits the bones. 
And thus we see that all bodies do not alike uphold 
existence, but rather that those seeds which constitute 
wind and heat cause life to stay in the limbs." 

This vital ether, which has been analysed into four 
constituent elements, from another point of view di- 
vides itself into two viz., the Mind and Soul, which, 
however, do but " make up a single nature. 3 ' The 
mind is the directing principle, and has its seat in 
the heart. "All the rest of the soul disseminated 
throughout^the body obeys and moves at the beck 
and movement of the mind. 

" The mind has more to do with holding the fast 
nesses of life, and has more sovereign sway over it, 
than the power of the soul. For without the under- 
standing and the mind, no part of the soul can main- 
tain itself in the frame for the smallest fraction of 



54 - LUCRETIUS. * 

time. The mind alone, itself, knows for itself, and 
rejoices for itself, at times when the impression /toes 
not move either the soul or the body together with it. 
But . when the mind is excited by some vehement 
apprehension, we see the whole soul feel in unison 
through the limbs ; the cheeks turn pale, the skin 
sweats, and often the whole body faints away." 

It will thus be seen that Lucretius, though he does 
not seem to have elaborated his entire conception of 
the matter into perfect clearness, conceives of the vital 
principle as a kind of ether, pervading the body, with 
a nucleus of a special and peculiar sensitiveness, which 
had its special seat in the breast. This nucleus was 
extremely sensitive to any appulse from without; it 
was capable also of spontaneous movement. Its move- 
ments, when not violent, it coulcl confine to itself ; but 
if they passed a certain limit, they at once communi- 
cated themselves to the rest of the ether, and this in 
its turn affected the parts of the body through which 
it was diffused. We shall, however, understand the 
matter better when we have examined more in detail 
the way in which Lucretius conceives the outer world 
to reach this ether, and produce in it the sensation of 
consciousness. 



HIS THEORY OF VISION. 5 

\ 

\ SECTION VI. 

LUCBETIUS'S THEOKY OF VISION. 

We have seen clearly that Lucretius reduces all the 
senses to modes of touch. Taste, smell, and sound 
are touches more or less violent of particles of matter, 
driven in various "ways against our bodies, and pene- 
trating in various places into them. We have seen 
also in what a perpetual war and turmoil he conceives 
all material things to. he ; so that it is impossible for 
us to move anywhere, or in any direction, without 
walking, as it were, through a cloud of dust, that beats 
perpetually on us from every side. Sounds, smells, 
and tastes are therefore ever beating on us, and find- 
ing their way into us, each at its appointed door. 

This is easy enough to comprehend. That vision, 
is produced in an exactly similar way, may not at 
first be comprehended quite so easily. Such, how- 
ever, is the theory of Lucretius. Just as smells 
stream off some bodies, and tastes off others, or as from 
some smells and tastes stream off together, so from 
all bodies alike there is yet another kind of emana- 
tion that i^ perpetually proceeding. Nothing risible 
exists that is not perpetually shedding off from its 
surface a picture or image of itself. Such pictures 
"are like films, and may each be named a rind." 
These films are perpetually being shot forward, in 
every direction, following one after another with ex- 
traordinary rapidity, each film being a complete pic- 



56 LUCRETIUS. * 

ture in itself, and inflicting a separate blow on any 
object in its way. They are of extreme thinness ^and 
fineness of texture, and as soon as ever they touch any 
rough substance, such as stone or wood, they are in- 
stantly dashed to pieces. This is the reason why such 
substances are opaque. There are other substances, 
such as glass, whose vacant spaces are of such a shape 
that the films can pass unbroken through them ; and 
this is the reason why such substances are transparent. 
There are, again, other substances at once very 
smooth and very hard, such as mirrors, through which 
the films cannot pass, and which yet cannot break 
them up and destroy them. Ey a sort of rebound, 
therefore, they are sent back again. This is the ex- 

l planation of the phenomenon of reflection. 

' As to the laws by which these films move, there seems 

to have been some confusion in the mind of Lucretius. 
The obvious fact that we cannot see round corners, 
must have led him to conceive of their, general move- 
ment being only in a straight line ; and he had studied 
the matter with sufficient accuracy to show him that 
" nature," as he expresses it, " constrains all things, 
when they are carried back and recoil from things, to 
be given back at angles equal to that- at which they 
impinged." Eut, .in spite of this, he imagines there 
are certain films that wander about in tortuous courses, 
apparently under the control of no law, straying far 
away from the objects from, which they originally pro- 
ceeded; and other films, he imagines, which have no 
corresponding objects at all, and which have not eman- 
ated from the surface of anything. 



HIS THEORY OF VISION. 57 

The movement of all these films is extremely rapid, 
as <Me may prove in a moment by observing how, " as 
soon as the brightness of water is set down in the 
open air, if the heaven is starry, in a moment the clear 
radiant constellations of ether imaged in the water 
correspond to those in heaven. 37 It is the breaking of 
these films against the eye that produce vision. They 
are driven against it one after another, packed together 
as though they were the pages of a picture-book. Did 
they merely come one at a time, they are so fine that 
no one could see them ; but when " thrown off con- 
stantly and repeatedly, they yield a visible image." 

As to the structure of the eye, and the way those 
films are received by it, Lucretius says nothing. He 
treats the eye as he treats the palate. The two organs 
each sufficiently explain and illustrate the other. As 
it is the nature of the one to taste, it is the nature of 
the other to see. 

Between, however, what the eyes really show us, and 
what we may fancy they show us, he distinguishes with 
an accuracy and acuteness that in later times the world 
was long in recovering. The eyes, he says, do not 
see distance. All they show us are certain shapes and 
colours, as though they were all painted on a flat sheet 
of paper, and thus without solidity. The perception of 
distance is an act not of sight but of unconscious infer- 
ence. It is produced in this way. Every film, as it 
is shot . along through the air, drives a certain amount 
of air before it ; and the greater the distance that a film 
has travelled before reaching the eyes, the greater are 
the power and the volume of this air. This air, says 



58 



LUCRETIUS. 



Lucretius, ""brushes the eyes as it enters them, and r so 
passes through.. The consequence is, that "we see ftow 
far distant each thing is. And the greater the quantity 
of air that is driven on before it, and the larger the 
current that "brushes our eyes, the more distant each 
different thing is seen to be." Nor must we wonder 
that we only see a single object when the sight of it is 
produced by a continuous number of films striking our 
eyes. " For thus when wind too beats us with suc- 
cessive strokes, and when piercing cold streams, we are 
not wont to feel each single particle of the wind or 
cold, but rather the whole result ; and then we perceive 
blows take effect upon our body, just as if something 
or other were beating it, and giving us a sensation of 
its body outside." 

"We shall realise this whole theory more vividly if we 
examine the way in which Lucretius uses it to explain 
the phenomena of reflection, and in especial the reason 
why we seem to see objects inside mirrors or reflecting 
surfaces. " The case," he says, " is really merely the 
same as when we see things in their reality beyond a 
door." That vision, as will be plain enough, is caused 
by two separate airs, the air inside the doorway and 
the air outside it. Supposing there is a doorway 
twenty feet from us, and through the Doorway we 
see a mail standing twenty feet beyond it. The films, 
or images of the doorway, and the leaves of the 
door, carry to our eyes in reaching us the intervening 
air that is within the . room ; and from the volume 
of that, we infer instinctively that the doorway is at 
its actual distance from us. The films, or images of 



t SIS THEORY OF VISION. 59 

the man "beyond the doorway, carry to our eyes also 
a siapilar amount of the air that is within the room ; 
but, in addition to this, they carry also an equal amount 
of the air from out of doors, and from this we infer 
instinctively that the man is at as great a distance 
from the door as the door is from ourselves. In the 
same way, two airs of different volume make us see 
reflected objects as though they were inside the sur- 
face that reflects them. It happens thus : Suppose a 
mirror to be twenty feet from us, the image of the 
mirror carries an air to our eyes, from the volume of 
which we at once infer the distance. The instant 
after we have felt this air, our pupil receives the image. 
We see the mirror, and we know how far off it is. 
Meanwhile an image of ourselves has been carried to the 
surface of the mirror, and in another instant rebounds 
back again to ourselves, and is received by the eyes. 
This image carries with it, as the image of the mirror 
did, another air, and an air of exactly the same volume, 
which follows the former air so closely, that the sensa- 
tions produced by the two are practically united ; and 
our first inference that the mirror was twenty feet 
from us, is supplemented now by the inference that 
our own form reflected in it is forty feet from us, in 
other words, that it is as far inside the mirror as we are 
outside it. 

" And now," says Lucretius, " to explain the other phe- 
nomena of reflection. The right side of our bodies is seen 
in mirrors to be on the left, because when the image comes 
and strikes on the plane of the mirror, it is not turned 
back unaltered, but is beaten out in aright line backwards, 



60 



LUCRETIUS. 



just as if you were to take a plaster mask before it is dry 
and dash it over a pillar or beam, and it forthwith wer-e to 
preserve the lines of its features undisturbed in front, and 
were to strike out an exact copy of itself straight back- 
wards. The result will be, that the eye which was right 
will now be left, and conversely the left become the right. 
An image may also be so transmitted from one mirror to 
another that five or six images are often produced. And 
thus all the things that bask in the dimmest corners of a 
house may yet all be brought out through winding passages 
by the aid of a number of mirrors, so unfailingly does the 
image reflect itself from mirror to mirror ; and when the 
left side is reflected it becomes the right side in the new 
image ; then it is changed back again, and turns round to 
what it was. Moreover, all mirrors which form little sides 
possessing a curvature resembling our sides, send back to 
us images with their right, corresponding to our right, for 
one or other of two reasons ; either because the image is 
transmitted from one side to another, and then, after it 
has been twice struck out, flies' to us ; or, it may be, because 
the image, when it has come to the mirror, wheels round, 
because the curved slope of the mirror teaches it to turn 
itself as we are turned. Again, you would think images 
step out and put down their feet at the same time with us, 
and mimic our actions. ' This happens because, from before 
whatever part of a mirror you move away, from that part 
forthwith no images can be reflected, since nature con- 
strains all things, when they are carried back and recoil 
from things, to be given back as angles equal to those at 
which they impinged." 

The sun, Lucretius says, blinds the eyes, because 
the images of it " are borne through the clear air with 
great downward force from on high, and strike the 
eyes, and disorder their fastenings." 

We can see light things out of the dark,. because. 



HIS THEORY OF VISION. 61 

" -vyhen the black air first lias taken possession of the 
eyei, the light air enters in afterwards, and cleanses 
the black shadows of the other air ; for this is a great 
deal more nimble and subtle and efficacious." We 
cannot, however, see dark things out of the light, 
"because the grosser air of darkness follows behind 
and quite fills all the openings, and blocks up the pas- 
sages of the eyes, not letting the images of any things 
at all be thrown into the eyes to move them." 

"When cc all looks yellow to the jaundiced eye," this 
is because " greenish - yellow seeds stream from the 
man's body, and meet the images of things ; and many, 
too, are mixed up in the eyes." 

When distant objects look blurred and hazy to us 
when square towers, for instance, seem to be round, 
and to lose all their angles " this is because, while the 
images are borne in through much air, the air by 
repeated collisions blunts the stroke." 

In spite, however, of these, and many other optical 
delusions, we must not admit that the eyes can in any 
way deceive us. The deception is duo to another 
cause. 

A few familiar instances will explain to us the real 
nature of the case. When we are sailing, the coasts 
seem to n^ove away from us, not we from them. 
The stars, which are really in constant movemejit, 
seem, if we watch them on a clear night, to be com- 
pletely at rest ; and again, if we watch them on a 
cloudy night, through the driving rack, they seem to 
be moving far faster than they do. But in these cases 
it is not the eyes that cheat us ; it is the mind that 



62 LUCRETIUS. 

makes -wrong inferences from the data given by sigjit. 
"It is the province of the eyes," says Lucretius, f' to 
observe in what spot soever light and shade are ; but 
whether the lights are still the same or not, and 
whether it is the same shadow which was in this spot 
that is now passing to that, this the reason of the 
mind, and only it, has to determine ; nor can the eyes 
know the. nature of things." Light and shade it is 
this, and this alone, we can be really said to see. Dis- 
tance and solidity : in a word, the real figure and the 
I I , real position of anything this we do not see, but we 

infer. And if we would seek for the source of optical 
delusions, we must seek it only in " the mental sup- 
positions which we add of ourselves, taking those 
things as seen which the senses do not see. For 
nothing is harder than to separate manifest facts from 
doubtful, which the mind straightway adds on of 
itself." 



SECTION* VII. 

THE MIND AND SENSE. 



Closely connected with his theory of vision is 
Lucretius's explanation of the chief phenomena of 
the mind, and especially the "will and the imagination. 
Images of things, as we have seen, he conceives to be 
wandering about everywhere ; and these, as has been 
observed before, are of various kinds. Those we have 



THE MISD AXD SENSE. 63 

been just considering are apparently conceived of as 
discharged exclusively in straight lines, and gradually 
dissolving after they have travelled a certain distance. 
But "besides these, there are others of "a far thinner 
texture than those that take possession of the eyes." 
Of such thin images the air is full. They are floating 
hither and thither in incalculable courses ; and when 
they meet, they continually get entangled with each 
other, " like cobwebs, or pieces of gold-leaf." Hence 
they are each made up of countless actual things ; but 
taking each as a whole, it is usually a thing with no 
existing counterpart. Some of these composite images 
are forms of possible though not of actual things ; 
others of things that are in their very nature impos- 
sible, such as centaurs, or satyrs, or chimmras, which 
are formed from the chance combinations of images of 
men, and horses, and goats, and other animals. " That 
this must be so," says Lucretius, " it is easy enough 
to see. !For so far as one result is like another, that 
which we see with the mind and with the eyes must 
be produced in a like way. And since I have shown 
that we perceive a line, for instance, by means of films 
or images thrown off its surface, you may see that the 
mind is moved by a precisely similar cause, with only 
this one difference, that it perceives much thinner 
images." Efere we have the explanation of dreams. 
In sleep the mind only wakes ; and, undisturbed by 
those thicker images to which the eyes are sensitive, 
it is beset by wandering multitudes of the thinner 
kind that has been just described images, for the 
most part, probably, fantastic and composite, but 



64 LUCRETIUS. 

sometimes intact, and corresponding with actual 
things, as when our dead seem to come back tp us 
and visit us. 

These images, too, seem to move and act like living 
creatures. Why? The explanation Lucretius gives 
of this is very curious. This appearance of movement 
is produced in much the same way as is that of the 
figures in a zoetrope. We have already seen that 
Lucretius seems never to conceive of these images as 
wandering about, or being discharged singly, but as 
closely following each other, or as being packed closely 
together like the leaves of a picture-book. And the 
apparent movements of the dream -images are pro- 
duced by a succession of such images of a single object, 
each in a slightly different position. 

Lucretius's theory of dreams will help us at once to 
understand his theory of the imagination. Imagin- 
ation, according to him, is little else than a selected 
dreaming. When we are asleep the dream-images have 
us at their mercy, and assail and excite our minds 
without explicable law. But when we are awake, and 
our body is sensitive to all external influences, the 
mind is more fenced about : and just as the bodily 
eyes practically see only those things that they pay 
attention to (for, be they never so plain, if we do not 
attend to them, " it is just the same asTif they were 
far away and distant"), so the mind, unless it pays 
attention to these thin images, can in our waking mo- 
ments perceive none of them. When, however, the 
mind wishes to imagine a certain thing, what happens 
is this : it strains its powers to see images of a certain 



MltfD AND SEXSB. 65 

kind ; and such images are, according to the Lueretian 
theory, always about us in innumerable multitudes. 
If we want to imagine a lion, for instance, there are 
always lion-images in our neighbourhood. Our mind 
need but attend to them, and it will at once see 
them. This is the reason why, " when the will has 
occurred to any one to think of a thing, the mind does 
on the instant think of that Yery thing." 

"And now/' says Lucretius, " I will explain how it comes 
to pass that we are able to step out when we please, and 
how it is given us to move about our limbs, and what 
cause is wont to send forward the great load of our body. 
I say that images of walking first present themselves to 
our mind, as we said before. Then the will arises ; for no 
one wills to do anything until his mind has first deter- 
mined what it wills. Erom the very fact that it first de- 
termines such a thing, there is an image of that thing. 
"When, therefore, the mind bestirs itself in sucli a way as 
to will to walk and step out, it strikes at the same moment 
the force of the soul, which is spread over the whole body, 
throughout the limbs and frame ; and this is easily done, 
since the whole is held in close union with the mind. 
Next, tlie soul in its turn strikes the body, and thus the 
whole mass by degrees is set in motion. Besides tins the 
body becomes rarefied, and the air enters in, in great quan- 
tities, through the opened pores, and is thus distributed 
into the mosjyninute parts of the body. In this way, then, 
by these two causes acting in two different ways, the body 
after the fashion of ships is carried on by sails and wind. 
And herein it need not excite any surprise that such very 
minute bodies can steer bodies that are so heavy, and turn 
them about ; for wind, though of a fine and subtle body, 
can push, on a large ship, and one hand can direct it to 
any point you like." 

A.C.S.S. Yol. viL E 



66 



LUCRETIUS. 



Ib will be seen from the above passage that J;he 
entire theory of Lucretius on these points betrars a 
certain confusion of thought. Will, he says, arises 
in the mind on a certain image being presented to the 
imagination. But he holds it to be also equally true 
that each act of imagination must be preceded by -will. 
What is the cause, then, of that initial act 1 

The answer to . this question is one of the most 
curious things in his whole system. Though in treat- 
ing of the will and the imagination he seems to con- 
ceive of the latter as solely the producer of the former, 
yet in another place he fully recognises the fact that 
the former is also the producer of the latter ; and he 
ascribes to it, in this capacity, all the attributes of 
absolute and undetermined freedom. The human will 
is self-determining; it is the producer of succeeding 
circumstances ; but, to a great extent, at least, it is not 
the product of preceding circumstances. It is a " man's 
own will," he says, " that makes for each a beginning." 
And again, "The power has been wrested from the Fates, 
by which we go forward whither the will leads each." 
Thus eager horses on the race-course cannot leap for- 
ward so quickly as the mind desires. Here the first 
cause is the mind. It is from the mind that the mo- 
tion is transmitted through the body. P-di cases as 
these are plainly quite distinct from those in which we 
are propelled onwards by a blow from without. l e For 
do you not perceive," he says, " that though in this case 
there is an outward force that pushes men on, there is 
yet something in our breast sufficient to struggle against 
and resist it ? And when this something chooses, the 



1 MIND AND SENSE. 67 

store of matter is impelled sometimes to change its 
couE&e through the frame, and after it has been forced 
forward is reined in." Hence, Lucretius argues, it is 
evident that all "motion cannot be linked together, 
nor a new motion always spring from another in fixed 
order." The mind is atomic, and therefore this free- 
dom of the mind is the result of a certain freedom from 
conditions in atomic movement. " There must, besides 
blows and weights, be another cause of motion, from 
which this power of free action has been begotten 
in us." This cause is none other than that tendency 
of the atoms, which in the very beginning he was 
obliged to postulate, to deflect continually a little, 
here and there, from their downward course ; without 
which, as we have seen, they would never have jostled 
against each other, but would have gone on. falling 
to all eternity in parallel lines, and at their original 
distances. 

It. certainly seems at first sight that, according to 
this theory, not the mind only would be delivered 
from natural law, but that there would be no unifor- 
rnity in nature anywhere. And Lucretius nowhere 
offers any direct explanation of this difficulty. It 
seems not improbable, however, that could we get to 
the bottom o his conception, we should find that, the 
mind being according to him the subtlest and most 
mobile of all material things, the atoms composing it 
were able to retain the whole of their original free- 
dom; whilst in the case of all other substances, it 
had been overcome by their weight and their coarser 
texture. 



G8 



LUCRETIUS. 



SECTION VIII. / 

THE MORTALITY OF MIND AND SOUL. 

We have seen how closely mind and soul are in the 
Lucretian theory connected with the "body. From this 
theory Lucretius deduces further, that mind and soul 
cannot live as soon as that connection is severed. 
The vital principle is not the body, but it is held by 
the body, and it grows and changes with the body's 
capacities for holding it. Under some of its aspects, 
though he never says as much, Lucretius seems to have 
conceived of this principle as a kind of subtle and 
powerful secretion of the body, a sort of potent gas 
or ether, generated by the flesh and blood, and react- 
ing on it. 

The following are the various arguments by which 
he seeks to demonstrate that, if the mind and soul are 
essential to the life of the body, the body is also essen- 
tial to the life of mind and soul, and that all conse- 
quently perish and are dissolved together. In the first 
place,, mind and soul being, as has been shown, made 
up of the smallest atoms, they will be spilt abroad as 
water is when the body the vessel that jjpntains them 
is broken. Also, we see mind makes its first appear- 
ance when the body does ; it grows with the body, it 
declines with the body, and therefore, according to all 
analogy, it will perish with it. The mind is subject 
to pain, as the body is ; therefore, according to all anal- 
ogy, it will be subject to death also. Diseases, of the 



MORTALITY OF MIND AND SOUL. 69 

body, drink, and other excesses, disorder the mind, 
and- the mind is often healed by medicine as the body 
is. Here is another symptom of the mind's mortality. 

Further, we see men die piecemeal, the vital soul 
leaving the limbs one by one. "Were the soul im- 
mortal, it would mass itself in the unaffected parts. 
This, however, it evidently does not do ; for, if it did, 
such parts would manifest a greater amount of sense. 
The mind has its seat in a particular part of a man's 
body, just as hearing has its seat in the ear. But if 
the ear be cut off, it mortifies ; and so, in like manner, 
when the body goes will the mind decay. 

At death, if the mind was immortal, ce it would not 
so much complain of dissolution as of getting rid of its 
vesture, like a snake, or of being turned out of doors." 

Again, if the soul be immortal, " and can feel when 
separated from the body, we must suppose it to be 
provided with five senses. But neither eyes, nor nose, 
nor hand, nor tongue, nor ears, can exist for the soul by 
themselves, or perceive anything apart from the body." 

Here is another fact to notice. Men in various 
ways in fighting, for instance lose their limbs, and 
go on with their occupation, if violently excited, with- 
out perceiving their loss. Meanwhile the limbs lie 
on the ground quivering. Because they quiver, it is 
evident that they retain something in them of vital 
principle. But it is impossible to think that in each 
piece there is remaining an entire soul, for in that case 
a man would have many souls. The soul or vital 
principle has therefore been cut up and divided ; but 
that which can be cut up cannot be immortal. 



70 



LUCRETIUS. 



I 



Again, if the soul is immortal, and comes into gnr 
"body at "birth, as some hold it does, why cannot we 
remember our former existence 1 If "between our cwo 
existences there has heen such a break of conscious- 
ness, this is equal to death, and in no sense can the 
two existences be called the same. So we must admit 
that the soul which was before has perished. 

Again, if the mind were waiting ready-made to join 
our bodies at the instant of birth, it would not be dis- 
persed, as it is, over all the body, " so that even our 
very teeth seem to have life in them, but it would be 
in a den apart by itself." Or if, on the other hand, 
it oozes in from without, and so blends itself with all 
the limbs in that way, much more will it be mortal ; 
for, says Lucretius, " whatever oozes in through another 
thing is dissolved, and therefore dies." 

Again, we observe that living creatures, such as 
worms, spring out of dead bodies. It is plain from 
this that fragments of the soul are left in the body 
after death, therefore the soul is not immortal. For it 
is impossible to believe that these worms have each of 
them a separate and newly-made soul, that builds for 
itself a place to dwell in. 

We must consider this also. The character of the 
various species of animals could not remain constant as 
it does, if ready-made souls could at random find their 
way into bodies. Some meet this by saying that souls 
are altered by the bodies they live in. But this, says 
Lucretius, is false, for this reason, " that whatever is 
changed is dissolved, and therefore dies." But if men 
say that human souls always cling to human bodies, 



? IMPERFECTION OF THE UNIVERSE. 71 

an<^ so on, " hoV is it that a soul can change from wise 
to foolish, and that a child has no discretion 1 " Men. 
will 'say that a soul grows weakly in a weakly "body. 
But even if this be so, it must, from this very fact, 
be all the more admitted that the soul is mortal, since 
" changed so completely through the frame, it loses its 
former life and sense." 

Again, what can be more ridiculous than the picture 
which the mind will have to present to itself if it con- 
ceives souls to have separate existences, before their 
respective bodies are prepared to receive them, than a 
throng of souls crowding about each body, as soon as 
it is completed, and struggling to get admission into it 1 

Finally', the analogy of all nature tells us that 
nothing can live but in its own especial element, or 
surrounded by its own special conditions. Trees can- 
not live in the sky, nor fish in fields, nor can we find 
blood in stones. " In like manner the nature of mind 
cannot come into being alone without body, nor exist 
far away from the sinews and blood." 



^ SECTION IX. 

THE IMPERFECTION AND MORTALITY 'OF THE 
UNIVERSE. 

Such, then, is " the Lucretian conception of the 
universe of mind and matter, or rather of matter 



72 



LUCRETIUS. 



organic and inorganic, animate and inanimate the 
joint -work of chance and of necessity, without pur- 
pose, without a mind to guide it. ^ 

Even without any scientific knowledge of the origin 
of things, says Lucretius, the manifold and manifest 
defects of this universe would at once make it clear to 
us that it was the work of no divine creator. Much 
of the earth, for instance, is wastefully occupied "by 
.mountains and forests and seas. Extremes of climate 
make many regions unfit for human habitation. "What- 
ever of the land is left for tillage, only yields its fruit 
grudgingly, when compelled "by incessant toil and 
labour. And then, even when the fruits of the earth 
have sprung up, heat and storm, and frost often cast 
them down untimely. Much of the earth is also 
infested by wild beasts, whose existence can fulfil no 
possible end. Children, too the young of the noblest 
and chief of living creatures are born miserable, 
wailing, and helpless ; whilst the young of the lower 
animals grow up without any of the care that is needed 
by us, and nature yields to them, all their food un- 
grudgingly. 

"What the beginning of this universe was we have 
already seen. As it is clear that it had a beginning, 
so, says Lucretius, it is equally clear that it will also 
have an end. Everything, in his eye, points to this 
conclusion. Eire, water, earth, and air, " out of which 
this sum of things is seen to be formed, do all consist 
of a body that had a birth, and is mortal. The whole 
world, therefore, must be reckoned of a like body. 
% I see that the chiefest members and parts of the world 



\ J IMPERFECTION OF THE UNIVERSE. 73 

} 

are, begotten and destroyed anew; I may accordingly 
* be sure that for heaven and earth as well there has 

;*;/ been; a time of beginning, and there will be a time 

r of destruction." Let us consider the four elements 

separately. Earth is visibly mortal, because it is 
broken by the tread of men into dust, which is carried 
off by the winds ; and water also eats away and dis- 
solves it. "Water is visibly mortal, because, though 
seas and rivers are always full, they are yet always 
losing their waters by evaporation, and also by absorp- 
tion into the earth. Air is visibly mortal, because 
"it is changed over its whole body every hour, in 
countless ways. For whatever ebbs from things, is 
always borne into the great sea of air ; and unless it 
in return were ever in many places ceasing to be air, 
and were also in return giving back bodies to things, 
all things would now have been dissolved and changed 
into air." The same, too, is the case with light and 
fire, which is for ever being supplied, and for ever 
wasted. All luminous things, the sun and the stars 
in heaven and the lamps and fires of earth, are always 
losing their substance by each fresh emission of light, 
and are consequently being recruited from some other 
element. Nor is any substance so solid that it does 
not waste away. Stone towers gradually waste and 
/ crumble. Eocks ^v^mble off the tops of mountains. 
/ Even iron and brass $re corroded, and gradually 
/ cease to be. They resolve themselves into some other 
/ form. All the elements, in fact, are at strife with 
one another, each preying upon and eating into the 
other. The sun, for instance, is always trying to drink 



74 ' LUCRETIUS. f, 

up the waters ; but- hitherto, says Lucretius, he Jhas 
failed, so abundant are the fresh supplies of water; 
"though once, there is a tradition, that fire goi^ the 
upper hand ; and once, as the story goes, water reigned 
dominant in the fields." 

From all this, we may conjecture the way in which 
the final disruption will take place. Nor, according 
to the theory of Lucretius, can there be wanting the 
chance of the catastrophe happening in yet another 
way. This universe which we call ours, is, as we have 
seen, a kind of azure bubble, with the earth in the 
middle of it. It is one only of an infinite number of 
similar worlds, which are all for ever falling downwards 
through the infinite void. It must be possible, there- 
fore, according to the Lucretian theory, that between 
two or more universes there may at any moment be 
a collision. 

It is, however, to causes from within that Lucretius 
seems chiefly to look for the final dissolution of things. 
Itfor does he seem to think that this dissolution is 
an event that promises to be very distant. He con- 
ceives the world to have taken not many centuries 
in bringing itself to its present condition; and he 
bases this opinion, on the fact that he knows of no 
history that goes farther back than the Theban war 
and the destruction of Troy. "JJV^refore," he says, 
" the truth, I think, is, that the whole has but a recent 
date, and the nature of the world is new, and has but 
lately had its beginning." But if, he concludes, there 
have been, as some men hold, other races and other 
civilisations, of whom all record has perished in some 



I HISTORY OF HUMAN PROGRESS. 75 

great flood or earthquake, all the more must we admit 
the entire future destruction of the earth and heaven. 
" Ani in no other way are we ourselves proved to be 
mortals, except because we all alike in turn fall sick of 
the same disease with those whom nature has with- 
drawn from life." 



SECTION X. 

THE HISTOKY OF HUMAN PROGRESS. 

Having now seen what was the Lucretian conception 
of man's dwelling-place, and also of his origin and 
nature, it remains to consider the account given of his 
progress from his earliest to his latest stage ; the history 
of society, of art, of manufactures ; and, lastly, of reli- 
gion. And here, as has been observed already, we 
shall find Lucretius, in a rough and general way, in 
singular accordance with the most modern speculation, 
and entirely opposed to a number of fanciful theories, 
such as that of the state of nature, and so forth, which 
have been current in later times. 

Men at first, s^s Lucretius, were savage, hardy 
creatures, scarcely to be ^stinguished from the lower 
animals, whom indeed they had not yet learnt to sub- 
jugate or use for food. They had neither fire, nor 
clothing, nor shelter, neither laws nor religion. They 
felt no wonder and no awe at nature. They acquiesced 



76 



LUCRETIUS. 



quietly in her courses. Their struggle for food, and to 
protect themselves against the wild animals, occupied 
all their time and thoughts. Having no leisu/a for 
reflection, they neither imagined gods nor feared them. 
In time they took a step forward. They learnt the 
use of fire, probably from the ignition of wood in 
forests, through the rubbing together of the branches. 
Having thus discovered fire, they learnt to apply it to 
cooking, from observing how the heat of the sun mel- 
lowed fruits, and improved the taste of them. Then by 
chance they discovered the use of metals, and how to 
use and work them, in the following way. When large 
forests caught fire, either from lightning or from some 
other cause, streams of various metals would often gush 
out of the veins of the heated earth. "And when 
men saw them afterwards cool into lumps, and glitter on 
the earth with a brilliant gleam, they would lift them 
up, attracted by the light and polished lustre, and 
would see them to be moulded in a shape the same as 
the outline of the cavities in which each lay. Then it 
would strike them that these might be moulded by 
heat, and cast in any shape soever." Gradually also 
they learnt to subdue and slay the wild animals, and 
use their skins for clothing ; and they also made huts 
for themselves. 

They now entered on a new sj#g ol existence, of 
which the most important^rfc'ature was monogamy. 
Here, says Lucretius, we have the source of all subse- 
quent improvement indeed, of the real humanisation 
of humanity. For now it was that the family affections 
sprang up round separate homes and firesides. 



I HISTORY OF HUMAN PROGRESS. 77 

" Jflbe fire made their chilled bodies less able to bear the 
frost beneath the canopy of heaven, and Venus impaired 
their strength, and children with their caresses soon broke, 
clown* he haughty temper of parents. Then, too, neighbours 
began to join in a league of friendship, mutually desiring 
neither to do nor to suffer harm ; and asked for indulgence 
to children and womankind, when, with cries and gestures, 
they declared in stammering speech that meet it is for all 
to have mercy on the weak. And though harmony could 
not be established without exception, yet a very large por- 
tion observed their agreements with good faith, or else the 
race of man would then have been wholly cut off, nor would 
the breed have continued their generations to this clay." 

Most of this gradual progress was due, especially so 
far as material improvement went, to the special genius 
of individuals ; and accordingly, for some time know- 
ledge was power, and men of intellect ruled the rest. 
Por it was only gradually and with, difficulty that mind 
obtained any mastery over matter. At first men used 
all the metals promiscuously. They made axes and 
tools out of gold and silver, and only by long experi- 
ence found out that these were not so serviceable as 
the harder metals. At last they made this discovery; 
and then the harder metals such as copper, and, lastly, 
iron were for a time looked upon as more precious 
than gold. 

In the same ^s^dual "way did men learn all the 
other arts and ordinafot^s of life. The art of weav- 
ing followed on the discovery of iron, "because the 
loom is fitted with iron, and in no other way can 
such finely polished things as the details of the loom's 
machinery be made. And nature impelled men to 



78 



LUCRETIUS. 



work up the wool before womankind, for the mala sex 
in general far excels the other in skill, and is far more 
ingenious ; until the rugged countrymen so upb|aided 
them with it, that they were glad to give it over into 
the hands of women, and take their share in support- 
ing hard toil." 

Thus gradually, through repeated struggles and re- 
peated failures, did the civilisation of man grow the 
work of the industry and labour of the many directed 
by the sagacity of the few. 

Whilst all this was going on, Lucretius conceives an 
important change to have taken place at one distinct 
stage. "Kings began to build towns and lay out a 
citadel as a place of refuge for themselves, and divided 
cattle and lands, and gave to each man in proportion 
to his personal beauty and strength of intellect." After- 
wards riches began to get more unequal The few 
contrived to centre in themselves most of the goods of 
the many ; gold too though how, Lucretius does not 
say grew to be looked on both as a sign and a con- 
stituent of riches, sought after by all, and amassed by 
some. Thus a new factor, a new power, was intro- 
duced into life the source of half life's present misery. 
Eiches-r-a false aim had now arisen to lure men on ; 
and the possession of riches now gave nicjje power than 
the possession of intellect. Thu^i^liings were turned 
upside down the criterion o^personal merit, and the 
general idea of what is happy or desirable in life. 

Two things now remain for us to consider the rise 
of language, and" the rise of religion, both of which 
were wanting to the earliest races of men. 



I HISTORY OF HUMAN PROGRESS. 79 

As to language, says Lucretius, the popular notion 
that it was invented by some particular man, who at a 
certain time invented a name for everything, is nothing 
but sheer folly. For "why," he asks, "should this 
particular man be able to denote all things by words, 
and to utter the various sounds of the tongue, and yet 
at the same time others 'be supposed not to have been 
able to do so ? Again, if others, as well as he, had not 
made use of words amongst themselves, whence was 
implanted in this man the previous conception of its 
use 1 or how could one man constrain and force many 
to learn the names of things, or, when learnt, to use 
them 1 ?" Far from having been taught in this way, 
language shaped itself slowly, and in the most ordinary 
course of nature. " Nature impelled men to alter the 
various sounds of the tongue, and use struck out the 
names of things, much in the same way as the inability 
to speak is seen to drive some children to the use of 
gestures, when it forces them to point with the ringer 
at the things that are before them." Nor is there any- 
thing strange in this, " since dumb brutes," says Lucre- 
tius, "and wild beasts, are accustomed to give forth 
distinct and varied sounds, when they have fears and 
pains, and when joys are rife." Thus dogs give quite 
distinct barks, when enraged, or when feeding their 
whelps, or wheu^i^mg an alarm at the approach of 
thieves. The same iS^jie case, too, with all other 
animals. " Therefore, if Different sensations compel 
creatures, dumb though they be, to utter different 
sounds, how much more natural is it that men in those 
times should have been able to denote dissimilar things 



80 LUCRETIUS. j. 

by many different words'? Whilst as for music and 
poetry, and every kind of musical modulation, this 
they learnt from the birds ; " whilst the whistlings of 
the zephyrs through the hollow reeds first taught pea- 
sants to blow into hollow stalks." 

And now, in conclusion, let us see what the Lucre- 
tian account is of the rise of religion. Man at first, 
as has been observed already, he says explicitly, had 
no trace of it. Modern theorists seek its origin in the 
wonder of early man at the phenomena of nature, and 
first amongst these, at the movements and effects of 
the sun. This, strangely enough, Lucretius seems to 
anticipate, and contradicts explicitly. "Never," he 
says, " would the early race of man with loud wailing 
call for the daylight and the sun, wandering terror- 
stricken over the fields in the shadows of night, but 
silent and buried in sleep would they wait till the sun 
with rosy touch had carried light into heaven ; for, ac- 
customed as they had been from childhood always to 
see darkness and light begotten in succession, never 
would any wonder come over them, nor any misgiving 
that never-ending night would cover the earth, and the 
light of the sun be withdrawn for evermore." Eeli- 
gion was the result, Lucretius thinks, of a deliberate 
and a later-developed kind of reflection, though he 
hardly distinguishes this with suffi^jkairtjlearness from 
the sort of wonder he herG-^nies man to have ex- 

Jr 

perienced. In time, he &eys, men observing that the 
system of heaven and the seasons came round in 
regular succession, tried and failed to find out by what 
causes this was brought about; and at length were 



f HISTORY OP HUMAN PROGRESS. 81 

compelled to postulate the existence of gods, to whose 
action these phenomena were to "be attributed. 

B?|t besides this, religion had another origin yet. 
" Men would see in waking mind glorious forms, and 
they would see them, in sleep of yet more marvellous 
size of body. To these then ^they would attribute 
sense, because they seemed to move their limbs and 
to utter lofty words suitable to their glorious aspect 
and surpassing powers. And they would give them 
life everlasting, because their face would ever appear 
before them, and their form abide ; and because they 
could not believe that beings possessed of such powers 
would lightly be overcome by any force; and they 
would be pre-eminent in bliss, because none of them 
was ever troubled with the fear of death, and because 
at the same time, in sleep, they would see them per- 
form many miracles, yet feel, on their part, no fatigue 
from the effort." 

The meaning of this singular passage will be ex- 
plained it we remember the theory of wandering films, 
or images, which has been described already, and will 
lead us n.p to Lucretius's theology, with which we may 
fitly close our account of his scientific system. 

The glorious forms just alluded to are nothing but 
wandering films, some of the finer sort, only per- 
ceived by the^rfe^: some of the coarser sort, that 
excite vision. ^ What^HiiBii, was their origin 1 They 
are not things that have 5^ such counterpart. They 
have been thrown off by actual bodies. But by what 
bodies 1 By the bodies of a . certain race of beings 
which, with a certain amount of fitness,, may be called 

A.C.S.S. vol. vii F 




82 LUCRETIUS. | 

gods, as "being superior in happiness and in beautj to 
ourselves, but who have no care or power over us 
or over the universe ; and who are just as rmJbh a 
product of the collision of atoms as it or we. These 
beings dwell in the spaces between the various worlds 
or universes, though how they can breathe there, 
or what they can rest on, or subsist on, or do to 
promote their supposed enjoyment, or what shape the 
world can be that they inhabit, Lucretius does not 
tell us. There, however, he suffers them to exist, 
a gratuitous superstition it must seem to us a sur- 
viving rudiment of a former system, answering no 
purpose in his own, and only introducing into it in- 
congruity and difficulty. And not only does he suffer 
these gods to exist, but some of the films thrown off 
by their bodies to wander hither into this world of 
ours, and to delude those. that see them into supposing 
them to be the actual personal presence of powers that 
guide and have formed the universe. 

We have now ended our survey of the scientific 
system that Lucretius wished to expound, and to en- 
force upon the world. We will now go on to take a 
survey of the poem itself, which he thought the fittest 
form in which to embody it ; and we shall then see 
not only how he handled in verse a thing so refractory 
as his main subject, but what JW&W'Q sort of uses 
he designed the explanatioi^l^t to subserve, and his 
views of that human life^fnd nature which he was so 
anxious that his discoveries should illuminate. 



CHAPTEE TV", 



THE POEM OF LUCKETITJS. 

" Ay, "but I meant not thee ; I meant not her, 
Whom, all the pines of Ida shook to see 
Slide from that quiet heaven of hers, and tempt 
The Trojan, while his neat-herds were abroad ; 
Nor her that o'er her wounded hunter wept 
Her Deity false in human-amorous tears ; 
Nor whom her beardless apple-arbiter 
Decided fairest. Rather, ye Gods, 
Poet-like, as the great Sicilian called 
Calliope to" grace his golden verse- 
Ay, and this Kypris alsodid I take 
That popular name of thine to shadow forth 
The all-generating powers and genial heat 
Of Nature, when she strikes through the thick blood. 
Of cattle, and light is large, and lambs are glad 
Nosing the mother's udder, and the bird 
Makes his heart voice amid the blaze of flowers : 
Which things appear the work of mighty Gods." 

TENNYSON, " Lucretius." 



BOOK I. 




The poem thus 

" Mother and mistress of the Koman race, 
Pleasure of gods and men, fostering 
Venus, whose presence breathes in every place, 
Peopling all soils whence iruits and grasses spring, 



84 



LUCRETIUS. 



And all the water's navigable ways, 

Water and earth and air and everything, 
Since by thy power alone their life is given 
To all beneath the sliding signs of heaven ; ^ 

Goddess, thou comest, and the clouds before thee 
Melt, and the ruffian blasts take flight and fly ; 

The dsedal lands, they know thee and adore thee, 
And clothe themselves with sweet flowers instantly ; 

Whilst pouring down its largest radiance o'er thee, 
In azure calm subsides the rounded sky, 

To overarch thine advent ; and for thee 

A livelier sunlight laughs along the sea. 

For lo, no sooner come the soft and glowing 
Days of the spring, and all the air is stirred 

With amorous breaths of zephyr freshly blowing, 
Than the first prelude of thy power is heard 

On all sides, in aerial music flowing 
Out of the bill of every pairing bird ; 

And every songster feels, on every tree, 

Its small heart pulsing with the power of thee. 

Next the herds feel thee ; and the wild fleet races 
Bound o'er the fields, that smile in the bright weather, 

And swim the streaming floods in fordless places, 
Led by thy chain, and captive in thy tether. 

At last through seas and hills, thine influence passes, 
Through field and flood and all the world together, 

And the birds* leafy homes ; and th^jj^WR fire 

Each to renew his kind with swa 



Wherefore, since thou, Sujly, only thou 
Art she who guides the world upon its way ; 

Nor can aught rise without thee anyhow 
Up into the clear borders of the day, 



f THE POEM: BOOK L 85 

IJeither can aught without thee ever grow 

Lovely and sweet to thee, to thee I pray 
AifJ and "be near thy suppliant as he sings 
Ofpiature and the secret ways of things." 

For I have set myself, he goes on, to expound these 
as best I may to my dear friend, the son of the Memniii, 
in this very poem ; and for my affection to him, I would 
have every charm given to my verses. And do thou, 
my Memmms, so far as thou canst in these present 
troublous times, give an attentive ear to me, for I am 
going to explain to you the whole system of things ; 
and out of what first elements the world, and men, 
and gods have all alike arisen. I have a teacher 
Epicurus who has explained all these things to me ; 
and his teachings when first given to men made a 
new era in their history. 

" When human life, a shame to human eyes, 
Lay sprawling in the mire in foul estate, 

A cowering thing without the strength to rise, 
Held down by fell Keligion's heavy weight 

Eeligion scowling downward from the skies, 
With hideous head, and vigilant eyes of hate 

First did a man of Greece presume to raise 

His brows, and give the monster gaze for gaze. 



Him not the taj^s of all the gods in heaven, 

Nor the heaven^-i.^titnings, nor the menacing roar 

C* thunder daunted. j&- was only driven, 
By these vain vaimtings/ N oH>desire the more 

To burst through Nature's gates, ancl rive the unriven 
Bars. And he gained the day ; and, conqueror, 

His spirit b^oke beyond our world, and past 

Its flaming walls, and fathomed all the vast. 



86 



LUCRETIUS: 



And back returning, crowned with victory, he r 
Divulged of things the hidden mysteries, 

Laying quite bare what can and cannot be, ^ 

How to each force is set strong boundaries, * 

How no power raves unchained, and nought is free. 
So the times change ; and now religion lies 

Trampled by us ; and unto us 'tis given 

Fearless with level gaze to scan the heaven. 

Yet fear I lest thou haply deem that thus 
"We sin, and enter wicked ways of reason. 

Whereas 'gainst all things good and beauteous 
"Tis oft religion does the foulest treason. 

Has not the tale of Aulis come to us, 
And those great chiefs who, in the windless season, 

Bade young Iphianassa's form be laid 

Upon, the altar of the Trivian maid? 



Soon as the fillet round her virgin hair 
Fell in its equal lengths down either cheek, 

Soon as she saw her father standing there, 
Sad, by the altar, without power to speak, 

And at his side the murderous minister, 
Hiding the knife, and many a faithful Greek 

Weepingher knees grew weak, and with no sound 

She sank, in speechless terror., on the ground. 

But nought availed it in that hour am^*t 
To save the maid from such a^JI^Sin as this, 

That her lips were the baby^HjSs that first 

Called the king fathew^&th their cries and kiss. 

For round her came the strong men, and none durst 
Kefuse to do what cruel part was his ; 

So silently they raised her up, and bore her, 

AH quivering,.to-the deadly shrine- before her. 



THE POEM: BOOK I. 87' 

And as they "bore her, ne'er a golden lyre , 

*Rang round her coming with a bridal strain ; 
But in the very season of desire, 

A stainless maiden, amid bloody stain, 
Shi died a victim felled by its own sire 

That so the ships the wished-for wind might gain, 
And air puff oiit their canvas. Learn thou, then, 
To what damned deeds religion urges men." 

Yes (Lucretius continues), and you too, Memmius, 
even you, will some time or other seek to fall away, 
and cower under the terrors of this false religion. 
And, indeed, what safeguard have you 1 ? How will 
you steel yourself against the terrors of the priests, 
who have ever a life to come with which to threaten 
you, and in which torments everlasting may, as they 
say, be yours 3 Did you know that death was death 
indeed, then you might keep a stout heart, and brave 
them. But now what do men know of the soul 3 
They know neither its nature nor its origin neither 
whence it came nor whither it is going. How shall 
they know, then, what may not be in store for it? 
What shall we do then $ Our only hope is in this. 
Let us grasp first the principles of things ; let us learn 
by what laws the stars and the sun move ; how the 
earth was formed, and how all things live and grow 
upon it. AncF^bx>ve all, let us find out by reason 
what the soul and nitfcd consists of, and what are the 
laws of those things wheiSs^tll our fears arise ima- 
gination, and dreams, and madnesSr"'*** 

Hard it is in Latin verses to expound the teachings 
of the Greeks. Our tongue is poor and wanting. ISTo 




88 



LUCMJSTIVS. 



I will essay to do 



one lias used it yet to treat such tliemes as these, 
yet for your sake, and the pleasure of your sweet 
friendship, I will not "be daunted. 
my best. 

This darkness, then, this terrible darkness, in which 
the human race is at present cowering, can be dis- 
pelled, not by any sunlight, nor the lucid darts of day, 
but by the aspect and the law of Nature 

' ' For fear takes hold upon the human breast, 
When, we see many things by Nature done, 
"Whereof the ways and means are known to none/' 

And accordingly we ascribe these phenomena to the 
gods. One thing, therefore, at starting, I will tell 
you first how that nothing can bo produced from 
nothing. And when you are once made certain of 
that, you shall see clearly how all things can be pro- 
duced and done without the hand of gods. 

Lucretius then goes on, in the next two hundred 
verses, to explain that the elements of all things are 
atoms and void, supporting his theory by arguments 
that have been described already. Atoms and void 
are both alike eternal. All composite things may pass 
away, but these remain from everlasting. Nothing 
can be born from nothing ; and notfesSg, when born, 
can go back to nothing : ^ " 



" Things seem J^K^r^ac die not. The spring showers 

D*e on the bosom of the motherly earth, 
But rise again in fruits and leaves and flowers, 
And every death is nothing but a birth." 



| THE POEM: BOOK J. 89 

Atoms, then, and empty space, lie goes on these, 
my friends, are all that really is. You can name 
nothing that is not a property of these, or else an 
accident : 

" That is a property which cannot be 

Disjoined from a thing and separate 
Without the said thing's death. Fluidity 

Is thus a property of water ; weight 
Is of a stone. Whilst riches, poverty, 

Slavery, freedom, concord, war and hate, 
Which change, and not inhere in things of sense, 
We name not properties, "but accidents." 

The Trojan war, for instance, was simply an accident 
of atoms and empty space ; nor, "but for these, would it 
ever have come to pass 

" Eor had things no material substance thus, 
Nor void to move in, never had the fire 

"Out of the fairest child of Tyndarus 

Lit in the Phrygian's "breast the fell desire, 

And put the torch to war ; nor Pergamus 

Had seen the dumb and lifeless steed draw nigh her, 

Out of whose flanks the midnight warriors came, 

Who ended all, and wrapt the towers in flame." 

Bemember then, I again tell you, that here are the 
two things that alone really are, infinite space and 
atoms atoms indivisible, indestructible, that have 
endured, and that will end^s^Jorever. Wherefore, 
they who held fire to be the onesuEstStJpae of things, 
and the sum to have been formed out of fire alone, are, 
of all philosophers, furthest from the truth. Chief of 



90 



LUCRETIUS. 



I 1 



this band is Heraclitus, a declarer of dark sentences, 
and a juggler with words. 

' " More famous he with babbling men and vain, f 
Amongst the Greeks, than those that strive to know 

The truth indeed. For fools are always fain 
To measnre meanings by the gaudy show 

Of twisted words that hide them. And a strain 
That fills their ears with honeyed overflow 

Of phrase and music, is at once decreed 

Surely to hold the very truth indeed." 

Lucretius then goes on to give the reasons why the 
theory of Heraclitus is untenable, and how it contra- 
dicts the very premises that he himself starts with. 
Kor any wiser are those who hold that things have 
four first beginnings, though some of those who have 
taught this, have been wise wiso above measure in 
other ways. 

" Chief of these 

Is he of Agrigent, Empedocles. 

Him in its three-shored bounds that isle of yore 
Beared, which the wild Ionian water laves, 

Bound curving bays and headlands, evermore 
Splashing the brine tip out of its green waves. 

Here does the racing sea withhold the shore 
Of Italy ; and here Charybdis raves ; 

And here does rumbling JStna moan ancf strain 

For strength to lighten at the skies again. 

Fair is that^d^j^^*^ 1 ^ 611 n ld it fair ; 

Itg, son^^no guard its soil are fierce and free, 
And all rich things, and gladsome things are there, 

Yet nothing ever was there, nor shall be, 



TEE: POEM; BOOK L 91 

More glorious than this great philosopher 
*More holy, marvellous, and dear than he : 
Yea, and with such a strength his mighty line 
Shouts through the earth he seems a voice divine. 7 ' 

And yet, says Lucretius, in spite of all this, lie has 
gone astray about the first "beginnings of things, as did. 
also Anaxagoras and all the rest, partly from their 
wrong conceptions of matter, partly because they 
denied the reality of empty space. And all these 
faults of theirs he points out in a way that we have 
already analysed. 

And now mark (he goes on) what remains to be 
known, and hear it more distinctly. For my mind 
does not fail to perceive how dark these things are ; 
but yet, despite all difficulties 

" Yet my heart smarting with desire for praise, 

Me urges on to sing of themes like these, 
And that great longing to pour forth my lays 

Constrains me, and the loved Pierides, 
Whose pathless mountain-haunts I now explore, 
And glades where no man's foot has fallen before. 

Ah sweet, ah sweet, to approach the untainted springs, 
And quaff the virgin waters cool and clear, 

And cull the flowers that have been unknown things 
To all men heretofore ! and yet more dear 

When mine sl&ll be the adventurous hand that brings 
A crown, for mine own brows, from places where 

The Muse has deigned to grant a crown for none, 

Save for my favoured browsT 



am I vain, Memmius, in such vaunts as these ; for 
I am struggling to teach great things, and to release 



92 LUCRETIUS. * : 

the human mind from the fetters of religious fear ; and : 

dark as my subject is, my song is clear and lucid, and 
over the crabbed things I teach, I lay the Muses' 

charm. * 

And now thus far I have taught you how solid i , 

bodies of matter fly about ever un vanquished through [ 

all time. I have next another thing to teach you. I ? 

must show you there is no limit to the sum of these f 

atoms, and likewise that there is no limit to the space 
they move in. As to space, I need but ask you, how 
can that be bounded $ For whatever bounds it, that , 

thing must itself be bounded likewise; and to this 
bounding thing there must be a bound again, and so on 
for ever and ever throughout all immensity. Suppose, { ; 

however, for a moment, all existing space to be bounded, \ 

and that a man runs forward to the uttermost borders, 

and stands upon the last verge of things, and then I 

hurls forward a winged javelin, suppose you that the * 

dart, when hurled by the vivid force*,, shall take its '\ 

way to the point the darter aimed at, or that some- 
thing will take its stand in the path of its flight, and ' j 
arrest it? 3for one or other of these tilings must hap- 
pen. There is a dilemma here that you never can 
escape from. Place your limit of things as far away as 
it shall please you, I will dog your steps till you have 
come to the utmost borders, and I will ask you what } 
then becomes of your javelin. Surely you must see ) 
what the end of this mj^Wbe : * I 



" The' air bounds off the hills, the hills the air ; \ 

Earth bounds the ocean, ocean bounds the lands ; ( 

Bat the unbounded All is everywhere." I 



t THE POEM: BOOK L 93 

1 

Lucretius here adds various other proofs of the in- 
finity of empty space, and the infinite number of the 
atoms, all of which have "been already stated. Such 
then| he exclaims, again reiterating his teaching 

" Such is the nature then of empty space, 
The void above, beneath us, and around, 

That not the thunderbolt with pauseless pace, 

Hurtling for ever through the unplumbed profound 

Of time, would find an ending to its race, 
Or e'er grown nearer to the boundless bound. 

So huge a room around, beneath, above, 

Yawns, in which all things being, are and move." 

The chance to which our world owes itself needed in- 
finite atoms for its production, infinite trials, and 
infinite failures, before the present combination of 
things arose, 

" For blindly, blindly, and without design, 

Did these first atoms their first meetings try ; 

No ordering thought was there, no will divine 

To guide them ; biit through infinite time gone by 

Tossed and tormented they essayed to join, 
And clashed through the void space tempestuously, 

Until at last that certain whirl began, 

Which slowly formed the earth and heaven and man." 

And now my Memmius, Lucretius goes on, be far from 
trusting those that say all things press towards the 
centre, and that there are men "beneath the earth, walking 
with their heads downwards. -^Fpr the universe being 
infinite, how can there be any ^Tit?^?^^ . flji^ even, 
grant that it had a centre, no heavy body could abide 
there; for everything that has weight must be for 



94 LUCRETIUS. * 

A 

ever and for ever falling, unless some rebound senji it 
upwards. 

Space, then, I have already proved to be infinite ; 
and space being infinite, matter must be infinite hlso ; 
lest, after the winged fashion of flame, the walls of the 
world break up suddenly, and fly along the mighty 
void, and the heavens fall upon the earth, and the 
earth break up from beneath the heaven, and the 
whole great universe in a single moment 

"Melt and be gone, and nothing take its place 
But viewless atoms and deserted space." 






BOOK II. 

The second book opens thus : 

" 'Tis sweet when tempests roar upon the sea 
To watch from land another's deep distress 

Amongst the waves Ms toil and misery : 
Not that his sorrow makes our happiness, 

But that some sweetness there must ever be 
Watching what sorrows we do not possess : 

So, too, 'tis sweet to safely view from far 

Gleam o'er the plains the savage ways of war. 

with purged eyes 

from the battlements and topmost towers 
Of learning, those high bastions of the wise, 
And far below us see this world of ours, 



THE POEM: BOOK II. 95 

* 

The vain, crowds wandering blindly, led by lies, 
% Spending in pride and wrangling all their powers, 
So far below the pigmy toil and strife, 
. The pain and piteous rivalries of life. 
i 

peoples miserable ! fools and blind ! 

What night you cast o'er all the days of man ! 
And in that night before you. and behind 

"What perils prowl ! But you nor will nor can 
See that the treasure of a tranquil mind 

Is all that Nature pleads for, for this span, 
So that between our birth and grave we gain 
Some quiet pleasures, and a pause from pain. 

Wherefore we see that for the body's need 
A pause from pain almost itself suffices. 

For only let our life from pain be freed, 
It oft itself with its own smile entices, 

And fills our healthy hearts with joys indeed, 
That leave us small desire for art's devices. 

Nor do we sigh for more in hours like these, 

Rich in our wealth of- sweet simplicities. 

What though about the halls no silent band 

Of golden boys on many a pedestal 
Dangle their hanging lamps from outstretched hand, 

To flare along the midnight festival 
Though on our board no priceless vessels stand, 

Nor gold nor silver fret the dazzling wall, 
Nor does the soft voluptuous air resound 
From gilded ceilings with the cithern's sound ; 

The grass is ours, and sweeter^undgwtli^n these, 
As down we couch us by the babbling sprJflg^- 

And overhead we hear the branching trees 
That shade us, whisper ; and for food we bring 



96 



LVCRETIVS. 



* 
4 



Only the country's simple luxuries. 

Ah, sweet is this, and sweetest in the spring, * 
"When the sun goes through all the balmy hours, 
And all the green earth's lap is filled with flowers ! " 

These, Memmius, these are this life's true enjoy- 
ments ; not the seducing pleasures given by wealth and 
art. "Will you get rid of a fever more quickly if you 
toss under a purple coverlet than under the "blanket of 
a poor man ] Just then as treasures, and high birth, 
and the pomp of kingly power, minister nothing to 
the "body's health, push, thy thought but a small step 
further, and you will see they minister nothing to the 
mind also : unless, indeed, you find that looking on 
the proud array of war, and the strength of obedient 
legions, your mind grows and swells with a haughtier 
strength also, and the scruples of religion are at once 
scared away from it, and the fears of death grow 
faint, as you realise your own power and greatness. 
But if we see that to talk like this Is folly, and that 
the fear of death cares nothing for liuman arms and 
armies, but that it and all other sorrows stalk menacing 
and unabashed through courts and palaces, and flinch 
nothing at the glitter of gold and purple, how can you 
doubt but that reason alone can daunt theml For 
what is all this life of ours 1 It is a struggle in the 
dark, and in this dark men are as children. They 
quake and quiver at they know not what, and start 
aside at objects wMcJj^ in the daylight they would 
only Jjjxgh^l- "*Tight then, more light, this is the 
thing we need for the liberation of man ; but it is not 
outer light, it is the inner light of reason; 



THE POEM: BOOK II. 97 

<r 

% ( Of reason searching Nature's secret way, 
And not the sun, nor lucid darts of day." 

And now mark, and I will explain to you the 
motions of the "bodies of matter : how things are 
"begotten and "broken np again, and with what speed 
they go moving through the great void. For verily in 
movement all things about ns are, perpetually wear- 
ing away, perpetually re-begotten. Some nations wax, 
others wane, and in a brief space the races of living 
things are changed, and, like runners, hand over the 
lamp of life. 

Here Lucretius goes on to explain more in detail 
the everlasting motion of the atoms, the way they 
strike, the way they rebound, and the ways in which 
they become intertangled. They move, he says, as the 
motes move in a sunbeam, which you may see stream- 
ing through a dark chamber, and in the apparent void 
mingle in the light of the rays, and, as in never-end- 
ing conflict, skirmish and give battle, combating in 
troops and never halting, driven about in frequent 
meetings and partings, so that you may guess from, 
this what it is for first beginnings of things to be 
for ever tossing about in the great void. So far as it 
goes, a small thing may give an illustration of a great 
thing, and put you on the track of knowledge. 

Kow how swiftly these atoms move, Memmius, you 
may learn from this : 

" When first the morning sprinkles carih^witli light. 

And in the forest's lone heart everywhere 1 ^ 
The birds awaken, and with fluttering flight 

Pour out theix flutinga on the tender air ; " 
A.C.S.S. voL YUU G 



98 



LUCRETIUS. 



at such a time we see how in a moment, in a s^iglo 
moment, the sun, far off though he be, darts his light 
through the whole creation, and clothes everything 
with his "brightness. But the sun's rays have to travel 
through air, and the air retards their course ; and there- 
fore they move slowly when compared with the atoms, 
which move only through pure and empty space, and 
which hurry on and on, not held back by anything. 

But some, ignorant of the nature of matter, say that 
without the providence of the gods the world could 
not have come to be what it has, nor the seasons vary 
in such nice conformity to the ways of men. Wan- 
derers they from, the true course of reason. For even 
if I did not know what first beginnings were, I could 
still maintain that the earth and heaven were never 
the work of any divine intelligence, so great are 
the defects with which they stand encumbered. All 
which, Memmius, I will by-and-by make clear to you ; 
but we will now go on to explain what is yet to be 
told of motions. 

Lucretius now goes on to deal with the primary 
downward tendency of atoms, and to account for the 
upward courses they take, through blows and rebound- 
ings, and being squeezed upwards out of solidifying 
substances. ISText he explains that uncertain sideways 
movement, which is the one respect in which the 
uniformity of atomic movement is broken, and which 
he here proclaims to be the origin, and the only pos- 
sible orii% <& the free-will of living beings. 

Then he goes on to explain that the laws of matter 
have been the same for ever ; that it is the nature of 



THE POEM: BOOK II. 99 

to be for ever moving ; and that though, things 
seem to "be now at rest, their atoms are still as unresting 
as they "were at the "beginning. JSTor need you wonder 
at tMs, *he says ; for when mighty legions nil in their 
courses all the places of the plains, in the mimicry of 
war, the glitter of them lifts itself up to the sky, and 
the whole earth about glitters with brass,, and a noise 
is made beneath by the trampling of the mighty 
ones, and the mountains smitten by the shouting hurl 
the voices upward to the stars of heaven, and all the 
wheeling horsemen scour the plains, and make them 
tremble with the charge : 

" Yet some place is there in the far-off hills 
Whence all this storm of chargers seems to rest, 
A still light brooding on the broad plain's breast." 

Lucretius now goes on to show that the atoms must 
be of various shapes, the kinds of things produced by 
them are so different, fluids, solids, and airs, tastes 
and smells. Were not the seeds of different shapes, 
and each special substance made of special seeds, 
how could the species of animals remain alike, and 
never vary 1 or how could parent transmit to child 
that special something by which the two mutually 
recognise each other I Tor this we see that even the 
beasts can do ; and they are just as well known to each 
other as human beings are, 

" Thus oft before our pillared sanctuaries, _^ 

When the lit altars lift their fragrant blaze, 
A calf pours forth its warm life's blood, and dies ; 
But she, the mother, in her lone amaze 



100 



LUCRETIUS. 



Goes through the fields, and still can recognise r 

Her own one's cloven footfalls in the ways, 
And looks to find it, and her eyes grow wild 

With wondering for her unreturmng child. 

<fc 

Then from her month breaks forth the desolate moan 
Through all the leafy groves, and she gives o'er 

Her search, only she oft goes back alone 
To that bleak stall her child shall know no more ; 

Nor tender willows, nor lush grasses grown 
Sweet with the dew-fall, nor clear streams that pour 

"With brimming lips their waves along the plain, 

Can tempt her mouth, nor ease her breast of pain." 

Eeniember then, says Lucretius, that the atoms have 
various shapes; lout the number of such shapes is 
finite, though of atoms of each shape the number 
must be infinite : for since the difference of shape is 
finite, those which are like are infinite, or the sum of 
matter will be finite. All this lie draws out at length, 
urging all the arguments that have been described 
already. 

And thus, he says, out of infinite matter, and 
through infinite space, things as they are continue, for 
ever being destroyed and for ever again renewed ; nor 
can death-dealing motions keep the mastery always, 
nor entomb existence for evermore, nor, on the other 
hand, can the birth and increase-giving motions of 
things preserve them always after they are born. 

" Thus from the depths of all eternity 

Tne unwearying atoms wage a dubious war ; 
And now with surging life doth victory lie, 
And now anon is death the conqueror ; 



* THE POEM: BOOK II. 1Q1 



And with, the funeral wail, the baby's cry 
^ Blends, as it opes its eyes on daylight's shore : 
Nor ever morning broke that failed to hear 
The infant's bleatings and the mourner's tear." 

i 

And herein, Memmius, it is most fit you should re- 
member that there is nothing that is known by sense 
that consists of one kind of seed ; all- is formed by a 
mixture of divers atoms. And when a thing has many 
properties, you must know it is a compound of seeds of 
many shapes. Such a compound is the great earth we 
live on, for her properties, as we can all see, are many. 
For she brings forth fires, and the great seas, and 
crops, and joyous trees, and the bodies of living things. 
Wherefore, of gods, and men, and beasts, she alone has 
been named the mother. Of her the Greek poets 
sang, that, borne on her towering chariot, she comes 
driving a yoke of lions. They have yoked to her car 
the beasts, to show that nature, however savage, should 
be softened by the care of parents. They have crowned 
her head with a mural crown, because, fortified in 
strong positions, she sustains cities. Phrygian bands 
escort her, for in Phrygia the story is that the first corn 
grew ; and Galli, too, are her guardians, to show that 
they who have done violence to the divinity of the 
mother, are unworthy to bring a living offspring to the 
daylight. 

" The tight-stretched timbrels thunder round her way, 

The sounding cymbals clash, and cry Prepare ! 
The threatening horns with hoarser music bray, 
And hollow pipes are loud upon the air ; 



102 



LUCRETIUS. 



And swords are borne before her, sharp to slay 

Emblems of rage to thankless souls that dare 
Neglect the Queen ; till holy fear has birth 

Of the great Mother over all the earth. 

\ 
Therefore when first she slowly comes progressing 

Through mighty cities, and with soundless tongue 
Breathes over men the dumb unworded blessing, 

Down in her path are brass and silver flung, 
A bounteous largess, mortal thanks expressing ; 

And flowers are showered by all the adoring throng, 
Till on the Mother and her train there falls 
A snowstorm of soft-settling rose-petals." 

But all this escort and progress are only symbolism. 
It is beautifully told and well set forth, but it is very 
far removed from true reason. JTor the nature of tho 
gods must enjoy supremo repose, and know neither 
care nor labour ; for no pain mars it, nor can aught 
we do appease it or make it angry. And if any one 
choose to call the sea Neptune, and corn Cores, and 
would rather use the word Bacchus than tho word 
wine, let us suffer him to say in this sense that tho 
earth is mother of gods, if he only forbears in earnest 
to sully his soul with the stain of foul religion. 

" For all this while the earth is blind and dumb, 

It neither knows, nor thinks, nor hears, nor feels, 
But blindly in it various seeds unite, 
And blindly these break forth, and reach the light," 

But though all things, Lucretius goes on, are com- 
posed of many seeds, it is evident that these combina- 
tions follow some laws, and only certain set combi- 
nations are . possible by the nature of things. Tho 



* THE POEM: BOOK II. 103 

* 

uniformity of nature shows us this ; and yon may 
learn it, too, from considering what the atoms are them- 
selves. You must know, too, that first beginnings have 
themselves no sensible qualities. In especial, you must 
remember that they are without colour. Lucretius 
gives many reasons for this, -more particularly, that 
colour cannot exist without light, and that it varies 
according to what way the light falls upon it. 

" After this fashion does the ringdove's down 
Change in the sun, and shift its plumy sheen ; 

Now all a poppy's dark vermilion, 
Now coral, glimmering over emerald green. 

So too the peacock, saturate with sun 
O'er all its sweep of tailing tail, is seen. 

To quiver in the light with varying dyes, 

And all the hues inconstant in its eyes." 

And now Lucretius goes on with his reasons why 
atoms cannot have either voice, or smell, or sense, 
or any sensible qualities "whatsoever. Life has arisen 
out of the lifeless, as we see even now worms arising 
out of clods, though in the case of the higher animals 
the lifeless matter has to go through many stages ; and 
only through special combinations of circumstances can 
it at last break forth into life and consciousness. But 
if any one shall say that sense may be so far begotten 
out of no-sensation, by a process of change, or by a 
kind of birth, all we have to show to such a man is, 
that this change and birth can only happen in obedi- 
ence to fixed laws, and under fixed conditions. Above 
all, the senses cannot exist in any body, till the living 
nature of that body has been begotten ; for till then, 



104 



LUCRETIUS. 



the atoms tliat will make up the principles of life and 
feeling are "wandering far and wide in air and earth, 
in flowers and trees and rivers. Common-sense will 
tell you that all this must "be so. Eor did the tftoms 
live, what then? Think of the picture you would 
have to form of them. 

" Sure, had they life, these seeds of things, why then 

Each separate particle would laugh and cry 
By its small self, and speculate like men 
' What were my own first seeds, and whence am II'" 

"Wherefore "be assured, Memmius, that we have all 
arisen out of lifeless things 

" And learn 

That what of us was taken from the dust 
Will surely one day to the dust return ; 
And what the air has lent us, heaven will hear 
Away, and render back its own to air." 

For death is not an extinction of matter, it is a 
change and a dissolution only. The atoms are like 
the letters of an alphabet, for ever shifting their 
places, and clustering into new words, and these 
words again clustering into new verses. 

And now, we entreat you, apply your mind to 
reason. Eor a new matter struggles earnestly to gain 
your ears ; and remember this, that the simplest thing, 
if new, is at first hard to be realised ; and the hardest 
thing grows easy when we have known it long enough, 

" Lift up your eyes, consider the blue sky, 

And all the multitudes of wandering signs 
It holds within its hollows ; mark on high 
How shines the sun, and how the clear moon shines* 



THE POEM: BOOK IL 105 



Supposing this great vision suddenly 
*' Broke on the gaze of man, my soul divines 
That to the astonied nations it would seem 
A mist, a fancy, a desire, a dream." 
* 

And yet how little, it is so familiar, do we now heed 
it 1 "Wonder not, therefore, if I lead your spirit on a 
farther and a more adventurous voyage, and carry you 
past the walls of heaven and the bounding blue, and 
show you what is there, far yonder, in the bottomless 
Tinplumbed depths, to which the spirit ever yearns 
to look forward, and to which the mind's inner self 
reaches in free and unhindered flight. There then, in 
the space beyond, where the atoms are for ever flying, 
are other worlds than .ours, woven as ours was out of 
flying atoms, and the blind clash of them. Our uni- 
verse is but one out of a countless number. . As a man 
Is but one amongst many men, so is our universe but 
one amongst many universes. And through all these 
runs a single law. They have risen in the same way, 
they are sustained in the same way; and in the same 
way, and by a like necessity, they will all one day 
perish. Do but realise this, and the whole scheme of 
things will grow clearer to you, and you will see how 

" Kid of her haughty masters, straight with ease 
Does nature work, and willingly sustains 

Her frame, and asks no aid of deities. 
For of those holy gods who haunt the plains 

Of Ether, and for aye abide in peace, 

I ask, could such as they are hold the reins 

Of all the worlds, or in their courses keep 

The forces of the immeasurable deep? 



1 



106 



TV, i IT .n " k v " AAUWV wjie stars to roll 

FO^S:^^ 

A multiplied but undivided god ' J 

And strike with bellowing thunder; fr oni the p o]c 

Now lug own temple*, now the unbending Z ' 
TW f^ m , doaetto tllosu vain lightnings try ' 
That stake the pure, ami pass the guilty by 1 ' 

t^^r ihs> you r st kn<w as weu - 

1!!1 T^ S " UniV011scs has g^ from small 
oxilk of 



seeds 



upon them out of the boundless 
space; and, lu like , they arc dimiuiehStj 
dmded, for thezr seeds get loose, and the botmdl m 



weU stricken m years, and the time of its dis olutiol 



1 



THE POEM. 107 



% BOOK III. 

Lucretius opens this book with an invocation to 
Epiclirus, Ms revered master : 

" Thou who wert first in drowning depths of night 
To lift aloft so clear a lamp, whose rays 

Strike along life, and put the shades to flight 
Thee, thee, chief glory of the Grecian race, 

I strive to follow, humbly and aright, 
And my feet in thy very footprints place ; 

Not that thy rival I would dare to be, 

But that I love, and loving follow thee. 

Thy rival ! Nay ; can swallows rival swans ? 

Or thunder-footed steeds competitors 
Eind 'mongst the she-goat's gambling little ones ? 

Oh, first and best of all discoverers, 
"We are but bees along the flowery lawns. 

Who rifle for our food thy fields of verse, 
And on thy golden maxims pause and prey 
All-gold, and worthy to endure for aye. 

For lo ! no sooner does thy powerful line 

Loud through the world the scheme of Nature sing. 

Than the mind hears, and at that note of thine 
Its flocks of phantom terrors take to wing. 

The world's walls roll apart, and I divine 
With opened eyes the ways of everything, 

And how through Nature's void immensity 

Things were not, were, and are, and cease to be. 

And lo ! the gods appear, the immortal races, 

Visible in the lucent windless air 
. That fills their quiet blest abiding-places, 

Which never noisy storm nor storm-clouds dare 



I 



108 LUGRRT117& r 



To trouble, where the frost's tooth leaves no traces, 

And downwards no white falling snowflakea f\fre, 
But on their lips the laughters never cease, 
Nor want nor pain invades their ageless peace. 

r 
But on the other hand we search in vain, 

For those swart forms, the fearful deities 
Of Hell. Our vision roams the whole inane, 

But aught like Acheron it nowhere sees. 
And I, when I to this high view attain, 

Feel on my soul a maddening rapture seize, 
And next a trembling, that thy hand should dare 
Thus to the quick to lay all Nature bare." 

And now, says Lucretius, since I havo shown what 

atoms are, their number, their Bhape, and their motions, 

and -how all things can bo produced out of thorn, 1 will 

next reveal the nature of the mind and soul, that the 

dream of Acheron may be onco and for all dispelled, 

which at present troubles life to its Inmost depth, casts 

a chill and deathly shade over our whole existence-, 

and leaves a taint and a bitterness in ovury pleasure. 

True it is that wo often hear inon vaunt that they havo 

no fear of death, and that the ills and hardships of life 

are all they really flinch from. But these arc merely 

boasters. Bring them, into any trouble or danger, and 

you will see how they botako themselves to their knees, 

whining to their gods, and forgetful of all their bravery. 

Such fearless firmness as these men feign, to have, can 

be given only by knowledge and calm reason. Listen 

to me, then, and I will lead you to it : 

*f First, then, I say the mind, which often we 
Call also understanding, wherein dwells 



THE POEM: BOOK III. 109 



The power that rules our whole vitality, 

Is part of man, as is whatever else 
Goes to make up his frame, as hands, feet, knees ; 

Nor is it, as a foolish Greek school tells, 
*A. harmony of all the members, spread 
As health is, everywhere from feet to head." 

But it resides in one particular place, just as sight, 
hearing, and smell do. Lucretius here goes on in 
detail to explain the nature of the mind, how it is 
connected with the vital soul, and how the two are 
connected with the "body, liow they govern it and are 
contained by it, how the former is seated in the heart, 
and how the latter pervades the whole frame. He then 
describes how the mind touches the soul and moves 
it, and how the soul in its turn touches the body; and 
from this he argues that they must of necessity be 
corporeal, for where there is no corporeality, there is 
no touch. With first beginnings, then, he says, inter- 
laced from their earliest birth, are mind and body 
fashioned, and gifted with a life of joint partnership ; 
and it is plain that the faculty of the body and of the 
mind cannot feel separately, each alone without the 
power of the other, but sense is kindled throughout 
our flesh and blown into a flame between the two, by 
joint motions on the part of both. 

And now (he goes on) I will show you that mind 
and soul are mortal ; and in what I have now to say, 
remember that I still use the words mind and soul in- 
differently, and that what I say of the one will apply 
in the same way to, the other, since both make up 
one thing, and are one single substance. First of all, 



110 



LUCRETIUS. 



then, remember of how fine a substance I have styown 
the soul to be, and how far more sensitive than any 
other thing, 

" More than a drifting smoke, or ductile river ; 

For even shapes of mists and smoke in dreams, 
Soon as they touch the mind will make it quiver, 

As when in sleep the votive altar steams 
Before our sight ; for even dreams like these 
Gome from the touch of films and images." 



Well, then, since you see that water is scattered when 
the vessel that held it is broken, and the mists melt 
away into the air, how can you doubt that the soul 
will one day do likewise when its body goes to pieces ? 
Again, we see that the mind is born with the body, 
grows strong with the body, and also with the body 
once more grows frail and feeble : 

" It follows then that when this life is past, 
It goes an outcast from the body's door, 

And dies like smoke along the driving blast. 
"We with the flesh beheld it born and rise 
To strength ; and with the flesh it fades and dies." 

And now consider this too. The body is subject to 
many diseases, and with many of these the soul is 
affected also. Often the reason wanders, often the 
reason, is for a time quite: slain. Such loss of reason 
comes from the powers of the: mind and soul being 
dissevered, and riven and forced asunder by the same 
baneful malady as the body is. Wha& shall we think 
then? 



* THE POEM: BOOK III. \\\ 

> 
" Even in the "body thus the soul is troubled, 

* And scarce can hold its fluttering frame together ; 
How should it live then, when, with force redoubled, 

Naked it feels the air and angry weather ? " 
t 

Again, Lucretius goes on (after having added a number 
of other arguments which have "been already given in a 
former chapter), seeds of the soul are evidently left in 
the body after death, "because worms and living things 
are bred out of it. And a soul that can be thus divided 
cannot be immortal. For it is impossible to think that 
each of these worms has an immortal soul of its own, 
that immediately at the birth of its body makes its 
way into it, and that thus many thousands of souls 
meet together in a place from which one has been with- 
drawn, and either find bodies ready made for them, or 
set each about making a body for itself. This is glar- 
ingly absurd: 

" For why should souls, if they can cast away 
Their mortal carcasses, and still live on, 

Thus toil to build themselves a den of clay ? 
Since when with bodies they are clothed upon 

They straight grow heirs to sickness and decay, 
And through them all the body's grief has gone. 

Nor for themselves could souls contrive to build 

Such prison-pens, how much soe'er they willed." 

Lucretius here brings forward several other arguments, 
and then he once more thus returns to this one : 

" Again, when creatures' bodies are preparing, 

Sure we should laugh to see the souls stand by 
Bands of immortals at each other glaring 
About that mortal house in rivalry, 



112 



LUCRETIUS. 



Each longing lie may be the first to fare in, 

And each braced up to push his best and try. e 
"Unless they settle it on this condition, 
That who conies first shall have the first admission/' 



Again, if more arguments arc still needed, for every- 
thing there is a fixed place appointed ; nor do fishes 
live in the land, trees in the clouds, nor the sap of trees 
in stones. And thus the nature of mind cannot come 
into being without the body, nor exist away from it. 
And therefore, when the body lias died, we must ad- 
mit that the soul is perished. Every argument points 
to this conclusion. "We cannot doubt it ; we cannot 
escape from it. Analogy, observation, and common- 
sense, all point the same way, and confirm us in a 
complete certitude : 

" Death is for us then but a noise and name, 
Since the mind dies, and hurts us not a jot ; 

And as in bygone times when Carthage came 
To battle, we and ours were troubled not, 

Nor heeded though the whole earth's shuddering frame 
Beeled with the stamp of armies, and the lot 

Of things was doubtful, to which lords should fall 

The land and seas and all the rule of all ; 

So, too, when we and otirs shall be no more, 
And there has come the eternal separation 

Of flesh and spirit, which, conjoined before, 
Made us ourselves, there will be no sensation; 

"We should not hear were all the world at war ; 
Nor shall we, in its last dilapidation, 

When the heavens fall, and earth's foundations flee. 

We shall nor feel, nor hear, nor know, nor see." 



* THE POEM: BOOK III. 113 

And even if for a moment we may imagine the 
impossible even should the soul still survive the body, 
what is that to us 1 For we are neither soul nor body, 
"but we are a single "being fashioned out of the wedlock 
of the two. Nor, again, if time should gather up our 
matter after death, and again remould it into the very 
"beings we now are, that is nothing to us, when once 
the chain of our consciousness has "been snapped 
asunder. Perhaps we may have existed "before : that 
gives us no sorrow. Suppose we can exist again : this 
need give us no more trouble than that. 

Therefore, when you see a man bemoaning his hard 
case, . that after death his body will either rot in the 
grave, or be consumed by fire, or be torn by wild 
beasts, the sound his mouth gives forth betrays a flaw 
somewhere. He does not really grant the conclusion 
he professes to grant. He has not with his whole 
mind realised that he will wholly die. The inveterate 
fancy still clings to him that there will still be a sur- 
viving something, that living will lament about its 
own death: 

" Perplexed he argues, from the fallacy 
Of that surviving self not wholly freed. 

Hence he bewails Ms bitter doom to die ; 
Nor does he see that when he dies indeed, 

No second lie will still remain to cry, 
Watching its own cold body burn or bleed. 

fool ! to fear the wild-beast's ravening claw, 

Or that torn burial of its mouth atfd maw. 

For lo ! if this be fearful, let me learn 

Is it more fearful than if friends should place 
A.C.S.S. vol. vii. H 



114 



LUCRETIUS. 



Thy decent limbs upon the pyre and bum 

Sweet frankincense 1 or smother up thy lace 

With honey in the "balm-containing urn 1 
Or if you merely lay beneath the rays 

Of heaven on some cold rock ? or damp and cold 

If on thine eyelids lay a load of mould ? 

Thou not again shalt see thy dear home's door, 
Nor thy dear wife and children come to throw 

Their arms round thee, and ask for kisses more, 
And through thy heart make quiet comfort go : 

Out of thy hands hath slipped the precious store 
Thou hoardedst for thine own,' men say, < and lo, 

All thou desired is gone ! ' but never say, 

4 All the desire as well hath passed away.' 

Ah ! could they only see this, and could borrow 
True words, to tell what things in death abide thee ! 

'Thou shalt lie soothed in sleep that knows no 

morrow, 
Nor ever cark nor care again betide thee : 

Friend, thou wilt say thy long good-bye to sorrow, 
And ours will be the pangs, who weep beside thee, 

And watch thy clear familiar body burn, 

And leave us but the ashes and the urn/" 

Often, too, at feasts men say, as they drink, and 
wreathe their garlands round tliem, " Miserable crea- 
tures that we are ! our joys are short ; tlxey will soon 
be part and parcel of the past, and the past never 
gives its own back again." As if after deatlx they 
would ever know thirst, and be pining for tlie wine- 
cnp that will never more be allowed them 1 

Once more, could [Nature only speak to ns, Ixow 
would she deride ns foolish mortals and reprove us 1 



THE POEM: BOOK III. H5 

" Fools," she -would say, " and sickly sorrowers ! why 
bemoan and wail for death, in this wise ? For say 
thy past life has been welcome to thee, and all its joys 
hav$ not "been given in vain, passing through thee like 
a leaky vessel that refuses to be filled say thou hast 
had thy will and thy fill of living : 

" Why not rise up then, like a sated guest, 
And enter, fool, upon thy dreamless rest ? " 

But if, on the contrary, life has been a sorrow to 
thee, and all the blessings that have been thine thou 
hast squandered, why, seek to re-begin the weary round,, 
and to gather what again thou wilt waste and squander 
as before 1 For hope not to find anything new. There 
is no other pleasure that I can contrive or discover for 
thee. 

" For though thy life be fresh within thy frame, 

Nor years have yet thy bodily strength abated, 
Ypu would find all things alway still the same, 

Nor e'er discover one thing new created 
Not shouldst thou live till all men's lives be done, 
For there is no new tiling beneath the sun." 

Think, too, of the bygone antiquity of the everlast- 
ing time before our birth, how that was nothing to 
us. For nature holds up to us the time that was be- 
fore us, as a vision of the future time that is to conie 
after us. 

" Look in the glass then. Say what shape is there ? 

Appears there aught of terrible or sad 2 
Does not the image that you gaze at seeni 
Even gentler than a sleep without a dream." 



116 



LUCRETIUS. 



Sure enough, however, the terrors men dread after 
death are not all vain imaginings. Birds truly eat a 
way into Tityos ; Sisyphus rolls his stone up-hill for 
ever. But he is a Tityos, who, as he grovels in^lust, 
is eaten up by anguish like a vulture; and lie is a 
Sisyphus who is for ever asking honours of the people, 
and is for ever going back disappointed. The tor- 
ments that we dreamed of in the future have their 
real being here, and men inflict them on themselves, 
in this very life around us. 

Ah 1 might men only see the real cause of their 
sorrows, how salvation would then dawn, on them I 
The man who is sick of home hurries forth from his 
lordly porticos, and then, again, hurries back, finding 
he is no better off abroad. In the town he says, Ah, 
would I were in the country ! and in the country, Ah, 
would I were in the town ! and to and fro between 
the two he goes hurrying in his chariot, and at each 
end of his journey he can do nothing but yawn for 
weariness. In this way each man flies from himself, 
but can never for a moment escape ; and lie hates 
himself, being sick with an unknown malady. But 
could he only see the matter rightly, leaving all else, 
he would study the nature of things ; and learning 
that certain extinction and death is the end of all, 
would learn so to order his life accordingly. 



THE POEM. 117 



BOOK IV. 

Ajid now, says Lucretius, since I have shown you 
what mind and soul is, and how life is born with, this 
body, and dies with the body's death, I will go on to 
explain to you a matter of the utmost moment ; I will 
show you how we see, and feel, and taste, and how 
our life is connected with and knows the external 
world. And hard though the subject be, I will make 
it sweet to you, overlaying all its bitterness with the 
sweet honey of the Muses. 

He now goes on to explain how films and images 
are perpetually streaming off the surface of things, 
and illustrates this by many analogies. For without 
doubt, he says, we see many things freely giving 
such discharge, not from the centre only, but from the 
outer surface itself. 

" This daily happens, when the sunlight gleams 

Through those broad awnings, yellow, red, and blue, 

Which flap and flutter on their poles and beams 
Over great theatres : for there you view 

How from their surface down their colour streams, 
And how they make to flicker with their hue 

The curving crowd, and all the scene's recesses, 

And the grave fathers in their stately dresses. 

And all the more the narrowing walls around 

Make of the theatre a well of night, 
So much more gaily do the colours bound, 

And every object laughs with wayward light." 

And therefore, he says, since sheets of canvas dis- 



118 



LUCRETIUS. 



charge colour from their surface, all things will natu- 
rally discharge their pictures too since, in each case 
alike they arc Kent forth from the surface. Nor are 
you to suppose that only those images arc going 
through the air, which are thus sent oil' the surface of 
things. There arc other images, with no counterparts, 
which spontaneously "begot and fashion themselves, as 
clouds do, and wander along as clouds do, with ever- 
varying and Inconstant shape. For the clouds in this 
way we can see continually 

"Fanning the air, and, gathering form on, high, 
Blot out the blue, and violate the sky ; 

Then through the air in shifting .shapes are horn: 
Now see we monstrous giants hurry ing past, 

"Who trail behind them lengths of .shade forlorn ; 
And now great mountains move along the blast, 

And crags and boulders from the mountains torn, 
By which the sun's dimmed face i overcast ; 

And now some mighty beast comes on amain 

With, packs of other storm-cloudH in its train/' 

And now I will go on to show with what case and 
celerity the images or idols that I spoke of arc be- 
gotten, and how incessantly they flow and fall away 
from things. Hereupon he explains more minutely 
the nature of these emanations, how fine their sub- 
stance is, and consequently with what swiftness they 
are capable of moving: 

" For we observe that things of little weight 

Are ever swift to move, of the which kind 
The snnlight is, which does not hesitate, 



THE POEM: BOOK IV. 119 

Ever pressed on by fresh light from behind, 
*To force its way, and nimbly penetrate 
Through all the space of air." 



ese idols or images of things are in their move- 
ments as swift as sunlight, and can pass through air 
as readily, nay, they must be even swifter; for the 
stars are farther from us than the sun, and yet 

" No sooner is the shine of water spread 

In the night air, beneath heaven's glittering plain, 
Than instantly to every star o'erhead 
A star within the wave responds again." 

Therefore, again and again, I repeat, you must admit 
that bodies, capable of striking the eyes and provoking 
vision, are constantly travelling through the air with 
a marvellous velocity. But because we can see with 
the eyes alone, the consequence is, that to whatever 
point we turn our sight, then all the same things meet 
and strike us with their shape and colour. Lucretius 
now goes on to explain the manner in which we infer 
the distance of things, and then the action of mirrors, 
and the real nature of the reflection in them. He 
then passes to optical delusions, and the various ways 
in which it seems that our eyes deceive us : 

" Now for this cause the far towers of a town 

Reach us as round, when they indeed are square ; 

The angles of their films are quite worn down 
In drifting towards us through the length of air ; 

And when they meet us, those strong things of stone 
Seem smooth and circular, as though they were 

Turned in a lathe ; but vaguely thus appear, 

And like a shadowy sketch of round things near." 



120 



LUCJRETIUS. 



And there are numberless oilier like cases as well, but 
they can be all. explained satisfactorily, and we must 
never for a moment admit that our eyes deceive us. 
The frailty, the sense of deception, is really in^ the 
mind. Do but think of the following instances, and 
you will see that this is so : 

" The ship in which, we sail seems standing still, 
The ship that rides at anchor drifting by ; 

And, as we hold to seaward, field and hill 
Seem to drop far astern ; and in the sky 

The stars we steer by seem immovable, 
And yet go moving on assiduously, 

Since each clear body has its hour to rise, 

Arid its long road to rest across the Hkie.s. 

And as we watch the sun and moon, their light 
Seems also fixed, yet still moves on we know : 

And when on deck we watch with straining Bight, 
Up from the sea-lino shadowy mountains go, 

Into one solid isle their shapes unite, 
And yet we know huge straits between them flow, 

And ways for fleets. And giddy children view, 

When they stop turning, all things turning too." 

So, too, the sun seems near us when it rises, and yet 
illimitable lands and seas and unknown people lie be- 
tween. A puddle of not a finger's depth seems to eon- 
tain the whole great heaven. As we pause on horse- 
back in a river-ford, the river seems to be standing 
still, and ourselves to be carried violently up the 
stream. A portico is supported on equal pillars, and 
yet as we. look through it their height seems to bo 
dwindling,. a:nd the floor seems to be rising, till they 



THE POEM: BOOK IV. 121 

i 

meet in a vanishing-point. Oars we know to be 
straight ; and yet dip them in the water, and their 
submerged part will seem to he bent and broken : 

"^So, too, we seem when chained in sleep profound 
To move in daylight, footing field and hill, 

Sailing new seas, and treading alien ground ; 
And when the earnest night is deep and still, 

Our ears are loud with many a fancied sound." 

And many other marvellous things are there, which 
would seek to shake the credit of the senses : but in 
vain ; for it is not the senses that deceive us, but we 
who deceive ourselves, by wrongly interpreting what 
they rightly tell us. Again 

" If a man hold that nothing can be known, 

He knows not whether he can know this even, 

Since he admits the things he knows are none. 
He stands with head on earth, and feet in heaven, 

And I decline to talk with such an one." 

"No such scepticism as this is utterly suicidal. The 
senses are all we can take our stand on, and they are 
unerring guides. 

And now, says Lucretius, I will explain the action 
of the other senses. Sounds, in the first place, are 
streams of atoms, whose shape varies with the quality 
of the sound : 

" Nor are the first beginnings of like form 

Which pierce the ears in crabbed sounds and sweet, 

As when, in air the braying trumpets storm. 
Which rouse barbarian nations to their feet, 

And when its carol comes from the wild swan. 

Over the headlong floods of Helicon." 



322 
When 



wi f,rt, 

r vmw8 ut 
* 

ords 



, 













THE POEM; BOOK IV. 123 

Also, they hear god Pan, when spring-time dawns, 

HJome, that wild head of his with pine-boughs bound, 
To touch the reeds with crooked mouth, and fling - 
Their song of sylvan music to the spring. 


ISTow, to proceed, you need not wonder how 

It is that voices come and beat the ears 
Through things through which the eyesight cannot go. 

Because of this the reason plain appears 
Full many a thing that lets the voice go through, 

The visual film to thousand pieces tears, 
'Tis of so fine a texture." 

Lucretius now proceeds to give that account of the 
remaining senses, of dreams, of the imagination, and 
of the way in which external things act as a stimulus 
to the mind, and the mind again acts as a stimulus to 
the body, which has been already explained at length. 
He then goes on to describe the nature of love, which, 
he treats of simply as a form of physical excitement. 
This pleasure, he says, is for us Yenus; from that 
desire is the Latin name of love from that desire 
lias first trickled into the heart yon drop of Yenus's 
honeyed joy, destined to be followed soon by chilly 
care. Eor though that which you yearn for is away, 
yet images of it are at hand, and its sweet name is 
present to the ears. But it is meet to fly such images, 
and scare away all that feeds love, and not keep your 
thoughts set upon one object, and so lay up for your- 
self care and unfailing pain. For the sore gathers 
strength, and becomes inveterate by feeding. For 
love, says Lucretius, is a fierce madness, a hungry 
longing, that will never be satiated, and will always 



124 



LUCRETIUS. 



leave you craving. For its sake yotmg men waste 
tlieir strength and ruin themselves, and their \vnole 
life is passed at the heck of another : 

" Meanwhile tlieir substance wastes and runs away * 

Turned into coverlets from Babylon ; 
Their duties are neglected day by day, 

And all their noble name is quite undone. 
Meanwhile upon her brow green emeralds play, 

Glancing in gold, and shoes from Sicyon 
Deck her elastic feet ; and tears and traces 
Are on her crumpled robe of love's embraces. 

And all the wealth their good sires toiled to gain 
Changes to head-gear, and rich anaclem, 

And Cean robes with trailing sweep of train, 
And feasts, and goblets thick with many a gem, 

And unguents, games, and garlands. All in vain ! 
They have their canker in the heart of them. 

A bitter something, in the midmost hours 

Of joy, starts up, and stings amongst the flowers. 

Either because they burn to see how they 

In foiil embraces and effeminate 
Slay their own selves, and waste their strength away; 

Or else the dainty lips, on whom their fate 
Hangs, some slight word of doubtful meaning say, 

Which stings their heart like fire; or soon or late 
They think her eyes are roaming, to beguile 
Others, and catch the footprints of a smile." 

And these evils are the evils of love when it is suc- 
cessful. How much greater are those of love that 
is crossed and hopeless ! So that it is best to watch 
beforehand, that you be never entangled in the snare. 



* THE POEM: BOOK IV. 125 

And yet even when you are entangled you may escape, 
unless you stand in your own way, and refuse reso- 
lutely to observe all those vices of mind and body 
which you may be quite sure will abound in her, woo 
whom you will. 3Tor this is what men do for the 
most part, blinded by passion, and attribute to their 
loved ones beauties that are not really theirs. 

" Muddy complexions have a dusky spell, 
A lover says. A slut's a natural creature, 

A romping hoyden seems a slim gazelle ; 
A sharp-tongued spitfire dazzles like a meteor. 

See, in yon slow and cumbrous movements dwell 
A queenly pride ; that face, without a feature, 

Is strangely touching ; and this fat plump chit 

Is, top to toe, the very soul of wit." 

Lucretius goes on, something in the temper of Pope, 
to describe how different is 

" Cynthia at her toilet's greasy task, 
To Cynthia fragrant at an evening masque." 

And draws a humorous contrast between the scene at 
the toilet indoors, when the lady is putting the last 
delicate stroke to her charms, with her maid behind 
her tittering at the whole process, and the lover out- 
side at the threshold full of yearning for the adored one, 
and thinking sacred for her sake the very house that 
holds her. 

And yet, says Lucretius in conclusion, it is not all 
love that is thus vain and deluding : some women 
have a genuine passion for their lovers or their hus- 
bands ; and often a wife, though of but small beauty, 



126 



LUCRETIUS. 



will by her gentle manners win the heart/ of a man, 
and custom will habituate him to pass his life *with 
her, and lore will set its mark on his heart at last, as 
dripping water will at last make a hole in a stone. 



BOOK V. 



the book opens with the praises of 



Here again 
Epicurus : 

" Where is the bard whose verse avails to tell 

Of themes like these- of Nature's ways sublime ? 

Or who shall so the power of verse compel 
As fitly to resound his praise in rhyme, 

Who all those spoils, that to his own hand fell, 
Hath left us as an heirloom for all time, 

Making us wise for ever 1 Truly none, 

Unless indeed it be a gocl alone. 

Por Memmius, if 'tis pleasing in thine eyes 
To speak the plain unvarnished truth of things, 

The author of these great discoveries 
He was a god of gods, a king of kings. 

For first through, him men, grew what men call wise, 
And from him every rule of prudence springs, 

Who towed oxtr life out of the storms and night, 

And moored us in the tranquil calm and light." 

What, compared to his discoveries, are those of other 

, discoverers? Ceres, it is said, gave corn to us, and 

Bacchus wine. But we could have lived on happily 



THE POEM: BOOK V. 



127 



without either of these, and many a nation does so 
even* now. But unless the "breast is clear, no life can 
be happy ; and hence he, Epicurus our mighty master, 
is rightly held a god by us, since from him come those 
sweet mental solaces which are even now spreading 
in the world, and soothing the hearts of men. 

" Yea, and our master therefore did far more 
Than vaunted Hercules. For how should we 

Eear the Nemean lion's rage and roar, 

Or that great bull in Crete beyond the sea, 

Or all the bristles of the Arcadian boar, 
Or what to us could snaky hydras be 1 

Or how would Gorgon fight us from his gloom, 

Or those Stymphalian birds with brazen plume ? 

Or that great dragon which for ever keeps 
The shining fruitage of the Hesperides, 

"With fierce and vigilant eye that never sleeps, 
Couched 'neath the shadow of the charmed tree?, 

Whilst round the midmost stem his huge coil creeps 
How should he harm us by his far-off seas, 

The Atlantic shore, and the abhorred waves 

Which even the wild barbarian never braves? " 

And all the other monsters of like kind that have been 
conquered, what harm, I ask, could they do us were 
they even now living 1 ? Hone, methinks neither 
these, nor the like of these. But unless the breast is 
cleared, it itself is full of monsters ; rather let us be 
afraid of them, and honour and glorify him who put 
them first to rout. 

Wherefore, walking in his footsteps, I will tell you 
in order how the world arose, and what laws it obeyed 



128 



. ..'av,n fa f,, m( . ( i, , ( , 

! W livin ,. Mll ^ 

' ' 






" Woll, not to dally ,, wiih t ,,j 



> tt , 

.Tw ,1 ' 

.iv au-rack bebin.1 



Btthc 8e mil y f ort barmh from 
Nor w;th & 8igns seo jit to aMur 



orld v i ^ ltans ^curi 
orid. For wliat life or senso is 



to 



the 



ri 

them? Korean they possibly 
ons m them? For TO hare seen 



THE POEM: BOOK V. 



129 



what life is. It cannot exist without a fleshly body ; 
and eVen in that "body it can live only in a certain part. 
Then, too, you cannot possibly believe that the gods 
exist in any parts of the world. Their fine nature is 
far withdrawn from our senses ; the mind itself hardly 
sees them. We cannot touch them ; and how then, I 
ask you, shall they touch us 1 "What folly, too, to say 
that the gods have made the world, and set it in 
order, and arranged it for the use of man] In the 
first place, what could possibly induce them to take 
such trouble 1 

" What could they gain from such a race as ours ? 

Or what advantage could our gratitude 
Yield these immortal and most blessed powers, ' 
That they in auglit should labour for our good 1 " 

Or what new incident could have broken in upon 
them, and made them desirous to change their former 
life ? Or even if they wanted to make a world, where 
did they find any pattern to work by, and how did 
they set about the business 3 or how, again, did they 
ascertain the world-making capabilities of the atoms, 
unless Nature herself, mother of the gods, had shown 
the gods all that she herself could do ? 

" But even had the science ne'er been mine 
Of first beginnings, and liow all began, 
I could show clearly that no power divine 

Helped at the work, and made the world for man ; 
So great the blunders in the vast design, 

So palpably is all without a plan. 
For if 'twere made for us, its structure halts ; 

In every member, full of flaws and faults. 
A.C.S.S. vol. vii. I 



It. 



v ( ' ' 
' 



' , ar "*tx ho or . 
^^ 












of the whole there 

^ i S for 6Vcr 

"*> dust and b eing 



out itt 

^^ ^ on 
fr m tllis >** 

a Iike disro1 ^- 

'^ r brok 11 



is for eyer 
of rays. 





P tjo sun; and the 
lte s ^tance in swift 




THE POEM : BOOK V. ]31 

a So you may see at night such earthly fire, 
* As hanging lamps, and torches blazing bright, 
Darting their flames out, as with keen desire, 

Desire, I say, to feed the wasting light, 
JVliich travelling, still doth on its path expire, 

And would if not renewed be broken quite ; 
But to the dying rays succeed fresh rays, 
And on the wall the light unpausing plays. ; ' 

Again, too, you may see that even stones are con- 
quered by time, high towers moulder and fall down 
crashing, and even the mountain-summits crumble to 
decay. 

Think of this, too, if the -world was ever born, so 
surely will it perish. And it must have had a birth- 
day it cannot have been from everlasting, or else 
some record would have come to us of times before 
the Theban war and the fall of Perganius. 

Again, as I have shown that nothing is solid but 
the atoms, and that void is mixed up with all things, 
and that void and atoms alone can resist all force and 
are indestructible, you may be certain, you surely can 
no longer doubt, that the grave and gate of death is 
gaping for the whole universe. 

Again, I have just shown you how all the elements 
of the world are engaged continually in a fierce in- 
testine war; and to this struggle there must some 
day be an end, either water, fire, or air will one day 
get the mastery, and then there will be the beginning 
of the end. Twice, indeed, even already, they feign 
that the battle has been wellnigh ended, and that 
water once was all but master ; and once again that 



132 



And now, mvH i (I1( , ri , fillH , ... 

i 7 1 i^t m ,i,, M ,j v , , r 

to .Itw-ril),. <}, (ilNl , ,. U> Am o 
1 J 111 " nt ,""- Mi "- 1 the 
'fromit. S(1 ,f ,, " ' ;'*'', .1Uw ft cart 
' ' " '"' """ "" rt ki '"' '/ lwk or 

< ' t1 "' 1 ' Il Ilte '* ', in 



^dually fMBlwl 
And from P iroln off 1R 



ev n 



: -v 



THE POEM: BOOK V. 133 

already; and again refers to the onward changeless 
sweejJ of the ether, which keeps on its even, way, 
unheeding all the turmoil and the storms in the lower 
air, between the earth and it. 

" Onward it ever drives in changeless sweep ; 
And how it still can so hold on and on. 

The Pontic sea may teach you, which doth keep 
Ever due on, nor turns, for any force, 
Its icy current and compulsive course." 

Upon this follows a long series of speculations on 
the motions of the sun and moon, the rest of the 
heavenly ."bodies, and the laws which govern the 
regular recurrence of the seasons, and the changing 
duration of the hours of light and darkness. 

And now, he says, since I have explained in what 
way everything might go on throughout the blue vault 
of heaven, I will go back to the infancy of the world, 
and the tender age of the fields, and show what, 
in their first attempts at child-bearing, they tried 
to raise 

" Up to the shores of light, and gave them there 
Into the keeping of the wandering air. 

In the beginning, then, the clods gave forth 
All kinds of herbage, and a verdant sheen 

"Was glossy on. the hills ; and flowery earth 
Laughed over all her meadows glacl and green : 

Then bushes next, and trees of greater girth, 
Orderly rising into air were seen. ; 

Which things came forth spontaneous everywhere. 

Like a bird's feathers or a horse's hair." 



134 



LUCUKTIUS. 



Then gradually, in UK* manner that lias 1io.cn described 
already, the earth gave birth to men, and amnufls, of 
the kinds that arc now with us :-- 



" But hardier far than we were, those first races 
Of men, mnce e.arth herself did them produce,, 

And braced them with a Tinner frame than "braces 
!!H now, and strung their anus with mightier thews. 

Nor sun nor rain on them left any traces, 
Nor Kidme.HS. And they never learned the use 

Of arts, for ages: but like beasts they ran 

Wild in the woods the early race of man, 

Tlie.ir strong anus knew not how to guide, the plough, 
Or how to plunge the spade and till the plain, 

Or from the tree.B to lop the failing bough. 
But what the, Kim had given them, and the rain, 

They took, and deemed it luxury enow. 
Nor knew they yet the fatal greed of gain. 

But in the woods they sought their simple, store, 

And stripped the trees, and never asked for more. 

For thick the acorns in the forest grew, 

And arbute-trees would yield the. berried prize, 

"Which, in the winter wears a scarlet luio ; 
And the eartlx bore these then of larger sixe ; 

And many another suchlike berry too, 
It, from its yet timnmished granaries, 

Gave gladly forth, more than sufficing then 

To appease the dawning wants of those poor men. 

And like wild herds they clustered to the sound 

Of falling waters, loud in many a dell, 
: To slake their thirst ; and as they roamed, -they found 
The nympks' green haunts, and there began to dwell ; 



THJS POEM: BOOK V. 



135 



For there sweet waters gushed from out the ground 
-In living streams, and on the damp rocks fell 
The damp rocks, green with many a mossy stain 
Then slipt away, and babbled to the plain. 

And they knew nought of fire, nor thought to fling 
The skins of beasts about their nakedness ; 

But the wild wood's roof was their covering, 

Or rugged mountain cave ; and they would press 

Into the brushwood, from the buffeting 

Of rain and storm, and all the weather's stress. 

And nothing yet of rule or law they knew, 

Nor how to keep the weal of all in view. 

Whatever fortune threw in each man's way, 
That each bore off and hoarded as his own, 

To grasp and clutch it as his proper prey, 
Aloof, and living for himself alone. 

And naked in the woods the lovers lay , 
And by her lust or his each girl was won ; 

Or else by force ; or bribed, she heard his suit, 

By little gifts of acorns or ripe fruit. 

And trusting in their strength of hands and feet, 
They would outstrip the wild beasts in the wood ; 

And some to death with ponderous clubs would beat, 
And hide from fiercer ones, who sought their blood : 

And just where night, with noiseless step and fleet, 
O'ertook them, like the dull sow's bristly brood, 

Down on the ground without a thought they lay, 

And burrowing in the leaves slept sound till clay. 

And never waking in the dark, with fright 
Would they cry out, amazed for all the shade, 

And beg the sun to bring them back the light. 
But stolid they would sleep, and undismayed, 



130 LUtlHKTlUH. 

Till rosy morning pleased to climb the height 

Of heaven ; for they, who from thrir birth surveyed 
The light and dark alternate rise and fall, 
Trusted the world, nor feared the end of all." 

]hit this state of things did not last for over. Pro- 
gress began, and Lucretius here. at. length, describes its 
advancing stages -the gradual discoveries of lire, of 
the use of the metals, of liousi'S, of law, of monogamy, 
and all the other elements and influences of civilisa- 
tion. And lie then goes on to account for the rise of 
religion, attributing it, us has been already said, to 
two different causes the sight of the wandering images 
of the gods' forms, and also to ignorance, of tlm hidden 
forces of nature. Then when unco this conception of 
the gods was formed 

" They gave them dwellings in the heavenly light, 
Far oil" and calm ; because for aye appear 

Through the high heaven to roll, the moon and night, 
Moon, day, and night, and all night's stars austere, 

And trailing meteors, vagrant things of light, 
And Hying fires that wander far and near ; 

And because snows ami hail and wind are there, 

And the hoarse threats that thunder through the air." 

hapless race of men, exclaims Lucre-tins, when 
first they 'taxed the gods with having anything to 
do with this world of ours and its management 1 
Little knew they the terror of the chains they were 
binding about themselves; what wounds, what tears 
they were preparing for their children's children i 
For still as we gaze at the vast world around us, t]ie 



THE POEM: BOOK V. 13J 

importunate fear will at times steal into our soul, that 
the power of the gods may be unlimited ; and religion 
begins to raise its reawakening head. 

Having made this digression, Lucretius again re- 
turns to his account of human progress, describing the 
rude, simple pleasures of our earliest ancestors, and 
warning us that luxuries, though inevitably found 
out one after one., and inevitably making us discon- 
tented with what went before, have made us no better 
pleased with the present, though they have made us 
displeased with the past, and that with splendour 
and refinement have come envy and discontent, from 
which the simple savage early world was free. Man- 
kind, he says, therefore, ever toils vainly and to no 
purpose, and wastes life in groundless cares, because 
men have never learnt what is the true end of getting, 
and up to what point true pleasure waxes. This by 
slow degrees has carried life out into the deep sea, and 
stirred up from their lowest depth the mighty billows 
of war. 

And now all has been told, how time by degrees 
brings each several thing before men's eyes, and reason 
raises it up into the borders of the light ; for things in 
their due order must be thus advanced and brought 
forward, until they have arrived at the summit beyond 
which they can go no further. 



138 



1SOOK VL 

lI. lust ]* oftho 



, 
hnt K! m ...... ( MN wVk W1 , w f ' , . 



r w ' W 
!ww '" ttl " a 

.f H . >Se , llmi!t !' Ul w 

K - y limti h 



,,f tnitl, w n,Ml fora 



Tor wlu 
c 

1 ""'" from 



wmi ( , 



plliu om . guc , HU fn , n 



out 



it s ^ 



THE POJSM: BOOK VI. 139 

and showed tlie chief good we should all strive to 
reach, and the narrow track that led to it, And he 
showed that the ills that plague men in this mortal life 
were ills that came from nature from a blind chance 
or force, call it what we will. For the terror that 
heretofore had held men in "bondage, and indeed still 
holds very many of them, is to "be dispelled by reason, 
and by reason only : 

" And now, since I have shown the ethereal plains 
Of heaven are mortal, and the earth below, 

And of all things that lieaven or earth contains 
The life and movement I have striven to show, 

The goal draws near. But something yet remains 
To tell. 1 have another mile to go : 

And in the Muse's car must mount on high, 

'Mid storms and winds, and tell you how they fly. 

For foolish mortals, one and all together, 
Say that the calm high gods, by each caprice 

Of fretful temper swayed, ordain the weather, 
Venting their rage in storms ; and when they cease 

From rage, relenting with a cloudless ether." 

But in order that reason may drive from, us the very 
remembrance of such old-wives' tales as these, and the 
unmanning and senseless fear that they would still, if 
they could, beget in us, I will sing to you of the law 
and aspect of heaven, and of the birth of the storms 
and thunders, and of the bright lightnings, that you 
may see how all goes on by a fixed unbending law, 
that has no thought of man, nor any care about him ; 
and that you may spare your pains, and never look to 



140 



LUCRETIUS. 



the skies for omens, nor lieed a jot from what quarter 
the volant fire has fallen. 

Thunder, in the first place, is the produce of clash- 
ing clouds, which either flap in the wind like canvas 
stretched and tossing over theatres, or, filled full^of 
wind inside, "burst suddenly as a distended "bladder 
does. 

It lightens, too, when the clouds have struck out by 
their collisions many seeds of fire; but we hear the 
thunder after we have seen the lightning, because, 
though the two are really simultaneous, the sound 
travels more slowly than the light does. There are 
also other ways in which the clouds 

" Dye all the landscape with their winged light, 

And with a rapid quivering flashes out 
The sailing storm/' 

For sometimes the fire is caused, not by the clouds 
themselves, but by the wind working its way into 
them, and growing hot by its own velocity. This 
takes place, you must know, when the clouds are very 
dense, and are piled up into the heaven to an unima- 
ginable height : 

" For do but note what time the storm-wind wild 

Comes carrying clouds like mountains through the air, 
Or on the mountain's selves the clouds are piled 

Motionless, and each wind is in its lair, 
Then may you mark those mountain-masses proud, 
And huge caves built of hanging rocks of cloud." 

Well, it is through these cloud-mountains that the 
storm raves and prowls, and pent amongst the caves 



THE POEM: BOOK VI. 



HI 



and precipices, howls like a pack of wild beasts, and, 
seeking a way out, rolls together seeds of fire, and at 
last conies "bursting out in forky flashes. 

And now I will tell you another thing ; I will tell 
you by what law 

" The mighty thunderbolt- 
Goes through the walls of houses like a shout ; " 

piercing things that no earthly fire can pierce nay, 
not even the fire of the sun in heaven. Lucretius ful- 
fils his promise at great length, and devotes nearly two 
hundred lines, of no great interest, to his account of 
these thunderbolts; asking in the middle, not with- 
out pertinence, why, if they were hurled, as was said 
commonly, by the gods, to execute their vengeance, 
so many of them fell in the seas and deserts, and why 
-the rest so rarely hit the only people for whom they 
possibly could have been intended. 

From these subjects he passes on to the laws of 
earthquakes, the way in which the sea is still supplied 
with water, although so much is being constantly evap- 
orated off its surface, the action of volcanoes, the rise 
and fall of the Nile, and a variety of other minor phe- 
nomena. He then at great length gives his explana- 
" tion of the action of the magnet ; and then suddenly 
leaps from this to a very short passage on the laws of 
the propagation of disease, which he traces to various 
conditions of climate, and the perpetual flying about 
in the air of particles that are hurtful to life, when 
attacking it under certain conditions. And it makes, 
he says, no difference whether we travel to places un - 
favourable to us, and change the atmosphere wliich 



142 



LUCRETIUS 



.wraps us round, or whether nature without our choice 
brings to us an atmosphere unsuited to us, or something 
to the use of which we have not been accustomed, and 
which is able to attack us on its first arrival. 

He then, without more preface, at once plunges into 
a description of the great plague at Athens, borrowed 
from the celebrated account given by Thucydides. 
Such a form, of disease, he says, and a death-fraught 
miasma, once within the borders of Cecrops defiled 
the whole land with dead, and unpeopled the streets, 
and drained the city of its citizens. Eising first and 
starting from the innermost borders of Egypt, having 
travelled through long reaches of air and over floating 
fields of sea, the plague pitched at last on the whole 
people of Athens : 

" The pestilence would first the head assail, 

And then the bloodshot eyes, wherein there stood 

A dull set fire. ; and next the throat grew pale 
Inside, and all its passage blotched with blood. 

Then ulcers formed, anon the voice would fail ; 
The tongue, the spirit's spokesman, would exude 

Blood also, and relaxed in every string, 

Lolled in the mouth a parched and listless thing, 

Hext down the throat the insidious pest would glide, 
And through the breast assault the heart's own door; 

Then slowly would the vital power subside, 
And through the month a stench begin to pour 

With the decaying breath." 

And so the description goes on for about a hundred 
and twenty lines, adding detail of this kind to detail, 
touching by the way on the agony and despair of the 



THE POEM: BOOK VL 



143 



sufferers how no remedy could be found anywhere 
and at the appalling spectacle 

" How medicine muttered low with voiceless fear." 

Ani this above all, says Lucretius, heaped death on 
death ; whenever any refused to attend their own 
sick, killing neglect soon after would punish them for 
their too great love of life, by visiting them in their 
turn with as foul an end, abandoned in their turn, 
and forlorn of help. 

" They too who stayed to tend the beds of death, 
Themselves anon were seen to dioop and die, 
Drawing contagion from the tainted breath 

That thanked tliem for their kindness piteously." 

And at length so great was the mortality, so many 
were the bodies in vain crying for burial, that the old 
rites of sepulture continued no more in the city, with 
which pious folk of old had been always wont to be 
buried : for everything was confusion and dismay, and 
each man would sorrowfully bury his own, in any way 
the present moment allowed. 

" And many a direful deed did men do then, 

Urged on by sudden want and poverty ; 
Por on the funeral pyres of other men 

'They thrust their own poor kin uproariously; 
And wranglings rose, and oft their blood they'd shed, 
Dogged, and dying ere they'd leave their dead." 

And with these lines the poem of Lucretius ends. 



CHAPTEE Y. 



LTJCB-ETIUS AS A POET. 

SOMETHING lias now been seen of what Lucretius did, 
under both its aspects. We have examined each of 
the two things he gave to the world, and for which 
the world remembers him his system of natural 
science, and the poem in which he set that system 
forth. It now remains to us to glance back over both 
of these, and to take some general view of them, that 
we may form some estimate of the place their author 
held both as a poet and a man of science ; and also 
which is a matter of deeper interest how he stands, 
when compared with us, in relation to the deeper and 
the more perplexed questions of life. 

We will consider him first in the character under 
which he is most generally known and spoken of, the 
character simply of a poet. 

And here the first and most obvious remark to make 
is, that though Lucretius was by his genius most un- 
doubtedly a great poet, yet, judging of his work as a 
whole, he has very certainly not written a great poem. 
We must say in this case, as Ottilia's tutor says in 
Goethe's novel, " We presume capabilities ; we require 



LUCRETIUS AS A POET. 



145 



accomplishments." And the " Essay on the Nature of 
Things " is not an accomplished poem. The very sub- 
ject itself, and still more the sort of treatment that, 
for his own purposes, Lucretius thought essential to it, 
shift out all possibility of its ever being this. By far 
the larger number of his verses are devoted to explain- 
ing facts which not only afford naturally no material 
for poetry, but which can only be approached fitly in 
the absence of all poetical excitation. Instead, there- 
fore, of putting poetry into the phenomena he has to 
deal with, Lucretius has, in the bulk of his work, to 
root out all that man has already put there. Man, 
and man's passions, and the human sense of beauty 
without these there can be no poetry. Nature is 
poetical only as connected with these. And when 
Lucretius deals with nature, it is his great aim to lull 
passion, fancy, and all emotion to rest, and coldly and 
calmly to see things as they really are. Much poetry, 
as we" all know, has been written about the moon, 
and we know well enough the sort of moods of which 
most of this poetry is the outcome. But when Lucre- 
tius writes of the moon, no such moods are his. The 
moon to him is simply a phenomenon, to be observed 
coldly, and with no passion, till the secret of its move- 
ments is explained, and every trace of mystery stolen 
from it. So, too, with all the rest of nature the sun, 
the stars, the lightning, the thunder, the storm, the 
clouds, light, vision, and finally human life, and human 
passion itself all is to be treated coldly and dispas- 
sionately; interrogated and cross -questioned in the 
pure spirit of prose, though committed afterwards into 
A.C.S.S. vol. vii. K 



146 



LUCRETIUS 



a form of verse. But it is a form only a form that 
cannot deceive us. The voice is still Jacob's voice 3 
though the hands are the hands of Esau. But it is 
enough to say that Lucretius, in the bulk of his work, 
writes as a man of science and in that is said conclu- 
sively that he cannot be writing as a poet. The poet 
and the man of science may both be dealing with the 
same object ; but the poet, when he deals with nature, 
tries to raise the commonplace into the region of the 
mysterious ; the man of science tries to bring down 
the mysterious to the level of the commonplace. And 
even when the two come to the same conclusion about 
the same thing, they would no more speak the same 
words or think the same thoughts about it, than would 
a lover and a physician who were watching the same 
girl dying. 

Considering, therefore, that a good four-fifths of the 
work of Lucretius is intentionally, and in its very 
essence, nothing but pure prose only prose versified 
it is hardly to be expected that it will, as a whole, 
give us the pleasure of a poem, or indeed leave us. with 
the impression that we have been reading one. Poetry, 
however, runs everywhere through it, like metallic 
veins in an ore ; and this poetry is of a very high and 
a very varied quality, though the scattered state in 
which it has thus been given to us has done much to 
hinder its popularity, and apparently made its author 
merely a poet's poet amongst the ancients, as it has left 
him a scholar's poet amongst the moderns. 

[For many reasons this is much to be regretted, so 
great and powerful, as a poet's, his genius was; and 



AS A POET. 147 

not this only, "but so versatile. Eew poets of antiquity 
show such a range of power and feeling, such a com- 
bination of humour with gravity, and of tenderness 
with indignation. Of all these qualities specimens 
have been given ; and though little justice can be done 
to them, in translation, something of their nature will 
be sufficiently obvious to the reader. There are one 
or two others that it may be less superfluous to dwell 
upon. First of these is the rude fierce vigour of his 
imagination, which will not be content with a hazy 
presentation of anything, but will have it dragged close 
before us solid, bare, and naked, as when, in dis- 
cussing whether the universe be infinite, he bids us 
picture its bound, if any bound there be to it, and 
asks what will happen then if we were 'to hurl a javelin 
into the space beyond. In this quality of keen ex- 
ternal observation, this attention to the material aspect 
of things, this habit of conceiving everything in some 
imaginable or picturable form, he seems to have sur- 
passed all the ancient poets, and not unfrequently puts 
us in mind of Dante. And he has in virtue of this a 
quality which makes him, in one particular way, seem 
to us not so much an ancient as a modern, that is, 
his manner of describing scenery, and all the changing 
aspects of the outer world. Of all ancient poets, in- 
deed, he is perhaps the most picturesque. The early 
aspect of morning, the low sunlight striking along the 
dewy grasses, the grey mist going up from the lakes and 
rivers these, and things like these, he describes almost 
as Wordsworth might have described them. There are 
other pictures, too, equally vivid such as that of the 



148 



LUCRETIUS 



square towers of a town, which, as we approach them, 
look rounded in the haze of distance ; or that of the 
coloured awnings flapping above the crowded theatre, 
with the bright-coloured sunlight pouring down, through 
them. Then, again, there are descriptions of storms 
and storm-clouds, their shapes, their movements, their 
slow weird changes, which are not unlike the verse 
of Shelley or the pictures of Turner, and to which 
no counterpart can be found in ancient literature. 
There are, too, a number of lesser touches such as 
his mention of the way in which, as we walk at morn- 
ing, our faces are brushed by the dewy threads of the 
gossamers, or by floating balls of thistle-down. "Whilst 
to heighten the effect of these, and to fill it in, we 
have perpetual allusion to the way in which our other 
senses, besides that of sight, are touched by the outer 
things of nature ; how our nostrils, for instance, are 
met with a pungent smell as soon as a night-light is 
extinguished suddenly or how the air by the sea- 
shore breathes on our faces salt, with the moist brine. 
In fact, Lucretius, more than any other of the great 
ancient poets, seems to bring back to us the atmosphere. 
of the past. We seem, as we read him, to be actually 
breathing the air that he breathed, to be smelling the 
same smells, and hearing the same noises, and to see- 
the skies, and seas, and hills, through the same liquid 
distance. 

We must be careful, however, not to read our own 
sentiments into Lucretius ; nor to think that, though 
he gives us all the pictures of storm, and cloud, and 
sunshine, of sea and valley, as accurately, and with as 



AS A POET. 



149 



much care, as a modern poet might, that he was like a 
modern poet in his feeling about them. The case is 
quite otherwise. In his descriptions of nature, Lu- 
cretius is a utilitarian, not a sentimentalist. His de- 
scriptions are not pictures to "be looked at for them- 
selves ; they are diagrams to illustrate the text of his 
scientific discourses. Some pleasure, no doubt, even 
as pictures, they did give to him; but this pleasure 
was secondary, and in many cases he would seem to 
be hardly conscious of it. Only dimly, and in the 
shape of the animal quickening of the spirits brought 
about in the spring-time, or in the sensuous pleasure of 
lying on green grass and feeling the cool shelter of 
trees, does he seem to have realised what joy a man 
may have in the world's outer beauty. And in this he 
was like all the other ancient, as contrasted with the 
modern poets. But the ancient poets as a rule not 
only felt less for nature than we do, but they also said 
less about it, and therefore the contrast between them 
and us is less striking. 

Eut though Lucretius did not, as "Wordsworth or 
Shelley did, nor even as Ausonius, Claudian, and the 
later Latin poets, feel the beauty of nature as a spec- 
tacle, moving them by its varied outlines and its ever- 
changing shades and colours, he did feel to the full the 
sublimity of it, as a vast immeasurable force, revealing 
itself indiscriminately now in this way, now in that 
in the earthquake, in the thunderstorm, or the power 
of turbulent waters. This feeling, however, we must 
remember is very different from that which prompted 
such lines as these : 



150 LUCRETIUS 

" There are two voices one is of tlie sea. 
And one is of the mountains both divine.; 
They were thy chosen music, Liberty." 

ISTature is the hero of the poem, of Lucretius ; but it is 
not a hero that has any sympathy with man, or can be 
anything to man, excepting in so far as man can use it. 
Eor the rest it is celebrated as a thing of boundless 
power, and, as such, a thing sublime and awful, but a 
thing as well of boundless impotence, that is exalted 
by the poet, only to be again dragged down by him, 
and which he would teach man to look at with fearless 
and equal eyes. Lucretius has no desire to worship 
Nature, sublime as, in its power, he feels it to be. He 
feels rather a sense of still greater sublimity in achiev- 
ing the splendid victory over his own impulse to wor- 
ship it, and the same impulse in other men, by which 
he knows that they too are tormented. 

This is the one notion that runs through his whole 
poem ; he is man's champion, as against all other forces. 
He tilts like a knight-errant against every form of 
terror, one by one unhorsing them, and leaving them 
disarmed and prostrate ; charging first at the most im- 
portunate and the most formidable, and then, having 
cleared the ground about him, demolishing at his 
leisure the lighter and more scattered squadrons. 

And thus though his poem, as we have said, is com- 
posed so largely of what is properly speaking pure 
prose, if we look at it by the light of the writer's in- 
tention, instead of what he has actually accomplished, 
we shall come to see in it the outlines of a true poetic 
whole. We shall see that there is in it something 



AS A POET. 151 

epic ; we shall see in it one single purpose "being worked 
out to its end without pause and this purpose an 
heroic one the destruction by a mortal man of all the 
terrible immortals, and the robbing the whole frame of 
things of their immemorial menace. We shall see that 
in the arrangement of the argument there is poetic art 
also, as it gradually rises in the middle to the demoli- 
tion of that stronghold of religion, the immortality of 
the soul, and then slowly brings us to confront lighter 
difficulties, as though a storm were slowly drifting 
away from us, and letting a gradual sunlight in on us 
through the clearing skies. 

Of course, in yiew of this, it may be contended by 
some that the " Essay on the Nature of Things " must 
take rank, as a whole, as a great complete poem. To 
a certain extent disputes of this kind are disputes of 
words merely, and there is little good in pursuing 
them. Perhaps we shall gain the best notion of the 
true poetic character of the poem of Lucretius as a 
whole by comparing it to the history of Herodotus, 
which has, as a whole, a fully equal title to be con- 
sidered poetry. There is in Herodotus the same epic 
treatment, the same quasi artistic massing of materials, 
the same constant presence of potential poetry, the same 
constant presence of actual prose. But in the fate of 
the two writers there has been this difference, that 
whereas the poetry of Herodotus has been as wings to his 
prose, the prose of Lucretius has been a dead weight 
on his poetry ; and in addition to this, there is yet 
another misfortune to be mentioned that the poetry 
of Lucretius has been also a dead weight on his science. 



CHAPTEE VI. 



LUCRETIUS AND MODEBN THOUGHT. 

A DEEPEB consideration, now remains for us. We have 

seen what Lucretius was as a man of science. "We 

have seen also what he was as a poet. In his first 

capacity, if he is judged on his own merits, his work 

will seem to us hut an antique curiosity a piece of 

scientific bric-a-brac. Judged of as a poet, we may each 

give him what place we will. But the special tastes, 

neither of the antiquary nor of the literary critic, 

are tastes of the first importance, or of any universal 

interest. Books were made for men, not men for 

books. Art and poetry are valuable only if they can be 

absorbed into life : life is not valuable because it can be 

absorbed into art and poetry. And though Lucretius, 

as a distinct subject of study, may afford keen pleasure 

to some of us, and seem a matter of really very grave 

moment, we should recollect, to the world in general, 

how trivial such mere student's interests are. Looking 

on Lucretius, however, in another light, not as scholars, 

or as critics, or as literary epicures, it is possible to 

connect him with other interests that are of really vital 

moment interests to the house of which science, and 



LUCRETIUS AND MODERN THOUGHT. 153 

art, and literature, are properly only doorkeepers. And 
yet, even looked upon in this way, lie will suggest 
thought, rather than dictate it. To many of us, how- 
ever, he can hardly fail of being very suggestive. 

To "begin then. "We have already seen in some 
detail what his science was. Let us now briefly com- 
pare that science, and the methods it was founded on, 
with the science of our own day. If we consider the 
various details of his theory of things, and judge of 
these by the exact form which he gave to them, it is, 
of course, plain at a glance how remote they are from 
what we now hold to be true. It will be seen, to a 
certain extent, that this could not be otherwise, if we 
merely consider what his conception was of the size 
and shape of the universe a conception which he 
seems to have adopted with but small reflection, and 
the truth of which he took but small pains to verify. 

But his science differs from ours in a deeper way 
than in any such superficial grotesquencss of detail. 
The entire foundation of his system is essentially 
defective and insecure. His first principles are crude, 
loose, and puerile. Such, for instance, is his concep- 
tion of gravity, and this conception is the, corner-stone 
of his whole edifice. Weight, as he explains it (weight 
with him being the one motor power in thc3 universe), 
and the tendency of every substance to be for ewer 
falling downwards, is, strictly speaking, unthinkable. 
How, in infinity, can there be either an up or down ? 
Starting with a premiss like tins, it is clearly impos- 
sible that he can know anything scientifically of the 
laws of motion. It is evident then, even if we go on 



154 



LUCRETIUS. 



farther, from the very nature of the case, what a want 
there will be in any explanation he can possibly have 
to offer, us. 

And there are many more wants of a like kind an 
absence of many conceptions which we now see to*" be 
essential to a true understanding of almost anything. 
Chief amongst these is his incapacity to conceive of 
the propagation of energy without the propagation of 
matter. Of how things can interact on each other 
from a distance by means of waves, of tremors, of 
vibrations, he knows nothing, he dreams nothing. All 
material interaction is conceived of by him in the crude 
form of material projection. A word, for instance, is 
a body with a definite shape, which strikes our ears as 
a stone might. Our sight of a door is produced by 
the whole of that door's surface striking our eyes, as 
a stone might. And all kindred phenomena are ex- 
plained in a like way. 

With so narrow and incomplete a conception of the 
powers that matter might possess, and of the aspects 
under which it was necessary to study and observe 
it, it is evident that under no circumstances could 
he have arrived at any real truth about things. And 
even on his own showing, his own first principles 
are quite inadequate, and he is perpetually mak- 
ing to them certain vague and unacknowledged addi- 
tions. To take, for instance, his theory of vision, and 
the perpetual emanation of films from the surface 
of things, he makes no attempts to explain why this 
emanation takes place. Matter, according to him, 
tends to always fall, unless forced upwards by other 



* 

LUCRETIUS AND MODERN THOUGHT. 155 

matter, or -unless rebounding off it. If this he the 
I only tendency of matter, it is clearly inexplicable why 

I the surface of everything should he for ever flying off 

I from it, at an incalculable velocity, not downwards 

f only, but upwards and sideways also. 

^ Again, he seems often to have a momentary glimpse of 

i laws, with which, as if by accident, he explains some 

1 single phenomenon, and then forgets and never again 

j recurs to them. Thus he seems to have some notion 

{ that the velocity of falling bodies will be in some pro- 

portion to the distance they have to fall. It is in this 
way he explains the extreme heat of the mid-day sun. 
The films of the sun, he says, have so far to fall that 
when they reach us they strike us very forcibly. 3But 
of the property of bodies that this explanation really 
implies, he takes no further notice whatsoever. 

Again, many of his explanations are actually no ex- 
planations at all. In his theory of vision, for instance, 
he makes no attempt of any kind to explain why the 
eyes are sensitive, and they alone, to the action of the 
visual films of things. In his account of the birth of 
the first human beings from the earth itself, he simply 
states a number of facts which, even had they been 
true, would have need of explanation themselves, just 
as much as the thing they purported to explain ; and 
again, there are a number of other cases in which he 
only becomes more definite by deserting altogether 
his own first principles, and supplanting them, for 
the time being, with those of the earlier physicists, 
and attributing to inanimate matter the qualities of a 
living organism.' He thus, as an explanation of the 



15G 



LUCRETIUS. 



movements of some of the heavenly bodies, says that 
they possibly wander pasturing through the fields of 
heaven, each one seeking after its own proper food. 
And he thinks likewise that he has explained the 
appearance of vegetation on the earth's surface, by 
saying that it grew from it as hairs do from the 
skins of some animals, and feathers from the skins 
of others. 

This is a subject that can only be touched on 
here in the briefest and most cursory way. That 
Lucretius did little to explain the actual truth of 
things is evident enough, without any comment at 
all. And enough has now been said to show that even 
had he possessed far better means for investigating 
the facts of nature, he would have been still unable 
to explain them, from his confused and limited notion 
of the ways in which that explanation was to be 
sought. 

The aim of science is to simplify as far as possible 
the multiplicity of phenomena, to trace in them the 
actions of common laws and principles, and thus to 
reduce the mystery of existence to a minimum, if not 
to do away with it altogether. And this Lucretius 
does not do. He states his principles clearly, and he 
continually employs them. But they are never really 
adequate ; and there are also many cases in which . 
he does not employ them at all ; and many others 
in which, though they are employed, they are sup- 
plemented by him unconsciously by additional prin- 
ciples, with which he makes no attempt to bring 
them into any connection. And thus his whole sys- 



LUCRETIUS AND MODERN THOUGHT. 157 

tern, in the form he gave it, is utterly unsound and 
unstable ; and even though it could not be disproved 
from without, it would have the principles of its own 
confutation within. 

Partly a cause and partly a result of this was the 
imperfect method which Lucretius for the most part 
followed. The method on which his conclusions rested 
was for the most part that of analogy, not of induction. 
These two methods are not opposed to each other, nor 
are they mutually exclusive. The first is properly the 
supplement of the second ; the second is the critic of 
the first. Analogy suggests explanations ; induction 
chooses between those suggested. To modern science' 
this choice is all-important. Lucretius seems to think 
it comparatively immaterial. Modern science interro- 
gates Nature with a view to showing how things are 
accomplished. The science of Lucretius interrogated 
Nature with a view to showing how things might ~be 
accomplished. And thus it is that such science as Ms 
was in its very nature not progressive, and could give 
men no additional mastery over matter. 

Nor, indeed, did it even aim at doing so. The spirit 
that inspired it, and the spirit that inspires modern 
science, are different things. Knowledge, for its own 
sake, is the first thing desired by the latter. Know- 
ledge, for the sake of discrediting supernatural agency, 
is the first thing desired by the former. So far as his 
mere analysis of matter goes, it is true that Lucretius 
employs a more accurate method of reasoning than that 
of mere analogy. He gives us there instances of genu- 
ine, if of somewhat crude, induction. But from that 



158 



LUCRETIUS. 



point forward his main concern is to suggest the possi- 
ble, rather than discern the actual. The skeleton of his 
argument is as follows : " We see a number of things 
happen day by day, which we all of us admit to "be 
natural, and which we attribute to no divine agency. 
Every event that men say the gods accomplish, I can 
show, by strict analogy, is no more supernatural than 
these are, and is no jot more wonderful." Thus, when 
he says that thunder is often caused by the bursting 
of a cloud distent with wind, as a bladder bursts, his 
aim is not so much to show that such is the actual 
cause of thunder, as that thunder, whatever its cause, 
is really as homely a phenomenon as one of the most 
trivial events of life, that we all admit has nothing 
divine about it. This will account, too, for his fancy- 
ing he has explained the action of lifeless matter, by 
comparing it to the action or the growth of an animal. 
The suppressed premiss is, the animal is not divine. 
It seeks its food, or its feathers grow, without the 
intervention of the gocls. The aid of the gods is no 
more needful to explain why the stars roam through 
heaven, or why living things grow from the lifeless 
earth. 

But great as are the differences between this science 
of Lucretius and that of modern times, we must not 
forget how much they have in common. His very 
method is but a part of the modern method, or rather 
it may be said that it is the modem method in its 
infancy. Both start with the same fundamental no- 
tion, that for the sum of things there may be found 
a natural explanation ; that everything is part of a 



LUCRETIUS AND MODERN THOUGHT. 159 

single order ; that tHs order is to "be understood by 
observation, not by assumption ; that the only organs 
of observation are the senses ; and that the unknown, 
which the senses cannot reach directly, they can reach 
indirectly through the known that is immediately 
before them. Thus one of the most grotesque of the 
doctrines of Lucretius that of the size of the sun, 
moon, and stars is founded, as has been observed 
already, on an approach to the true method. 

But not only in many places does he approach the 
true method, but in his more general views of things 
he all but arrives at what are now held to be the true 
conclusions. His general forecast of what the order 
of things must be is the same as that of our modern 
speculators. His scientific prescience is the same as 
theirs ; only he is like a Moses, who may merely see 
the promised land afar. He cannot go over Jordan and 
make it really his own, see what are the actual grapes 
that grow there, and enter into the cities walled up to 
heaven. He has planned a conquest, but he has not 
really made it. 

How insecure his structure was, how easily injured 
by the very arguments by which it was supported 
what a contrast it presents in this way to the struc- 
ture of modern science must be apparent to any one 
who examines it. There is hardly a detail in it that 
does not exemplify this. Eor instance, it will be re- 
membered that he explains the phenomenon of re- 
flection, by saying that images rebound from things 
that are smooth and liard. An antagonist might at 
once ask him how he accounted for the reflections 



160 



LUCRETIUS. 



II 1 



in water. He lays it down in speaking of the 
soul entering the body, that " whatever oozes in 
through, another thing is dissolved, and therefore 
dies." An antagonist might ask him how, were this 
true, images could pass through glass. Again, as* to 
these same images, it might he asked of him. how 
things so fine, as he conceives them to "be, could carry 
air before them, as he says they do ; or how this air 
could pass, as on his principles it must, through trans- 
parent things, which are evidently air-proof. In 
another place he says that, " if the mind be immortal, 
it must have five senses. But there can be no senses 
apart from the body." And yet he attributes to the 
mind one of the most important of all the senses 
namely, sight. It sees, he says, just as the eyes do, 
only its vision is provoked by finer images. In his 
account of the voice, and the way in which we hear 
it, he says that a word as soon as it is uttered splits 
up into a number of words, and can thus be heard 
by a number of people at the same time. His own 
manner of reasoning might be used against him here. 
Words being material, cannot be infinitely divisible. 
If they split into any great number, they will become 
inaudible. But it may be said that when we hear a 
word, a number of such words enter our ears. "Were 
that so, the more people there were within reach of a 
voice, the weaker to each one would that voice sound, 
as there would be fewer of these wandering words to 
enter the ears of each ; and thus, suppose a room were 
filled with a thousand people, each of these would 
hear worse than if it were only filled with a hundred 



LUCRETIUS AND MODERN THOUGHT. 161 

people. These are but a few instances out of many, 
of the way in which Lucretius can he confuted by 
his own reasoning. 

But if we consider the general result of his teaching 
nis first principles and his last conclusions if we 
consider these as he taught them, and not the ways by 
which he arrived at and supported them, we shall see 
that, as far as these go, his message to the world and 
that of modem science is practically identical. Human 
life, in both systems, is the same momentary pheno- 
menon in the great and ever-changing evolution of 
things. It is the result of a power that knew not what 
it did in creating it. A little while it is, and again a 
little while and it is not. It is hut a bubble on the 
surface of the great flux of matter. It is an isolated 
thing, connected with no interests beyond itself. It 
is to be judged of and ordered with reference to itself 
solely. It is to be valued solely on account of its 
present resources, and all these resources are to be 
expressed in terms of conscious and of realised happi- 
ness. Lucretius says this as distinctly, and thought 
he could prove it as surely, as Professor Huxley or 
August e Comte. In relation to human life then in 
relation, that is, to the thing that alone gives any- 
thing any interest for us the materialism of Lucretius 
and the materialism of our own clay are in exactly the 
same position. 

But this leads us on to the consideration of another 
and a deeper difference than any we have before been 
dwelling on. This is, that life itself is not the same 
thing for us as it was for Lucretius. Men's eyes have 

A.O.S.S. vol. vii L 



i 



162 



LUCRETIUS. 



been opened since Ms day, and" they have become 
conscious of new difficulties ; they have had new ex- 
periences of which he knew little or nothing. Since 
he lived, religion and philosophy have transmuted the 
face of life, and have unfolded in human nature*ca- 
pacities that were before not bargained for. 

To begin with what is commonly called philosophy, 
it can hardly fail to strike any one who is in the least 
acquainted with metaphysical speculation how strangely 
confused Lucretius is in his treatment of mind and 
matter \ how little he sees the difficulty of tracing the 
connection between the universe we are conscious of, 
and the mind that is conscious of it; how little he 
sees what sensation really is ; how completely he con- 
founds it with the external cause that produces it. 
To say that without a mind to conceive what we call 
the universe, no universe is conceivable, to say that 
mind creates matter just as truly as matter creates 
mind, is, to any one at all trained in exact thinking, a 
commonplace. Eut to the whole side of the question 
here indicated Lucretius seems an entire stranger. 
Many of our most eminent modern physicists are prac- 
tically much in his case, it is true and remind us, to 
quote the words of one of themselves, " what drivellers 
even men of strenuous intellect may become, through 
exclusively dwelling and dealing with," not, as this 
writer says, "theological chimeras," but with the 
physical side of things merely, to the exclusion of the 
metaphysical. Eut they, though they practically lose 
sight of the other side of the question, yet theoretically 
acknowledge, for the most part, that the other side 



LUCRETIUS AND MODERN THOUGHT. 163 

exists; and is only not a subject for study, because 
it is so great a mystery that no study can unravel it. 
The following are the words of Professor Tyndall : 

The passage from the physics of the brain to the corre- 
sponding facts of consciousness is unthinkable. Granted 
that a definite thought and a definite molecular action in 
the brain occur simultaneously ; we do not possess the in- 
tellectual organ, nor apparently any rudiment of the organ, 
which would enable us to pass by a process of reasoning from 
the one to the other. They appear together, but we do 
not know why. Were our mind and senses so expanded 
as to see and feel the very molecules of the brain, were 
we capable of following all their motions, all their group- 
ings, all their electric discharges, if such there be ; and 
were we intimately acquainted with the corresponding 
state of thought and feeling, we should be as far as ever 
from the solution of the problem, ' How are these physical 
processes connected with the facts of consciousness '1 7 The 
chasm between the two classes of phenomena would remain 
intellectually impassable." 

But of this difficulty Lucretius knows nothing. He 
does not see that two classes of phenomena exist at all, 
and how closely each is dependent upon the other. 
As a suggestive illustration of the gulf between his 
mind and the modern mind with regard to this ques- 
tion, we may compare his words with the words of a 
modern poet, where the two are contemplating the 
same event, and expressing it in almost the same 
language. A passage in which Lucretius speaks of 
the destruction of the existing universe has been 
already quoted, describing how one day it shall all 
crumble, naelt, and utterly pass away, and leave no- 



164 



LUCRETIUS. 



tiling behind it but invisible atoms and deserted space. 
Exactly the same thing has been said in words which 
we all know far better. 

" Like the baseless fabric of this vision, r 
The cloud-capt towers, the gorgeous palaces, 
The solemn temples, the great globe itself, 
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve, 
And, like this insubstantial pageant faded, 
Leave not a rack behind. "\Ye are such stuff 
As dreams are made of, and our little life 
Is rounded with a sleep." 

But how differently do Lucretius and Shakespeare con- 
ceive of the same catastrophe that is predicted in the 
verse of both of them ! Lucretius simply means that 
the world which is made up of atoms will be one day 
shattered, and become atoms again ; it will, in short, 
be pulverised and reduced to the dust that it was made 
of. But Shakespeare means far more than this. To 
him the atoms and the dust are no more lasting than 
the universe that has been built, or that has built, 
itself, out of them. They, too, are an insubstantial 
pageant likewise ; they, too, have no existence but in 
dreams the dreams the stuff of which we ourselves 
are made of. The language of Shakespeare may not 
be strictly philosophical, but it expresses a meaning 
that is at the root of all philosophy ; it expresses a 
meaning which Lucretius seems to have had no 
glimpse of. 

But not only is his position with regard to philo- 
sophy so different to what ours is ; his position with 
regard to the worth of life, and religion as connected 



LUCRETIUS AND MODERN- THOUGHT. 165 

with life, is even more different. The crude and 
puerile theology with which he had to combat, it was 
easy enough to prove a useless factor in any theory of 
the conduct or existence of life. Starting with his 
enTpty space and atoms, as the raw material of every- 
thing, he could show easily enough that no such gods 
as the world, he knew, believed in, could "be of any as- 
sistance in explaining how the universe was manufac- 
tured. But the God which modern science encounters, 
and whose aid it is endeavouring to dispense with, is 
a very different God from these ; He is a God to whom 
time and space are nothing, and who is "behind the 
atoms themselves, making them what they are, and 
being the one cause of their existence. The ways in 
which modern theists have expressed the connection 
of God with the world, and the creation of the world, 
have been very various both in form and meaning. 
But to take as an instance such a phrase as this, 
" The universe is a thought of God," they one and all 
show us how different a thing is the theism we are 
calling in question now, to that which was called in 
question in the ancient world. And that theism has 
thus grown a profounder thing, shows us also how the 
world has grown more and more to see the profundity 
of the enigma of existence for which it has held 
theism to be the only solution. 

The mere enigma of existence, however, is not the 
only one that now confronts us. "We find ourselves 
perplexed by problems that are yet more importunate, 
and yet more difficult to deal with problems not con- 
cerning the origin of the world, and of life and con- 



166 



LUCRETIUS. 



sciousness, but with the use to be made' of life and 
consciousness when originated. Men during the last 
two thousand years have been growing more and more 
conscious of a worth, a solemnity, and a purpose in 
human life. They have felt more and more that e it 
must have some important end ; they have been 
troubled more and more with aspirations towards 
things they have named holy, and high, and sacred. 
They have become convinced that these are the things 
they ought to live for, and that life is something 
worse than worthless if they fail to do so. And all 
this inward consciousness has associated itself, and 
been absorbed into, then? conception of God, a God 
to whom they felt that they were rising, and who on 
his part was, they felt, condescending to them. 

Whilst, however, the ideal of life has been thus grow- 
ing, thus taking a grander and more august shape, and 
been catching brighter colours and a purer light, the 
actual facts of life have remained much the same. And 
thus the contrast between what ought to be and what is 
has grown more marked, more painful, and more per- 
plexing, and men have come to be tortured with a new 
set of doubts and questions. Is the moral life only a 
dream *? If it be not if it be the real end of man how 
is it that it seems so few can attain to it ? If justice 
be the thing that in some moods we feel it to be, how is 
it that injustice seems everywhere to have the mastery *? 

Germs of this view of life are doubtless to be traced 
in Lucretius ; but they were not distinct enough in 
his mind, or often enough present with him, to perplex 
his view of things, and his facile explanation of the 



LUCRETIUS AND MODERN THOUGHT. 167 

universe. How easily, for instance, and with what 
slipshod ingenuity, does he dispose of the problem of 
free-will ! How little does he see how much, at least 
to some men's reason, may seem to hang on a denial 
of it ! The contrast between his attitude and that of 
men in later ages, in the presence of the same facts, 
and trained in the same school of reasoning, is illus- 
trated very forcibly by a comparison between him and 
the Persian philosopher-poet, Omar Khayyam, now so 
well known to English readers through the translation 
of Mr Fitzgerald. Omar, like Lucretius, was a materi- 
alist; and like Lucretius, by virtue of his materialism, 
was a disbeliever in all theology. But to Lucretius 
this disbelief was pure gain. Tor the Persian, it raises 
as many problems as it solves. Both say alike that 
there is no God, and no life hereafter. But Lucretius 
says this with an earnest and grave content. Omar 
says it with a fierce despair, and would reason and ob- 
servation let him, he would gladly embrace the faith 
that he is thrusting from him ; and this gives to his 
language a passionate bitterness that in Lucretius is 
quite wanting. The presence of a mindless uniformity 
everywhere, that takes no heed of man, and knows 
nothing of him, Lucretius contemplates with com- 
placency. Omar discerns in such a spectacle food for 
another temper. He sees that not only is nature thus 
"rid of her haughty lords," which is all that Lucretius 
sees, but that the soul of man is rid also of its .desire, 
and its comforter. He does not congratulate men upon 
this discovery; he commiserates them. There is no 
help anywhere, this is what he says to them: there 



168 



LUCRETIUS. 



is no help anywhere, and who will show us any 
good 1 

" And that inverted "bowl they call the sky, 
Whereunder crawling, cooped, we live and die, 

Lift not your hands to It for help for It * 

As impotently rules as you or I. 

With earth's first clay they did the last man knead, 
And there of the last harvest sowed the seed ; 

And the first morning of creation wrote 
What the last dawn of reckoning shall read. 

Yesterday This day's madness did prepare, 
To-morrow's silence, triumph, or despair : 

Drink! for you know not whence you come, nor why: 
Drink ! for you know not why you go, nor where." 

And here again, when urging every argument he can 
think of to prove how self-contradictory is the very 
conception of a God, there is the same note of despair 
audible at the discovery that these contradictions 

exist : 

" What ! out of senseless Nothing to provoke 
A conscious Something, to resent the yoke 

Of unpermitted pleasure, under pain 
Of everlasting penalties if broke ! 

What ! from his helpless creature be repaid, 
Pure gold for what he lent us dross allayed 

Sue for a debt we never did contract, 
And cannot answer oh, the sorry trade ! 

Oh Thou who didst with pitfall and with gin 
Beset the road I was to wander in, 

Thou wilt not with predestined evil round 
Emesh, and then impute my fall to sin ! 



LUCRETIUS ASD MODERN THOUGHT. 169 

Oh Thou who man of baser earth didst make, 
And even with Paradise devise the snake, 

For all the sin wherewith the face of Man 
Is blackened, Man's forgiveness give and take ! " 

jfnd the same painful and unsatisfied cry, the same 
confession that the burden of the problem of life, 
whether interpreted by faith or science, is a burden 
too great for him to bear, bursts out in these verses 
with yet more distinctness : 

" Would but the desert of the fountain yield 
One glimpse if dimly, yet indeed revealed, 
To which the fainting traveller can spring, 
As springs the trampled herbage of the field ! 

"Would but some winged Angel, ere too late, 
Arrest the yet unfolded roll of Fate, 

And make the stern recorder otherwise 
Enregister, or quite obliterate ! 

Ah Love ! could you and I with Him conspire 
To grasp this sorry scheme of things entire, 
Would we not shatter it to bits and then 
Remould it nearer to the heart's desire I " . 

Of language like this there is scarcely a trace in 
Lucretius. Life, it is true, he looks upon as in many 
ways a gloomy thing. Even at its best he does not 
seem to set a high value on it. But were it freed 
from the evils "which men themselves make for them- 
selves, it would be, he thinks, a desirable possession, 
yielding us, while it lasted, a tranquil and sufficient 
pleasure, though not pleasure various or great enough 
to make us wish for its prolongation beyond its usual 






170 



LUCRETIUS. 



term. At all events, however imicli he values it, or 
however little he values it, there is nothing in it to 
him of that painful mystery "by which the heart of the 
modern world has "been tortured, and "before which the 
modern world is now standing with a fresh pang $f 
amazement. 

If, then, we would seek in Lucretius for any 
thoughts or considerations beyond those valued only by 
the student, the bookworm, and the critic, we shall find 
that they lie in this in the way in which he brings 
home to us the advance which the world has made, 
not so much in the means for solving the riddle of 
things, as in the knowledge of how hard and how com- 
plicated the riddle is. We have, it is true, ampler 
means for discovering true answers ; but the question 
grows before us far more rapidly than the answer does. 
Farther and farther, certainly and more certainly, are 
men pushing their conquests into regions that were 
once mysterious, and yet the mystery that has not 
been conquered remains more formidable than ever ; 
or else, if we would fain, have nothing of mystery at 
all, a choice confronts us more momentous than was 
over offered to the ancient world. Either man's life 
is a mystery to be solved by no scientific method, a 
mystery which no scientific method so much as sheds 
a glimmer of light on, either there is" an order of 
things which the proofs and verifications of the 
physicists cannot touch, or even go near to, things 
supernatural, supersensual, and essentially immaterial, 
whose ways are not the ways of matter, nor the laws 
of matter its laws ; and if this be so, in this region is 



LUCRETIUS AND MODERN THOUGHT. 171 

to be sought by faith, a reconciliation of all the con- 
tradictions that torment us : or else, if all this be 
untrue, then there are really in things no contra- 
dictions at all, except those of our own making. 
Man's moral and spiritual life is a dream. Justice 
is nothing but a name. It is not a power, and there 
is no reason why we should look for its supremacy. 
Men are nothing but machines, forces of nature, 
by some means or other become self-conscious; but 
their lives are without any significance whatsoever. 
They are but a brief series of so many sensations of 
pleasure and of pain. If we give life so little meaning 
as this, we shall of course have less to do to explain it. 
And yet even if we look upon it in this way, we shall, 
as has been said before, not have explained it. The 
perplexity, however, which besets the modern world, is 
not the inability to explain how physical processes are 
related to the facts of consciousness, as to determine 
what, if that relation be what many think it is, the - 
facts of consciousness may be worth, and if they have 
any significance at all beyond themselves. 

On the whole, if we compare the state of men's 
minds now with the state of men's minds as exempli- 
fied by Lucretius, it will be hard to say that we have 
arrived at a clearer or more satisfactory view of things. 
"We have grown wiser, it is true ; but we have (so far 
as mere human intellect goes) grown wiser only by 
having come to recognise what a very short way our 
greatest wisdom carries us. Modern science, as a mat- 
ter of fact, leaves us in greater perplexity than did 
ancient science. In some ways it may simplify tho 



172 



LUCRETIUS. 



mystery of things. But it concentrates this mystery 
as well as simplifies it. It may reduce it into a 
smaller compass, but it leaves it more impenetrable. 
Faith, and the various theologies in which faith em- 
bodies itself, offer to cut the knot. Science can only 
satisfy us .by assuring us that, as far as our moral life 
goes, there is no knot to cut. Philosophy again steps 
in, and claims that science depends on it, and can 
have no certainty that is not derived from it. 

And now .on all sides we see faith failing; philoso- 
phies in conflict, and science, though its superstructure 
is daily growing, feeling its foundations becoming more 
and more insecure. And amongst the most thought- 
ful minds, who cannot accept faith as the guide of life, 
and who yet feel that reason alone will not take the 
place of it, we find traces theoretically, if' not practi- 
cally, of a despondent scepticism. Let us do our best, 
they say, and live by what light we have. But these 
lights are very feeble, and their strongest rays are lost 
in the gloom beyond us. 

"We are such stuff 

As dreams are made of, and cmr little life 

Is rounded with a sleep." 



END OF LUCRETIUS. 




PRIOTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS. 



