


KARL 
MARX 


HIS LIFE AND,WORK 


REMINISCENCES BY 
PAUL LAFARGUE and 
WILHELM LIEBKNECHT 


} 
ial 


INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS. NEW YORK 


ut 


KARL MARX 


HIS LIFE AND WORK 





REMINISCENCES BY 


Paul Lafargue amd Wilhelm Liebknecht 


gral 


NTE 
?ynO 


INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS ° NEW YORK 


Copyright, 1943, by 
INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS CO., INC. 
PRINTED IN THE U.S. A. 


-~ 208 














CONTENTS 


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF AUTHORS 5 
REMINISCENCES: 
By Paul Lafargue 7 


By Wilhelm Liebknecht 30 





“His name and his work will endure through the ages.” 


The concluding words of the speech by Frederick 
Engels over the grave of Karl Marx, who died sixty 
years ago, March 14, 1883. 





About the Authors 


PAUL LAFAR GWE 


Paul Lafargue was born January 15, 1842, in Cuba, but 
lived in France, except for periods of exile, from 1851 till 
his death in 1911. Expelled from the university because of 
his Socialist activities among the students, he went to Eng- 
land in 1865, to continue his medical studies, where he made 
the acquaintance of Karl Marx, later marrying his daughter 
Laura. 

Returning to France as a physician and as a member of 
the First International, he soon became a leading figure in 
the French Socialist movement and as such participated in 
the Paris Commune of 1871. After the defeat of the Com- 
mune, Lafargue found refuge in Spain where he engaged in 
Marxist literary work against the Anarchists. He returned 
to France in 1882 and together with Jules Guesde (1845- 
1921) became the outstanding theoretician of French Social- 
ism. 

Lafargue contributed extensively to the Socialist and la- 
bor press of France and other countries. He was also the 
author of numerous books and pamphlets on political, eco- 
nomic and philosophic subjects—specializing in the field of 
historical materialism, and translated into French many ot 
the writings of Marx and Engels. Lenin considered La- 
fargue “one of the best-equipped and most talented dis- 
seminators of the ideas of Marxism.” 

The reminiscences of Marx reproduced here were first 
published by Lafargue in the German Socialist journal 
Neue Zett (New Time) in September, 1890. 


WILHELM LIEBKNECHT 


Wilhelm Liebknecht was born March 2g, 1826, in Gies- 
sen, Germany. Trained for the teaching profession, he very 
early in his youth became attached to the democratic move- 
ment and participated in the revolutionary risings of 1848- 
49, after which he emigrated to England. While living in 
London, he came under the influence of Marx, and upon 
his return to Germany in 1862 he took an active part in the 
nascent labor movement. 

Together with the other outstanding leader of the Ger- 
man working class, August Bebel (1840-1913), he founded 
in 1869 the Social-Democratic Party and was the editor of its 
papers, first the Volkstaat (People’s State) and later the 
Vorwaerts (Forward) over which he presided till his death, 
August 7, 1900. Liebknecht was among the first to enter the 
Reichstag as a Socialist and during the Franco-Prussian War 
(1870-71) voted against war credits and protested against 
the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine for which he was im- 
prisoned by Bismarck. 

Liebknecht was endowed with exceptional organizational 
abilities and contributed greatly to the unification of the 
political labor movements into one party in 1875. He was 
also a talented speaker and prolific writer of articles and 
pamphlets addressed to the workers. While on the plat- 
form he would command attention whether his audience 
consisted of opposing Reichstag deputies or friendly workers 
in a trade union hall. Liebknecht fought against all at- 
tempts at revisions of Marxism although Marx and Engels 
frequently found it necessary to call attention to his politi- 
cal and tactical errors. 

‘The material published here are excerpts from his book 
about the life of Karl Marx which Liebknecht published in 
1896. 











BY PAUL LAFARGUE 





wee first time I ever saw Karl Marx was in February 
1865. The International* had been founded on Septem- 
ber 28, 1864, at a meeting in St. Martin’s Hall. I came from 
Paris to bring him news of the progress made there by the 
young organization. Monsieur Tolain, now a senator of the 
bourgeois republic and one of its representatives at the 
Berlin Conference, had given me a letter of introduction. 

I was twenty-four years old. Never in my life shall I for- 
get the impression made on me by that first visit. Marx was 
in poor health at the time, and was hard at work upon the 
first volume of Capital (published two years later, in 1867). 
He was afraid he might be unable to finish it, and he gladly 
received young people, ‘‘for,” he used to say, “I must train 
men who will continue the communist propaganda after I 
am gone.” 

Karl Marx was one of those rare men who are fitted for 
the front rank both in science and in public life. So in- 
timately did he combine these two fields that we shall never 
understand him unless we regard him simultaneously as 
man of science and as socialist fighter. While he was of the 
opinion that every science must be cultivated for its own 
sake and that when we undertake scientific research we 
should not trouble ourselves about the possible con- 
sequences, nevertheless he held that the man of learning, 
if he does not wish to degrade himself, must never cease to 
participate in public affairs—must not be content to shut 





* The International Workingmen’s Association, fathered by Marx, 
usually referred to as the First International —Ed. 


~ 


4 











himeelf up in his study or his laboratory, like a maggot in 
a cheese, and shun the life and the social and political 
struggles of his contemporaries. 

“Science must not be a selfish pleasure. Those who are 
so lucky as to be able to devote themselves to scientific pur- 
suits should be the first to put their knowledge at the service 
of mankind.” One of his favorite sayings was, “Work for 
the world.” 

Though he deeply sympathized with the suffering of the 
working class, what had led him to the communist stand- 
point was not any sentimental consideration, but the study 
of history and political economy. He maintained that every 
unprejudiced person, uninfluenced by private interests and 
not blinded by class prejudices, mi.st perforce come to the 
same conclusion. But if he studied the economic and po- 
litical development of human society without any precon- 
ceived notions, he wrote only with the definite intention of 
spreading the results of his studies, and with the firm de- 
termination to provide a scientific foundation for the 
socialist movement, which down to his day had been lost in 
utopian mists. As far as public activity was concerned, he 
took part in this only in order to work on behalf of the 
triumph of the working class, whose historic mission it is 
to establish communism as soon as it has attained to the 
political and economic leadership of society. In like manner 
the mission of the bourgeoisie as soon as it rose to power 
was to break the feudal bonds which hampered the devel- 
opment of agriculture and industry; to inaugurate free inter- 
course for commodities and human beings, and free contract 
between employers and workers; to centralize the mearis of 
production and exchange; and to prepare the material 
and intellectual elements of communist society. 

Marx did not restrict his activities to the land of his 
birth. “I am a citizen of the world,” he would say, “and I 
work wherever I happen to be.” In actual fact, he played 
a prominent part in the revolutionary movements that 
developed in the countries (France, Belgium, England) to 

§ 











which events and political persecutions had driven him. 

But at my first visit, when I saw him in his study in 
Maitland Park Road, he appeared before me, not as the in- 
defatigable and unequaled socialist agitator, but as the 
man of learning. From all parts of the civilized world, party 
comrades flocked to his study in order to consult the master 
of socialist thought. This room has become historical. Any- 
one who wants to realize the intimate aspects of Marx's 
intellectual life must become acquainted with it. It was 
situated on the first floor, well lighted by a broad window 
overlooking the park. On both sides of the fireplace and 
opposite the window were crowded bookshelves, on the top 
of which packets of newspapers and manuscripts were piled 
up to the ceiling. On one side of the window stood two 
tables, likewise loaded with miscellaneous papers, news- 
papers, and books. In the middle of the room, where the 
light was best, were a small and plain writing table, three 
feet by two, and a wooden armchair. Between this chair 
and one of the bookshelves, facing the window, was a 
leather-covered sofa on which Marx would occasionally lie 
down to rest. On the mantelpiece were more books, inter- 
spersed with cigars, boxes of matches, tobacco jars, paper- 
weights, and photographs of his daughters, his wife, 
Frederick Engels and Wilhelm Wolff. 

Marx was a heavy smoker. “Capital will not bring in 
enough money to pay for the cigars I smoked when I was 
writing it,” he told me. But he was still more spendthrift in 
his use of matches. So often did he forget his pipe or his 
cigar that he had constantly to be relighting it, and would 
use up a box of matches in an incredibly short time. 

He would never allow anyone to arrange (really, to dis- 
arrange) his books and papers. The prevailing disorder was 
only apparent. In actual fact, everything was in its proper 
place, and without searching he could put his hand on any 
book or manuscript he wanted. Even when conversing, he 
would often stop to show a relevant passage or figure in the 
book itself. He was at one with his study, where the books 


9 








and papers were as obedient to his will as were his own 
limbs. 

He took no account of external symmetry when arranging 
his books. Quarto and octavo volumes and pamphlets were 
placed side by side; he arranged his books not according to 
size but according to content. To him books were intel- 
lectual tools, not luxuries. “They are my slaves,” he would 
say, “and must serve my will.” He had scant respect for their 
form, their binding, the beauty of paper or printing; he 
would turn down the corners of the pages, underline pas- 
sages, and cover the margins with pencil marks. He did not 
make notes in his books, but could not refrain from a ques- 
tion mark or a note of exclamation when an author kicked 
over the traces. His system of underlining enabled him to 
find with great ease any desired passage. He had the habit, 
at intervals of some years, of re-reading his note-books and 
the marked passages in the books he had read, in order to 
refresh his memory—which was extraordinarily vigorous and 
accurate. From early youth he had trained it in accordance 
with Hegel’s advice of memorizing verses in an unfamiliar 
tongue. 

He knew Heine and Goethe by heart, and would often 
quote them in conversation. He read the poets constantly, 
selecting authors from all the European languages. Year 
after year he would read Aeschylus again in the original 
Greek, regarding this author and Shakespeare as the two 
greatest dramatic geniuses the world has ever known. He 
had made an exhaustive study of Shakespeare, for whom 
he had an unbounded admiration, and whose most in- 
significant characters, even, were familiar to him. There was 
a veritable Shakespeare cult in the Marx family, and the 
three daughters knew much of Shakespeare by heart. Shortly 
after 1848, when Marx wished to perfect his knowledge of 
English (which he could already read well), he sought out 
and classified all Shakespeare’s characteristic expressions; 
and he did the same with some of the polemical writings 
of William Cobbett, for whom he had a great esteem. Dante 

10 





and Burns were among his favorite poets, and it was always 
a delight to him to hear his daughters recite Burns’ satirical 
poems or sing Burns’ love songs. 

Cuvier, an indefatigable worker and one of the great 
masters of science, when director of the Paris Museum, had 
a number of workrooms installed for his personal use. Each 
of these rooms was devoted to a particular branch of study, 
and for this purpose was equipped with the necessary 
books, instruments, anatomical accessories, etc. When 
wearied by some particular occupation, Cuvier would move 
on to the next room, finding that a change of mental work 
was just as good as a rest. Marx was just as untiring a worker 
as Cuvier, but he had not, like him, the means for the 
provision of several workrooms. He rested himself by pacing 
up and down the room, so that between door and window 
the carpet had been worn threadbare along a track as 
sharply defined as a footpath through a meadow. Sometimes 
he would lie down on the sofa and read a novel; he often 
had two or three novels going at the same time, reading 
them by turns—for, like Darwin, he was a great novel reader. 
He had a preference for eighteenth century novels, and was 
especially fond of Fielding’s Tom Jones. The modern nov- 
elists who pleased him best were Paul de Kock, Charles 
Lever, the elder Dumas and Sir Walter Scott, whose Old 
Mortality he considered a masterpiece. He had a predilection 
for tales of adventure and humorous stories. The greatest 
masters of romance were for him Cervantes and Balzac. Don 
Quixote was for him the epic of the decay of chivalry, whose 
virtues in the newly rising bourgeois world became ab- 
surdities and follies. His admiration for Balzac was so pro- 
found that he had planned to write a criticism of La 
Comédie Humaine as soon as he should have finished his 
economic studies. Marx looked upon Balzac, not merely as 
the historian of the social life of his time, but as a prophetic 
creator of character types which still existed only in embryo 
during the reign of Louis Philippe, and which only reached 
full development under Napoleon III, after Balzac’s death. 

11 


Marx could read all the leading European languages, and 
could write in three (German, French and English) in a 
way that aroused the admiration of all who were well ac- 
quainted with these tongues; he was fond of saying, “A 
foreign langauge is a weapon in the struggle of life.” He 
had a great talent for languages, and this was inherited by 
his daughters. He was already fifty years old when he began 
to learn Russian. Although the dead and living languages 
already known to him had no close etymological relation to 
Russian, he had made such progress in six months as to be 
able to enjoy reading in the original the works of the 
Russian poets and authors whom he especially prized: 
Pushkin, Gogol and Shchedrin. His reason for learning 
Russian was that he might be able to read certain official 
reports of investigations—which the government had sup- 
pressed because the revelations they contained were so ap- 
palling. Some devoted friends had managed to procure 
copies for Marx, who was certainly the only economist ot 
Western Europe who had cognizance of them. 

Besides the reading of poetry and novels, Marx had re- 
course to another and very remarkable means of mental 
relaxation, viz., mathematics, of which he was exceedingly 
fond. Algebra even gave him moral consolation; and he 
would take refuge in it during the most painful moments 
of a storm-tossed life. In the days of his wife's last illness, 
he found it impossible to go on in the usual way with his 
scientific work, and his only escape from the thought of her 
sufferings was to immerse himself in mathematics. At this 
period of spiritual agony he wrote an essay upon the in- 
finitesimal calculus, which, according to the reports of 
mathematicians who know it, is of the first importance, 
and is to be published in his collected works. In the higher 
mathematics he could trace the dialectical movement in its 
most logical and at the same time in its simplest form. Ac- 
cording to his way of thinking, a science was only really 
developed when it had reached a form in which it could 
make use of mathematics. 

12 








Marx’s library, comprising more than a thousand volumes 
laboriously collected in the course of a lifetime of research, 
was insufficient for his needs; and for many years he was a 
regular attendant at the British Museum Reading Room, 
whose catalog he greatly prized. Even his opponents are 
compelled to admit that he was a man of profound and 
wide erudition; and this not merely in his own specialty 
of economics, but also in the history, philosophy and 
literature of all countries. 

Although he invariably went to bed very late, he was 
always afoot between eight and nine in the morning. Hav- 
ing drunk a cup of black coffee and read his newspapers, 
he would go to his study and work there till two or three 
next morning—breaking off only for meals, and (when the 
weather was fine) for a walk on Hampstead Heath. In the 
course of the day he slept for an hour or two on the sofa. 
As a young man, he had had the habit of spending whole 
nights at work. For Marx, work had become a passion, and 
one so absorbing that it was apt to make him forget his 
meals. Not infrequently he had to b summoned again and 
again before he would come down to the dining room; and 
hardly had he finished the last mouthful before he was on 
his way back to his desk. He was a poor eater, and even 
suffered from lack of appetite, which he tried to combat 
by the stimulus of highly seasoned food, such as ham, 
smoked fish, caviar and pickles. His stomach had to pay for 
the colossal activity of his brain, to which, indeed, all his 
body was sacrificed. Thinking was his supreme enjoyment. 
I have often heard him quote from Hegel, the master of 
the philosophy of his youthful days, the saying: “Even the 
criminal thought of a scoundrel is grander and more sub- 
lime than the wonders of the heavens.” 

He must undoubtedly have had a very strong constitu- 
tion, for otherwise he could never have endured so unusual 
a way of living or such exhausting intellectual labors. He 
was, in fact, very powerfully built. A man above the average 


13 





height, he had broad shoulders and a deep chest, and his 
limbs were well proportioned on the whole, though his legs 
were rather too short for his body. If he had practiced gym- 
nastics in his youth he would have become an extremely 
powerful man. The only physical exercise he took was walk- 
ing. He could walk for hours, and even climb hills, talking 
and smoking the whole time, without showing a sign ot 
fatigue. It may be said that he did his work while walking 
in his study. Only for short intervals would he sit down 
at his desk in order to commit to paper what he had thought 
out while pacing the floor. He was fond, too, of conversing 
while thus engaged in walking, only pausing in his walk 
from time to time, when the discussion became lively or the 
conversation especially important. 

For years it was my custom to join him in his evening 
strolls on Hampstead Heath, and it was during these walks 
through the fields that I acquired through him my educa- 
tion in economics. Without noticing it himself, he developed 
in these talks with me the whole of the first volume of 
Capital as he was writing it at the time. As soon as I got 
home I would, to the best of my ability, jot down the sub- 
stance of what I had heard; but at first I found it very 
difficult to follow Marx’s profound and complicated 
thought-process. Unfortunately I lost these invaluable notes, 
for after the Commune my papers in Paris and Bordeaux 
were seized and burned by the police. Especially do I regret 
the loss of the notes made one evening when Marx, with 
a characteristc abundance of proofs and reflections, had 
been expounding his brilliant theory of the development of 
human society. It was as if a veil had been lifted from my 
eyes. For the first time I clearly grasped the logic of uni- 
versal history, and became able to refer to their material 
causes the phenomena of the evolution of society and ideas 
—phenomena which to outward seeming are so contradic- 
tory. I was dazzled by it, and this impression lasted for years. 
The theory had the same effect upon the Madrid socialists 
when I expounded it to the best of my poor abilities. It is 


14 





the greatest of all Marx’s theories, and unquestionably one 
of the greatest ever formulated by the human mind. 

Marx’s brain was armed with an incredible quantity of 
historical and scientific facts and philosophical theories, 
and he was amazingly skilled in making use of all this 
knowledge and observation which he had gathered during 
lengthy intellectual labor. At any time, and upon any con- 
ceivable topic, he could supply the most adequate answer 
anyone could possibly desire to any enquiry, an answer al- 
ways accompanied by philosophical reflections of general 
significance. His brain resembled a warship which lies in 
harbor under full steam, being ready at a moment's notice 
to set forth into any of the seas of thought. Indubitably, 
Capital discloses to us a mind remarkable for its energy and 
rich in knowledge. But for me, as for all who have known 
Marx well, neither Capital nor any of his other writings 
exhibit the full extent of his knowledge or the full grandeur 
of his genius and knowledge. The man towered high above 
his writings. 

I worked with Marx. I was nothing more than the writer 
to whom he dictated, but this gave me the opportunity of 
observing how he thought and wrote. For him, work was at 
once easy and difficult. It was easy because, whatever the 
theme, the apposite facts and reflections surged up in his 
mind in abundance at the first impulse; but this very 
abundance made the complete exposition of his ideas 
laborious and difficult. 

Vico wrote: “Only for God, who knows all, is the thing 
a substance; for man, who knows externals merely, it is 
nothing more than a surface.” Marx grasped things after 
the manner of the God of Vico; he did not see the surface 
only, but penetrated into the depths, examining all the 
constituent parts in their mutual interaction, isolating each 
of these parts and tracing the history of its development. 
Then he passed on from the thing to its environment, 
watching the effect of each upon the other. He went back 
to the origin of the object of study, considering the trans- 

15 








formations, the evolutions and revolutions through which 
it had passed, and tracing finally even the remotest of its 
effects. He never saw a thing as a thing-by-itself, out of 
touch with its setting; but an extremely complicated world 
in continual movement. His aim was to expound all the 
life of this world, in its manifold and incessantly changing 
actions and reactions. The writers of the school of Flaubert 
and de Goncourt complain of the difficulty of giving an 
accurate account of what we see; and yet that which they 
wish to describe is nothing more than the surface of which 
Vico spoke, nothing more than the impression they receive. 
Their literary task was child’s play compared with that 
undertaken by Marx. He needed quite exceptional powers 
of thought to comprehend the reality; and no less excep- 
tional talent for exposition, if he was to make intelligible 
to others what he saw and wanted them to see. He was never 
content with what he wrote, altering it again and again, 
and he always felt that the presentation remained inade- 
quate to the idea. One of Balzac’s psychological studies, Le 
chef d’oeuvre inconnu [The Unknown Masterpiece] which 
has been pitifully plagiarized by Zola, made a deep im- 
pression on him because it was in part a description of his 
own feelings. A talented painter is so tortured by the urge 
to reproduce exactly the picture which has formed itself in 
his brain that he touches and retouches his canvas in- 
cessantly, to produce at last nothing more than a shapeless 
mass of colors, which nevertheless to his prejudiced eye 
seems a perfect reproduction of reality. 

Marx united both the qualities essential to a brilliant 
thinker. He was incomparable in his power of analyzing an 
object into its constituent parts; and he was a master in the 
art of rebuilding this object, in all its details and in its 
various forms of development, and also in the art of dis- 
covering its inner connections. His method of demonstra- 
tion does not consist in playing with abstractions, as he has 
been accused of doing by economists who are incapable of 
thinking; he does not employ the device of the geome- 

16 











tricians who, having isolated their definitions from the sur- 
rounding world, then go on to deduce conclusions in. a 
realm quite out of touch with reality. We do not find in 
Capital a unique definition, or a unique formula; what we 
find is a series of highly subtle analyses which bring out 
the most fleeting nuances and the most inconspicuous differ- 
ences of degree. He begins by noting the obvious fact that 
the wealth of societies in which the capitalist mode of pro- 
duction prevails consists of an enormous accumulation of 
commodities; commodities, concrete objects and not math- 
ematical abstractions, are the elements or cells out of which 
capitalist wealth is built up. Marx now takes firm hold of 
the commodity, twists it in every direction, turns it inside 
out, and extracts its secrets from it one after another— 
secrets of which the official economists have never had an 
inkling, and which are none the less more numerous and 
more profound than the mysteries of the Catholic faith. 
Having studied the commodity from every angle, he goes on 
to consider its relationships to other commodities, as shown 
in exchange; then he passes to its production, and to the 
historical prerequisites of its production. He contemplates 
the phenomenal forms of the commodity, and shows how it 
passes out of one form into another, how one form necessar- 
ily gives rise to another. The logical sequence of develop- 
ment of the phenomena is displayed with such consummate 
art that we might imagine Marx to have invented it; and 
yet it issues from reality, and is a reproduction of the actual 
dialectic of the commodity. 

Marx always worked with extreme conscientiousness. He 
never gave facts or figures which he could not substantiate 
from the best. authorities. In this matter he was not content 
with second-hand sources, but went always to the fountain 
head, however much trouble it might entail. Even for the 
verification of some subsidiary item he would pay a special 
visit to the British Museum. That is why his critics have 
never been able to convict him of an error due to careless- 
ness, or to show that any of his demonstrations were based 


17 


on facts which could not stand severe examination. His 
habit of consulting original sources led him to read the 
least known authors, who were quoted only by him. Capital 
contains such a number of quotations from unknown 
writers that it might be supposed they were introduced to 
make a parade of learning. But Marx was moved by a very 
different impulse. He said: “I mete out historical justice, 
and render to each man his due.”’ He considered it his duty 
to name the author, however insignificant and obscure, who 
had first expressed a thought, or had expressed it more 
precisely than any one else. 

His literary conscience was no less strict than his scientific 
conscience. Not merely would he never rely on a fact about 
which he was not quite sure, but he would not speak on a 
topic at all unless he had made a thorough study of it. He 
would not publish anything until he had worked over it 
again and again, until what he had written obtained a 
satisfactory form. He could not bear to offer half-finished 
thoughts to the public. It would have been most distressing 
to him to show one of his manuscripts before it had been 
finally revised. This feeling was so strong in him that he 
said to me one day he would rather burn his manuscripts 
than leave them behind him unfinished. His method of 
work often involved him in tasks the magnitude of which 
is hardly to be conceived by the readers of his books. For 
instance, in order to write the twenty-odd pages of Capital 
dealing with English factory legislation he had worked 
through a whole library of blue-books containing the re- 
ports of special commissions of enquiry and of the English 
and Scottish factory inspectors. As the pencil markings 
show, he read them from cover to cover. He regarded these 
reports as among the most important and significant of the 
documents available for the study of the capitalist mode 
of production; and he had so high an opinion of the men 
who had made them that he doubted whether it would be 
possible to find in any other nation “men as competent, as 
unbiased, and as free from respect of persons as are the 

18 





English factory inspectors.’’ This remarkable tribute will be 
found in the preface to the first volume of Capital. 

Marx drew an abundance of facts out of these blue-books 
—which many of the members of the House of Commons 
and the House of Lords (to whom they were circulated) 
used only as targets in order to ascertain the power of their 
weapons by counting the number of pages the bullets would 
penetrate. Others sold them by weight as waste paper. That 
was the best use they could make of them, for it enabled 
Marx to get his copies cheap from a waste paper dealer in 
Long Acre. According to Professor Beasley, Marx was the 
man who most highly esteemed these English official en- 
quiries, and was indeed the man who had made them 
known to the world. But Beasley did not know that as long 
ago as 1845 Engels had taken many extracts from the British 
blue-books for his treatise on The Condition of the Work- 
ing Class in England in 1844. 


Those who would know the man’s heart and love it, that 
heart which beat so warmly beneath the outer wrappings 
of the scholar, had to see Marx when his books and manu- 
scripts had been thrust aside—in the bosom of his family, 
and on Sunday evenings in the circle of his friends. At such 
times he was a most delightful companion, sparkling with 
wit and bubbling over with humor, one whose laugh came 
from the depths. His dark eyes would twinkle merrily be- 
neath his bushy eyebrows when he listened to some bright 
sally or apt rejoinder. 

He was a gentle, tender and considerate father. A favorite 
phrase of his was: “Children must educate their parents.” 
His daughters loved him ardently, and in the relationship 
between him and them there was never a trace of paternal 
authority. He never ordered them about, being content to 
ask them to do him a favor, or to beg them not to do some- 
thing which he would rather they left undone. Yet seldom 
was a father’s counsel more listened to than his. His daugh- 
ters looked on him as their friend and behaved to him as to 


1G 














a playmate. They did not address him as “Father,” but as 
“Moor’—a nickname which had been given him because of 
his dark complexion and his ebony locks and beard. On 
the other hand, as far back as 1840, when he was not yet 
thirty, to his fellow members of the Communist League he 
was “Father Marx.” 

He would spend hours playing with his children. They 
remember to this day the sea-fights and burning of whole 
fleets of paper boats, which he made for them and which he 
would then—amid jubilation—set fire to in a large bucket of 
water. On Sundays the girls would not allow him to work; 
he was theirs for the whole day. When the weather was 
fine, the whole family would go for a country walk, stop- 
ping at a wayside “pub” for a modest luncheon of bread and 
cheese with ginger beer. When the children were still quite 
small, he would shorten the miles for them by telling them 
stories without end, fantastic fairy tales invented as he went 
along and spun out to fit the length of the walk, so that his 
hearers forgot their fatigue. Marx had an incomparably 
rich poetic imagination, and his first literary efforts were 
poems. His wife treasured these youthful verses, but would 
not let anyone see them. Marx’s parents had intended their 
son to become a man of letters or a university professor. In 
their view he degraded himself by devoting himself to 
socialist agitation and by occupying himself with the study 
of political economy (a subject then little esteemed in Ger- 
many). 

Marx once promised his daughters that he would write 
them a play about the Gracchi. Unfortunately this scheme 
never ripened. It would have been interesting to see what 
“the knight of the class war,” as he was called, would have 
made of the theme—a terrible and splendid episode in the 
class struggles of the ancient world. This was but one of 
many plans that were never carried out. For instance, he 
intended to write a work on logic, and another on the his- 
tory of philosophy, the latter having been one of his favorite 
studies in earlier days. He would have needed to live to a 

20 


hundred to have a chance of writing all the books he had 
planned, and of presenting to the world a portion of the 
wealth with which his mind was stored. 


Throughout his whole life, his wife was a companion in 
the truest, fullest sense of the word. They had known one 
another in childhood, and had grown up together. Marx 
was only seventeen when they were betrothed. They had to 
wait nine years before their marriage in 1843, but thence- 
forward they were never separated until Frau Marx died, 
not long before her husband. Although born and brought 
up in a noble German family, no one could have had a 
more lively sense of equality than she. For her, social dif- 
ferences and distinctions did not exist. In her house, at her 
table, workmen in their working clothes were welcomed 
with as much politeness and cordiality as dukes or princes 
would have been. Many workers from all lands enjoyed 
her hospitality, and I am sure that none of those whom she 
received with such simple and unfeigned kindliness ever 
dreamed that their hostess was descended in the female line 
from the Dukes of Argyll, or that her brother had been 
Minister of State to the king of Prussia. Nor were these 
things of any moment to her. She had left them all to 
follow her Karl; and she never regretted what she had done, 
not even in the days of their greatest want. 

She had a serene and cheerful temperament. Her letters 
to her friends, effortless outpourings of her facile pen, were 
the masterly productions of a lively and original mind. 
Her correspondents regarded the days on which these letters 
arrived as days of rejoicing. Johann Philip Becker has pub- 
lished a number of them. Heine, the ruthless satirist, 
dreaded Marx’s mockery, but he had a great admiration for 
the keen and sensitive intelligence of Frau Marx. When 
the pair stayed in Paris, he was a constant guest in their 
house. Marx had so much respect for his wife’s intelli- 
gence and critical sense that (as he told me in 1866) he 
submitted all his manuscripts to her, and greatly valued 

21 











her judgment. She copied his writings before they went to 

ress. 
: Frau Marx had many children. Three of them died quite 
young during the phase of privation through which the 
family passed after the Revolution of 1848, when they were 
refugees in London living in two small rooms in Dean 
Street, Soho Square. I got to know only the three daughters 
of the family. When, in 1865, I was introduced to Marx, the 
youngest (now Mrs. Aveling) was a delightful child, more 
like a boy than a girl. Marx was wont to say that his wife 
had made a blunder about the sex when she gave Eleanor 
to the world. The two other daughters formed the most 
charming and harmonious contrast that can be conceived. 
The elder, Jenny (now Madame Longuet), was of a swarthy 
complexion like her father, with dark eyes and raven locks; 
the younger, Laura (now Madame Lafargue), took after her 
mother, having a fair skin, rosy checks, and a wealth of curly 
hair, with a golden sheen, as if it concealed the setting sun. 

In addition to those already named, there was another 
important member of the Marx family, Helene Demuth by 
name. Of peasant birth, she had become a servant in the 
Westphalen family when quite young, long before Jenny 
von Westphalen married Karl Marx. When the marriage 
took place, Helene would not part from Frau Marx, but 
followed the fortunes of the Marx family with the most self- 
sacrificing devotion. She accompanied Marx and his wife in 
all their wanderings through Europe, and shared in their 
various expulsions. The practical spirit of the household, 
she knew how to make the best of the most difficult situ- 
ations. It was thanks to her orderliness, thrift and mother- 
wit that the family never had to endure the worst extremity 
of destitution. A mistress of all domestic arts, she acted as 
cook and housemaid, she dressed the children and also cut 
out the children’s clothes, stitching them with Frau Marx’s 
help. She was simultaneously housekeeper and majordomo. 
The children loved her like a mother; and she, returning 
their love, wielded a mother’s influence over them. Both 

22 


Marx and his wife regarded her as a dear friend. Marx 
played chess with her, and frequently got the worst of the 
encounter. Helene’s love for the Marx family was uncritical; 
everything they did was right, and could not be anything 
but good; anyone who criticized Marx had to reckon with 
her. All who were drawn into intimate relations with the 
family she took under her motherly protection; she had, so 
to say, adopted the whole family. Having survived Marx 
and his wife, she has now transferred her attentive care to 
the Engels household. She had made Engels’ acquaintance 
in youth, and was as fond of him as of the Marx family. 

Besides, Engels was, so to say, also a member of the Marx 
family. The girls spoke of him as their second father. He 
was Marx’s alter ego. In Germany for many years their 
names were invariably coupled together, and history will 
always record their names together in its pages. In our mod- 
ern age, Marx and Engels realized the ideal of friendship 
portrayed by the writers of classical antiquity. They had be- 
come acquainted in youth, had undergone a parallel devel- 
opment, had lived in the most intimate community of 
thoughts and feelings, had participated in the same revolu- 
tionary agitation, and had worked side by side as long as 
they could remain together. Presumably they would have 
done so throughout life, had not circumstances forced them 
apart for twenty years. After the defeat of the Revolution of 
1848, Engels had to go to Manchester, while Marx was 
compelled to stay in London. None the less they continued 
to share their intellectual life by means of an exchange of 
letters. Almost daily they wrote to one another about politi- 
cal and scientific happenings, and about the work on which 
they were engaged. As soon as Engels could free himself 
from his work in Manchester, he hastened to set up house in 
London, only ten minutes’ walk from his beloved Marx. 
From 1870 till Marx's death in 1883, hardly a day passed on 
which they did not see one another, either at the one house 
or the other. 

There were always great rejoicings in the Marx household 


23 














when Engels announced his intention of coming over from 
Manchester. The coming visit was a topic of conversation 
for days in advance, and on the day of his arrival, Marx was 
so impatient that he could not work. At length came the 
hour of reunion, and then the two friends would spend the 
whole night together, smoking and drinking, and talking 
of all that had happened since their last meeting. 

Marx valued Engels’ opinion more than that of anyone 
else. Engels was the man he deemed worthy to be his col- 
laborator. In fact, Engels was for him a whole public. To 
convince Engels, to win Engels over to an idea, no labor 
seemed to Marx excessive. For instance, I have known 
him to re-read entire volumes in search of facts required 
to change Engels’ opinion concerning some minor detail 
(I cannot now recall what it was) in the political and re- 
ligious war of the Albigenses. To win over Engels’ opin- 
ion was a triumph for him. 

Marx was proud of Engels. He recounted to me with 
pleasure all his friend’s moral and intellectual merits; and 
he made a special journey to Manchester in order to show 
Engels to me. He admired the remarkable versatility of 
Engels’ knowledge; and he was uneasy at the possibility of 
any accident that might befall him. “I am always terrified 
lest he should be thrown on one of his mad cross-country 
gallops,” said Marx to me one day. 

Marx was as good a friend as he was a loving husband 
and father. His wife, his daughters, Helene Demuth and 
Frederick Engels were beings worthy of the love of such a 
man as himself. 


Marx, who had begun as one of the leaders of the radical 
bourgeoisie, found himself forsaken by his associates when 
his position became too sharply defined, and treated as an 
enemy as soon as he became a socialist. A hue and cry 
was raised against him, he was vilified and calumniated, 
and then he was driven out of Germany; thereafter a con- 
spiracy of silence was organized against him and his works. 


24 





His Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte—which 
showed that of all historians and publicists of the year 
1848 Marx was the only one who understood the true na- 
ture of the causes and effects of the coup d’état of Decem- 
ber 2, 1851, and the only one who elucidated them—was 
completely ignored. Not a single bourgeois journal made 
any mention of the work, despite its actuality. The Pov- 
erty of Philosophy (an answer to Proudhon’s The Philoso- 
phy of Poverty) and A Contribution to the Critique of 
Political Economy were likewise ignored. Only the founda- 
tion of the International Working Men’s Association and 
the publication of the first volume of Capital broke this 
conspiracy of silence which had lasted some fifteen years. 
Marx could no longer be ignored; the International grew, 
and filled the world with the fame of its deeds. Although 
Marx kept himself in the background and let others appear 
as the chief actors, the identity of the leader was soon 
discovered. In Germany, the Social-Democratic Party was 
founded, and speedily became a power which Bismarck 
courted before he attacked it. Schweitzer, a follower of 
Lassalle, published a series of articles (Marx thought them 
worthy of note) which made Capital known to working 
class readers. The Congress of the International adopted 
a resolution moved by Johann Philip Becker recommend- 
ing the book to international socialists as the bible of the 
working class. 

After the rising of March 18, 1871, in which there was a 
desire to trace the handiwork of the International and after 
the defeat of the Commune (which the General Council 
of the International defended against the onslaughts of 
the bourgeois press of all lands), the name of Marx became 
world famous. He was now universally recognized as the 
invincible theoretician of scientific socialism, and as the 
organizer of the first international labor movement. Capital 
was now the textbook of socialists in every country; all so- 
cialist and labor journals popularized his theories; and 
during a great strike in New York extracts from his writings 

2h 


were published as leaflets in order to inspire the workers 
to hold firm and to prove to them the justice of their 
demands. Capital was translated from the German into 
the other most widely read European languages: into Rus- 
sian, French and English. Extracts from the book ap- 
peared in German, Italian, French, Spanish and Dutch. 
Whenever, in Europe or America, opponents have tried to 
refute Marx’s theories, socialist economists have been able 
to find an effective answer. Today, in very truth, Capital 
is what the above-mentioned congress of the International 
declared it to be, the bible of the working class. 

But Marx’s active participation in the international so- 
cialist movement left him too little time for his scientific 
work; and further fatal blows were struck at this work by 
the death of his wife and that of his eldest daughter, Mad- 
ame Longuet. 

Marx and his wife were intimately associated by ties of 
mutual dependence. Her beauty had been his joy and his 
pride; her gentleness and her devotion had made it far 
easier for him to bear the poverty inseparable from his 
varied life as a revolutionary socialist. The suffering 
which brought Frau Marx to the grave was destined also to 
shorten the life of her husband. During her long and 
painful illness, Marx was worn out—mentally by distress, 
and physically by sleeplessness and by lack of fresh air and 
exercise. These were predisposing causes of the pulmonary 
inflammation which was to make an end of him. 

On December 2, 1881, Frau Marx died as she had lived, 
a communist and materialist. Death had no terrors for 
her. When she felt that it was close at hand, she said: 
“Karl, my strength is broken.” These were her last ar- 
ticulate words. On December 5, she was buried in uncon- 
secrated ground in Highgate cemetery. In accordance 
with her lifelong sentiments and those of her husband, the 
funeral was kept as private as possible, and only a few 
intimate friends accompanied the body to its last resting- 
place. At the graveside Frederick Engels spoke as follows: 

26 








“My friends, the high-minded woman whom we are 
burying here was born at Salzwedel, in the year 1814. 
Soon afterwards her father, Baron von Westphalen, was 
transferred to Treves as Councillor of State, and there be- 
came an intimate friend of the Marx family. The children 
grew up together. The two highly gifted natures found 
one another. When Marx entered the university, they 
had already made up their minds to join their lives. 

“They were married in 1843, after the suppression of 
the first Rheinische Zeitung, which Marx had edited for a 
time. Ever since, Jenny Marx had not only shared the 
fortunes, the labors and the struggle of her husband, but 
had taken part in them with the fullest understanding and 
the most glowing enthusiasm. 

“The young couple went to Paris, for an exile which 
was at first voluntary, but only too soon became a real one. 
The Prussian government extended its persecution of Marx 
even there. With regret I have to add that no less a man 
than Alexander von Humboldt lent himself to being active 
in the execution of the expulsion order against Marx. 
The family was driven to Brussels. Then came the Feb- 
ruary Revolution. During the ensuing disturbances that 
also broke out in Brussels, the Belgian government was not 
content with arresting Marx, but thought fit without any 
reason to throw his wife into prison as well. 

“The revolutionary advance, begun in 1848, collapsed 
already in the following year. Further exile ensued, at 
first in Paris, and then, owing to a renewed intervention of 
the French government, in London. This time for Jenny 
Marx it was indeed exile with all its terrors. Neverthe- 
less she bore up against the material difficulties, thanks 
to which she saw her two boys and her little girl sink into 
the grave. But it was a terrible blow to her that the gov- 
ernment and the bourgeois opposition, from the vulgar 
liberals to the democrats, made common cause in a great 
conspiracy against her husband; that they bespattered him 
with the most mean, detestable calumnies; that the whole 


27 











press closed its columns against him, so that for a while 
he stood defenseless against the onslaught of foes whom 
he and his wife could not but despise. And this state of 
affairs lasted very long. 

“But it did not last forever. The European proletariat 
once more secured conditions of existence in which a cer- 
tain amount of independent mobility became possible. ‘The 
International was founded. The class struggle of the work- 
ers spread from land to land, and Karl Marx, her husband, 
fought as the foremost of the foremost. Now began a period 
in which she received compensation for many of the griev- 
ous troubles of the past. She saw the calumnies which had 
been showered on Marx scattered like chaff before the 
wind; she saw his doctrines, which the reactionaries of all 
shades of opinion, from the feudalists to the democrats, had 
so much exerted themselves to suppress, being preached 
from the housetops in all the languages of the civilized 
world. She saw the proletarian movement, which to her 
was bone of her bone and flesh of her flesh, shaking the 
foundations of the old world from Russia to America, and 
pressing forward ever more certain of victory despite the 
most strenuous opposition. One of her last joys was to 
note the striking proof of inexhaustible energy recently 
given by our German workers in the last elections to the 
Reichstag. 

“What such a woman, with so keen and critical an un- 
derstanding, with so much political tact, so much energy 
and passion, with so much devotion for her comrades-in- 
arms in the labor movement—what such a woman has done 
during the last forty years has not been made public, has 
not been recorded in the annals of the contemporary press. 
It is known only to those who have lived through it all. 
But this much I am sure, that the wives of the refugees 
from the Commune will often think of her, and that many 
of us will sadly miss her bold and clever advice—bold but 
never boastful, clever but never dishonorable. 

“TI need not speak of her personal qualities. Her friends 

28 


know them, and will not forget them. If there was ever 
a woman whose supreme delight it was to make others 
happy, it was she.” 

After his wife’s death, Marx’s life was nothing more 
than a sequence of stoically endured physical and moral 
sufferings, which were intensified when a year later his eld- 
est daughter, Madame Longuet, died suddenly. He was 
broken, and never recovered. The end came on March 14, 
1883, in his sixty-seventh year, when he fell asleep, sitting 
at his work table. 





BY WILHELM LIEBKNECHT 


1. FIRST MEETING WITH MARX 


The friendship—with Marx’s two eldest daughters, one 
six and the other seven years old—began a few days after 
I had arrived in London in the summer of 1850 from 
Switzerland, and, in fact, from one of the prisons of ‘Free 
Switzerland,” having been sent through France with a de- 
portation passport. I met the Marx family at the summer 
outing of the Kommunistische Arbeiterbildungsverein 
[Communist Workers’ Educational Union] somewhere near 
London, I don’t remember whether in Greenwich or in 
Hampton Court. “Pére Marx,’’ whom I saw for the first 
time, immediately undertook a severe examination of me, 
looked me deeply in the eyes and examined my head fairly 
closely—an operation to which I was already accustomed 
from Gustav Struve who, because he obstinately persisted 
in doubting my “moral backbone,” especially liked to make 
me the victim of his phrenological studies. However, the 
examination passed off successfully; I withstood the look of 
the lion’s head with the coal-black lion’s mane; the exami- 
nation turned into lively cheerful conversation. Soon we 
were in the midst of unrestrained merry-making—Marx 
one of the most unrestrained of all—and I at once be- 
came acquainted with Frau Marx, with Lenchen, the faith- 
ful servant of the family from youth onwards, and with 
the children. 

From that day I was at home in Marx’s house and I 
never missed a day with the family, which at that time 
lived in Dean Street, one of the streets off Oxford Street, 
while I took up my quarters in nearby Church Street. 


30 











2. FIRST CONVERSATION 


My first lengthy conversation with Marx took place the 
day after our encounter at the above-mentioned country 
outing of the Communist Workers’ Educational Union. 
Then there was naturally no opportunity for any detailed 
talk and Marx invited me to come the following day to the 
meeting place of the union when Engels would probably 
also be present. I came a little before the appointed time; 
Marx was not yet there; but I found several old acquaint- 
ances and was in the midst of a lively conversation when 
Marx clapped his hand on my shoulder, greeting me in a 
very friendly way. Engels, he said, was in the private 
parlor, where we would be more alone. I did not know 
what a private parlor was, and it occurred to be that I was 
now about to face the “big” examination; however, I fol- 
lowed trustingly. Marx, who made the same sympathetic 
impression on me as the day before, had the property of 
inspiring confidence. He took me by the arm and led me 
into the private parlor, t.e., the private room of the land- 
lord—or was it a landlady?—where Engels, who had already 
provided himself with a pewter pot full of dark brown 
stout, immediately received me with merry joking. In a 
moment we had ordered from Amy (or “Emma” as she had 
been rechristened in German by the refugees, on account 
of the similarity of sound), the nimble waitress, ‘‘stuff’ to 
eat and drink—among us refugees the stomach question 
played an important role. In a moment the beer arrived 
and we sat down, I on one side of the table, Marx and 
Engels opposite me. With the massive mahogany table, 
the shining pewter mugs, the foaming stout, the appearance 
of the genuine English beafsteak and trimmings, the long 
clay pipes which invited one to smoke them—it was all 
so comfortable that I was vividly reminded of a picture in 
the English illustrations to “Boz.” But all the same it 
was an examination! But, why shouldn’t it turn out all 
right? The conversation came more and more into swing. 


31 











I had not had any personal contact with them before my 
meeting with Engels in Geneva the year before. Of Marx, 
I knew only the articles in the Paris Jahrbiicher and The 
Poverty of Philosophy, and of Engels, The Condition of 
the Working Class in England. I, who had been a Com- 
munist since 1846, had only been able to procure The 
Communist Manifesto shortly before my meeting with 
Engels after the campaign on the Constitution, although 
I had naturally heard of it before and knew the contents; 
I very rarely got a sight of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
[New Rhenish Gazette]; during the eleven months of its 
appearance I was either abroad or in prison or in the 
chaotic life of storm and stress of the volunteers. 

I was suspected by my two examiners of petty-bourgeois 
“democracy” and “South German exuberance of feeling” 
and many judgments which I pronounced on men and 
things met with very sharp criticism. On the whole, the 
examination passed off not unfavorably and the conversa- 
tion gradually assumed a wider scope. Soon we were in 
the sphere of natural science, and Marx made fun of the 
victorious reaction which imagined that it had stifled the 
revolution and did not suspect that natural science was 
preparing a new revolution. King steam, who had revo- 
lutionized the world in the previous century, was coming 
to the end of his reign and another incomparably greater 
revolution would take his place, the electric spark. And 
then Marx related to me, full of fire and enthusiasm, that 
for the last few days there had been exhibited in Regent 
Street the model of an electrical machine which pulled a 
railway train. “Now the problem has been solved—the con- 
sequences are unpredictable. The economic revolution 
must be followed by a political one, for the latter is only 
the expression of the former.” 

In the manner in which Marx discussed this progress of 
science and mechanics, his conception of the world, and 
especially what has been termed the materialist conception 
of history, was so clearly expressed that certain doubts 

32 


which I had hitherto still maintained melted away like 
snow in the sunshine of spring. That evening I did not 
get home at all—we talked and joked and drank until late 
the next morning, and the sun was already high in the 
heavens when I went to bed. But for a long time, I could 
not sleep. My head was too full of everything that I had 
heard. At length, my thoughts, roving hither and thither, 
drove me out again and I hurried to Regent Street in order 
to see the model, this modern Trojan horse, which bour- 
geois society in suicidal fascination had introduced with 
rejoicing into their Ilion, as once the Trojan men and 
women had done with theirs, and which would bring 
about their certain destruction: #oeto hutpa — the day 
will come when holy Ilion will be destroyed. 

A dense crowd indicated the show window behind which 
the model was exhibited. I pressed my way through and, 
correctly enough, there was the locomotive and the train 
—and both of them were running merrily round. 


It was then the beginning of July 1850. 


3. MARX AS TEACHER AND EDUCATOR 
OF REVOLUTIONARIES 


“Moor” (Marx) with his advantage of five or six years 
over us “young fellows’ was conscious of the whole su- 
periority of his ripened manhood, and he took every oppor- 
tunity of testing us, and especially me. With his colossal 
reading and marvelous memory he could easily give us a 
difficult time. How he rejoiced when he enticed a “‘young” 
student into difficult waters and proved to him in corpore 
vili [in his own person} the miserable character of our 
universities and of academic education. 

But he educated also, in regular fashion. I can say of 
him in a double respect, in the wider and the narrower 
sense of the words, that he was my teacher. And one had 
to follow him in every sphere. I will say nothing of eco- 
nomics. In the Pope’s palace one does not speak of the 


33 











Pope. I will say something later about the lectures on 
economics in the Communist League. Marx was at home 
in both modern and ancient languages. I was a philolo- 
gist and it gave him a childish pleasure when he could put 
before me some difficult passage from Aristotle or Aeschylus 
which I could not immediately understand. How he 
scolded me one day because I did not know—Spanisht 
In a moment he had pulled out Don Quixote from a heap 
of books and proceeded at once to give me a lesson. From 
Diez’ comparative grammar of the Latin languages I al- 
ready knew the basic features of the grammar and word 
construction and so I got on quite well under Moor’s 
excellent guidance and his careful assistance when I faltered 
or came to a standstill. And how patient he was in teach- 
ing, he who otherwise was so stormily impatient! Only 
the entrance of a visitor put an end to the lesson. Every 
day I was examined and had to translate from Don Quixote 
or some other Spanish book—until my ability appeared suf- 
ficiently proven. 

Marx was an excellent philologist—it is true more of the 
modern than of the ancient languages. He had the closest 
knowledge of Grimm’s German grammar, and he was more 
familiar with the German dictionary of the brothers 
Grimm, in so far as it had appeared, than I, the philologist, 
was. He wrote English and French like an Englishman 
or Frenchman, though it is true he was not quite fluent in 
speaking. His articles for the New York Tribune are in 
classical English, his Poverty of Philosophy, written in 
reply to Proudhon’s Philosophy of Poverty, is in classical 
French—the French friend whom he got to read the manu- 
script for the press found very little to correct. 

Since Marx knew the essence of language, and had 
busied himself with its origin, development and structure, 
he did not find it hard to learn languages. In London, 
he also learned Russian and during the Crimean War he 
had even the intention of learning Arabic and Turkish. 
but this was not carried out. Like anyone who really de- 


34 


sires to master a language, he laid chief stress on read- 
ing. 

One who has a good memory—and Marx had a rare mem- 
ory which never let anything go—quickly acquires by much 
reading the vocabulary and phrases of a language. Prac- 
tical use is then easily learned. 

In the years 1850 and 1851, Marx gave a course of lec- 
tures on economics. He only decided on it unwillingly; 
but after he had given a few private lessons to a small 
circle of friends, he allowed himself after all to be per- 
suaded by us to give instruction to a larger circle. In this 
course, which was a great pleasure for all who had the 
good fortune to take part in it, Marx already unfolded 
completely the basic features of his system as it is to be 
found in Capital. In a crowded hall of the Communist 
League, or the Communist Workers’ Educational Union, 
which was then situated in Great Windmill Street—in the 
same hall where two and a half years before The Com- 
munist Manifesto had been decided on—Marx demon- 
strated his remarkable talent for popularization. Nobody 
hated vulgarization more than he did, that is to say the 
falsification of science, making it shallow and uninspired. 
No one, however, possessed in a higher degree the capacity 
of expressing himself clearly. Clarity of speech is the fruit 
of clarity of thought; clear thinking necessarily determines 
a clear form of expression. 

Marx proceeded methodically. He put forward a sen- 
tence, as short as possible, and then he explained it in a 
longer exposition, taking the greatest care to avoid using 
any expressions which would not be understood by the 
workers. Then he called upon the listeners to put ques- 
tions to him. If he did not get any, he began to examine 
and did this with such pedagogical skill that not a single 
gap or misunderstanding escaped him. I learned, on ex- 
pressing my admiration at his skill, that Marx had already 
delivered lectures on political economy in the Workers’ 
Union at Brussels. In any case he had the makings of an 


35 














excellent teacher. In teaching he also used a blackboard 
on which he wrote out the formulae—including those 
familiar to all of us from the early part of Capital. 

It was a great pity that the course lasted only half a year, 
or even less. Elements came into the Communist League 
with whom Marx was not satisfied. After the waves of the 
flood of emigration had died away, the League shrank and 
took on a rather sectarian character—the old followers of 
Weitling and Cabet began to come to the fore again and 
Marx, for whom such a small sphere of activity was not 
sufficient and who had better things in view than to sweep 
away old cobwebs, kept away from the Communist 
League. ... 

He was a purist in speech almost to the point of pedan- 
try. And my upper Hessian dialect, which still obstinately 
stuck to me—or I to it—brought innumerable sermons on 
my head. 

If I relate such small things, I do so in order to show 
how Marx felt himself the teacher in relation to us “young 
fellows.”’ 

This of course also expressed itself in another way. He 
demanded much. As soon as he had discovered a gap in 
our knowledge, he insisted strongly that it must be filled— 
for which purpose he suggested the necessary measures. 
If one was alone with him, one went through a regular 
examination. And his examinations were no joke. Marx 
was not to be deceived into taking an X for a Y. And it 
he noticed that it all bore no fruit, then friendship also 
came to an end. It was an honor for us to have him as a 
“schoolmaster.” I was never with him without learning. ... 

At that time it was only a tiny minority in the working 
class that had raised itself to socialism; and among the So- 
cialists themselves those who were Socialists in the scienti- 
fic sense of Marx—in the sense of The Communist Mani- 
festo—were only a minority. The mass of the workers, in 
so far as they had at all awakened to political life, re- 
mained stuck in the fog of sentimental democratic wishes 


36 





and phrases such as characterized the movement of ’48 
and its prelude and aftermath. The applause of the crowd, 
popularity, was for Marx the proof that one was on the 
wrong path and his favorite quotation was the proud verse 
of Dante: “Segui tl tuo corso, e lascia dir le genti.” [Fol- 
low your path and let people say what they will.] 

How often he quoted this verse to us, which also comes 
at the conclusion of the Preface to Capital. No one is en- 
tirely insensitive to thrusts, blows, gnat bites and bug 
bites, and Marx, as he followed his path, attacked from all 
sides, worried by cares for his daily bread, misunder- 
stood, indeed often rudely rebuffed by the mass of the work- 
ing people for whose struggle for emancipation he was 
forging the weapons in the stillness of the night, while 
they were running after glib-tongued wind-bags, dis- 
sembling traitors, even open enemies. Marx must often 
have encouraged himself in the loneliness of his poor, genu- 
inely proletarian study room with the words of the great 
Florentine, and drawn fresh energy from them. 

He did not allow himself to be led astray. Unlike the 
prince of the Thousand and One Nights, who lost the vic- 
tory and the reward of victory because he was enticed by 
the noise and the terrible pictures around him to look 
anxiously back, Marx strode forward, his eyes always look- 
ing ahead, fixed on the shining goal—he “let people say 
what they would” and even if “the earth had collapsed 
in ruins” he would not have been held back from his path. 
And the victory has been awarded to him. Though not 
indeed the reward of victory. 

Before all-conquering death mowed him down, he lived 
to see that the seed which he had sown had sprung up in 
glorious fashion and was ripening for the sickle of the 
reaper. Yes, his was the victory—and we have the reward 
of victory. 

If he hated popularity, he had a holy anger against popu- 
larity-seeking. Smooth-tongued speakers were an abomina- 
tion to him and woe to those who gave way to phrases. 


37 








Then he was inexorable. “Phraseur’ [phrasemonger] was 
in his mouth the most severe criticism possible, and if he 
had once recognized someone to be a phraseur then he was 
finished with him. Logical thinking and clear expression 
of thoughts—that is what he instilled into us “young fel- 
lows’ on every occasion and compelled us to study. 

At about that time the magnificent Reading Room of 
the Britsh Museum, with its inexhaustible book treasures, 
had been built, and to this, where he used to spend every 
day, Marx also drove us. Learn! Learn! That was the 
categorical imperative which he often enough cried loudly 
to us, and which was also evident from his example, in- 
deed from the mere sight of this ever powerfully working 
intellect. 

While other refugees made plans for the overthrow of 
the world and day by day and evening after evening in- 
toxicated themselves with the hashish draught of thinking 
that “tomorrow it will begin,” we, the “incendiaries,” the 
“bandits,” the “scum of humanity” sat in the British Mu- 
seum and endeavored to educate ourselves and to prepare 
weapons and munitions for the future struggles. 

Frequently one had had nothing to eat, but that did not 
prevent one from going into the Museum—there at any 
rate one had comfortable chairs to sit on and a pleasant 
warmth in winter—which was lacking at home, if one had 
anything like a “home” at all. 

Marx was a stern teacher; he not only forced one to 
learn but he also convinced himself whether one had 
learned. . . . As a teacher, Marx had the rare quality of 
being stern without being discouraging. 

And Marx had still another excellent qualification as a 
teacher; he compelled us to exercise self-criticism and did 
not tolerate that one should rest satisfied with what had 
been achieved. With the whip of his mockery he cruelly 
lashed the easy-going flesh of speculativeness. 


38 





4. MARX’S STYLE 


Marx is said to have had no “‘style,’”’ or a very bad one. 
That is said by those who do not know what style is— 
smooth-tongued speakers and phrasemongers who have not 
understood Marx and were not capable of understanding 
him, incapable of following the flights of his intellect to the 
highest peaks of science and passion and to the profound- 
est depths of human suffering and human depravity. If 
Buffon’s phrase holds good of anyone, it holds good of 
Marx: “‘the style is the man’”—Marx’s style is Marx him- 
self. A man who was so thoroughly truthful as he was, 
who knew no other cult than that of truth, who at a mo- 
ment’s notice would throw aside propositions, however 
laboriously arrived at and dearly cherished, as soon as he 
was convinced that they were incorrect, could not but show 
himself in his writings as he was. Incapable of hypocrisy, 
incapable of pretense or posing, he always was himself 
in his writings as in his life. It is true that with such a 
many-sided, wide-embracing and varied nature, the style 
cannot be so uniform, unvaried or even monotonous as in 
the case of less complex, narrower natures. The Marx of 
Capital, the Marx of The Eighteenth Brumaire and the 
Marx of Herr Vogt are three different persons, and yet in 
their diversity they are the same Marx—in their trinity still 
a unit—the unity of a great personality which expresses it- 
self differently in different spheres and yet always remains 
the same. Certainly the style of Capital is hard to under- 
stand—but is the subject dealt with easily comprehensible? 
The style is not merely the man, it is also the matter, 
it must adapt itself to the matter. There is no royal road 
to science, each must laboriously struggle and climb even 
when he has the best teacher. To complain of the heavy, 
difficult, incomprehensible or even clumsy style of Capital 
is merely to acknowledge one’s own laziness of thought 
or incapacity for thinking. 

Is The Eighteenth Brumaire incomprehensible? Is the 

39 














arrow incomprehensible which flies straight to its goal and 
buries itself in the flesh? Is the spear incomprehensible 
which, flung with a sure hand, strikes the enemy right in 
the heart? The words of The Eighteenth Brumaire are 
arrows, are spears—it is a style which brands and kills. If 
hatred, if contempt, if glowing love of freedom have ever 
been expressed in burning, destroying and elevating words, 
it is in The Eighteenth Brumaire, which combines the in- 
dignation and severity of a Tacitus with the deadly satire 
of a Juvenal and the holy anger of a Dante. The style 
is here what it originally was in the hands of the Romans, 
a sttlus, a sharp steel implement for writing and for stab- 
bing. The style is a dagger employed for striking with 
certainty to the heart. 

And in Herr Vogt—this sparkling humor—this joy, remin- 
iscent of Shakespeare, at having discovered a Falstaff and 
in him an inexhaustible mine for furnishing an arsenal 
of mockery! 

However, I will not speak further here of Marx’s style. 
Marx’s style is indeed Marx. He has been reproached 
with having attempted to compress the greatest possible 
content in. the smallest possible space, but that is pre- 
cisely Marx. 

Marx attached extraordinary value to pure correct ex- 
pression and in Goethe, Lessing, Shakespeare, Dante and 
Cervantes, whom he read every day, he had chosen the 
greatest masters. He showed the most painstaking con- 
scientiousness in regard to purity and correctness of speech. 

Marx was a severe purist—he often searched long and 
laboriously for the correct expression. He hated super- 
fluous foreign words and if, nevertheless, he frequently 
used foreign words himself—where the subject did not 
require it—his long stay abroad, especially in England, must 
be borne in mind. But what an infinite wealth of original, 
genuine German word formations and word constructions 
we find in Marx who, inspite of the fact that two-thirds 
of his life were passed abroad, performed very high serv- 


40 


ices for our German language and belongs to the most 
eminent masters and creators of the German language. 


5. MARX AS POLITICIAN, TEACHER AND MAN 


Politics for Marx was a study. Empty political talk 
and talkers he hated like poison. And in fact can one 
imagine anything more stupid? History is the product 
of all the forces acting in mankind and in nature, the 
product of human thought, of human passions, of human 
needs. Politics, however, is theoretically—the knowledge of 
these millions and billions of factors working at the “loom 
of time,” and practically—the action determined by this 
knowledge. Politics is therefore both a theoretical and 
an applied science. 

How angry Marx could become when he spoke of the 
empty heads who settled matters with a few stereotyped 
phrases and who, taking their more or less confused desires 
and notions for facts, decide the fate of the world at the 
cafe table, in newspapers or popular meetings or parlia- 
ments. It is fortunate that the world does not take any 
notice of them. Among the “empty heads” were included 
very famous, much celebrated “great men.” 

In this matter Marx did not only criticize, he has also 
given a model example; especially in his writings on the 
recent development of France and on the coup d’état of 
Napoleon, and in his letters to the New York Tribune, he 
has provided classical examples of the political writing of 
history. 

Here is a comparison which forces itself upon me. The 
coup d’état of Bonaparte, which Marx dealt with in his 
Eighteenth Brumaire, was also made the subject of a famous 
piece of writing by Victor Hugo, the greatest of the French 
romantics and artists in phraseology. What a contrast be- 
tween these two works and these two men! On the one 
hand, the monstrous phrase and the monster of phrases, 
on the other hand, the facts, methodically arranged—the 


41 














cool deliberate man of science and politics, angry, but 
whose judgment is never disturbed by his anger. 

On one hand, fleeting, shimmering foam, outbreaks of 
pathetic rhetoric, grotesque caricatures, on the other hand, 
every word a well-directed arrow, the naked truth convinc- 
ing by its nakedness—no indignation but the establishment 
and branding of what is. Victor Hugo’s Napoleon le Petit 
[Napoleon the Little] passed rapidly through ten editions 
and is today forgotten. And Marx’s Eighteenth Brumaire 
will still be read with admiration thousands of years hence. 
Victor Hugo’s Napoleon le Petit was a firework, Marx’s 
Eighteenth Brumaire is a work of history which for the fu- 
ture historian of culture—and the future will know no other 
world history than the history of culture—will be as indis- 
pensable as Thucydides’ history of the Peloponnesian War. 

Only in England could Marx become what he has be- 
come—as I have already explained on another occasion. 
In such an economically undeveloped country as Germany 
was until the middle of this century, Marx could not have 
arrived at his critique of bourgeois economy and at a 
knowledge of capitalist production any more than this 
economically undeveloped Germany could have had the 
political institutions of economically developed England. 
Marx was as much dependent on his environment and the 
conditions in which he lived as any other human being 
and without this environment and without ‘these condi- 
tions he would not have become what he is. No one has 
proved that better than he has himself. 

To observe such an intellect while conditions operate 
upon it and while it penetrates deeper and deeper into 
nature and society—that is already in itself a deep intellec- 
tual enjoyment and I can never congratulate myself highly 
enough on my good fortune which led me as an inex- 
perienced young fellow, thirsting for knowledge, to Marx 
and brought me under his influence and schooling. 

And in view of the many-sidedness, indeed one could say 
all-sidedness of this universal mind—that is a mind embrac- 


42 


ing the universe, penetrating into all essential particulars, 
despising nothing as unessential and _ insignificant—the 
schooling was necessarily also a many-sided one. 

Marx was one of the first who grasped the significance 
of Darwin's investigations. Already prior to 1859, the year 
of the publication of the Origin of Species—by a re- 
markable coincidence also the year Marx’s Critique of 
Political Economy appeared—Marx had recognized the 
epoch-making significance of Darwin who, far removed 
from the noise and bustle of the big city, was preparing 
on his peaceful country estate a revolution similar to the 
one Marx himself was preparing in the stormswept center 
of the world—only that the lever was applied at another 
point. 

Particularly in the sphere of natural science—including 
physics and chemistry—and of history, Marx followed every 
new appearance, noted every progress: and Moleschott, 
Liebig, Huxley—whose “popular lectures” we conscien- 
tiously attended—were names as often occurring in our 
circle as Ricardo, Adam Smith, MacCulloch and the Scot- 
tish and Italian political economists. And when Darwin 
drew the conclusions of his investigations and made them 
public, for months we talked of nothing else but Darwin 
and the revolutionizing power of his scientific achievements. 
I lay stress on this because “radical” enemies have spread 
the story that Marx out of jealousy only recognized the 
merits of Darwin very reluctantly and to a very limited 
extent. 

Marx was the biggest-hearted and most just of men, 
where it was a question of appreciating the merits of 
others. He was too big for envy and jealousy, as for vanity. 
Only for false greatness, artificial renown in which in- 
capacity and meanness spread themselves, had he a deadly 
hatred—as for everything false and falsified. 

Marx was one of the few men among the big, little and 
mediocre personalities known to me who was not vain. 
He was too big for that, and too strong—and certainly 


43 











also too proud. He never posed and was always him- 
self. He was as incapable as any child of wearing a mask 
or disguising himself. Except where it was necessary on so- 
cial or political grounds, he expressed his thoughts and 
feelings in full and without reservations and they were to 
be seen in his face. And if it was necessary to keep any- 
thing back, he exhibited what I might almost call a childish 
awkwardness which often amused his friends. 

There never was a more truthful person than Marx—he 
was the very embodiment of truth. On looking at him, one 
knew at once where one stood. In our “civilized” society 
with its permanent state of war one cannot of course always 
tell the truth—that would be to deliver oneself into the 
hands of the enemy or to become a social outlaw—but if 
one often cannot tell the truth one does not need for that 
reason to tell an untruth. I cannot always say in words what 
I am feeling and thinking, but that does not mean that I 
must or should say what I do not feel and think. The one 
is wisdom, the other is hypocrisy. And Marx was never 
hypocritical. He was simply incapable of it—exactly like an 
unspoiled child. Indeed, his wife often called him “my big 
child.” And no one has understood him and known him 
better than she—not even Engels. It is a fact that when he 
came into “‘society”—in quotation marks—where great atten- 
tion was paid to externals and one had to exercise restraint, 
then our “Moor” was in fact a big child and he could be. 
come embarrassed and red like a little child. 

Persons who acted were an abomination to him. I remem- 
ber still how he laughingly related to us his first encounter 
with Louis Blanc. It was when he was still in Dean Street, 
in the little apartment which really consisted only of two 
rooms, of which the front room, the parlor, served as a room 
for visitors and for work, while the rear one served for 
everything else. Louis Blanc had announced himself to 
Lenchen, who led him into the front room while Marx 
hastily dressed himself in the other; the connecting door, 
however, was partly open and through the crack a farcical 


44 


play was to be seen. The great historian and politician was 
a very little man, hardly taller than an eight-year-old boy, 
but nevertheless terribly vain. After a glance around the 
proletarian drawing room, he discovered in one corner the 
extremely primitive mirror, before which he immediately 
took up his position. He threw himself into an attitude, 
drawing up his dwarf stature to the fullest possible extent— 
he wore shoes with the highest heels that I have ever seen— 
and, regarding himself self-complacently, began to posture 
like a March hare in love and to cultivate as imposing an 
attitude as possible. Frau Marx, who was also a witness of 
the comic scene, could with difficulty keep from laughing 
aloud. When his toilet was finished, Marx announced his 
entry with a powerful cough, so that the fop of the people’s 
tribune could take a step back from the mirror and meet 
the incomer with a stylish bow. Certainly with Marx noth- 
ing was te be gained by posing and acting. And so the 
“little Louis”—as he was called by the Paris workers in con- 
trast to Louis Bonaparte—was soon behaving as naturally 
as he was capable of doing. 


6. MARX AT WORK 


“Gentus ts an infinite capactty for taking pains” as some- 
one has said, and if this is perhaps not quite correct still it 
is certainly so at least to a very great extent. 

There is no genius without extraordinary power of work- 
ing and extraordinary performance of work. The so-called 
genius who knows nothing of either is only an irridescent 
soap bubble or a bill of exchange drawn on castles in the 
air. But where power of working and performance of work 
above the average are to be found, there is genius. I have 
met many who were considered by themselves and some- 
times also by others to be geniuses who, however, had no 
power of working—they were only dilettantes with a gift of 
gab and much talent for self-advertisement. All the 
really eminent men whom I have known were extremely 


45 











diligent and worked very hard. This holds good of Marx 
to the fullest extent. He worked colossally, and since he 
was often prevented from working during the day—especial- 
ly during his first period while a refugee—he had recourse 
to working at night. When he came home late in the eve- 
ning from a session or meeting, he regularly sat down to 
work for a few hours. And the few hours lengthened them- 
selves out more and more until at last he worked almost 
the whole night through and slept in the morning. His wife 
seriously remonstrated, but he declared laughingly that it 
was in accordance with his nature. 

I myself even at schoo] had been accustomed to carry 
out the more difficult work late in the evening or during 
the night, when I felt most active intellectually, and there- 
fore I did not regard the matter in the same light as Frau 
Marx. But she was right. And in spite of his unusually 
powerful constitution, Marx already at the end of the ’fifties 
began to complain of all sorts of disturbances in his bodily 
functions. The advice of a doctor had to be taken. The con- 
sequence was a categorical ban on night work; also much 
physical exercise, walks and rides were prescribed. At that 
time I used to walk about with Marx a good deal in the 
neighborhood of London, especially on the hills to the 
north. He recovered very quickly, for in fact he had a bodily 
constitution excellently adapted to great exertions and per- 
formance of work. However, hardly did he feel himself well 
again before he gradually slipped once more into the habit 
of working at night until another crisis took place forcing 
him to a more reasonable mode of life—but always only so 
long as necessity made compulsory. The crises became more 
violent—a liver complaint developed, malignant tumors 
made their appearance. Gradually the iron constitution was 
undermined. 

I am convinced, and this was also the verdict of 
the doctors who treated him at the end, that if Marx 
could have made up his mind to lead a natural life, that 
is, one corresponding to the requirements of his body, or, 

46 





we may say, more in accordance with hygiene, he would 
still be living today. Only in his last years—when it was 
already too late—did he refrain from working at night. He 
worked so much the more during the day. He worked on 
every occasion when it was at all possible. Even when he 
went for a walk he had his notebook with him and made 
entries at every moment. And his work was never super- 
ficial. There is work and work. He always worked intensive- 
ly, thoroughly. I have received from his daughter Eleanor 
a historical! table which he had drawn up in order to get a 
survey for some subsidiary note. Certainly for Marx there 
was nothing that was subsidiary and this table for his own 
immediate practical use is drawn up with as much diligence 
and care as if it were intended for publication. 

Marx worked with an endurance which often filled me 
with astonishment. He did not know what fatigue was. He 
had to collapse and even then he did not relax. 

If the value of a man is to be reckoned according to the 
work performed by him—as the value of things is by the 
quantity of labor embodied in them—then, even from this 
standpoint, Marx is of so high a value that only a few 
among the giants of intellect could be put alongside of him. 

And what has bourgeois society given as remuneration for 
this enormous total of work? On Capital he worked for 
forty years—and how he worked! He worked as only a Marx 
could work. And I do not exaggerate when I say that the 
worst-paid wage earner in Germany has received more in 
wages during forty years than Marx received as “honora- 
rium"—literally, a payment of honor—for one of the two 
greatest scientific creations of this century, the other being 
the works of Darwin. 

“Science” has not a market value. And could one expect 
bourgeois society to pay a respectable price for the elabora- 
tion of its own death sentence? 


47 


47. MARX AND CHILDREN 


Marx, like all persons of a strong and healthy nature, 
was extraordinarily fond of children. He was not merely 
the most tender father, who could be a child with his chil- 
dren for hours together—he also felt himself, as it were, 
magnetically drawn to strange children who came in his 
path, especially those who were poor and helpless. Hun- 
dreds of times, when wandering through poverty-stricken 
districts, he would suddenly tear himself away from us in 
order to stroke the hair and press a penny or halfpenny in 
the little hand of some child sitting in rags at a doorway. 
He had become suspicious of beggars, for in London beg- 
ging has become a regular trade—and indeed one with a 
golden foundation although its income is only in copper. 
Accordingly he did not allow himself to be humbugged for 
long by beggars, men or women, to whom in the beginning 
he never refused a gift—as long as he had anything. He had 
even a furious anger against some of them who had levied 
toll on him by artistic exhibition of artificial disease and 
poverty, because he regarded the exploitation of human 
sympathy as an especially gross meanness and a theft from 
poverty. But if a beggar approached Marx with a whimper- 
ing child, then he was irretrievably lost, were rascality de- 
picted never so plainly on the beggar’s countenance. He 
could not resist the beseeching eyes of the child. 

Bodily weakness and helplessness always aroused his lively 
sympathy. A man who beat his wife—and wifebeating was 
then very much the fashion in London—he would gladly 
have had flogged to the point of death. Owing to his impul- 
sive nature on such occasions he not infrequently involved 
both himself and us into trouble. One evening I was riding 
with him on the top of an omnibus towards Hampstead 
Road when in front of a gin palace at a halting place we 
noticed a crowd out of which came a piercing woman’s 
voice shrieking, murder! murder! Quick as lightning, Marx 
sprang down and I after him. I wanted to hold him back— 


48 





I might as well have tried to hold back a bullet from a gun 
with my bare hand. In a moment we were in the midst of 
the throng; and the wave of human beings closed behind us. 
“What is the matter?” What was the matter was only too 
soon visible. A drunken woman had had a quarrel with her 
husband, the latter wanted to get her home, she resisted and 
raised an outcry like one possessed. So far, so good. There 
was no reason for our intervention—that we saw. But that the 
quarreling pair also saw, and they immediately made peace 
and then turned on us, while the crowd around us drew 
closer and closer and took up a threatening attitude against 
the “damned foreigners.” The woman especially made a 
furious onslaught on Marx and aimed her attack at his 
magnificent, shining black beard. I tried to calm the storm 
—in vain. And if two powerful constables had not oppor- 
tunely appeared on the battlefield, we would have had to 
pay dearly for our philanthropic attempts at intervention. 
We were glad to come out of it with a whole skin and to be 
seated once more on an omnibus going towards home. 
Afterwards Marx was somewhat more cautious in such at- 
tempts at intervention. 

One had to have seen Marx with his children in order to 
get a full idea of the depth of feeling and childishness of 
this hero of science. In his minutes of leisure or on walks, he 
carried them about, played the maddest, merriest games 
with them—in brief, was a child among children. On Hamp- 
stead Heath we often played “cavalry”: I took one of the 
little daughters on my shoulders, Marx the other, and then 
we vied with one another in trotting and jumping—on 
occasion there was also a little fight between the mounted 
riders. For the girls were as unrestrained as boys and could 
also endure a bump without crying. 

The society of children was a necessity for Marx—he re- 
created and refreshed himself by this means. And when his 
own children were grown up or dead, then the grandchil- 
dren took their place. Little Jenny, who in the beginning of 
the ’seventies married Longuet, one of the Commune refu- 


49 











gees, brought Marx several children into the house—wild 
youngsters. The eldest especially, Jean or Johnny, now on 
the point of “serving” his year as an involuntary “volun- 
teer” in France, was the grandfather’s favorite. He could do 
what he liked with him and he knew it. One day, when 
I was on a visit in London, Johnny, whom the parents had 
sent over from Paris—as occurred several times every year— 
hit upon the brilliant idea of converting Moor into an 
omnibus, on the box of which, that is to say Marx’s shoul- 
ders, he set himself, while Engels and I were appointed to 
be omnibus horses. And when we were properly harnessed, 
then there was a wild chase—I should have liked to say 
furious drive—in the little house garden behind Marx’s 
cottage in Maitland Park Road. Perhaps it may have been 
in Engels’ house at Regents’ Park. The average London 
houses are all so much alike that they can be easily con- 
fused, and especially the house gardens. A few square meters 
of gravel and grass, both so closely covered with a layer of 
London “blacks” or “black snow” the soot particles flying 
around, that one cannot distinguish where grass and gravel 
begin and end—that is the London “garden.” 

And now they started off, gee up! With international 
cries in German, English and French—Go on! Plus vite! 
Hurrah! Moor had to trot so that the sweat ran down his 
face, and if Engels or I tried to slacken the pace at all, the 
whip of the unrelenting driver immediately descended on 
our backs: you naughty horse! en avant! And so on, until 
Marx could not go on any more—and then negotiations. 
began with Johnny and an armistice was concluded. 


8. LENCHEN 


Every since the time when Marx’s household was estab- 
lished, Lenchen, in the words of one of the daughters, be- 
came the soul of the house and, in the highest, noblest sense 
of the words—the maid of all work. Was there anything 
which she did not have to do? Was there anything which she 

50 


did not do joyfully? I will only recall the many journeys to 
the mysterious, much-berated and yet cultivated, benevolent 
relative, the “uncle” with the three gilt balls. And always 
she was cheerful, laughing, ready to help. But no! She could 
also be angry and Moor’s enemies hated her with a fierce 
hatred. 

If Frau Marx was not well, Lenchen acted as mother—and 
on other occasions, also, she was a second mother to the 
children. And she had a will of her own—a strong, firm will. 
What she thought necessary had to happen. 

Lenchen exercised, as we have said, a sort of dictatorship 
to formulate the relationship precisely, I might say: 
Lenchen was the dictator in the house, Frau Marx the ruler. 
And Marx submitted like a lamb to this dictatorship. It has 
been said that no one is a great man in the eyes of his valet. 
Marx was certainly not one in Lenchen’s eyes. She would 
have sacrificed herself for him, she would have given up her 
life for him and Frau Marx and each of the children a hun- 
dred times over if it had been necessary or possible—she did 
indeed give her life—but Marx could not impress her. She 
knew him with all his moods and weaknesses and she twisted 
him round her little finger. However irritable his mood, 
however much he stormed and raged so that everyone else 
was glad to keep clear of him, Lenchen went into the lion’s 
den, and if he growled she so forcibly read Leviticus to him 
that the lion became as tame as a lamb. 


g. WALKS WITH MARX 


Our journeys to Hampstead Heath! Were I to live to be a 
thousand years old, I would never forget them. Hampstead 
“Heath” lies beyond Primrose Hill and like it is well known 
to the world outside London through Dickens’ Pickwick. 
It is today still very largely heath, that is to say, hilly coun- 
try, not built upon, with prickly gorse bushes and groups 
of trees growing on it.’ It has miniature mountains and 
valleys where everyone can roam and sport at will without 


jl 











fear of trespassing, t.e., penetrating without authorization 
into private property, where one may be stopped by a 
guardian of the holy property and subjected to fine. Hamp- 
stead Heath is still today a favorite place for the Londoner’s 
excursions, and on a fine Sunday it is black with men’s and 
gay with women’s clothes. The ladies have a special pred- 
ilection for putting the patience of the, in any case very 
patient, donkeys and hack horses to the test. Forty years ago, 
Hampstead Heath was very much larger and more primitive 
than it is today. A Sunday on Hampstead Heath was one of 
our greatest joys. The children talked of it the whole week 
beforehand and to us grown-ups, old and young, it was also 
a source of the greatest joys. The very journey thither was a 
festival. The girls were excellent walkers, lissom and un- 
tiring as cats. From Dean Street, where the Marxes lived— 
a few doors away from Church Street where I had my an- 
chorage—it was a good hour and a quarter, and as a rule 
we started out by eleven o'clock in the morning. Frequently, 
it is true, we started later, for early rising is not the custom 
in London and it always took some time before everything 
was ready, the children looked after and the basket properly 
packed. 

The basket! It stands, or rather hangs, before my ‘mental 
eye’ as really, as vividly, as alluringly, as appetizingly as if 
I had seen it on Lenchen’s arms only yesterday. 

For the basket was our provision store, and when one has 
a strong and healthy stomach and very often not the neces- 
sary small change in one’s pocket (large sums at that time 
were entirely out of the question), then the food question 
plays a very outstanding role. And the good Lenchen, who 
kept a sympathetic heart in her breast for us starving and 
therefore ever-hungry guests, knew this very well. A mighty 
roast of veal was the traditional ptéce de resistance for a 
Sunday on Hampstead Heath. A basket of unusual dimen- 
sions for London, rescued by Lenchen from the old days at 
Treves, served as a receptacle, as a sort of tabernacle, for 
the holy of holies. Along with the roast was tea with sugar, 


52 








and occasionally some fruit. Bread and cheese we would buy 
on the Heath, where, as in Berlin coffee gardens, crockery 
and hot water with milk could be obtained and everyone, 
according to desire and means, could—and can—buy bread, 
cheese, butter, beer, together with the shrimps, watercress 
and winkles characteristic of the place. 

The march itself was usually accomplished in the follow- 
ing order: I went in front as vanguard accompanied by the 
two girls—sometimes relating stories, and sometimes doing 
free gymnastic exercises or hunting for wild flowers, which 
at that time were not so rare as they now are. Behind us 
came some friends. Then came the main body of the army: 
Marx with his wife and perhaps some Sunday visitors who 
claimed a certain amount of attention. And behind these 
came Lenchen with the hungriest of the guests, who helped 
her to carry the basket. If there was more company present 
it divided itself between the various columns of the army. I 
need hardly say that the order of march or battle array 
could be varied according to mood or needs. 

Arrived on the Heath, we would first of all look out for a 
spot where we could set up our tent, taking into account 
the possibilities of obtaining tea and beer. 

Autar epet posios kai edettos ex eron hento— 

But after they had refreshed themselves with food and 
drink—then the excursionists sought out the most comfort- 
able place for sitting and camping, and—provided a nap 
was not given the preference—the Sunday newspapers 
bought on the way were brought out from the pockets and 
we would begin to read and talk politics—while the chil- 
dren, who quickly found playmates, played hide-and-seek 
among the gorse bushes. 

But we had to introduce some variety into our life of 
ease and so races were held, and sometimes there was wres- 
tling, aiming with stones or other sports. One Sunday we 
discovered in the neighborhood a horse-chestnut tree with 
ripe burrs. “Let's see who can bring down the most,” some- 
one cried, and with shouts of “hurrah” we set to work. 


53 








Moor was like a madman, and certainly bringing down 
chestnuts was not his strong point. But he was indefatigable 
—as we all were. The bombardment only ceased when the 
last chestnut had been secured amid wild cries of triumph. 
Marx could not use his right arm for eight days afterwards, 
and I was no better off. 

The greatest “treat” of all was a ride on the donkeys. 
What uproarious laughter and merry-making there were! 
And what comical scenes! How Marx amused. himself—and 
us! He amused us in two ways: both by his more than primi- 
tive equestrian skill and also by the fanaticism with which 
he asserted his virtuosity in this art. His virtuosity consisted 
in the fact that as a student he had once taken riding lessons 
—Engels asserted that he had never taken more than three— 
and that in the festival years when he visited Manchester 
he went out riding with Engels on a venerable Rosinante 
that was probably a great-grandchild of the gentle lamblike 
mare which old Fritz had once presented to the worthy 
Gellert. 

Our return home from Hampstead Heath was always very 
jolly, although the pleasure in retrospect did not evoke such 
joyful thoughts as in anticipation. We were saved from 
melancholy—although we certainly had only too good 
grounds for it—by our sardonic humor. The woes of the 
refugee did not exist for us—if anyone began to complain 
he was reminded in most emphatic fashion of his social 
duties. 

The order of march on the way back was different from 
that on the way out. The children had made themselves 
tired by running about, and formed the rearguard together 
with Lenchen who, being lighter of foot and load since the 
basket was emptied, was now able to take charge of them. 
Usually we struck up a song, only rarely political songs, 
mainly folk songs, especially sentimental songs and—this is 
no fable—“‘patriotic” songs from the “Fatherland,” such as 
“O Strassburg, O Strassburg, du wunderschéne Stadt, which 
was a great favorite. Or the children would sing Negro songs 


54 








to us, and even dance as well—if their legs had recovered 
somewhat from fatigue. During the march, it was as imper- 
missible to speak of politics as of refugee sorrows. On the 
other hand, we spoke much of literature and art, and then 
Marx had an opportunity of showing his tremendous 
memory. He would recite long passages from the Divine 
Comedy, of which he knew almost the whole by heart, and 
scenes from Shakespeare, in which case his wife, who had an 
excellent knowledge of Shakespeare, would often relieve 
him.... 

From the end of the ’fifties we lived in the north of Lon- 
don, in Kentish Town and Haverstock Hill, and then our 
favorite walks were on the hills and fields between and be- 
hind Hampstead and Highgate. Here we could look for 
flowers and identify plants, which gives especial pleasure to 
town children in whom the cold, seething ocean of stones 
of the great city produces a passionate hunger for the green 
scenery of nature. What a joy it was for us when in the 
course of our wanderings we discovered a little pond over- 
shadowed by trees and I was able to point out to the chil- 
dren the first living “wild’’ forget-me-not. And our joy was 
still greater when we came on a luxuriant, dark velvet green 
meadow, onto which we ventured after carefully recon- 
noitering the ground in defiance of warnings against “‘tres- 
pass,” and discovered some wild hyacinths among other 
spring flowers in a wind-protected spot... . 


10. ILLNESS AND DEATH* 


On Moor’s stay in Mustapha (Algiers) I cannot say much 
more than that the weather was awful, that Moor found 
there a very clever and friendly doctor and that everyone 
in the hotel was attentive and friendly towards him. 

During the autumn and winter of 1881-82, Moor was at 
first with Jenny in Argenteuil near Paris. There we met 


* A letter from Tussy (Marx’s youngest daughter—Eleanor)—Ed. 
55 








and remained together for a few weeks. Then he traveled 
to the south of France and to Algiers, but came back very ill. 
He passed the autumn and winter of 1882-83 in Ventnor 
(on the Isle of Wight) from where he returned in January, 
1883, after Jenny’s death—January 8. 

Now about Karlsbad. We visited it for the first time in 
1874. Moor had been sent there on account of a liver com- 
plaint and sleeplessness. In the following year, 1875, his 
first stay having done him a great deal of good, he went 
there alone. The next year, 1876, I accompanied him again 
because he said that he had missed me very much the year 
before. In Karlsbad he took his cure with great conscien- 
tiousness and carried out exactly what was prescribed for 
him. We made many friends there. As a traveling com- 
panion, Moor was delightful. Always in good spirits, he was 
always ready to enjoy everything whether it was beautiful 
scenery or a glass of beer. And with his extensive knowl- 
edge of history he could make every place that we came to 
even more vivid and living in the past than it actually was 
in the present. 

I believe that various things have been written about 
Moor’s stay in Karlsbad. Among other things I heard of a 
longish article. 1 cannot remember now in which paper it 
appeared; perhaps M.O. in D. could tell you something 
more about it. He spoke to me about a very good article. 

In 1874-75 we saw each other in Leipzig. Then on our 
way home we made an excursion to Bingen, which Moor 
wanted to show me because he had been there on his honey- 
moon with my mother. Besides that we also went to Dres- 
den, Berlin, Prague, Hamburg and Nuremberg during these 
two journeys. 

In 1877, Moor should have gone back to Karlsbad. How- 
ever, it was reported to us that the German and Austrian 
governments intended to expel him, and since the journey 
was too long and expensive to let it come to an expulsion, 
he did not go to Karlsbad any more—to his disadvantage 
for he always felt after the cure as if he had been re- 
juvenated. 

56 


ste, 





We went to Berlin chiefly in order to visit the faithful 
friend of my father, my dear uncle Edgar von Westphalen. 
We remained only a few days. To Moor’s joy we heard later 
that the police had paid him a visit at our hotel on the third 
day—exactly an hour after we had left. 

In the autumn of 1880—when our dear mother was al- 
ready so il! that she could only rarely rise from her sickbed— 
Moor had a serious attack of pleurisy. It became so danger- 
ous because he had been always neglecting his illness. The 
doctor (our excellent friend Donkin) regarded the case as 
almost hopeless. It was a terrible time. In the large front 
room lay our mother, in the little room behind was Moor. 
And the two of them, who were so used to one another, so 
close to one another, could not be together in the same 
room. 

Our good old Lenchen (you know what she was to us) 
and I had to look after both of them. The doctor said that 
our care saved Moor’s life. Be that as it may, I only know 
that neither Helene (Lenchen) nor I ever went to bed for 
three weeks. We were up and about day and night, and if 
we were at any time absolutely exhausted, we took turns 
in resting for an hour. Moor once more got the better of his 
illness. I shall never forget the morning when he felt him- 
self strong enough to go into mother’s room. They were 
young again together—she a loving maid and he a loving 
youth, who were entering life together—and not an old man 
devastated by illness and a dying old woman who were 
taking leave from one another for life. 

Moor became better and if he was not strong, still he 
appeared to be strong. 

Then mother died—on December 2, 1881; her last words 
—remarkably enough in English—were addressed to her 
“Karl.” When our dear General (Engels) came, he said— 
what at the time almost moved me to anger—“Moor ts also 
dead.” 

And it was actually so. 

With mother’s life went that of Moor also. He struggled 


57 





hard in order to keep going, for he was a fighter to the last 
—but he was a broken man. His general state of health be- 
came worse and worse. If he had been selfish, he would have 
let things take their course. However, for him there was 
something which stood above everything else—that was his 
devotion to the cause. He attempted to complete his great 
work and therefore he agreed to undertake another voyage 
of recovery. 

In the spring of 1882 he went to Paris and Argenteuil,* 
where I met him, and we passed some really happy days 
together with Jenny and her children. Moor then traveled 
to the south of France and finally to Algiers. 

During his whole stay in Algiers, Nice and Cannes he was 
dogged by bad weather. He wrote me long letters from 
Algiers. Many of them I have lost, because on his request 
I sent them also to Jenny~and she gave me very few of 
them back. 

When Moor finally came home again, he was very ill; and 
now we began to fear the worst. On the advice of the doc- 
tor, he spent the autumn and winter at Ventnor in the Isle 
of Wight. I must mention here that at that time, on Moor’s 
wish, I spent three months in Italy with Jenny’s youngest 
son, Jean (Johnny). In the spring of 1883 I went to Moor 
and took Johnny with me, who was his special favorite 
among his grandchildren. I had to go back because I had to 
give my lessons. 

And now came the last dreadful blow: the news of Jenny’s 
death. Jenny, the first born, Moor’s favorite daughter, died 
suddenly (on January 8). We had received letters from 
Moor—I have them now before me—in which he writes 
that Jenny’s health was better and we (Helene and I) did 
not need to be anxious. We received the telegram announc- 
ing her death an hour later than the letter in which Moor 
wrote the above. I traveled immediately to Ventner. 





* This is the journey spoken of at the beginning of this letter. [Note 
by Wilhelm Liebknecht.] 


58 





I have gone through many sad hours in my life, but none 
was so sad as that. I felt that I was bringing my father his 
death sentence. On the long anxious journey, I tortured my 
brain thinking how to impart the news to him. I did not 
need to impart it, my face betrayed me—Moor said at once, 
“Our Jenny is dead!” and then he requested me to go to 
Paris at once and help with the children. I wanted to re- 
main with him—he would not suffer any contradiction. I 
had hardly been half an hour in Ventnor when I was al- 
ready on my sad troubled way to London in order to set out 
immediately for Paris. I did what Moor wished on account 
of the children. 

I will not speak of my journey there—I can only recall 
that time with a shudder—that mental agony, that torture— 
but no more of that. Sufficient—I came back and Moor 
returned home—to die. 

And now a word about our mother. She lay dying dur- 
ing a whole month and suffered all the terrible tortures 
which cancer brings with it. Yet her good spirits, her in- 
exhaustible wit, which you know very well, never de- 
serted her for an instant. She inquired as impatiently 
as a child for the results of the elections then being held 
in Germany [1881], and how she rejoiced at our victories. 
Up to her death, she remained cheerful and tried by joking 
to relieve our anxiety about her. Yes, in spite of her 
frightful suffering, she joked—she laughed—she laughed 
at the doctor and all of us because we were so serious. She 
remained fully conscious until almost the last moment, 
and when she could not speak any more—her last words 
were addressed to ‘‘Karl”—she pressed our hands—and tried 
to smile. 

As far as Moor is concerned, you know that he went 
from his bedroom into the study in Maitland Park, sat in 
the armchair and tranquilly went to sleep. 

This armchair the “General” kept until his death and 
I have it now. 

If you write about Moor, don’t forget Lenchen. I know 


59 








you will not forget mother—Helene was to a certain extent 
the axis around which everything in the house turned. 
The best, truest friend. Therefore be sure not to forget 
Helene, if you write about Moor. 

Now, since you wish it, a little more about Moor’s stay 
in the south. We—he and I—spent a few weeks at the begin- 
ning of 1882 with Jenny in Argenteuil. In March and 
April, Moor was in Algiers, in May in Monte Carlo, Nice, 
Cannes. Toward the end of June and during the whole 
of July he was again with Jenny, and Lenchen was also 
in Argenteuil at the time. From Argenteuil Moor went 
with Laura to Switzerland, Vevey, etc. Towards the end 
of September or at the beginning of October, he returned 
to England and immediately went to Ventnor where 
Johnny and I visited him. 

And now a few notes on your questions about the other 
children. Our little Edgar (Musch) was born in 1847— 
but I am not quite sure—and he died at the end of 1855. 
“Little Fawkes’* (Féxchen) Heinrich was born in Novem- 
ber 5, 1849, and he died when about two years old. My 
little sister Francisca, born in 1851, died while still a baby, 
about eleven months old. 

And now to your question about our good Helene or 
“Nymy’” as we called her in the end, because Johnny 
Longuet called her that, I don’t know why, when he was 
still a baby. Lenchen came to my grandmother from West- 
phalia as a little child of about eight or nine years old, 
and she grew up with Moor, mother and Edgar von West- 
phalen. Helene always remained very tenderly attached 
to the old Westphalen. And Moor also. He never tired 
of telling us of the old Baron von Westphalen, of his 
wonderful knowledge of Shakespeare and Homer. He 
could repeat word for word from beginning to end whole 


* He got the name Fawkes from the hero of the “Gunpowder Pilot,” 
Guido (Guy) Fawkes, whose anniversary November 5 every year is still 
noisily celebrated or, more correctly, execrated. [Note by Wilhelm 
Liebknecht.] 


60 











rhapsodies of Homer and he knew most of Shakespeare’s 
plays by heart both in English and German. Moor’s father, 
on the other hand—Moor had a great admiration for his 
father—was a real ‘‘Frenchman” of the eighteenth century. 
He knew his Voltaire and Rousseau by heart, as the old 
Westphalen knew his Homer and Shakespeare. And Moor 
undoubtedly owed his remarkable many-sidedness to a 
large extent to these “hereditary” influences. 

But to return to Helene. Whether she came to my par- 
ents before or after they went to Paris (which occurred 
very soon after their marriage) I cannot say. I only know 
that my grandmother sent the young girl to our mother 
“as the best that she could send her—faithful, dear Len- 
chen.” And faithful, dear Lenchen remained with my 
parents, and her younger sister, Marianne, also came later 


on. You will hardly recall her because it was after your 
time. 


11. WANT AND PRIVATION 


Innumerable lies have been spread about Marx—in- 
cluding the one that he lived in riotous luxury while the 
common herd of refugees around him went hungry and 
starved. I do not consider myself justified in entering here 
into details, but I can say this: Marx and his family experi- 
enced for years the misery of the life of a refugee. There 
can have been few refugees who suffered more than Marx 
and his family. And in the later period also, when the in- 
come was larger and more regular, the Marx family was 
not spared cares over daily food. During whole years— 
and the worst was then already over—the pound sterling 
which Marx was paid each week for his articles to the 
New York Tribune was the only certain source of income. 


12. MARX’S GRAVE 


Marx’s family grave, it should more correctly be called. 
It is situated in the Highgate cemetery in the north of 
London on a hill which overlooks the giant city. 

61 





Marx did not want a “memorial.”” To have desired to 
put up any other memorial to the creator of The Com- 
munist Manifesto and of Capital than that which he had 
built himself would have been an insult to the great dead. 
In the heads and hearts of millions of workers, who have 
“united” at his call, he has not merely a memorial more 
lasting than bronze, but also the living soil in which what 
he taught and desired will become—and in part has already 
become—an act. 

We Social-Democrats have no saints and no saints’ burial 
places but millions think with thankfulness and veneration 
of the man who rests in this cemetery in the north of 
London. And a thousand years hence, in a period when 
the savagery and narrow-mindedness which the efforts for 
the emancipation of the working class today encounter 
have become a scarcely credible tale of the past, free and 
noble men will still stand at this graveside and with bared 
heads whisper to their children: 


“HERE Lies KARL Marx!” 


Here lies Karl Marx and his family. A simple marble 
slab, bordered with ivy, lies like a pillow at the head 
of the grave which is enclosed by marble blocks, and on 
the slab is the inscription: 


JENNY VON WESTPHALEN 
The beloved wife of 
Kari. Marx 
Born 12 February 1814 
Died 2 December 1881 
AND KARL MARX 
Born May 5, 1818, died March 14, 1883 
And Harry LONGUET 
Their grandson 
Born July 4, 1878, died March 20, 1883 
And HELENE DEMUTH 
Born January 1, 1823, died November 4, 1890 
G2 








The family grave does not contain the whole family; 
that is in respect to the members no longer alive. The 
three children who died in London are buried in other 
London cemeteries—one of them, Edgar (“Musch’”), for 
certain, the other two probably in the cemetery of Whit- 
field Chapel in Totenham Court Road. And Jenny Marx, 
the favorite daughter, rests in Argenteuil near Paris, where 
death snatched her from her flourishing family. 

But if not all of the dead children and grandchildren 
have found a place in the family grave, still there is one 
who belonged to the family, although not by blood rela- 
tionship: “the faithful Lenchen,” Helene Demuth. 

That she should rest in the family grave had been de- 
cided already by Frau Marx, and after her by Marx. And 
Engels, the faithful Eckhart, like faithful Lenchen, carried 
out this duty together with the surviving children as he 
would have carried it out also on his own initiative. 

What Marx’s children thought of Lenchen, how tenderly 
they were attached to her, how deeply they revered her 
memory, can be seen from the letter of Marx’s youngest 
daughter. 

And when on my way home via Paris, after my last 
visit to London, I was revelling in old London reminis- 
cences with “Lérchen” in Draveil, where Lafargue and 
his wife Laura Marx had fashioned themselves an enviable 
country home, and I spoke of my intention of writing this 
memorial booklet, she also said to me, just as Tussy had 
done in the letter reproduced above and afterwards also 
by word of mouth: “Don’t forget about Lenchen!” 

Now-—I have not forgotten Lenchen and shall not forget 
her. Was she not indeed a friend to me for forty years? 
Was she not indeed in the London refugee period often 
also my “providence”? How often she helped me out with 
sixpence when my pockets were empty and there was not 
too low a tide in Marx’s house—for if the tide was low there, 
then there was nothing to be got from Lenchen. And how 
often, when my ability as a tailor did not suffice, did she 


63 








artistically repair some indispensable article of clothing, 
which was—on financial grounds—not replaceable in any 
period of time that could be foreseen, so as to make it 
wearable again for some weeks. 

When I saw Lenchen for the first time, she was twenty- 
seven years old and, while no beauty, she was pretty, well- 
grown and had very attractive features. She had no lack 
of admirers and she had repeated opportunities of making 
a good match. Nevertheless, without having made any 
vow, it was a matter of course for her faithful heart that 
she had to remain with “Moor” and Frau Marx and the 
children. 

She remained—and the years of her youth passed away. 
She remained during want and privation, in good fortune 
and misfortune. Her first rest came when death had mowed 
down both the woman and the man to whom she had 
linked her fate. She found rest with Engels and with him 
she died—forgetful of self to the last. And now she rests 
in the family grave. 


64 





Build a Library of Marxist Books 



















y , t bad e iy : Ved 
¥ By MARX and ENGELS ©,’ On Copitl = “0 128 
The Communist, Manifesto :° $.10 The Housing Question JB 
Selected Correspondance af Ludwig Feuerbach x, 
Marx and Engols 2.25 Socialism, Utopian and ‘ ( ' 
The Civil War'tn the U. S:° 2.60 ‘Scientific Sky AG / 
| V. b 
By KARL MARX | ui Glcsunalty Were 
Wage-Labor and Capital > .10 pe de ta of i oy f Hi 
Value, Price and Profit © >” I " 7 Me ek ate 5k 
Eighteenth Brumaire of oF Cabttallem ighont| Steas 30 
3 Louis Bonaparte , £0 wettintes Betis a) ote 
; Class Struggles in France 1.00 1 an P ee one ae 
; "Left-Wing" Communism, an 
ss Critique of the Gothe Infantile Disorder we 4.) 
Programme 1.00 an . ’ 
k Letters to Kugelmann 1.00 7 ce Se Sea st hg 
/ : Her to American 
Revert of Philosophy Bl 26,5 Workers 05 
« The Civil War in France 1 25% , 
By JOSEPH.STALIN 
By FREDERICK ENGELS Marxism and the National 
On Historical Materialiam ~~ .10 Sruastion ' ee 
Leninism = 2.25 
| The British Labour Movement od The War of National Liberation .15 
Germany: Revolutidn and ~ ' ‘Dialectical and Historical 
Counter-Revolution _, 46 Materialism AS, 
Qrigin of the Family 5 » 1.00 © The Tasks of the Youth | 18 y 
my ry 
NSgie 
¥ INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS 
381 Fourth Avenue : .. New York 









