TEXT FLY WITHIN 
THE BOOK ONLY 



00 

u<OU_1 64364 

co ^ co 

> 



The Nature of Human Personality 



BY G. N. M. TYRRELL 

The Personality of Man 



The Nature of 
Human Personality 

G. N. M. TYRRELL 



FOREWORD BY PROFESSOR II. H. PRICE 



George Allen and Unwin Ltd 

BUSKIN HOUSE MUSEUM STREET . LONDON 



First published in 1954. 

This book is copyright under the Berne Convention. 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of private 
study, research, criticism or review, as permitted under 
the Copyright Act 1911, no portion may be repro- 
duced by any process without written permission. 
Enquiry should be made to the publisher. 



Printed in Great Britain 

in 12 point Bembo type 

at the University Press 

Aberdeen 



FOREWORD 



ALL students of psychical research are familiar with the work of 
the late G. N. M. Tyrrell. The distinction of his writing, the 
breadth and fairness of his mind, the originality of his contribu- 
tions both to the experimental side of the subject and to the 
theoretical interpretation of the facts, had made him one of the 
world's leading authorities in this difficult and fascinating field. 

This book was written in the last year or two of his life. When 
he died in October 1952 the manuscript was almost complete, 
and only a very little editing has been necessary, chiefly in the last 
chapter. As he himself explains in the preface, it was intended to 
be a sequel to The Personality of Man (1946). It is also, in a way, a 
sequel to his earlier work Homo Fabor (1951). Its main aim is not 
to present fresh evidence, but to assess the significance of the 
evidence we already have. What light do paranormal phenomena 
throw on the nature of human personality and the relations of 
human personality to the rest -of the universe? Tyrrell's answer 
is that if rightly considered^ they alter our whole perspective 
('perspective' is one of the kdy-words of the book). The para- 
normal facts which psychical research has revealed cannot just ba 
added to the 'normal' facts we already know. They demand a 
revolution in our whole view of the world. Why do we call 
them 'paranormal' at all? Because they conflict with certain 
deep-rooted beliefs which all of us hold: beliefs so deep-rooted 
that we seldom formulate them in words and are not ordinarily 
even conscious of holding them. And that is also the reason why 
we are all of us so reluctant to accept the paranormal facts. Their 
consequences are too upsetting. 

These beliefs make up what might be called the common- 
sense outlook. What is their source? According to Tyrrell, they 
have a biological origin. They are instinctive beliefs, instilled 
into us by Nature for practical ends. A phrase he sometimes uses 
for describing them is 'the adapted mind'. He thought that the 
human mind, no less than the human body, has been adapted to 
its environment in the course of evolution. The adapted mind 
presents us with a simplified picture of the world and of ourselves, 
much as a child's first history-book presents a simplified picture of 
the historical facts. We instinctively believe that the world as we 



VI FOREWORD 

perceive it by the senses is wholly objective; that there is nothing 
outside space and time; that the superficial self detectable by 
introspection and expressed in bodily behaviour is the whole 
self; that all the problems which we meet with are finally soluble. 
Of course this simplified picture has great biological utility. 
It helps us to live, and we could hardly live without it. Tyrrell 
does not deny that it corresponds in some degree to the facts, as 
the child's history-book does. But paranormal phenomena show 
that it is quite inadequate; and that is where their importance lies. 
They show us that human personality is far more complex and 
also far more baffling than common sense assumes. They suggest 
that the concepts of Space and Time do not apply to the whole of 
Reality; that even the most familiar material objects may have 
strange properties, of quite a different order from those revealed 
by our senses; that it would be nearer the truth to say extunt 
omnia in mysterium than to suppose that all problems are in 
principle soluble. 

In this respect, Tyrrell argues, psychical research confirms the 
teachings of the mystics, who have always maintained that the 
perceptible world, and the empirical self too, are only appearance 
of a deeper reality inaccessible to the senses and the intellect. 
Jndeed, he thinks that the 'intuitive' faculty which is present in its 
highest degree in the mystics is present in some degree in all men, 
along side of the adapted mind with its biologically-instilled 
instinctive beliefs. In the last chapter of the book there is a brief 
discussion of the relations between psychical research and religion 
from this point of view. Many readers will probably wish that 
this chapter had been longer. 

H. H. PRICE 

Our grateful thanks are due to Professor H. H. Price for his 
valuable advice and help in the preparation of this last book by 
G. N. M. Tyrrell. 

C. M. TYRRELL. 
G. M. JOHNSON. 



PREFACE 



THIS book is a sequel to The Personality of Man, which was 
published in the Pelican Series by Penguin Books Limited in 
1946. Many letters were received from this and other countries 
containing questions prompted by the evidence cited in this book; 
and it seemed to the author that further consideration of this 
evidence was required. 

The Personality of Man presented the factual side of psychical 
research, giving evidence which had been collected with rigorous 
care. Most of it was taken from the Proceedings and Journals of the 
Society for Psychical Research, a body which for the last seventy 
years has investigated the paranormal along scientific lines. 

The present book has added a little to the evidence; but its 
principal object has been to consider its significance and to probe 
as deeply as possible into its meaning. The result of examining 
paranormal evidence is that certain principles of interest and im- 
portance have come to light. In the first place, the human faculties 
which give rise to the paranormal are seen to be universal. The 
paranormal therefore does not consist of mere oddities but of 
something universal, which is partly hidden. Everyone, for 
example, possesses in some degree the faculty of telepathy though 
only a few possess it markedly. It is a faculty which is world-wide 
in principle; but it is not reliable nor is it adapted for practical use 
like the ordinary senses. If perfected and made reliable it would 
not fit into life in the material world. Among the less civilized 
nations, it is, however, more widely operative than among the 
more highly sophisticated. 

The tendency to regard the paranormal as a mere queer, 
isolated oddity arises because our minds have been developed for 
practical efficiency. The paranormal, if it came to the fore, would 
merely confuse and complicate the world of daily life. When, 
however, the mind is seeking for truth in deeper regions, the 
paranormal becomes an indicator of first importance. It gives a 
hint of the vast perspective of things which is hidden from the 
practical mind for practical reasons. 



Vlll PREFACE 

Psychical research also brings home another thing when we 
begin to grasp it: it shows that our attitude of mind plays a larger 
part in the acquisition of knowledge than we realize. In fact, the 
mind, for practical efficiency, is made to regard the things about 
it in a particular fashion; and a feature of great sublety is intro- 
duced into this mental attitude. The fact that there is a mental 
attitude is concealed from the mind which possesses it; otherwise 
the serene confidence of the practical man would be disrupted. 

This useful practical illusion loses its utility as soon as the 
mind, attaining a higher vantage-point, endeavours to discover 
the truth about its own situation. It has before it the difficult 
task of overcoming its own set habits. Here psychical research is a 
great help, for it reveals these set habits: the general attitude of 
mankind towards the paranormal reveals them: the tendency to 
ignore the paranormal and to explain it away reveals that there 
is something artificial and specialized in the human mind. 

If these set habits can be overcome, the paranormal takes us 
still further and reveals two facts of paramount importance. 
One is that the ordinary common self of daily life is not the whole 
self, but is no more than a specialized abstraction from a far 
greater self, whose characteristics and scope go beyond our com- 
prehension. The second is that the universe is similarly not solely 
composed of that which the senses and intellect can grasp, but 
extends indefinitely beyond our sensory limits, beyond space and 
time and beyond the reach of anything that can be grasped by the 
mind. 

In this short book examination of the different branches of 
the paranormal will show that all alike converge towards these 
two great principles. And these principles are entirely opposed 
to the world-outlook of the present day, which is largely the 
product of science. They show that Materialism rests on a sub- 
jective basis; for it is the result of the mind's unconscious inter- 
pretation of facts in accordance with its own constitution. 

This pointing of the different branches of the paranormal in 
one direction has inevitably led to a certain amount of repetition. 
The reader may regard this as unnecessary; but on the part of the 
author it is deliberate. For experience has shown that the mind, 



PREFACE ix 

urged by its innate impulses, will repeatedly reject thtse con- 
clusions if they are not frequently reiterated. 

Thus, the primary lesson which the paranormal has to teach 
is this. Nature always urges us to turn outwards in the search for 
truth; but if we wish to discover things that lie outside the field 
of practical achievement, the essential thing is to look within. 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

FOREWORD V 

PREFACE vii 

I Psychology and Psychiatry i 

II To What does Extra-Sensory Per- 
ception Point? 9 

III The Problem of Mental Mediumship 17 

IV The Light thrown by Apparitions 41 
V The Physical Side 61 

VI Our Mental Attitude in Science and 

Thought 71 

VII How Improbable is the Paranormal? 78 

VIII The Occult 84 

IX Normal and Paranormal are One 93 

X The Pathway to Religion 106 

INDEX 121 



CHAPTER I 

Psychology and Psychiatry 

PSYCHOLOGY is one of the newer sciences; therefore the things 
it will ultimately reveal are not yet as visible as they are in 
the older sciences. One can, however, notice an important feature 
at the outset. Experimental psychology has adopted the methods 
of physical science and applied them to the study of the mind 
without criticizing this procedure. Physics, chemistry, geology, 
astronomy, etc., set out to analyse the physical universe; therefore 
their primary aim is to be objective. In other words, they con- 
centrate their attention on the data supplied by the human senses 
and observe the external world with accuracy and constant 
repetition until they have built up a valid picture of it. This 
concentration on the spatial and temporal attributes of matter 
directs these subjects more and more towards measurement and 
mathematics. 

Psychology entered the laboratory with this inheritance from 
the physical sciences and endeavoured to explore the mind on 
similar lines. Since the mind cannot be directly measured, quanti- 
tative methods had to be applied to reactions of the body as it 
responded to mental stimuli. This method revealed facts which 
were indeed related to the mind: it probed a certain distance into 
that psycho-physical combination which we call man; but what 
many psychologists did not realize is that in following the tech- 
nique of physics they had embarked upon their research from a 
specialized and not from a general standpoint. They had launched 
out into the physical world before beginning to investigate the 
mind; and hence imposed restrictions which a more introspective 
method would not have done. It did not occur to them that it was 
necessary to examine one'i> own mind and realize its peculiarities 
before embarking on the study of mind in general. 

The experimental psychologist would probably reply to this 
by saying that in psychology he had adopted the only possible 



2 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

line. To step into the external world, he would say, as a pre- 
liminary to studying the mind, is inevitable. Up to a certain point 
this is true; but it is not wholly true. The main point is that, even 
if it were the only way of exploring the mind, it is absolutely 
essential, if we are not to be woefully misled, to recognize the 
limited and specialized character of the tools we are using and to 
make allowances for them. It should be recognized that this type 
of psychology has adopted a specialized mode of approach, which 
is impregnated with peculiar limitations. 

If we are to form any reliable idea of the nature of mind (or, 
indeed, of the ultimate nature of anything), it is necessary to see 
it from an impartial standpoint. If we cannot do this at once, 
we can at least leave the specialist's groove and look at it from 
different, converging points of view, integrating these so as to 
bring the object of our research into something like a true 
perspective. But the type of psychologist I am considering does 
not seem to be conscious of the highly special character of his 
angle of approach: he does not say: I am looking at the human 
mind from one particular point of view only, therefore I can 
describe only one special aspect of it. He appears to think that 
psychology gives him a central and all-inclusive picture, which he 
identifies with the mind as it is in an absolute sense; and those who 
hear his account for the most part acquiesce and hold the same 
point of view. The result is that his picture of mind penetrates no 
nearer to the final essence of mind than an astronomer's picture of 
the sun would do if he examined nothing but reflected sunlight. 

It is because the human senses and intellect have been devel- 
oped along pragmatic lines for dealing practically with matter 
that mind is seen only through its reactions with matter; and this 
causes mind to be regarded either as an isolable entity, like a 
material object, or else as a function of such an object. On 
account of the specialized nature of our own minds, our reason is 
easily deflected and led astray. It says: Wherever we look, we never 
find mind in operation apart from the physical brain. Mind must 
therefore be a causal effect of matter; or, if it is not, it must at any 
rate be something that we can investigate by the methods which 
are used in the physical sciences. But these exclusive alternatives 



PSYCHOLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 3 

result from the fact that the scientist looks at things through a 
limited peep-hole. 

The psychology of the laboratory has embarked upon a 
somewhat self-contradictory programme, for its aim is to explore 
the internal by external methods. But psychology, like every 
other science, has two distinct objects in view. One is to gain 
knowledge: the other is to evolve techniques which are useful in 
practice. It is the second objective which has always been by far 
the most successful in science. 

During the last fifty years, psychology has launched out in a 
new direction and has developed a medical branch known as 
psychiatry, the roots of which may be traced back to the end of the 
eighteenth century, when Mesmerism began to attract attention. 
Mesmerism, afterwards called Hypnotism, blazed the trail for the 
new psychology by stepping across the boundary of the ordinarily 
conscious mind and entering a new and unexplored field. During 
the nineteenth century more and more attention was turned to- 
wards this field, but as one might have expected, it was explored 
more for its medical utility than to gain knowledge of the human 
being. It was investigated because it offered a means of curing 
mental disorders, which had their origin beyond the conscious 
boundary. Paul and Pierre Janet worked upon it in France during 
the 1 8 8os ; Binet practised it a decade later. In 1903, F. W. H. 
Myers published his book, Human Personality and its Survival of 
Bodily Death, in which he developed his theory of the Subliminal 
Self. This theory was based, not on the evidence of medical 
psychology alone, for at that time it had not advanced far, but 
also on the collection of cases that had been made in the early 
days of psychical research. It was a wider theory than that con- 
structed by the psychiatric branch of psychology. During the 
first third of the twentieth century, the work of Sigmund Freud 
attracted widespread attention. He was a pupil of Charcot, who 
had devoted himself to the investigation of hysteria, in the course 
of which he discovered that factors outside the conscious mind 
were responsible for this disorder. Some of these factors were found 
to have been suppressed from consciousness and thereby gave rise 
to conflicts in the subconscious region of the mind. The latter 



4 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

was designated by Freud the 'Unconscious'; and, for dealing with 
this region of the mind, he invented the technique of psycho- 
analysis, for which he became world famous. 

It is important to remember that psychiatry has always been 
a medical technique rather than an exploratory branch of science. 
Hence it is bound to approach its subject from a highly special 
point of view. It does not stand back and survey the mind from 
various angles, which is a method essential for arriving at truth. 
One instance of this is provided by the creation of the vague term 
'unconscious'. What does it mean? Is the 'unconscious' un- 
conscious? What does one mean by 'an unconscious mental 
process'? Can a process which is unconscious be intelligibly called 
'mental'? If so, the term 'mental' needs to be redefined. How far 
does the 'unconscious' extend? Has it a boundary? If so, where is its 
boundary? Does precognition take place in the 'unconscious'? If 
so, the 'unconscious' must transcend the precincts of time, as we 
know it. 

The psychiatrist has not attempted to answer these questions 
but has concentrated on the cure of mental diseases. Therefore 
his statements about the nature of the human being and the ap- 
parent implication of his terms need not be taken too seriously. 
One psychiatrist, for example, said: 'The unconscious is merely a 
term which comprises everything that exists, that has existed, or 
that could exist beyond the range of this individual consciousness.' 1 

This kind of thing, as well as the universal conclusions drawn 
by Freud from his researches, brings to mind the story of the frog 
which tried to inflate itself into a bull. Psychiatry deals with 
only a fringe of the mind beyond normal consciousness: yet its 
investigations of dreams and complexes, and especially the wider 
work of C. G. Jung, have been of great value. 

From the standpoint of an inquiry which endeavours to form 
an adequate conception of the human being, the important tiling 
about psychiatry is that it has crossed the boundary of normal 
consciousness, and its crossing has been generally accepted; and 
it has added from its own point of view to the evidence that there 

3 Dr. H. Godwin Baynes, Journal Society for Psychical Research, Vol. xxx, 
p. 68. 



PSYCHOLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 5 

is more beyond this boundary. Freud, at least in his early work, 
still regarded the normal consciousness as the centre of the human 
being and the 'unconscious' as being a rubbish-heap in the back- 
ground. Myers, taking into account the more far-reaching 
evidence of psychical research, was struck by the fact that the 
subliminal self contains a goldmine as well as a rubbish-heap. The 
long history of intuition and inspiration, which is chiefly 
responsible for the intellectual progress of the human race, pro- 
vides still more evidence that the mind extends far, beyond the 
conscious boundary in a positive direction. Every original thinker 
receives his key-ideas from outside his conscious mind. Flashes 
of inspiration are far more effective than the logical process of 
academic reasoning. Poets, authors, musicians, scientists have owed 
most of their greatest works to this; while genius supplies an 
overpowering example of it. All that the psychiatrist has done 
is to take a first step across the boundary at a somewhat low level 
and to investigate what he immediately finds there. 

If we abandon the view-point of the specialist and take a 
general survey, the common-sense assumption about the human 
being is reversed. Instead of seeing the normally conscious being 
as the centre of the self, and the subconscious or unconscious as 
no more than a marginal fringe, it shows that the centre of the 
human being lies beyond, and not on the near side of, the boundary 
of normal consciousness. The normal self is a highly specialized 
abstraction from the total human personality and is adapted for 
existence under v~ry special circumstances. The nature of the 
whole being is far beyond the capacity of the intellect to grasp. 

There are three features of normal consciousness which are of 
great importance for our whole inquiry. One is that the sphere of 
operation of the ordinary mind is extremely limited. The second 
is that it is for the most part conscious only of things which 
affect it in a practical manner. The third is that its degree of con- 
sciousness varies continually, passing up and down a graded scale 
from a narrow range at the bottom (which is the practical end) 
to a wider range when engaged in reflective thought. 

Our awareness of what goes on in our bodies is extremely 
restricted. When we make use of our senses, we are aware only of 



6 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

their end-products. Of the complex processes which go on when 
we see, hear or touch, we are totally unaware. With muscular 
movement it is the same. We will that our hand shall go out and 
grasp an object; but all we are conscious of is that it does so. 
The immensely complicated series of processes that our will has 
set in motion make no impression on our awareness the nerve- 
impulses, the exactly co-ordinated muscular contractions, the 
incredibly complicated activities of the brain-cells all these we 
neither control nor know anything about. Yet they surely 
cannot be wholly mechanical: they are minutely regulated. How 
can mind be absent from the details of this regulating process? 
It has been arranged that our narrow band of practical conscious- 
ness shall be unaware of this regulating portion of the mind. All 
that the normally conscious mind is aware of is the willed effort 
and its result; and this means that it has been limited and adapted 
for practical ends. 

This brings us to the second point. The ordinarily conscious 
mind is strictly conditioned in other ways, being adapted to 
common life as the glove to the hand. It is so conditioned that 
everything that is not necessary to become part of its awareness is 
withheld from its consciousness. Not only are the processes of per- 
ception, muscular action and all bodily functions withheld from 
view: it is so constituted that it instinctively turns a cold shoulder 
to anything likely to confuse its world or to distract its attention 
from practical efficiency. The unpopularity of such deeply 
probing subjects as philosophy or psychical research and the 
reduction of religion to mere outward and formal observance are 
examples of this. 

The third point is that the mind flashes up and down its graded 
scale of awareness so rapidly that it does not realize that it is 
doing so. At the level of action the mind cannot reflect: it can do 
little more than react to sense-stimuli. Instantly it can, however, 
mount to a higher level of awareness; and then it is able to ponder 
over what sense-revelations mean. In a flash it has risen to a higher 
condition of consciousness. It has expanded. So there are ranges of 
being or selfhood even within the confines of ordinary conscious- 
ness; and beyond these confines the range continues. 



PSYCHOLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 7 

Psychology points to two important things. In the first place, 
to the high degree of specialization which the practical portion 
of the mind has undergone while it was being adapted to the 
physical world. In the second place, to the fact that the prac- 
tically adapted part does not include the whole. The mind is not 
a self-contained entity, neatly rounded off and confined within 
a rigid boundary. It is true that it has the appearance of being 
such; but the further psychology advances the more this is shown 
to be only an appearance. The appearance has been pre-arranged 
by nature to ensure simplicity throughout practical life. In truth, 
the self expands indefinitely beyond its empirical boundary, and 
in essence it is incomprehensible. If any physical analogy were 
applicable to the mind, it might be compared with the spectrum 
of light. All knowledge we have of it shows that it is far more like 
this than it is like an isolated and self-contained entity. 

To realize that the mind or self is not something enclosed 
within the spatial boundary of the body is extremely important; 
but there is something else of equal importance. This is the way 
in which our true nature has been concealed from us. The innate 
tendency of the mind is to assume that everything is a detached 
entity, easily comprehensible by the human intellect. This* 
assumption is justified so long as we are dealing with the practical 
side of life: that is why it has been instilled into the human 
mind and why we always take it for granted. The entire metho- 
dology of science reflects this characteristic of the mind, in spite 
of the fact that the advance of pure science gently but persistently 
unmasks it. And although psychology is a comparatively new 
science, this unmasking is making steady progress. The subtlety 
of our mental constitution and the importance of realizing it looms 
larger and larger the more we make progress. At last we begin to 
see that it is a universal principle underlying the whole of our 
conception of ourselves and of the universe. It is extremely 
subtle, for part of its very constitution is that it remains invisible 
so long as the mind remains at a low level of awareness. 

An inkling of this mysterious, invisible factor which enters 
into our processes of reasoning, is supplied by reflection on the 
past history of man. Instinct plays a dominant role in the animal 



8 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

world; and as human beings arose out of that world, instinct 
played a major role in the formation of the human mind. To deny 
that we have inherited instincts from our primitive ancestors would 
be to fly in the face of truth. Instinct forms, in fact, the red and 
infra-red portions of the mental spectrum. Without it, the 
human mind would be quite inefficient in action. But the bands 
of the mental spectrum interpenetrate one another that is why 
the spectrum of light is an imperfect analogy. Instinct does not 
remain at the bottom but rises and impregnates the mind at the 
level of intellect; but the subtle point is that it acts in a hypnotic 
manner, causing the conscious mind to be unaware that it is 
being acted upon. Nevertheless, as the level of awareness rises 
the power of instinct declines, and then it becomes easier to see 
through this quasi-hypnotic suggestion. 

Instinct not only impregnates sense-perception: it flows into 
every department of practical life, and is responsible for the 
world's eternal troubles. War is prompted by instinct mingled 
with reason; and man brings vast suffering upon himself by 
acting in ways that pure reason would denounce. But all the 
while the clear light of reason, untrammelled by instinct, would 
'reveal the insanity of actions prompted by the lower levels and 
would suggest easy methods of negotiating a satisfactory peace 
and of settling every kind of difficulty. The madness of actions 
prompted by the lower levels of the mind would then be as clear 
as daylight. 

From our general standpoint, which is wider than that of the 
specialist, the salient achievement of psychology is this: by the use 
of recognized scientific methods it has crossed the boundary of 
normal consciousness and discovered that there is more of the self 
beyond. And we notice a remarkable and highly significant thing. 
Now that the Rubicon has been crossed and a more first-hand 
contact has been made with the mystery of being, the latter 
becomes less and less easy to define. The psychologist has opened 
an ever-widening vista: the apparently comprehensible begins 
to lapse into the incomprehensible, which is a sure sign of a 
step towards reality. 



CHAPTER II 

To what does Extra-Sensory Perception Point? 

TURNING now to psychical research, the first question that 
arises concerns the significance of extra-sensory perception; for 
this is the most definite and fully confirmed branch of what is 
called the 'paranormal*. A brief summary of the evidence for it 
was given in chapters 6 to 15 in The Personality of Man. The 
evidence falls into two main groups, (i) spontaneous and (2) ex- 
perimental. The spontaneous group consists of some hundreds of 
carefully collected cases sent in by members of the public and 
thoroughly examined by the Society for Psychical Research, and 
some by other similar bodies. Also many true statements have 
been uttered by mediums and taken down verbatim at the time, 
and these concern facts which the medium could not possibly 
have known by any normal means. 

The experimental category includes tests of a qualitative 
nature, in which the agent looked at some object while the per- 
cipient, sometimes many miles away, noted down his impressions. 

Also book-tests have been carried out, in which a medium 
has stated what was on a particular page in a book which was 
standing on a shelf in a house to which she had no access. 1 

During the las*- two decades quantitative experiments have 
been carried out based on the principle of guessing cards or 
simple objects, to which statistical evaluation can be applied. 
These experiments, carried out chiefly in America and England, 
run into thousands. 

The evidence, when taken all together, is immensely strong; 
for the spontaneous cases were carefully sifted and examined before 
publication; the witnesses were often questioned personally and all 
relevant evidence was taken into account. The spontaneous 
precognitive cases, published by the Society for Psychical Re- 
search, amount to about two hundred. 

1 See Proc. S.P.R., Vol. xxxi, p. 242. 
9 



IO THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

The quantitative experiments have the advantage that the like- 
lihood of chance, as an explanation of the results, can be calculated 
mathematically. The qualitative experiments, on the other hand, 
have the advantage of revealing a good deal more of the process. 
When the object is not a card or something of the kind, it can 
be seen how the percipient reaches some aspect of it or approaches 
it by association of ideas. This insight into the process protects 
the experimenter from making fictitious assumptions to which the 
card-experiments are likely to give rise, such as the view that 
extra-sensory perception is a kind of analogue to ordinary sense- 
perception, whose processes take place in the space-time world. 

Examples of both qualitative and quantitative evidence for 
extra-sensory perception were given in The Personality of Man, 
and it is our business in this book to consider their significance. 
But before doing so, it seems worth while to give an account of 
some rather different experiments carried out by myself, which 
were omitted from The Personality of Man for lack of space. 1 

The apparatus used for these experiments was electrically 
operated and the results recorded automatically. I sat at a small 
table with the controlling apparatus in front of me and behind it 
"a wooden screen about three feet square. The percipient sat at 
a similar table about five feet away from mine with her part of 
the apparatus in front of her and behind it a similar screen. We 
sat so that both the screens were between us and we could not see 
each other; nor could we see each other's apparatus. 

In front of me were five keys, rendered soundless by mercury 
contacts, and an automatic recorder of the results. In front of 
the percipient were five little boxes with overlapping spring 
lids, each containing an electrical pea-lamp. When I pressed a key, 
it lit the corresponding lamp in one of the boxes, and the experi- 
ment consisted in the percipient trying to open the box in which 
Was the lighted lamp. All results were recorded automatically on a 
morse-tape machine from which a strip of paper emerged driven 
by clockwork. On the strip, successes were recorded as double 
dashes and failures as single dashes. When the percipient opened 
a box with a lighted lamp in it, a double dash was automatically 

2 See Proc. S.P.R., Vol. xliv, Part 147, pp. 99-166. 



TO WHAT DOES EXTRA-SENSORY PERCEPTION POINT? II 

recorded; and if any of the four boxes without a lighted lamp 
inside were opened, a single dash resulted. Thus there was a 
permanent record of every trial. 

Every precaution was taken. The box-lids closed tightly on to 
velvet and were tested in the dark to make sure that no ray of 
light escaped. The keys were silent. An automatic device was 
installed which ensured that if more than one box were opened at 
a time, no success could be recorded. An additional device was 
sometimes employed which precluded hypothetical light-leakage 
or the still more hypothetical suggestion that the box with the 
lighted lamp in it might be slightly warmer than the others 
(for the experiments were conducted at the rate of one a second). 
The percipient merely tipped up the overlapping box-lids with 
her finger as fast as she could, and they instantly snapped down 
again and were held tightly by their springs. This additional 
device arranged that when a key was pressed the lamp-circuit 
was selected, but the lamp was not lit: the act of opening the box 
lit it. This experiment seemed, therefore, to involve precognition. 

This electrical apparatus gave opportunity for trying different 
kinds of experiments, and often for trying them without the 
knowledge of the percipient. When, for example, I pressed th<f 
keys, which I always did in a strictly random order by using 
figures taken from logarithmic tables, I knew which lamp I was 
lighting. But a commutator was inserted between the keys and 
the lamps so that, by pressing an additional key, the commutator 
revolved quickly, shopping in an unknown position and connecting 
the lamps to the keys in an unknown order. Thus selection of the 
boxes by thought-transference was eliminated. I also installed a 
mechanical device which could take the place of the keys and 
would light the lamps in an unknown order; and this order could 
also be changed by pressing another key. Interesting experiments 
could thus be carried out which could not be done by the guessing 
of cards. 

Some conclusive precognitive experiments were done in 
another way. The percipient selected a box and opened it before 
any lamp had been lit. About half a second later I pressed a key, 
which lit one of the lamps unknown to me, for the commutator 



12 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

was always in action and the connections between keys and lamps 
unknown. The successes and failures were recorded automatically 
on the morse recorder. In this experiment the two dashes marking 
a success were not quite opposite to one another, the dash made by 
opening the box beginning earlier than the dash made by pressing 
the key. This displacement was an automatic proof that the key 
was pressed after the box had been opened. 

One experiment carried out under these conditions consisted 
of 2255 trials of which 539 were successes. The successes were thus 
88 above chance-expectation. This, when worked out by the sta- 
tistical formulae, gave odds against chance of over 100,000 to i. 

An argument against the view that these experiments were 
actually precognitive might perhaps be brought forward as 
follows. It might be said that the percipient clairvoyantly 'saw' 
the table of randomized numbers in front of me and which I used 
to press the keys in a random order, although they were hidden 
from her by double screens. She then detected clairvoyantly the 
complicated wiring of the commutator, which was enclosed in a 
thick wooden box so as to be inaudible when operated. The 
commutator connections were frequently altered during experi- 
'ments; but it might be said that the percipient had detected or 
worked out beforehand which of the lamps would be lighted, 
although this working out was unsuccessful in the case of failures. 

It is important to realize that 'clairvoyance' in the sense of a 
direct perception of physical objects without the use of the sense- 
organs, is a purely theoretical conception and is unsupported by 
any positive evidence. In fact, it is inherently contradictory. 
Suppose, for example, that a pack of cards has been shuffled in 
an unknown order and that the percipient correctly guesses more 
of the cards than can be attributed to chance, why should we 
assume that the physical properties of the cards are being perceived 
by a faculty which is akin to sight? If, say, the fourth card in the 
pack is correctly guessed (or known), how does 'clairvoyance' 
operate? The first three cards must be transparent to the faculty 
while the fourth card is opaque ! How can any faculty of per- 
ception render a physical object transparent or opaque to suit its 
convenience? This literal theory of 'clairvoyance' is obviously 



TO WHAT DOES EXTRA-SENSORY PERCEPTION POINT? 13 

absurd. Besides, spontaneous cases of apparent 'clairvoyance' also 
point against the view that the faculty is in any way akin to sight; 
for in some of these eases the scene of the event is perceived some 
hours after it has occurred. It is only the quantitative experiments 
which suggest this literal theory of 'clairvoyance' because of their 
uninformative nature; the qualitative experiments and the spon- 
taneous cases point in the opposite direction and indicate that 
so-called 'clairvoyance' does not take place in the physical world 
at all. Its source is outside that world and unknown to us. To take 
the physical hypothesis of 'clairvoyance' seriously is therefore 
unscientific and irrational. 

One interesting point in the experiments with the electrical 
machine is worthy of mention. The trials were conducted so 
rapidly that the percipient's hand had begun to move towards the 
box that it was going to open before the key had been pressed in 
the great majority of the experiments. It is therefore questionable 
whether most of the experiments were not in fact precognitive, 
whether they were intended to be so or not. I have been struck 
by the fact that all evidence of a paranormal kind seems to pass 
over the border of precognition with indifference, as if there were 
no real boundary there. 

Many experiments done under different conditions with this 
electrical machine gave very high odds against chance. For myself, 
at any rate, they proved the existence of extra-sensory perception 
up to the hilt; and the work of others fully endorsed it, as was 
shown in The Personality of Man, chapter 5. 

The guessing of cards which are looked at one by one by an 
agent suggests at first sight the passage of thought from his brain 
or conscious mind to the brain or conscious mind of the per- 
cipient. But experiments of a qualitative kind throw more light 
on the process and do not endorse the superficial impression 
given by card-guessing. Two examples from a series of experi- 
ments carried out a long time ago serve as an illustration of this. 
For this purpose the lapse of time does not invalidate them. The 
question of the part played by chance can only be assessed by 
reading the whole series. 1 

1 Proc. S.P.R., Vol. xxi, pp. 60-75. 



14 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

Miss C. Miles was the agent and Miss H. Ramsden the per- 
cipient. They were twenty miles apart at the time. 

On October 2Oth, 1905, Miss Miles concentrated her attention 
on the idea of SPHINX. On the same day at 7 p.m. Miss Ramsden 
recorded her impression as follows: 
Cossack 
Cross 

Compass (?) 
Luzac (the publisher) 
Luxor in Egypt 

Here I gave up in despair, then suddenly came the word 
Whistle! 

This I believed to be correct. H. R. 

Again on October 2Oth, 1906, the following episode happened. 
Miss Miles writes as follows : 

'Blaise Castle, Henbury. On Saturday, October 20th, I 
had tea with the Bishop of Bristol. He showed me all over the 
grounds [and] chapel; there was a cross. 

'I wished you to see the bishop. C. M.' 



From Miss Ramsden: 

'Ardverikie, Kingussic, N.B., Saturday, October 20th. I 
believe you forgot all about it ! 

'6.30 p.m., a necklace and a ring seen as two circles, one 
inside the other. 

'7.30 p.m. A.M.W. letters intertwined like a monogram, 
church steeple, a fish, a star, a cup of tea, something round . . . 
egg-shaped, a ball of pink string, a cockle-shell "latme", 
Bishop Latimer, Archbishop. . . . H. R/ 

From Miss Harford: 

'Blaise Castle, Henbury. Saturday, October 20, 1906. 1 sent 
Miss Miles off at four o'clock to the Bishop of Bristol's Palace 
in a pony cart driven by a groom. She found the Bishop in and 
had tea there. 

'Something round, egg-shaped, may mean a very curious 



TO WHAT DOES EXTRA-SENSORY PERCEPTION POINT? 15 

Arab ring which I wear, and which has a history and we have 
talked about it a good deal. It has a large, dark red stone, 
something like a cornelian or jaspar with heavy old-fashioned 
setting, and the shape of the stone is like the pointed end of an 
egg. CHARLOTTE HARFORD.' 

These descriptions do not suggest the flashing of an idea from 
mind to mind through space. They suggest the uprising of an 
idea from the subconscious to the conscious. They suggest that 
the idea is there in the background all the time and is trying to 
find its way into consciousness by selecting ideas at the conscious 
level that are more and more closely associated with it. The 
process is strongly reminiscent of the description given by 
Gurney in the Willett script, 1 of the way in which mediumistic 
messages are shepherded through to the level of consciousness. 
Association may go along a wrong track and lead to failure; or 
else quite separate ideas, such as 'Whistle' may conic in from an 
unknown source. But the method did get as far as 'Luxor' when 
the object was 'Sphinx', and 'Bishop' when the agent was thinking 
of the Bishop of Bristol. There is a tendency to go off onto side- 
lines that are linked with the main idea, such as the egg-shapc*d 
stone in the ring. These spreading processes are not very suitable 
for statistical evaluation. 

The work done in psychical research on the faculty known 
as extra-sensory perception, when regarded as a whole, brings 
to light two important facts. The first is that the evidence for 
the existence of this faculty is incontrovertible. The second is 
that it does not consist of an extra sense akin to seeing, touching, 
hearing, etc. It is not something which makes a direct response 
to physical stimuli; nor does it operate in the physical world. 
It is not the sort of thing that can be investigated to the bottom 
by physical science. All the evidence shows that the extra-sensory 
information rises to consciousness from the subconscious region, 
or the unconscious or extra-conscious or whatever term we 
choose to employ for the extended region of the self which lies 
beyond the restricted region of the self in everyday life. 
1 See Chap. Ill, pp. 30-33 below. 



l6 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

The source and origin of this information is probably not 
in time as we know it not, that is to say, in the kind of time 
in which physical processes take place for extra-sensory in- 
formation about present, past or future events shows no sign 
of crossing the kind of boundary which separates them in this 
the past, present and future, the physical world. All points to the 
view that the world extends beyond the limits of the sense- 
field: also it points to an extension of ourselves beyond what in 
practical life we are impelled to regard as the whole of us. In 
this outward pointing to a vast beyond lies the significance of 
extra-sensory perception. It is a thing of great importance; but 
the rational mind tries to reject or belittle it. At the same time 
we must remember that the rational mind, unless it rises to a 
high level of intuition, is swayed by instinct. For example, Dr. 
A. C. Ewing, in a lecture on Reason and Intuition (British Academy 
1941), said: 'But now the conclusion strongly suggested to very 
many minds is that, while we may use reason as a reliable instru- 
ment to argue from given ultimate premisses to conclusions based 
on them, these premisses are themselves merely instinctive beliefs 
with no possible rational justification, the mere product of 
evolution or of feeling/ This is why extra-sensory perception 
has not been regarded as supplying information which is of 
cardinal importance for science and philosophy. 

Extra-sensory perception opens a door. It indicates that the 
world we live in is not the whole universe or even complete 
in itself. It shows it to be continuous with an extension of reality 
lying far beyond the range of our senses. The instinctive urge 
to cling to the ordinary world and to reject evidence for the 
existence of anything beyond is deeply rooted in the primitive 
mind of all humanity. Its origin is pragmatic, for it was evolved 
to promote practical efficiency and to make the external world 
appear simple; it was not designed to lead the mind to ultimate 
truth. Also, our minds are so constituted that they forcibly 
persuade us to believe that our senses show us the whole of 
reality; and they rebel against any evidence which threatens to 
reveal the contrary. 



CHAPTER III 

The ProUem of Mental Mediumship 

PSYCHIATRY has crossed the border from the conscious to the 
unconscious; but psychical research has crossed it too and has 
explored further. One reason why psychical research is particularly 
illuminating is that it shows that the mind or self beyond the em- 
pirical boundary of consciousness amounts to a great deal more 
than the mere limbo of repressed desires to which psychiatry 
points. 

In The Personality of Man it was pointed out that carefully 
conducted sittings with mediums belonging to the mental cate- 
gory showed that all claim to be producing direct communications 
from the dead, but that such communications vary a great deal in 
quality. They are, in fact, graded. The lower grades (which 
are the commonest) contain much verbosity and often little sense; 
but here and there facts about the dead person who claims to be 
communicating shoot up among the padding as if coming through 
from a remote background; and characteristic things emerge 
which the medium could not normally have known. This points 
to the view that we should not jump to any cut and dried and final 
explanation until we have examined all the grades and qualities 
of mediumship and have got the problem into perspective. 

The psychologist is not, as a rule, inclined to do this, for he 
inherits the scientific tradition which is based on the specialized 
character of the human mind and makes every question appear to 
be finally answerable. He assumes that every problem will 
rapidly converge to a final answer although pursued in isolation. 
The naive spiritualist also follows a similar path, maintaining 
that the dead person is there in the simple sense in which a 
human being in this world speaks from the other end of a tele- 
phone. 

An example of low grade mediumistic material is provided 
by the following brief abstract from a sitting of my own. The 

17 



18 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

letter T indicates myself; and the letter C the medium's 
control. 

C: Father, father. I hear someone say father, father. 

T: Yes. That is right; that means someone is coming. 

C: Yes. That is right. Such a nice young man too. 

T: Oh yes, do you know him? 

C: He has got nice eyes like you. 

T: Oh, yes, yes. Perhaps he will say who he is. 

C: Yes he will in a minute, I think. Laughs with his eyes. 
Smiles with his eyes. I see him. 

T: Yes. 

C: There is also your mother. 

T: Yes. 

C: She tells me she is your mother. She is nodding her head 
in agreement. She is saying no words. It is as if two or three 
come together to see you and I feel them lending strength. 

T: Will you give them my greeting? 

C: They hear you. 

T: I am very glad to hear they are there. 
, C : I hear the name ROBERT spoken. [The name ROBERT 

means nothing to me.] 

T: Yes. 

C: I wouldn't worry too much about the names because 
they put them in at the oddest times and they may not be 
to do with the people I am speaking of, you see. 

C (In a whisper): I so much want. . . . Halloa, Halloa, 
are you there? Halloa, are you there? 

T: Yes I am here. Yes I can hear you. 

C: Yes, Yes, you have lost hold again. It is all right. I 
am talking to him. 

T: Yes I heard you speaking to me just now. 

C: Now I hear them say mother, but it is not your mother. 
I gather it is a mother still here, still alive. 

This sort of vague patter continues at great length without 
conveying anything definite. But at a higher level it is inter- 
spersed by flashes of definite information, which are often not 



THE PROBLEM OF MENTAL MEDIUMSHIP 19 

only true but also characteristic of the purporting communicator. 
These give the impression of shooting through from another 
source. Examples are given in The Personality of Man chapter 22. 
At the highest level, the communications become clear and de- 
finite and differ entirely from the low grade type. 

It is often asked why, if these are the dead communicating 
with the living, they do not tell us about the conditions in which 
they exist and give a clear description of the world they live in. 
Even a partial realization of our own situation in this world 
shows this question to be extremely naive, for it ignores the fact 
that our minds are only capable of grasping knowledge of the 
particular kind they are suited to, and that our vocabulary is 
adapted to that kind of knowledge. Anythmg that does not con- 
form to our specialized ways of thinking appears to our minds 
bizarre and is tossed aside as trash. A question of this kind does, 
in fact, reveal something of cardinal significance about ourselves, 
for it shows that our minds are so constructed that they take 
it for granted that they can grasp everything in the universe. 
The basic fact which the mind is so incapable of realizing is 
that the world we live in is no more than a tiny corner of the 
whole; for the very roots of the mind have been impregnated try 
Nature with the assumption that this world is the whole. 

When we approach the difficult question of what mediumistic 
communications imply, we should not allow ourselves to reject 
without examination anything that has a surface-appearance 
of being trivial and Childish; for anything which lies outside our 
common experience is likely to give rise to contempt. For this 
reason it is worth while to devote considerable space to communi- 
cations on the highest level which claim to emanate from the 
dead. They pose a different problem; at any rate they give us 
reason to pause and reject any quick and easy psychological 
solution. 

In chapter 18 of The Personality of Man a few examples were 
given of the automatic scripts of Mrs. Willett, which are the best 
examples of high level communications known to me. It is worth 
while devoting a good deal of space to a consideration of these 
high grade communications. 



2O THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

Mrs. Willett was one of the small and scattered group of ladies 
who practised automatic writing in the early part of this century 
in connection with the cross-correspondence. 1 Mrs. Willett, after 
a time, used to lapse into a peculiar state of consciousness as she 
wrote, unlike that of the ordinary mediums, for she had no 
'control' and her normally conscious-self did not disappear. 
Edmund Gurney, who had been an extremely active worker 
in psychical research in its early days, died in 1888. He was one 
of the principal communicators through Mrs. Willett and in 
the course of a series of most interesting scripts he describes the 
process by which, from his point of view, communications are 
produced and externalized. These show Mrs. Willett as a rather 
inefficient go-between, who had to be coaxed and educated in 
the technique of communicating by a small group of deceased 
persons who had been vitally interested in psychical research 
during their lifetimes. One of the group was F. W. H. Myers, who 
died in 1901. He spoke as follows in one of Mrs. Willett's early 
scripts of 1909: 'I am trying experiments with you to make you 
hear without writing therefore as it is I Myers who do this de- 
liberately do not fear or wince when words enter your con- 
sciousness or subsequently when such words are in the script. 
On the contrary it will be the success of my purpose if you recog- 
nise in yr. script phrases you have found in your consciousness. 
I know this must be for a while disconcerting and be filled with 
the fear of that eternal SS (subliminal self) which I hope we have 
succeeded in dethroning to some extent. Therefore be agreeing 
to be disconcerted and do not analyse whence these impressions, 
which I shall in future refer to as Daylight Impressions, come 
from, they are parts of a psychic education framed by me for 
you. . . .' 2 The " Daylight Impression " was afterwards re- 
ferred to by the initial letters D.I. 

Myers's hope that the subliminal self, as the supposed origina- 
tor of the messages, has to some extent been 'dethroned' is a 
reference to the Cross Correspondences, referred to in chapter 17 
of The Personality of Man. These were apparently to disprove 

1 See Chapter 17, The Personality of Man. 
1 Proc. S.P.R. Vol. xliii, p. 51. 



THE PROBLEM OF MENTAL MEDIUMSHIP 21 

the view that they originated from the subliminal selves of living 
persons. It consisted of a central theme distributed to the various 
automatists in fragments which did not make sense by themselves 
but which did make sense when put together. 

Edmund Gurney, however, was the ostensible sender of a great 
many of the communications through Mrs. Willett, and he 
endeavoured to explain how the communications were sent. His 
explanation was not completely clear, for Mrs. Willett had 
difficulty in passing on what he said, as the following example 
shows. But the process was very complex, so that one can under- 
stand that nothing very difficult and certainly nothing beyond 
experience of a terrestrial kind could find its way through this 
restricted channel. 

The following communication came on June 4th, 1911. The 
late Lord Balfour was present and the initials G.W.B. refer to 
him. 

Oh he says something French, . . . pas qui coute. 
Oh yes, I know I'm trying I will try. 
He says say how you feel. (Oh I'm all right.) 
I'm far, I'm far. 

He says, I want to speak and he says, what I'm going to 
say is not to be taken as applying to D.I. 1 when the communi- 
cation is more direct and simpler, and he says, not to be taken 
as applying to all sensitives or even to all phenomena of any 
given sensitive. But it's an attempt to show how in some cases 
some scripts are produced. 

The descending chain telepathy inspiration telepathy 
selection. Oh he says, What thought is implied by the words 
'mutual selection'? 

Oh he says, is he there? (G.W.B.: Yes, I'm here.) 
Does it reach him? (G.W.B. : Yes, I hear quite well.) 
I want to make a shot at a partial definition of what con- 
stitutes mediumship. 

That organisation in which the capacity for what an odd 
word 

1 'Daylight Impressions', see p. 20, above. 



22 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

Oh, Edmund, say it slowly excursus is alive to the capacity 
for definite selection. Then finally the possession of as it were 
a vent, through which the knowledge can emerge. 

Oh he says, there's a line of Tennyson's I'm thinking of 
lies open unto me. 

And all things he says like that, he says I don't repeat. 

I thought I'd said it I wonder where I am. He says, don't 
lose the thread. 

Oh he says, what I'm going to say now may lead to some 
misunderstanding according as whether the right or the wrong 
deductions are drawn from it. 

It's something like this. [Pause] 

Say that after Oh! how difficult it is say that after 
deliberation a certain theme is selected. Then he says something 
in German motif- to be got through various channels. I'm 
only speaking now of the process of selection, he says, and in 
so far as that's concerned I'm limited to the contents of the 
conscious and unconscious self. 

Oh he says, Gerald Oh he says like that. He's calling 
someone. Nobody answers he keeps on calling someone. He 
says Gerald. Oh he keeps on calling. Oh! he says where is 
Gerald? 

(G.W.B.: I'm here.) 

Oh he says, docs he hear? How can I know that he hears? 

(G.W.B.: All right, I'm hearing perfectly.) 

Oh I see him so plainly. [Remark by Mrs. Willett.] 

He says to me Don't fail me go on, go back to where you 
left off about the mind. 

Mind, he says, was the last word. [Refers to conscious and 
unconscious self.] He says Remember I am distinctly ruling 
out the thoughts suggested by the words telepathy and inspira- 
tion. 

Oh he says, Well then I look over the available factors oh, 
and see what will serve. Oh he says, it isn't only I who select 
Oh he says, now you've got it. There's another field for 
selection and it's such part of my mind, I, Gurney, as she can 
have access to. Oh he says, What part? Why? Oh, I've missed a 



THE PROBLEM OF MENTAL MEDIUMSHIP 23 

word something something limited to then I've skipped 
something, but I. hear him say thoughts potentially. 

Oh he says, put it another way. Having access to my mind 
her selection is chiefly limited to that which can naturally 
link onto human incarnate thought. Oh he says, I wish I could 
get that word potential rightly used. I'm not saying it's limited 
to the actual but to the potential content. Oh he says, does he see 
what I'm driving at? 

(G. IV. B.: I think I do and no doubt I shall understand still 
better when I read it over.) 

He says, that's where the gamble comes in. How will it be 
used, the knowledge supernormally gained? Now then, you 
have present in the whole self the matter from which I selected, 
plus the matter supernormally acquired from me. Now comes 
the weaving. Oh he says, That's where subliminal activity 
comes in. Oh he says, it's a dangerous weapon, yet we can't do 
without it. 

Often there is a fairly long period of don't get that 
word it contains a g and an s and a t and an n. [G. IV.B. 
suggests gestation but no notice is taken of this.] Say incubation 
he says, and then conies the uprush. And then, he says, now P 
must bring in telepathy as the guiding influence. He says this 
process is only one among a great variety. Oh he says, We must 
experiment he says, so much is unmapped. 

Oh, and he says, the waste of material when we keep on 
hammering at one point approaching it from every can't 
read that word of the compass only to find that the point had 
been grasped and that we might have passed on to new matter. 

Oh he says, I can't see your mind, Gerald, but I can feel you 
in some dim way through her. He says, It's a sort of lucky bag, 
her mind to me when I'm not shut out from it. 

He says I think I got some things I wanted said about 
selection. It's the thought of its being as it were a mutual 
process that I wanted driven home. 

Oh he says, now say this for me. He says, you want to foster 
in sensitives a sort of dual attitude belief in their capacity. 

Oh! say it slowly I'm so tired, I'm so tired Oh I'm 
3 



24 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

climbing. Oh! I'm climbing. Belief, Oh I will, I will say it 
belief in their capacity to have access to the mind of the com- 
municator together with a wholesome sense of discrimination 
in regard to the expressions not right regard to something 
to which that access leads productions. 

Oh he says, you mayn't know it, there's a natural bent to 
extreme scepticism here. 

Oh he says, there are such a lot of things I want to tell you, 
and there's the longing to know when one has struggled how 
far one has succeeded in making oneself Oh he says, I mustn't 
go much further now. 

Oh he says, don't give me up Gerald help me and help 
her. 

Oh I can't go on, I'm so tired. 

Oh he says, only one more thing only one more thing for 
him. 

He says it over and over. I'm trying (almost sobs). 

Being is antecedent to Oh he says, you've not got the 
word I want but say it it'll suggest Yes, that's it, action. 

Oh that's done. [A pause; after which waking stage 
follows.] 1 

Lord Balfour summarizes the gist of these communications as 
follows: 

(1) The choice of a theme; 

(2) The selection of material relevant to the theme by the 
sensitive from the mind of the communicator, and prob- 
ably also by the communicator from the mind of the 
sensitive; 

(3) a period of 'incubation', often a long one, during which 
there comes into play an operation described as 'weaving', 
and consisting in some kind of subliminal activity; 

(4) actual production of script, involving selection by the 
communicator from the 'available factors' in the mind of 
the sensitive, and the bringing in of telepathy as a 'guiding 
influence'. 

1 Proc. S.P.K., Vol. xliii, pp. 232-5. 



THE PROBLEM OF MENTAL MEDIUMSHIP 25 

The first, third and fourth stages are but briefly in- 
dicated in the D.I. we are now considering, but further 

light is thrown upon them in later sittings, to which I shall 

presently have to call attention. 1 

The chief factors employed in constructing the messages 
coming through Mrs. Willctt, and in getting them externalized, 
are described by Gurney in further D.Is. 2 

Telepathy, The following D.I. was obtained on September 24th, 
1910, in which Sir Oliver Lodge (O J.L.) acted as recorder: 

(Gurney speaking): Telepathy isn't involuntary, it's I'm 
going to do it like this what's the word? Propulsion 
you watch the receipt. 

Mrs. W.: Now he's as if holding my hand, it's as if having a 
tooth out, youve got to set your teeth and go through with ic. 
He says James and another name. 

E.G.: Now she's got it, and you watch it coming up. It's 
got into the subliminal. 

Mrs. W.: Hyslop! (uttered in a tone of surprise) Oh, he 
says, Good; he's pleased. 

E.G.: Lodge, this is terribly exhausting. I think you've got 
something now. Wait a bit, let Lodge think, and then let him 
speak and you rest. (To Lodge) Now you speak. 

O.J.L.: I gather that you have been trying to explain, or 
rather illustrate the process of telepathy to me. 

E.G.: Yes. 

O.J.L.: And tha' you got William James through, and then 
a word that perhaps she does not know, Hyslop. Does she know 
it? 

E.G.: Oh yes, she's read it, but she doesn't know why I say 
it, nor do you, in that juxtaposition. Let me know when the 
meaning that is there is seen by you. There may be a little time 
to pass first, but when the meaning is plain, say so. 

O.J.L.: About telepathy, you mean it has to be purposed, 
that the thought cannot be picked up from stray people, that 
it has to be injected? 

1 Proc. S.P.R., Vol. xliii, pp. 337-8. 

8 'Daylight Impression' sec p. 20 above. 



26 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

E.G.: What you say about telepathy isn't altogether right. 
It's not one thing and one process, but there are degrees of it, 
and it depends on the instrument partly and upon the familiarity 
of the agent. There must be practice on both sides. 

Here's what appears to be a complete contradiction of what 
I've said, and yet both are facts. Through my carelessness she 
will sometimes see telepathically what I hadn't intended her to 
know. There are three more things that I can speak of. [Under- 
stood by OJ.L. to mean three processes of telepathy.] 

There's the direct directing conscious intended what's 
the word? 

OJ.L.: Impact? 

E.G.: No, no, that's the other end propulsion. 

OJ.L.: Yes, I see. 

Mrs. W.: The starting end he's speaking of. 

OJ.L.: Yes; emission? radiation? 

E.G. : No, that's not the word I want, there's too many con- 
notations about that. The sparking end something like that 
like two big clouds coming together and then the lightning; 
something like that. That's one kind; and then the other kind 
that led to this theory of unconscious mentality in the dis- 
carnate the coma business, dream business. I can only talk, 
about it, say, pull out the stops I see in front of me. I'm putting 
it the way I can get it through. 

Mrs. W. : He's encouraging me. 

E.G. : I wish Lodge would tell you so. 

OJ.L.: Yes, you are doing well. 

E.G.: My [word illegible in notes] way of putting it is 
letting down a shutter. If I am what you would call very 
"close" to her, I could shut off certain impressions and then I 
can switch them on. 

OJ.L.: Is it like removing a screen? 

E.G.: Ah (he says), screen. Do you remember about a 
screen long ago? [Did not wait for an answer but continued] 
A third thing may happen; when the shutter is down there 
may be a leak, without deliberate switching, a general as 
against a specialized impact may take place. Do I express it? 



THE PROBLEM OF MENTAL MEDIUMSHIP 27 

O.J.L.: Yes, that is quite clear. 

E.G.: In my record there's a case in point, that Mrs. 
Verrall has, of a leak which called out corresponding thought 
in the mind which was the very last I would have desired to 
stimulate. . . . 

The three kinds of telepathic communication here enumerated 
have this in common, that they imply voluntary action on the 
part of the communicator. 1 

Gurney is saying two things about telepathy. One is that it is 
dynamic something forcefully projected from agent to percipient. 
The other is that it is not one simple process: there are 'degrees' 
of it. In a D.I. of March 5th, 1912, Gurney says something more 
about it: 

G.W.B.: If I understand you rightly, you spoke in an 
earlier D.I. of telepathy, inspiration, and mutual selection, 
as being distinct processes, forming a descending chain. Is that 
correct? 

Say again, i. 2. 3. 

(G.W.B. repeats question. D.L immediately follows.} 

. . . Telepathy, inspiration, mutual selection He says they 
mark different stages of the soul's commerce, it sounds like. 
He says it's very difficult to get it clear, but it's best for me to 
get some rough definitions down. He says, Telepathy is the 
action of mind upon mind; not of brain upon brain, but of 
mind upon mind. And he says, there are as many varieties of 
telepathy as there are varieties of human beings. He says, 
Telepathy shades off in to inspiration, and inspiration shades off 
into mutual selection. . . . 2 

According to Gurney, telepathy is not a thing that fits into a 
neat category as physical processes do. It is probably inexpressible 
in words. Gurney and the struggling Mrs. Willett together get 
something through about it; but it is evidently impossible to get a 
complete description through. Telepathy is apparently something 

1 Proc. S.P.R., Vol. xliii, pp. 186-8. 2 Proc. S.P.R., Vol. xliii, p. 252. 



28 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

that opens out and out and eludes the mind more and more the 
further we pursue it. 

Incidentally, it is of interest to note that Mrs. Willett is there, 
in her own consciousness all the time. She does not disappear 
and give place to a 'control' as does the ordinary medium; and 
this fact may account for the unusual clarity of these communica- 
tions. 

Telaesthesia. Gurney draws a marked distinction between tele- 
pathy and what he calls 'telaesthesia'. In a D.I. of October 8th, 
1911, he says: 

. . . tclaesthesia is a bedrock truth, a power of acquiring 
knowledge direct without the intervention of discarnate mind. 

Oh he says, telepathy's one thing that's thought com- 
munication: telaesthesia is knowledge, not thought, acquired 
by the subliminal when operating normally in the metetherial. 

Oh he says, Here comes in our work again. Oh he says, 
what I'm saying may be used to cut at the spiritualistic hypo- 
thesis, but it doesn't. Again, who selects what of the total of 
telaesthetically acquired knowledge shall externalise itself 
shall blend itself with those elements received by direct 
telepathic impact? 

Oh he says, Supposing I take her into a room and I screen off 
any action of my own mind on hers: her subliminal with its 
useful copious pinch of the salt of Eve's curiosity takes stock 
of the contents of the room. Normal consciousness is later re- 
gained, and lying in the subliminal is knowledge of certain 
objects perceived, not as the result of the action of my mind, 
but as the result of telaesthetic faculty. Oh he says, Here 
come I on script intent. Here be arrows for my quiver. Who 
selects which of all these Have patience with me, oh, Edmund, 
I am trying, oh, I'm such a great way away. Oh, Edmund, Oh 
he says, Who applies the stimulus under which certain ideas 
use that word, not what I wanted emerge, blended, which 
upon study will be found to be relevant to the total aim of that 
particular piece of automatism? 1 

1 Proc. S.P.R., Vol. xliii, p. 194. 



THE PROBLEM OF MENTAL MEDIUMSHIP 29 

We gather from this that, speaking very roughly, telepathy is 
the deliberate projection of thought from one mind to another 
while telaesthesia is a kind of outward feeling of the mind in an 
attempt to draw knowledge into itself. Gurncy distinguishes 
between thought and knowledge; and that is a distinction we 
cannot easily understand. He uses the analogy of a room into 
which the subliminal of Mrs. Willett goes and takes hold of what 
is there. One gathers that what is taken in is something between 
ideas and sense-imagery something between thought and dream- 
scenery. 

Another factor in the passage of mental material from the 
discarnatc to the incarnate is what Gurney calls 'excursus'. 

Success in the production of these scripts requires (we arc 
told), on the part of the sensitive, 'a capacity for Excursus allied 
to a capacity for definite selection'; and by 'excursus' is meant a 
passing, as it were, outside herself and an entry into communion 
with the spiritual world. The communicator and the sensitive 
are represented as 'mutually selecting' from each other's minds 
the communicator from the contents of 'the conscious and 
unconscious self 'of the sensitive; the sensitive from 'such part of*" 
the mind of the communicating spirit as she can have access to.' 

Under the heading of Mutual Selection comes the description 
of the rather elaborate process of choosing, guiding and shepherd- 
ing to the point of emergence the topics which it is desired that the 
automatist should bring out. The subject is one of great interest, 
because it is not likely that Mrs. Willett, from her own reading 
or ideas on the subject, could have conceived the complexity of the 
process as Gurney describes it; or the wider, 'non-crystallised' 1 
type of thought which is stated to exist in the deeper ranges of the 
self. 

Somewhere in the depths of the self, the automatist has the 
power of Excursus, that is the power of passing 'as it were, out- 
side herself and entering into communion with the spiritual world'. 
By means of this faculty of Excursus, the sensitive can select 
1 Sec pp. 31, 33 below. 



30 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

material from 'such part of the mind of the communicating spirit 
as she can have access to'. This is the part which 'can naturally 
link onto human incarnate thought', and it includes the 'potential' 
as well as the 'actual' content of this mind. 

The communicator is then able to exercise his selection on the 
material thus lying in the mind of the sensitive and to shepherd it 
upwards through the levels of the automatist's self towards emer- 
gence. That is what is meant by 'mutual selection'. 

Gurney gives a concrete example of the way in which he selects 
from the'minds of the sensitive or automatic writer with whom he 
is working: 

Say I wrote of horses. I get telepathically the idea of sound, 
clatter of the horses' gallop. I get the idea in a Verrall channel, 
for instance, of Pegasus; I get the idea, perhaps, of chariot races 
equus, or something like that, he says and I select and push 
up into its place where it will be grasped and externalised, two 
trump cards telaesthetically acquired call it horseshoe, or, he 
says, the steeds of Dawn. The point is, I didn't place them there; 
I found and selected them: and the eight other elements or 
objects seen in the room remain dormant and never exter- 
nalise themselves perhaps. The spiritualistic agency decides 
what element appropriate to its own activity shall emerge 
alongside and intertwined with matter placed in position by 
direct telepathic impact. 1 

Gurney says more about the 'room' in another script dated 
January 2ist, 1912. It is an important description though not 
altogether easy to understand. 

(G.W.B. You referred at a former sitting to telaesthesia as 
a process by which the mind of the sensitive acquired know- 
ledge on its own account. The subject carne up in connection 
with what you call mutual selection. You spoke of taking the 
sensitive into a 'room' and screening off any action of your 
own mind on hers; whereupon her subliminal proceeds to take 
1 Proc. S.P.R., Vol. xliii, pp. 194-5. 



THE PROBLEM OF MENTAL MEDIUMSHIP 31 

stock of the contents of the room. Do you mean a real room, 
or only a room existing in your mind?) 

I'll throw something at you, and you must make what you 
can of it. 

I'll take that portion of her which can emerge in uprush, 
and I, as it were, link it on with that deeper subliminal stand- 
point, which can be in touch with what I want to get known; so 
that there is that portion of her which can normally acquire 
telaesthetically in its own deep profound plane passing on the 
knowledge to that plane from which an uprush can come. 

Oh, he says, what I'm going to say to you now makes 
Sidgwick tear his hair because it's meaning the ocean in a 
child's bucket. 

I'm going to call that deepest portion, nearer to the tran- 
scendental self I'm going to call it anything you like, any 
symbol, say H. Well, the H-self and I agree on what we want 
what I want to get transmitted, and which the H-self 
normally, in its own H-ness, through its own cognitive faculties 
can know. And here is the 'bucket' process, it's here where 
just because it's the most difficult I shall fail worst in trying to 
get near the thought. The H-self will touch the uprushable 
self just the grade below the uprushable, and the uprushable 
and the grade below will receive the knowledge from the H. 
But in putting it into the uprushable focus, as it were, it will 
know that a sort of crystallisation, often through symbolism, 
must be arrived a c : and we will imagine, if we like, that having 
been foreseen both by me and the H-self, we deter mined upon 
what sort of crystals to aim at, so that the uprushable self has, as 
it were, presented to it what I called a 'room', the knowledge 
which the H-self is informing to the point where it becomes 
uprushable. Just below that uprushable point there's a sort of 
dim moment where both modes enter into cognition I mean, 
where a knowledge of the thing as it is in the H-stage is united 
to a knowledge of the crystals which, the emblem which, can 
best express that which in its H-ness cannot, or rarely, uprush 
for all these states are variable and the success variable. 
Then comes that moment of binding when the self that lies in 



32 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

juxtaposition to the uprushable absorbs the knowledge from H, 
and passes it on to the uprushable point in such a state as makes 
uprush possible. It then rushes out as words spoken or written, 
or dreams, or never-to-be-denied moments of prescience, 
precognition of supernormal knowledge. But that supernormal 
will contain within it the normally acquired knowledge of H 
that element of normality will be there. Oh, he says, that isn't 
the invariable method, only one of them; and he says, The tele- 
pathic impact is another. . . .* 

Although Gurney has done his best to explain the regions of 
the self behind normal consciousness and the processes which go 
on there when the dead are trying to communicate with the 
living, it is not altogether easy to follow him. I think it would be 
unreasonable to expect it to be easy. Lord Balfour paraphrases 
Gurney 's description as follows: 'In answer to my question about 
the "room" Gurney distinguishes between different grades of the 
subliminal self. There is a deeper self which can telaesthetically 
acquire knowledge direct from the communicating spirit of that 
which he wants to get known. There is another self on a less 
profound plane to which the knowledge so acquired can be 
passed on, and through whose action it can emerge in uprush. 
There is also a self "the self in juxtaposition to the uprushable" 
which is intermediate between the other two. Let H stand for the 
deeper self; H x for the intermediate self; and H 2 for the self 
which is immediately responsible for the emergence of the message 
in written or spoken words. The communicator and H agree 
upon what they want to get transmitted, H having acquired know- 
ledge of this through the faculty of telaesthetic cognition which 
is native to it in virtue of its H-ness. What happens next is ad- 
mittedly difficult to explain, but it is something of this kind. 
Contact is effected in the first place between H andH 1} and later, 
through the mediation of H l5 between H and H 2 . The know- 
ledge which H has acquired from the communicator is thus passed 
on to both Hj and H 2 , but not in the form in which it has been 
acquired by H. In that form it would be all but impossible 
1 Proc. S.P.R., Vol. xliii, pp. 242-4. 



THE PROBLEM OF MENTAL MEDIUMSHIP 33 

for it to emerge. Some change must take place analogous to 
crystallisation out of a state of fluidity. The individual crystals 
should be symbolic or emblematic of the knowledge acquired 
by H, but they are not the direct expression of that knowledge. 
Now it is possible for the necessary crystallisation to be brought 
about by concerted action between the communicator and H. 
They can decide what type of ' "crystals" are appropriate in the 
particular case. The crystallisation itself is effected in H 1? with 
the result that H 2 has presented to it what had been called a 
"room" that is to say, a collection of "crystals" of a kind best 
fitted to express the knowledge acquired by H in a form in which 
it can be externalised. There is a dim moment when the original 
knowledge and its crystallised expression both enter into cogni- 
tion together. 

Finally comes the "binding", when, under the influence of 
the communicator, H, H l9 and H 2 are linked with one another. 
H! absorbs the knowledge from H and passes it on to H 2 in 
crystallised form. It is then automatically externalised, and 
may convey veridical messages, supernormal from the standpoint 
of the supraliminal self but embodying knowledge normally 
acquired by H through the exercise of its telaesthetic faculty. 

"This is only one among several methods; direct telepathic 
emission is another.' 1 

What are we to gather from this explanation? The complex 
process of passing ideas through a sensitive these different kinds 
of telepathy, the indefinable faculty of telaesthesia, the curious 
process of 'excursus', the limitations imposed on what can be 
selected, the necessity for 'crystallising* ideas into restricted 
forms which can be put into words, the chancy factor of what may 
or may not get through in 'uprush' all these show that, if 
Gurney is speaking the truth, communication with a world 
outside this one is a highly complex matter, hazardous in the 
extreme and very severely limited. All has to pass in the end 
through a narrow bottle-neck. Gurney's descriptions do at any 
rate present the problem in perspective, and this gives them a 
sense of reality. It is not just a further extension of this world 

1 Proc. S.P.R., Vol. xliii, pp. 244-5. 



34 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

which his words disclose: it is a step towards something far greater 
transcending our comprehension. According to Gurney, the self 
or the H-selves stretch far away beyond our normal con- 
sciousness in this world to uncomprehended modes of thought; 
and the way in which he transmits ideas through Mrs. Willett 
bears a comparison with the way in which intuitional and in- 
spirational ideas come through into the consciousness of all 
thinkers. We know that inspirational influx is a fact and that the 
most valuable ideas do come in this way. Genius is founded on 
what comes through from beyond. Gurney's description, 
therefore, with its far-reaching implications, bears the stamp of 
truth. 

But the most difficult problem is the status of the communi- 
cator. If we take different grades of communications and compare 
them with one another, it becomes obvious that another factor 
enters in, to which Gurney has not referred. In mediumistic 
communications of a low grade, the communicators are quite 
unconvincing. Their light patter evidently arises from some factor 
in the mind of the medium; but here again the solution may not 
,be simple. On the next higher grade communicators become 
more characteristic of what they were in life and they remember 
significant incidents in their lives. The sitter has at times a feeling 
that the genuine communicator is there. This suggests a possibility. 
May it not be that when the difficult process of getting ideas 
through fails, a pseudo-personality or effigy is formed somewhere 
in the foreground and patters along unconvincingly, though 
claiming all the time to be the communicator? When conditions 
improve, the genuine communicator in the background might 
succeed in deflecting this run of patter towards the kind of things 
he wants to say. At a still higher grade the genuine communicator 
gains more control and the communications become clearer. 
Even in the present case, freedom and fluency are to some extent 
curbed by Mrs. Willett's difficulties over words and phrases and 
the obvious limitations she finds in trying to convey Gurney's 
explanations. 

The question of whether the communicators are the deceased 
persons they claim to be is still one of difficulty : but the alternative 



THE PROBLEM OF MENTAL MEDIUMSHIP 35 

view that they are pseudo-personalities constructed in the sen- 
sitive's unconscious raises far greater difficulties. On the latter view 
the histrionic qualities of Mrs. Willett's scripts would have to 
be attributed to her own 'unconscious'. All her stumbling efforts 
to keep up with Gurney would have to be regarded as a feat of 
play-acting. This is a tall order; and it is not all. Some of the 
ideas which the communicators endeavour to transmit are ob- 
viously beyond her. This comes out clearly in certain scripts which 
discuss which type of philosophy is most suitable to the mind- 
brain relation. In trying to transmit this, poor Mrs. Willett was 
almost overcome. And then we must remember the cross- 
correspondences, in which Mrs. Willett played a leading role. 1 
These were broken up into fragments by the communicator and 
distributed among the automatists; and it was clearly stated that 
this was done deliberately in order to prove that a single mind 
had planned the whole and that they were not due to cross- 
telepathy among the automatists. The themes of the cross- 
correspondences were also based upon an erudite knowledge 
of the classics, which Mrs. Willett did not possess, but Myers, 
Gurney, A. W. Verrall, H. Butcher, who claim to have pro- 
duced them, had all been first class classical scholars. It is true 
that Mrs. Verrall, who was one of the automatists, was also a 
first class classical scholar; and some thought that the classical 
cross-correspondences originated in her subconscious mind. But 
after her death, the classical themes continued, and no other 
living member of the group could have supplied them. 

If we weigh the whole situation with as little bias as we can 
command, the facts point to the view that no communications of 
this kind are in the least like communications that take place in 
this world. They contain all kinds of complications; they involve 
an extension of the self which carries us beyond our ken; and the 
best communications are stamped with the characteristic per- 
sonalities of the dead, reaching through from the background. 
The Willett communications make it abundantly clear why it is 
that no communicator can give a description of his life or of the 
world he is in, or send through items of profound wisdom or truth 
1 See The Personality of Man, chapter xvii. 



36 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

beyond that which we can grasp in our present world. Every- 
thing that comes through has to run the gauntlet of all kinds of 
loss and distortion, and has finally to pass through a bottle-neck 
after being reduced to language that can express only things in 
our world and does not transcend what is familiar to the medium's 
mind. 

There is another thing about the Gurney communications 
which gives rise to reflection. Gurney, and also Myers and the 
other communicators through Mrs. Willett, appear to be as 
natural and mundane as they were in the flesh. Gurney has the 
same humorous optimism that he had in life. Sidgwick is afraid 
that by the time the messages get through they will be distorted 
and misunderstood. Gurney 's attempts to describe how messages 
originate in the larger and remoter part of Mrs. Willett's sub- 
liminal self makes Sidgwick 'tear his hair'. It seems to him like 
trying to pour the ocean into a bucket. This type of anxiety was 
characteristic of Sidgwick in life. 

How is. it that, having passed into the larger world Gurney 
Myers, Sidgwick and the rest are still so like what they were 
in life? But when we reflect, the answer occurs to us that perhaps 
they are not. Having entered into a larger and different world, 
they may also have entered into larger and different phases of 
selfhood, which match that world. Perhaps because they have to 
pass through the same narrowing and specialized channels that 
the messages themselves have to traverse, they may become 
temporarily narrowed and 'crystallized' too. Like the messages, 
they may be reduced to this-worldly forms of themselves in 
fact to what they were when they lived in this world. 

The chief value of this evidence seems to be that it opens up 
a new perspective. It does not tell us what the future life is or what 
we shall be like in it. It merely shows us that reality is there, 
opening out and leaving behind our little minds with their 
mundane thoughts. It is like the ocean seen from a point on the 
sea-shore. It is as though a voice said to us: There; now you can 
catch a glimpse of yourself and of the absurd, conceited folly 
that makes you think now that you can grasp everything there is. 
Now you have a chance of realizing that your little mind is 



THE PROBLEM OF MENTAL MBDIUMSHIP 37 

adapted to grasp only a tiny corner of the universe. And even 
that corner you understand only in a pragmatic manner. 

The sense of improbability when we transcend this material 
world is due in essence to the fact that our minds are so closely 
adapted to it. This makes matter appear to us to be the central 
thing in the universe and to be the originator of everything, and 
time, as we know it, to be universal, and life in time to be the 
only kind of life possible. We cannot believe that being, which 
shows itself throughout the graded order of all the world of life, 
and in the unseen properties of matter as well, has its origin in the 
roots of the universe. 'Being' appears only as tiny specks in the 
vastness of space: how can it be the central thing? For, as we say 
this, we assume that the spatial world is the centre. That the whole 
physical universe, so busily explored by the astronomer, and 
revealing dimensions so vast that they make the mind reel 
that this physical universe is itself only an outlying suburb of 
reality, a sort of desert on the fringe of civilization is a conception 
our minds refuse to entertain despite the facts that point towards 
it. They refuse because they arc adapted to that desert world. 
Once this has been grasped, we shall be on our guard for un- 
conscious assumptions which lead our thinking to foregone 
conclusions. Our belief to-day that the physical universe occupies 
the centre, indeed the whole, of reality arises from the same 
mental fixation which caused our ancestors to assume that the 
earth was the centre of the universe and that the sun, moon and 
stars were attendants which circle round it. Discovered facts 
are accepted; but it is nevertheless true that the shape of our 
outlook is there from the start and we tend to manipulate evidence 
to make it fit into our outlook. The advance of science is bringing 
this situation gradually to light, but so far it has modified the 
character of our minds to a very small extent. 

If being or selfhood, and not matter, is primary in the uni- 
verse, our existence outside the space-time world is not at all 
improbable: but here the fixed character of our mind comes in 
and insists that the material world to which it is adapted is 
the centre. The mind, too, is without perspective and regards 
anything unfamiliar as an absurdity. Are we, for example, 



38 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

basically separated as individuals and always bound to remain so; 
or shall we ultimately merge into a conglomerate human mass? 
The adapted mind will never see that both these ideas belong to 
the material world which is its province, and that beyond that 
world, in the range of being or selfhood, neither need be true. 
The logic of this world can be transcended and reality soon passes 
beyond our reach. Besides, how far does our knowledge even of 
this world go? What is matter? Can we answer this question 
comprehensively? What is the ultimate character of the brain 
with which the practical level of our consciousness is so closely 
integrated? How do we know that it does not possess properties 
in the background which our senses do not reveal and which may 
be very different from the properties with which we are familiar? 
These background properties might differ very much from the 
foreground properties which arc of a spatial kind and are the only 
type of property which our senses allow us to investigate. There, 
in the background, may exist the essential relations between brain 
and mind; and that would supply a reason for the fact that mind 
does not stand out as an isolable entity in the sense-field in the way 
which science demands that it must do unless it is merely a 
function of matter as we know it through our senses. 

This possibility that both mind and matter extend beyond our 
this-world purview is not pure speculation. The evidence of 
psychical research supports it; so too docs the lay-out of the 
universe as far as we have explored it, for it is highly improbable 
that it comes to an end where our senses reach their limits. 
Before attempting to assess the evidence for a future life, it 
is therefore necessary in the first place to realize something 
of our own situation, our specialized mentality and the limitations 
and coercive forces under which we live and think. The pragmatic 
tendencies within us may falsify our whole outlook unless we are 
aware of them. 

Many years ago, the philosopher William James pointed out 

that there are three possible types of relation between mind and 

brain productive, transmissive and permissive. 1 The productive 

type of relation seems obvious to our minds because we place 

1 Human Immortality, Ingersoll Lectures for 1897-8, p. 25. 



THE PROBLEM OF MENTAL MEDIUMSHIP 39 

matter at the centre of things. But the evidence for telepathy and 
extra-sensory perception does not point to it, for the arguments 
against a physical theory of telepathy are overwhelming; and 
precognition is quite incompatible with the view that physical 
traces in the brain cause knowledge of the future. Never mind, 
whispers the adapted self; the productive theory must hold the 
field: the evidence for telepathy and precognition can easily be 
ignored! It is this coercive tendency to reach a foregone con- 
clusion that causes us to regard the normally conscious self of 
everyday life as the whole of our being, although intuition, 
inspiration, the paranormal and religion all point in the opposite 
direction. Even psychologists are prone to adopt this view in 
spite of the fact that psychology itself, in its modern develop- 
ments, points against it. 

Gurney's accounts of communications, if we accept it, gives a 
most instructive glimpse of the greater self beyond normal con- 
sciousness. We cannot comprehend what goes on in these ever- 
widening fields. Communications of good quality such as these 
strongly suggest that the dead are working behind the scenes, 
doing what they can to shepherd certain ideas, with varying 
degrees of success, through paths strewn with great psychological 
obstacles. But the point of chief importance for us to grasp is that 
these difficulties are not likely to be reduced to complete com- 
prehensibility by ourselves; for the more they are pursued the 
further they recede into the unknown. 

Mediumistic communications, regarded as a whole, dispel the 
surface view that a direct and simple exchange of messages takes 
place on the lines of communications in this world, which is the 
usual view in spiritualistic circles. At the same time they dispel the 
theory that the problem can be solved by postulating a temporary 
pseudo-personality in the medium's unconscious, although 
something of this kind may be a factor in lower-grade com- 
munications. No pat and ready answer accords with the facts, 
though it does respond to the tendency of our own minds. The 
Gurney explanation suggests something far more in line with the 
modern outlook, for it suggests a vista within ourselves, stretching 
away into the unknown and passing beyond our comprehension. 
4 



4O THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

From this far territory it would seem that the dead can communi- 
cate when the conditions are favourable; but what comes through 
if it has escaped distortion, must be reduced to our own limited 
way of thinking before we can receive it. 

The chief thing to realize is that the best evidence throws the 
question into a far-reaching perspective. How much of it do we 
grasp? How much of the view we tend to take is supplied by the 
specialized characteristics of our own minds? How much is the 
wide-spread assumption that the dead no longer exist due to the 
pragmatic character of our thinking? It is our own minds which 
need to be subjected to careful scrutiny if we are to make any 
valid advance in knowledge beyond the everyday world. 



CHAPTER IV 

The Light thrown by Apparitions 

AN interesting branch of psychical research, which was not dealt 
with in The Personality of Man, is that concerned with accounts 
of apparitions. The Society for Psychical Research has accumu- 
lated a large number of such cases, and, like all work done by that 
body, they rest on sound evidence. 

Soon after it was founded, the Society went into the question 
of sensory appearances very thoroughly by carrying out a Census 
of Hallucinations. A question was drafted, which read as follows : 
'Have you ever, when believing yourself to be completely awake, 
had a vivid impression of seeing or being touched by a living 
being or inanimate object, or of hearing a voice; which impression 
so far as you could discover, was not due to any external physical 
cause?' The three senses of sight, hearing and touch were there- 
fore included. This question was circulated to 17,000 persons, of 
whom 15,316 replied No, and 1684 replied Yes. This meant that 
nearly 10 per cent, of those questioned stated that they had had 
sensory hallucinations. 

Those who answered Yes were asked to give detailed reports 
of their experiences, which were carefully examined and classi- 
fied. The collectors vere on the look-out for the following 
possible sources of error: (i) Inaccuracies in the narratives. 
This is a matter to be decided by individual judgement after 
each case has been studied separately. (2) The possibility that the 
collectors may have selected death-cases by going to persons 
they knew had had them. It is shown that at any rate in many of 
the cases the collectors knew nothing about the percipients' 
previous experiences before issuing the Census Question. (3) The 
possibility that expectation, or some other normal cause, may 
account for the coincidence. This was carefully considered 
and more than sufficient weight seems to have been attached 
to it. 

41 



42 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

After this census, a steady flow of cases came in, covering a 
period of many years. The collectors were critical and asked: 
(i) Is the account first hand? (2) Was it written before the event? 
(3) Has the witness been corroborated? (4) Was the percipient 
awake at the time? (5) Was the percipient educated and of good 
character? (6)Was the apparition recognized? (7) Was it seen out 
of doors? (8) Was the percipient in a state of anxiety or expect- 
ancy? (9) Could details have been put back into the narrative after 
the event? (10) If the experience coincided with an actual event 
of the same kind, could the coincidence be due to chance? The 
cases collected were therefore far above the level of hearsay 
evidence. 

Expectancy is often cited as the cause of coincidence between 
a dream or waking apparition and the occurrence of a similar 
event in real life ; and this possibility has certainly to be allowed 
for. But it is easy to overestimate its explanatory power, as the 
following example shows. The friend of a certain lady was so ill 
that his death was expected at any time. The lady had a dream, in 
which she saw a corpse laid out on a bed; but it was not the 
corpse of her male friend, who was so ill, but the corpse of his 
wife. So far as she knew, the wife was not ill at all; but news 
arrived saying that she had been suddenly taken ill, and shortly 
afterwards she died. Thus knowledge from a paranormal source 
was not deflected by expectation. 

As the apparitional cases accumulated, it was found that they 
fell into four main classes : (i) 'On Friday December ist, 1882, at 
9.30 p.m., I went into a room alone and sat by the fireside, and 
endeavoured so strongly to fix my mind upon the interior of a 
house at Kew, in which resided Miss V. and her two sisters, that 
I seemed to be actually in the house. During this experience I must 
have fallen into a mesmeric sleep, for although I was conscious, 
I could not move my limbs. I did not seem to have lost the power 
of moving them, but I could not make the effort to do so, and my 
hands, which lay loosely on my knees, about six inches apart, felt 
involuntarily drawn together and seemed to meet although I was 
conscious that they did not move. 

'At TO p.m. I regained my normal state by an effort of the will, 



THE LIGHT THROWN BY APPARITIONS 43 

and then took a pencil and wrote down on a sheet of note-paper 
the foregoing statements. 

'When I went to bed on the same night, I determined that I 
would be in the front bedroom of the above-mentioned house at 
12 p.m., and remain there until I had made my spiritual presence 
perceptible to the inmates of that room. 

'On thenext day, Saturday, I went to Kew tospend theevening, 
and met there a married sister of Miss V. (namely Mrs. L.)' 

The narrator had only met this lady once before. 'In the 
course of conversation', he continues, '(although I did not think 
for a moment of asking her any questions on such a subject), she 
told me that on the previous night she had seen me distinctly on 
two occasions. She had spent the night at Clarence Road and had 
slept in the front bedroom. At about half-past nine she had seen 
me in the passage going from one room to another, and at 12 p.m. 
when she was wide awake, she had seen me enter the bedroom 
and walk round to where she was sleeping, and take her hair 
(which is very long) into my hand. She also told me that the 
apparition took hold of her hand, and gazed intently into it, 
whereupon she spoke saying, 'You need not look at the lines, for 
I have never had any trouble'. She then awoke her sister, Miss V., 
who was sleeping with her and told her about it. After hearing 
this account, I took the statement, which I had written down on the 
previous evening, from my pocket, and showed it to some of the 
persons present, who were much astonished, although incredulous. 
I asked Mrs. L. if she was not dreaming at the time of the latter 
experience, but this she stoutly denied, and stated that she had 
forgotten what I was like, but seeing me so distinctly she re- 
cognized me at once.' 

The lady and her sister give a corroboration. Intense concen- 
tration by the agent before going to sleep is mentioned in other 
cases of this kind. 

Two features to be noticed about this case are: (i) the agent's 
figure is seen walking down the passage very much as a figure is 
often seen in cases of haunting, and (2) the agent's figure ap- 
proaches the percipient's bed and behaves with apparent con- 
sciousness of her, very much as a crisis-apparition behaves. 



44 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

The similarity between this experimental case and the spon- 
taneous cases discussed below is obvious. I have found records of 
sixteen occasions on which this experiment has been tried with 
success, and in most cases success has been achieved on the first 
attempt. Here then, is a repeatable experiment which for some 
reason or other appears to have been ignored by investigators. It 
is clearly an important experiment, for if it could be repeated at 
will, it would be known when and where to expect such appari- 
tions, and one could be prepared with the means for testing them 
with cameras, sound-recording apparatus or the like. Moreover, 
the states of the agent could be studied; hypnosis and suggestion 
could be applied and so on. On several of the recorded occasions 
the agent, after concentrating his mind strongly on the selected 
percipient (who was ignorant that any experiment was being 
tried), went to sleep; and it was while he was asleep that the 
apparition was seen. 

Mr. J. Kirk l made nine successful experiments (only one of 
which has been counted in the above sixteen, because on only one 
occasion was his apparition actually seen) and these are of great 
interest, because they bridge the gap between experimental 
apparitions and experimental telepathy. For example, in one ex- 
periment Mr. Kirk, instead of trying to make his own apparition 
seen, tried to make the percipient see a bright disc at which he was 
looking. She saw luminous clouds which concentrated into a disc. 

There are many examples of Crisis Cases which happened a 
long time ago. Here is a brief account of a more recent one. 2 
It occurred to Mrs. Dick-Cunyngham, and was brought to 
notice through the good offices of Mr. Douglas Fawcett. 

The vision seen was of Mr. Eustace Neville Craig, a close 
friend of Mrs. Dick-Cunyngham. The latter, writing to Mr. 
Fawcett recently, said in reference to her experience : 'I did not 
even know he had been suddenly taken ill (operation). One 
Sunday I had gone to church in London with my mother. 
Suddenly I got the clearest vision I have ever seen. It was like a 
shutter opened slowly and then closed again slowly. For two 

1 Journal S.P.R., Vol. v, pp. 21-30. 

* Journal S.P.R., Sept.-Oct., 1944, pp. 72-4. 



THE LIGHT THROWN BY APPARITIONS 45 

seconds I saw Eustace lying quite motionless on a bed, his eyes 
were closed, he was as white as a sheet. There were two nurses in 
white caps; one was advancing holding a glass of medicine. 
Then the vision vanished. I came home and said to Dixon (her 
maid), " I believe Mr. Craig is ill". The following Tuesday his 
death was in The Times. Afterwards I heard he had never recovered 
consciousness after an operation.' 

In reply to a request for further details, Mrs. Dick-Cunyingham 
wrote: '. . . Unfortunately it [the incident] took place a long 
while ago in May 1932. . . . Though so long ago I remember it 
as if it had occurred yesterday. The "vision" came to me during 
morning service (during the prayers after the first hymn) at the 
church of St. Paul's, Knightsbridge. It seemed to me as if I 
suddenly saw a spot of light, round in shape. This enlarged rather 
slowly. Then I saw the picture I described inside the circle only 
for a second. Then, as if curtains were drawn over it, very 
slowly it faded. No, I had no special reason for thinking of 
Eustace Craig at that moment, except that I had not heard 
anything from him or of him for some time, which was unusual, 
as we were very great friends, and I did not know he was ill. I 
mentioned the incident to my maid (who has been with me about 
twenty years) because she is, I think, genuinely psychic. Yes, she 
remembers about it, and would corroborate. . . . The exact 
date (offhand) I cannot remember. I believe it may have been 
May 14 or 18, but I know it was May 1932. The vision was on 
Sunday. Notice of derth, Eustace Neville Craig, in The Times two 
days later, Tuesday. . . . Some weeks after Eustace died I had 
another vision of him (not so strong). I saw him quite plainly 
standing at the end of my bed. He did not speak. I have had talks 
with him through a medium several times. . . . He himself was 
not interested in psychic things. No, I do not very often have 
"visions"; that is why I said it was the "clearest vision I had ever 
had", but I very often seem to know things that are going to 
happen. . . . Yours very truly, Vera Dick-Cunyngham.' 

This case bears a striking similarity to the older cases in the 
Society's collection. The phrases, 'the clearest vision I have ever 
seen', and 'though so long ago I remember it as if it had occurred 



46 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

yesterday' echo almost verbally the comments of many bygone 
percipients with regard to the vividness and impressiveness of 
their experiences. 

The vision possessed, also, two special features: (i) On the first 
occasion it appeared in a special space of its own. (2) It emerged 
out of a bright spot or cloud; but on the second occasion it ap- 
peared in physical space. There is a popular tendency to believe 
that an apparition which appears in physical space and takes its 
normal place among the surroundings, must be in some sense 
more objectively 'there' than an apparition which appears in a 
special space of its own, or appears in a dream. But the apparent 
indifference of apparitions to the kind of space they appear in 
would seem to negative this belief. The kind of spatial setting is 
surely merely part of the chosen dramatic form given to the 
figure: it is not evidence that an apparition is actually present when 
it appears in another kind of space. The present case falls exactly 
into line with previous cases in this respect. 

Mrs. Dick-Cunyngham has kindly given permission for the 
real names and addresses to be printed. 

The third group deals with apparitions of people long dead. 
Mrs. P. 1 and her husband had gone to bed, but she, wrapped in her 
dressing-gown, was lying on the outside of the bed, waiting to 
attend to her baby, which lay in a cot beside her. The lamp was 
still alight and the door of the room was locked. She says, 'I was 
just pulling myself into a half sitting posture against the pillows, 
thinking of nothing but the arrangements for the following day, 
when, to my great astonishment I saw a gentleman standing at the 
foot of the bed, dressed as a naval officer, and with a cap on his 
head having a projecting peak. The light being in the position 
which I have indicated, the face was in shadow to me, and the more 
so that the visitor was leaning upon his arms which rested on the 
foot rail of the bedstead. I was too astonished to be afraid, but 
simply wondered who it could be; and instantly touching my 
husband's shoulder (whose face was turned from me), I said, 
"Willie, who is this?" My husband turned, and, for a second or 
two, lay looking in intense astonishment at the intruder; then, 
1 Proc. S.P.R., Vol. viii, p. 26. 



THE LIGHT THROWN BY APPARITIONS 47 

lifting himself a little, he shouted, "What on earth are you doing 
here, sir?" Meanwhile the form, slowly drawing himself into an 
upright position, now said, in a commanding yet reproachful 
voice, "Willie, Willie". I looked at my husband and saw that his 
face was white and agitated. As I turned towards him he sprang 
out of bed as though to attack the man, but stood by the bedside 
as if afraid, or in great perplexity, while the figure calmly and 
slowly moved towards the wall at right angles with the lamp in the 
direction of the dotted line. (A diagram is included with the 
account.) As it passed the lamp, a deep shadow fell upon the room 
as of a material person shutting out the light from us by his 
intervening body, and he disappeared, as it were, into the wall. 
My husband now, in a very agitated manner, caught up the lamp 
and turning to me, said, "I mean to look all over the house to see 
where he has gone", I was by this time exceedingly agitated too, 
but, remembering that the door was locked, and that the myster- 
ious visitor had not gone towards it at all, remarked, "He has not 
gone out by the door". But without pausing, my husband 
unlocked the door, hastened out of the room, and was soon search- 
ing the whole house.' 

Mrs. P. was wondering if the apparition could indicate that 
her brother, who was in the navy, was in some trouble, when her 
husband came back and exclaimed, ' "Oh no, it was my father". 
My husband's father had been dead fourteen years: he had been a 
naval officer in his young life.' 

During the following weeks Mr. P. became very ill and then 
disclosed to his wife that he had got into financial difficulties and, 
at the time of the apparition, was inclined to take advice of a man 
who would probably have ruined him. 

Here, again, the figure is life-like and intrudes on the per- 
cipients suddenly and unexpectedly. There is in fact no intrinsic 
difference between it and a crisis-apparition. 

The fourth class is that of ghosts which haunt houses. The 

following example is old but was at the time extremely well 

authenticated. Miss R. C. Morton 1 (pseudonym) a medical 

student, evidently had, from the way she reports her researches, a 

1 Proc. S.P.R., Vol. viii, pp. 311-29. 



48 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

well-balanced, scientific mind and was free from superstitious 
fears. She, as well as the principal observers in the case, were 
personally interviewed by Frederic Myers. The following points 
should be noted. 

(1) The hauntings lasted for seven years from 1882 to 1889. 

(2) During this period about twenty people heard the ghost 
and of these at least seven saw it; probably more. 

(3) The hauntings rose to a peak period in 1885, and after 
1886 gradually faded away. 

(4) The figure was usually taken for a real person by those who 
saw it for the first time. 

(5) All the observers agreed as to the description of the figure, 
which was tall, wearing a dark dress with widow's weeds, one 
hand usually half hidden in the folds and a handkerchief held to the 
face. One observer did not see the handkerchief. The face was 
never well seen, but the general description tallied with the appear- 
ance and habits of Mrs. S., the second wife of a former tenant. 

(6) The house dated from about 1860 and had only been occu- 
pied by two families before the Morton family, and their history 
was known. 

(7) The phenomena consisted of the visual apparition, which 
followed, more or less, a routine going down the stairs from the 
bedroom landing to the drawing-room, standing at a particular 
spot in the bow-window, then leaving the drawing-room by the 
door, going along the passage and disappearing by the garden 
door. Also footsteps were heard by many percipients, always of 
the same description. 'Her footstep is very light', says Miss 
Morton, 'you can hardly hear it except on the linoleum, and then 
only like a person walking softly with thin boots on/ The swish 
of woollen drapery was also heard. These footsteps were unlike 
any of those of the Morton family. All the servants were changed 
during the period of hauntings; but the footsteps went on un- 
altered. There were other sounds, especially during the peak 
period, of bumps, turning of door handles, heavy and irregular 
footsteps, heavy thuds and bumpings, noises like heavy articles, 
such as boots, being thrown across the passage, and the sound 
of something heavy being dragged. 



THE LIGHT THROWN BY APPARITIONS 49 

(8) The sounds were sometimes collectively perceived, as 
many as five persons having heard them at once. The visual 
apparition never seems to have been actually seen by more than 
one person at a time; but it was on one occasion seen by the four 
Miss Mortons in quick succession in four consecutive positions 
on its route from the drawing-room to the orchard. 

(9) Besides the evidence of awareness of its situation provided 
by the behaviour of the figure in walking up and down stairs, 
through doorways and along passages, etc. (Miss Morton once 
saw the figure deliberately walk round her father, who could not 
see it) on more than one occasion it stopped and looked as if about 
to speak when Miss Morton addressed it. 

(10) The non-physical character of the figure was proved 
in several ways. It appeared in a room with the doors shut; it 
vanished while being watched; it was twice seen to pass through 
threads lightly fastened across the stairs; it only became substantial 
and solid looking towards the end of the period. It was obvious 
that no physical sounds could be caused by the feet of a figure 
having no substantiality; for sound-waves are caused only by 
the reaction on one another of physical bodies. Miss Morton's 
frequent attempts to touch the figure failed because it always 
managed to place its visible surface beyond her reach. Sometimes 
one person would see the figure while another present would not. 
Miss Morton's father never saw it, although she pointed out to 
him the place where she saw it, and he went and stood by it. It then 
moved round him. 

(n) The figure had no luminosity of its own and behaved 
with reference to the lighting of the scene as a material figure 
would have done. 

(12) Cold feelings, or a cold wind, sometimes accompanied the 
figure. 

(13) The dogs were affected by the apparition. A retriever was 
several times found in the kitchen in a state of terror. A Skye 
terrier twice ran to the foot of the stairs, wagging his tail at an 
invisible something, and jumping up and fawning. Then it 
suddenly slunk away with its tail between its legs and ran under a 
sofa. 



5O THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

(14) Miss Morton says, 'I felt conscious of a feeling of loss as 
if I had lost power to the figure'. Also some mental connection 
between the figure and the percipients is indicated by the fact 
that 'the figure has not been called up by desire to see it, for on 
every occasion when we had made special arrangements to watch 
for it, we never saw it. On several occasions we have sat up at 
night hoping to see it, but in vain my father with my brother- 
in-law, myself and a friend three or four times, an aunt and myself 
twice, and my sisters with friends more than once; but on none 
of these occasions was anything seen. Nor have the appearances 
been seen after we have been talking or thinking much of the 
figure/ 

All this shows that there is a large element of subjectivity 
in ghost-seeing. Whether or not the ghost is seen depends on 
the make-up of the observer and on the direction his thoughts 
are taking. But the whole thing is not subjective; for the fact that 
the ghost is seen only in one particular place indicates that there 
is an objective factor as well and in this case the objective factor 
was clearly connected with a former inhabitant of the house. 

Returning to crisis-apparitions, the question arises as to 
whether or not the relation between the subjective and objective 
features is due to chance. 

When considering the possibility that the coincidence between 
the experience and the event may be due to chance, the following 
considerations must be taken into account. 

'Coincidence' was defined by the collectors of the crisis cases as 
occurring only if the event happened within twelve hours before 
or after the experience. Even striking likenesses at greater 
intervals were not counted as coincidental cases. 

Again, it has to be remembered that as a rule, neither the event 
nor the experience consists of one incident only. If a sequence of 
incidents in the experience coincided with a similar sequence of 
incidents in the event, the likelihood of chance-coincidence 
diminishes very rapidly. 

The argument is frequently put forward that when the ex- 
perience is a dream, because dreams are so many, the probability 
of chance coincidence is very large indeed. This argument may be 



THE LIGHT THROWN BY APPARITIONS 51 

valid in some cases; but it has to be remembered that not infre- 
quently the dream-experience that coincides with the event 
differs considerably in character from an ordinary dream. There- 
fore to class it with ordinary dreams for statistical purposes is to 
introduce a methodological error. The following were included 
in some reports of cases: 'I rushed down to the drawing-room 
again, and, sinking on my knees by my husband's side, fainted and 
it was with difficulty I was restored to myself again.' Again the 
percipient burst into tears when asked about her experience and 
said, 'I suppose I fainted, as I lost all recollection for some time, 
and when I came to myself the apparition had gone but one 
thing I am sure, and that is that it was not a dream. It made such an 
impression on my mind I shall never forget it/ 'The following 
circumstance is impressed upon my mind in a manner which will 
preclude its ever being forgotten by me or the members of the 
family interested/ 'It is nearly thirty years ago now, but it is as 
vividly impressed on her memory as if it had happened yesterday/ 
'I only know I shall never forget it/ 'She was terribly frightened, 
rushed into a nieghbour's house and dropped in the passage/ 
'I turned round and saw my husband's mother, looking very 
death-like. I said, "Oh mother, what a start you gave me !" But she 
was gone. A feeling of great depression came over me, and I was 
quite unable to go on my husband's errand, but went home. . . . 
I fainted before I saw Mr. Alger and after recovering, I felt unwell 
so that I had to go to bed/ People do not behave like this every 
time they have a dream. 

A study of well evidenced cases of apparitions seen when the 
percipient was awake shows that they possess the following 
characteristics: 

(1) They do not always appear in physical space, looking like 
material objects. They sometimes appear in a space of their own. 
The wall may seem to open and the apparition appear in it; or a 
face may appear as if reflected in a polished piece of furniture. 

(2) The great majority of the cases that have been carefully 
collected point to their subjective character. The apparitions may 
appear and disappear in locked rooms: they often vanish while 
being watched: they may become transparent and fade away: they 



52 THE NATURE OP HUMAN PERSONALITY 

are frequently seen and heard only by some of the persons present, 
which seems to indicate that they are not reflecting physical 
light, or creating physical sound: they disappear into walls or 
closed doors and can pass through physical objects: people have 
put their hands through them and have walked through them 
without encountering any resistance: they leave no physical 
traces behind them. 

It is true there are some cases of apparitions which give evi- 
dence of being genuinely physical; for some have been photo- 
graphed and the type called 'poltergeists' move physical objects 
about. These may belong to a different class; for the great majority 
of apparitional cases collected by the Society for Psychical Re- 
search give every indication that they are subjective, that is to say, 
they are hallucinations of the senses. Of course such hallucinations 
need not originate entirely in the percipient. The cause of the 
hallucinations may be outside him. In the case of a ghost, for 
instance, which appears again and again and is recognized as a 
former occupant of the house, the appearance may be entirely 
subjective, yet the cause of it may possibly reside in the person 
depicted. 

Another characteristic of apparitions when they appear in 
ordinary space is their remarkable likeness to persons in the flesh. 
Occasionally they have been known to react in their movements 
to the presence of those who are watching them. Another curious 
thing is that apparitions have been seen to cast shadows as they 
passed in front of lamps. This, however, is no proof of their 
objectivity; for the visual hallucination is minutely constructed to 
react to its surroundings. 

Again, there are quite a number of cases in which an apparition 
has been seen collectively. So far as can be gathered from all those 
accounts, the two or three percipients see the apparition in the 
same place and looking, on the whole, the same. One example is 
given on page 63 of The Personality of Man. 

A certain Canon Bourne and his two daughters were out 
hunting, and the daughters decided to return home with the 
coachman while their father went on. 'As we were turning 
to go home', say the two Misses Bourne in a joint account, 



THE LIGHT THROWN BY APPARITIONS 53 

'we distinctly saw my father waving his hat to us and signing 
us to follow him. He was on the side of a small hill, and there 
was a dip between him and us. My sister, the coachman and myself 
all recognized my father and also the horse. The horse looked so 
dirty and shaken that the coachman remarked he thought there 
had been a nasty accident. As my father waved his hat I clearly 
saw the Lincoln and Bennett mark inside, though from the dis- 
tance we were apart it ought to have been utterly impossible for 
me to have seen it. ... Fearing an accident, we hurried down 
the hill. From the nature of the ground we had to lose sight of 
my father, but it took us a few seconds to reach the place where we 
had seen him. When we got there, there was no sign of him any- 
where, nor could we see anyone in sight at all. We rode about for 
some time looking for him but could not see or hear anything of 
him. We all reached home within a quarter of an hour of each 
other. My father then told us he had never been in the field, nor 
near the field in which we thought we saw him, the whole of 
that day. He had never waved to us and had met with no 
accident. My father was riding the only white horse that was 
out that day.' 1 

One might quote also the much more recent case of the two 
holiday makers who both saw a guest-house with brightly 
coloured umbrellas on the lawn as they passed in a bus. When 
they went back to book rooms in it, it had vanished. 2 At first 
sight collective cases appear to be rare. When looking through 
the records of the Society for Psychical Research I found 130 cases; 
but there are probably more. This is not a large percentage on the 
whole; but the reason of this comes to light when one reads the 
cases carefully. It is that in the majority of cases in which appari- 
tions are seen, the percipient is alone; there is no one present to 
share the experience. If one takes the number of cases in which 
more than one person is present, collective visual hallucination is 
not particularly rare. 

Collective perception of an apparition does not involve the 
objectivity of the apparition; for our minds are interrelated be- 
neath the conscious surface, as the ample evidence for telepathy 

1 Journal S.P.R., Vol. vi, p. 129. 2 The Personalty oj Man, p. 65. 



I THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

as proved. But this, and the extraordinarily accurate assimilation 
f apparitions to external circumstances, such as dimness when the 
ght fades, and the casting of a shadow, shows how subtle, and 
etailed these created hallucinations can be. They can be so 
xactly like material objects as to be indistinguishable from them. 
r et on occasion, when there is some reason for it, apparitions can 
low vivid details when it is almost dark or at a normally im- 
ossible distance. The resemblance to the physical is therefore 
rtificial. 

Another important thing about these visual creations is that 
icy can be very extensive. There is the case of Miss Ruth Wynne 
tid her pupil, for example. 1 The two were out for a walk in 1926 
ear Bury St. Edmunds, and after passing through a farm-yard 
icy came to a road flanked by a high brick wall. Following the 
rail they came to -some tall wrought-iron gates, through which 
icy could see the drive, leading to what was evidently a large 
ouse among trees. A corner of the house, with stucco front and 
reorgian windows, was visible. It was some months before they 
>ok the same walk again. Passing once more through the farm- 
ard, they came out upon the road: but there was no brick wall, 
o iron gates, no drive and no house. The road was flanked with a 
itch, beyond which was tumbled earth, with mounds and a pond. 
To one in the neighbourhood had ever heard of the house they 
LW. The well-known experiences of Miss Mobcrley and Miss 
mrdain in the gardens of Versailles is another example of this 
ind of wide-spread hallucination. Evidently visual hallucinations 
*e not necessarily restricted to a single figure or object: they 
in provide whole surroundings. But they rarely do so; and the 
;ason why they do not is plain. If sensory hallucinations were 
equent and on a large scale, no one's life would be safe. We 
mst see, hear and feel things as they are or we should soon be 
illed. 

In March, 1938, an interesting experience happened to a 
Ir. J. S. Spence, who was taking a holiday in South Devon. 2 

1 Apparitions, pp. 46-7, Myers Memorial Lecture, 1942, by G. N. M. Tyrrell, 
iblished by the Society for Psychical Research. 
3 Journal S.P.R., June-July, 1947. 



THE LIGHT THROWN BY APPARITIONS 55 

He entered a cave in a headland, but had an unpleasant feeling of 
being watched; so he turned and came out again. But a feeling of 
depression came over him and he had the impression that some- 
thing was straining at a leash. Climbing up the cliff by a little path, 
he found himself waist-deep in bracken and bramble. He came to 
a long wall, made without mortar, the stones of which looked 
fresh and were not covered with creeper. Looking at the ordnance 
map he had with him, he saw marked on it a gate and a solitary 
tree at the other side of the headland. But neither were there: 
only a few stunted trees bent by the wind. As he went on the 
atmosphere seemed to become less charged and less tense, and 
for the first time he heard a sound a seagull screaming overhead. 
Then looking ahead, he saw the lone tree and the gate as marked 
on the map; and the grass was fresher and greener and there was 
less bracken. 

Next day he set out to go to the cave again, and the tide was 
up far higher than it could have been in comparison with the day 
before. After it had gone down sufficiently, he found the place 
where he had entered the cave; but the entry was nearly blocked 
by rubble, and he decided not to try to enter. Climbing up the 
cliff he felt once more the atmosphere charged with strain and 
unfriendliness: the same tight feeling came across his forehead and 
he felt the sweat breaking out. Again the bracken became waist- 
deep. He followed the wall, made of neat slabs of stone until 
suddenly he felt giddy, though he could see the wall stretching 
away in front of him. On impulse, he took a snap with his camera 
of the view in front of him. Another pace, and his left foot slipped 
as if into a rabbit-hole. He collapsed onto his other foot and wildly 
seized two tufts of grass. For a moment everything went black: 
then he found himself on the edge of the cliff, clinging to the 
grass. He pulled himself to safety and made his way home. The 
photograph, when developed, looked straight down on to the 
sea-shore below. The wall had now changed and appeared very 
old, covered by brambles and partly in ruins. 

This shows how dangerous large scale hallucinations would be, 
and why they so seldom occur. But when the mind is not on the 
qui vive, as it always is in daily life, sensory hallucinations can take 



56 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

charge. Mrs.Willett, in the aloof state in which she could still 
speak and describe things, had a remarkably vivid vision of a scene 
taken from Plato's Symposium. 1 She said of the figures in the scene: 
'I know them much better than many of the people I live with.' 
And also : 'Do you know that man's as real to me as if I could 
touch him !' Yet this picture was created only by the reading of an 
account of the scene in a book. 

So it seems that if the safety device, which in waking life 
concentrates all attention on the deliveries of the sense-organs, 
lapses into abeyance, the mind can create environments which are 
just as real, to all appearance, and just as complete as those the 
senses provide. 

When comparing the large number of cases of apparitions 
recorded in the Proceedings and Journal of the Society for Psychical 
Research, it is interesting to collect and bring together those 
characteristics. Very few apparitions possess individually all those 
characteristics, but the evidence for each of them is good, and it is 
instructive to endow an imaginary apparition with them all. Let 
us imagine, then, that a 'perfect apparition' of a human figure is 
standing beside an ordinary human being. There would be the 
following points of resemblance and of difference, each of which 
is taken from well evidenced cases collected by the Society for 
Psychical Research. 

(1) Both figures would stand out in space and would appear 
equally real and solid. The apparition would be just as clear and 
vivid in matters of detail, such as the colour and texture of skin 
and clothing, as the material person. 

(2) We should be able to walk round the apparition, view- 
ing it from any distance and from any standpoint, and, as regards 
distance and perspective, we should detect no difference between 
it and the living person. 

(3) If the light happened to be poor, both figures would be 
badly seen, and if more light were turned on, both figures would 
appear brighter. If the light went out, both figures would dis- 
appear in the darkness. 

(4) Both figures would obscure the background. 

1 The Personality of Man, pp. 161-2. 



THE LIGHT THROWN BY APPARITIONS 57 

(5 ) If the apparition happened to be wearing a rose in its button- 
hole, we would probably smell the scent of it. 

(6) On approaching the apparition, we should hear it breathing 
and we should hear the rustle of its clothes as it moved and its 
shoes would shuffle on the floor. 

(7) The apparition would probably behave as if aware of our 
presence, looking at us in a natural way and possibly smiling and 
turning its head to follow our movements. It might even place its 
hand on our shoulder, in which case we should feel an ordinary 
human touch. 

(8) The apparition might speak to us, and possibly it might go 
as far as to answer a question; but we should not be able to engage 
it in any long conversation. 

(9) If a mirror were fixed to the wall we should see the ap- 
parition reflected in it at the appropriate angle, just as we should 
see the reflection of the real man. 

(10) Both figures would probably cast shadows, but the evi- 
dence on this point is uncertain. 

(n) If we were to shut our eyes or turn our head, the appari- 
tion would disappear just as the figure by its side would do. And 
on reopening them, we should see it again. 

(12) In addition to its clothes, the figure might have accessories 
such as a stick or any other object. And it might be accompanied 
by a dog or even by another human being. These would appear 
normal and behave in a normal manner. With regard to a human 
companion, I do not think it would make any difference whether 
he had ever existed or not. Mr. Pickwick or Sherlock Holmes 
would probably do as well as Charles Dickens or Sir Arthur 
Conan Doyle, and would appear just as alive and natural. 

(13) The apparition might pick up any object in the room or 
open and close the door. We should both see and hear these ob- 
jects moved: yet physically they would never have moved at all. 

In these points the apparition's imitation of a material figure 
would be perfect. But we should find points of difference no less 
striking. 

(14) For one thing, as soon as we came near the apparition, or 



58 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

(15) If we tried to take hold of the apparition, our hand would 
go through it without encountering any resistance. In the most 
perfect case I am not quite sure about this; for the sensation 
of touch is undoubtedly hallucinated in such cases, and it might be 
that we should feel our hand stopped at the surface of the appari- 
tion's body, as by something impenetrable; but at the same time 
we should see our hand go through it without let or hindrance. 
Apparitions when cornered avoid this interesting situation by 
disappearing. 

(16) If we were to sprinkle French chalk on the floor and could 
induce the apparition and the human being to walk on it together, 
we should find that only the real man left any footprints, although 
we should hear the footsteps of both. 

(17) If we were to take a photograph of the two figures, only 
the real man would come out. And if we had a sound-recording 
apparatus, only the sounds made by the real man would be re- 
corded. It is true that these inferences do not rest on direct evi- 
dence. But the non-physical character of apparitions is so clear 
that the inference seems to be inescapable. 

(18) After a time, which might be anything up to half an hour 
or so, the apparition would disappear. It might suddenly vanish; 
or it might become slightly transparent and fade away; it might 
vanish into the wall or go down through the floor; or it might, 
conventionally, open the door and walk out. 

(19) Sometimes we should probably find that the apparition 
did not imitate the behaviour of the material man quite so closely. 
It might, for instance, become slightly luminous; it might show 
small details of itself when we were so far away from it that 
normally we could not possibly have seen them; it might even so 
far forget itself as to make us see it through the back of our head! 

These points of resemblance and of difference between an 
apparition and a physical human being, which a careful examina- 
tion of collected cases reveals, show how minutely regulated 
hallucinations of the senses can be. Perhaps 'sensory constructs' 
is a better term to use than 'sensory hallucinations'; for such cases 
make it plain that perception of an entire environment, as com- 
plete in every way as that which surrounds us in daily life, can 



THE LIGHT THROWN BY APPARITIONS 59 

be constructed by the mind without any assistance from the 
bodily sense-organs. (Previous experience of the deliveries of the 
sense organs is, however, an essential preliminary.) But in the 
normal, waking state these mental constructions arc reduced to 
mere occasional fragments because of the danger that would 
otherwise arise. In the case above quoted, for example, Mr. 
Spence came near to falling over the cliff because his sensory 
construct was pervasive and went backwards in time, showing the 
cliff further out to sea than it actually was. 

The importance of these cases of apparitions is that they act 
as a peep-hole, throwing light on the construction of the human 
being beyond that part which is adapted for life among physical 
surroundings. They show that the sense-faculties are not limited 
in their action to purely objective causes; nor do they come to a 
dead end where their practical services cease. Rather, they are in 
practical life abstracted and specialized from a larger field: and it 
is important to realise this; for it is true, not only of the sensory 
faculties, but of the human being altogether. 

Thus apparitions, as well as all sensory abnormalities, are very 
instructive if examined seriously: but few people do examine them 
seriously. The common attitude is to smile and regard them as 
fairy-tales or amusing stories. For common sense they are trivial 
and unreal; but how completely we fail to realize that in rejecting 
them, common sense is behaving pragmatically and is not presenting 
a balanced picture of the truth. 

It is interesting to compare the visual perception of any object 
in the room with the apparition of a person as seen in one of the 
numerous 'crisis-cases' collected by the Society for Psychical 
Research. In a crisis-case an apparitional figure is seen of a friend 
at a distance, who may be seriously ill, or dying, or undergoing 
an accident. The event in the physical world causes the character 
of the visual experience to be what it is in both cases; but in both 
cases also the cause of the visual experience itself is subjective. 
When we look at an object our subjective experience is minutely 
related to the objective facts. When we see a crisis-apparition, it is 
somewhat different. The correspondence of what is seen with 
what is actually occurring at a distance is far looser and may even 



60 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

represent the facts symbolically. This brings home to us that the 
subjective element in sense-perception is not itself rigidly caused 
by objects in the external world or by the processes occurring in 
our sense-organs. There is within us an independent creator of 
sense-experiences of a psychological kind; and this in the case of 
sight, touch, hearing, etc. has been linked during our evolution 
with minute exactitude to physical processes in the brain. A 
telepathic factor can put the psychological creator of sense- 
imagery into action as effectively as a physical factor in the ex- 
ternal world. A picture of visible surroundings can be created 
without the intervention of any external physical factor at all. 
Psychologists and psychiatrists deal with the creation of sense- 
imagery in dreams, which is wholesale and prolific; but they 
concentrate their attention on the underlying, psychological 
causes of the subject-matter of the dream and not on the interesting 
and important question of how the imagery is produced. The 
fact that some lines of research are marked out and selected, while 
others are passed over and ignored is in itself significant. In fact a 
good deal of light could be thrown on psychology by studying 
the unconscious behaviour of the mind of the psychologist. 

The study of apparitions thus points towards the same con- 
clusion to which phychical research in general points. It shows that 
the human self transcends or overflows its apparent boundary and 
extends beyond it how far we cannot tell. It shows, too, how 
irrational and unbalanced we become whenever we venture to 
cross this boundary. A book by W. F. Prince, entitled The En- 
chanted Boundary, 1 was referred to on page 232 of The Personality 
of Man. This book cites many examples of the extraordinary 
behaviour of people when they are faced with valid evidence of 
paranormal happenings. They behave as though they were en- 
chanted and arrive at conclusions in accord with their own mental 
constitution but quite at variance with the facts. The lesson is 
plain. Our minds are narrowly adapted to a single corner of 
reality and if we try to leave it we are hopelessly at sea. 

1 Boston Society for Psychic Research, 1928-32. 



CHAPTER V 

The Physical Side 

IT is natural to assume, especially to-day, that science alone can 
reveal the nature of the universe and can do it completely. In 
revealing its physical character, science has undoubtedly made 
much progress; but it must never be forgotten that our knowledge 
of the physical world reaches us through the combined media of 
our mind and our senses, so that the mode of transmission of that 
knowledge lies outside the province of physical science. We must 
therefore be careful not to identify the external world with its 
appearance to ourselves. The extent of the physical universe may 
not be discoverable by physics: its apparent boundaries may be 
determined by our own limitations. 

This is where psychology and psychical research begin to 
reveal important things; for they throw a good deal of light on our 
limitations, instead of plunging at once into the objective and 
neglecting the subjective, as the physical sciences do. In the 
first place, the evidence of psychical research shows that there is 
more of ourselves behind the scenes than appears on the surface. 
It shows that to accept the entire human being as a tiny spark of 
vacillating consciousness, wrapped up with and dependent on the 
body, is to accept an illusion. But this illusion is necessary if we 
are to have a practical and simple outlook in daily life. Many facts 
support the view that the human being is greater than its normal 
consciousness. The ancient philosophers of India saw this; and it 
is not too much to say that this transcendence lies at the core of 
religion. 

Now let us look at psychical research from a rather different 
angle and ask the question whether, in addition to pointing to a 
further extension of ourselves, it points to a further extension of 
the world. This is not a question to be solved by objective science. 
It is not a matter of the extent of space or time; it turns on the 
capacity of our own mental and physical powers. The evidence 



61 



62 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

for extra-sensory perception, rightly interpreted, carries us at once 
beyond space and time. It was pointed out in chapter II that the 
more we look into cases of 'telepathy' and 'clairvoyance' and into 
the experiments made on them, the plainer it becomes that tele- 
pathy is not akin to a radio message travelling through space; 
nor is clairvoyance a power of perceiving physical objects with 
a kind of pseudo-sight. Both arise out of what psychologists call 
the 'unconscious'; in other words, they take place in the further 
extension of ourselves which lies behind the scenes. It is there that 
we get hold of the information and pass it up to the conscious 
mind. It is an internal process: and its modus operandi we do not 
understand. 'Mind-reading' and 'object-reading' are superficial 
explanations that we try to force upon the facts because such 
explanations appeal to us. Quantitative experiments with the 
guessing of cards, etc., suggest these superficial explanations 
in terms of thought-reading and object-reading because they 
show practically nothing of the process but only the result; 
and some investigators have been misled because they have 
concentrated their attention entirely upon the experimental 
evidence. 

Telepathy, if we study the evidence for it as a whole, suggests 
that minds are in contact with one another beyond the range of 
normal consciousness. It is there that telepathy occurs. Clair- 
voyance suggests that matter has properties beyond the range 
of our senses and that these properties are in touch with the mind 
outside normal consciousness. The phenomenon called 'psycho- 
metry', in which a sensitive person, by holding an object in his 
hand, can give verifiable information about its owner, suggests 
the same thing. What these unsensed properties of matter can be 
we do not know; but telepathy, clairvoyance and psychometry all 
point to a further extension of the world beyond the range of the 
senses. That is to say, these things point to the view that matter is 
not as it were an island but a peninsula. 

Precognition suggests this also; and it does it in a more startling 
manner. For however we try to explain precognition, we always 
end up by attempting to fasten upon it some kind of explanation 
that agrees with the workings of our minds. We pull it into our 



THE PHYSICAL SIDE 63 

accustomed ways of thinking. But inevitably we fail, however 
loth we are to admit it. 

Now the important thing about psychical research is that it 
throws a revealing light upon ourselves, showing both our own 
limitations and those of the world we live in. It shows also that 
there is a very strong impulse in us to reject any hint of these 
limitations and to deny them stoutly. Any problem which presents 
itself to the mind must be potentially soluble by it: that is a basic 
axiom of instinct. But psychical research endorses the truth that 
our minds are limited and specialized; also that the universe 
extends indefinitely beyond our mental grasp. This basic fact 
sinks in only very slowly, not because it is complicated or difficult, 
but because it goes against the grain. 

The evidence for the physical phenomena 1 of psychical 
research, which appear to violate the laws of physics, is not as 
clear as one could wish. Some brief examples were given in 
chapters 24 and 25 in The Personality ofMan\ and we shall not 
here add to that evidence, for the object of this volume is not 
so much to put forward further evidence for the paranormal but 
to discuss its significance. The difficulty is that fraud has often 
been discovered in connection with these phenomena, and no 
examples of one phenomenon repeated over and over again can 
be obtained, as would be necessary if it were to be scientifically 
tested. 

In estimating the evidence for the physical phenomena of 
incdiumship, we should take tight hold of ourselves if we do not 
wish to be deceived; for we are between two fires. On the one 
hand there is the risk of being deceived by the medium, and on the 
other there is the risk of being deceived by an instinctive tendency 
of rejection within ourselves. We have, in fact, to balance on a 
knife-edge. We must use our critical faculty and demand good 
evidence, watching for every possibility of fraud; and at the same 
time we must restrain this critical faculty when it tends to explain 
reasonable evidence away. We must keep an equally sharp look- 
out on the phenomena and on ourselves. While keeping on our 

1 Poltergeist phenomena, telekensis, levitation, 'materialization', etc. Sec 
The Personality of Man, chapters 24 and 25. 



64 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

guard against every pitfall, we must at the same time remember 
that intellectual education forces upon us the conviction that 
everything that really happens must fit into a pattern that is 
intelligible to ourselves. 

The deep-seated urge in the mind acts curiously. If the 
evidence is strong, we may admit verbally that strange things do 
happen, while at the same time we deny them in our hearts. 
One often comes across this sort of thing, for example, in the 
case of some learned person who formally admits the evidence 
for telepathy, but immediately afterwards flies away from the 
subject and re-enters into his specialist groove. Having ad- 
mitted that telepathy takes place, he does not pounce on it as an 
outstanding discovery; he does not proceed to consider its sig- 
nificance for science or for philosophy, but leaves it entirely 
alone. He is being urged to do this by an unconscious instinct; 
and it is absolutely out of the question that he is occupying an 
impartial standpoint. 

The faculty called 'psychometry', which was described on 
pages 176-7 of The Personality of Man, also suggests that there may 
be properties of matter which our senses do not reveal. There is 
plenty of evidence that certain types of sensitives, by holding an 
object in the hand, can make true statements about those who have 
owned or previously touched it. But the evidence as a whole, and 
notably that collected by Dr. Eugene Osty, who was director 
of the Institut Metapsychique in Paris, does not point to the view 
that the information has been impressed on the matter of the 
object as we know it; for when once contact with the object has 
put the sensitive in touch with those who have previously 
handled it, the object itself can be destroyed without affecting 
the sensitive's power to continue to relate facts about these 
persons. 

This points to the view that matter possesses properties we 
neither see, feel, hear, taste or smell. In practical life this possibility 
does not occur to us (there is a good reason why it does not); 
but when we ask ourselves point blank whether it is likely that 
our senses show us all the properties of matter, free and unbiased 
reason answers that it is not. For the development of our senses 



THE PHYSICAL SIDE 65 

was carried out along wholly pragmatic lines to serve us in the 
exacting field of the struggle for existence. It is not likely that 
anything unhelpful to us in this struggle would have entered into 
our field of perception; on the contrary, it is probable that any 
perception not thoroughly utilitarian would have been blacked 
out by nature. We know that our eyes only respond to a short 
range of the spectrum set up by vibrations in the aether, while our 
ears respond only to a limited range of vibrations of the air. The 
possibility at once arises that matter may possess properties that 
do not create physical vibrations even beyond the infra-red or 
ultra-violet, or in the supersonic region of air-waves, and are not 
of a kind we call 'physical' at all. Mme. Morel was one of the best 
psychometric sensitives that Dr. Osty experimented with, though 
there were others who possessed the faculty in a remarkable 
degree. After much experience he summed up the conclusions 
indicated by his work as follows: (i) After the sensitive, by holding 
the object, has once achieved psychological connection, or rapport, 
with the contactor, the object may be destroyed without affecting 
the sensitive's power to give information about him. (2) The 
material of which the object is made does not make any difference. 
(3) If objects used in this way are allowed to touch one another, 
it does not make any difference. (4) The length of time during 
which the owner has possessed the object or made contact with it 
does not matter. (5) The lapse of time since the owner last 
touched the object does not matter. (6) When once the sensitive 
has entered into the life of the owner of the object, the whole of 
that life is accessible and not merely the portion of it during which 
he possessed the object. 1 

No. (i) shows that the information is not stamped on the 
physical properties of the object, which can be destroyed by fire 
or in any physical manner. Nos. (2) to (5) indicate that it is not 
the physical material of the object that comes into play. No. (6) 
suggests that the role of the object is to put the sensitive in 
touch with the owner or with someone who has touched it. 

The information may come directly from the person concerned 
by extra-sensory perception (including precognition). It is of 
1 The Personality of Man, pp. 176-7. 



66 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

course clear that the object itself plays an essential role in estab- 
lishing this extra-sensory relation. But the point is that it does not 
appear to establish this relation by means of the properties we 
call * physical ', but by means of some properties which are not 
apparent to the senses. Psychometry, in fact, points to the view 
that matter has further properties which are not of a spatial kind 
and are not perceptible to the human senses. 

It is difficult to overcome the pressure of the innate instincts 
in our minds which we have been discussing; but it is well worth 
while making an effort to do so. Let us take an illustration to 
help us. Think of a solid object, perhaps a cricket-ball. At first 
sight nothing could be more obvious than the self-contained 
completeness of the cricket-ball. The bowler holds it in his hand; 
we can see it from every side; all there is of it is surely contained 
within its visible boundary. But let us press the question whether 
there can be properties of the cricket-ball which we do not see, 
and which do not respond to our touch. How could there be? 
we are inclined to ask. Such properties, if outside its spherical 
boundary, would be streaming after it as it travels down the pitch. 
It is self-evident that the cricket-ball, as we see it, is a complete 
object. 

Yet, just at this point, there is a vital parting of the ways. 
It is here that Nature, or the adapted constitution of our minds, 
causes us to take something as axiomatic without knowing that we 
are doing so. Ordinary people do this: scientists, psychologists 
and even philosophers do it. Where is the boundary of the cricket- 
ball? Where is the boundary of our world? Do we set out to 
explore it in a state of mental freedom? Or are we mentally con- 
fined to a limited region? If you ask the astronomer, he will say 
that there is no boundary in the external universe beyond which 
we cannot explore in principle. The range of our senses is indeed 
limited; but we can supplement them by means of instruments, 
and there is no definite limit to the range of instrumentally 
assisted sense-perception. The physicist similarly sees no inherent 
boundary in the direction of the very small. He, too, can ap- 
parently carry exploration on indefinitely by means of new 
instruments and ingenious devices of inference. 



THE PHYSICAL SIDE 67 

The philosopher, in analysing the perceptual situation, starts 
with that situation as given by the senses. He clarifies and analyses 
it; he examines what happens when we make use of our sense- 
organs; but he does not step back a pace behind his starting point 
and examine what the instinctive level of the mind has taken for 
granted. The result of this is that what nature presents as the 
absolute starting point for all inquiry is not, in fact, the true 
starting point. Much more would be revealed if we were to go 
behind it. The world of space, time and matter is not the zero 
line; it is only made to appear to be so. By means of concurrent 
circumstances, of which our own constitution is foremost, the 
physical universe, as we see it, is made to appear to be the starting 
point and also the goal of all investigations it is given the specious 
appearance of being isolated and including all. Telescopes, micro- 
scopes and all other means of scientific inquiry add to knowledge 
only within the range that has been given this false appearance of 
being the all-in-all. 

Now the cricket-ball, like every other object, appears to be 
complete. We cannot imagine that it has properties that are not 
contained within its spherical boundary, and which trail about 
after it as it rushes about in space. But this is just where instinct 
controls our minds. The cricket-ball may have properties which 
do not exist in space and therefore do not trail about after it. 
It may have properties also which do not endure in time. Such 
properties would not be confined within the spherical boundary 
of the ball, nor wou. 1 d they exist in space outside that boundary. It 
requires disciplined reflection to enable us to grasp this, and in so 
doing to overcome the instinctive urge to deny the possible 
existence of such properties. But if we succeed in thinking in a 
balanced manner, the physical world, and indeed the universe 
as a whole, changes its perspective. We then see the physical 
world of space and time as no more than an abstracted aspect of 
the whole, which has been cleverly isolated by Nature. It has 
been given this appearance of isolation in order that finite beings 
with very limited minds should be able to live in it. The analyses 
and explorations of scientists and philosophers begin after the 
assumptions which Nature forces upon us have been made. 



68 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

As we have seen above, psychomctry points to the existence of 
properties of matter which are not detectable by physical means, 
and are not in themselves physical. The modern subject of psycho- 
somatics also points in the same direction. Even modern researches 
in physics suggest the same thing; for researches which attempt to 
discover the ultimate nature of matter lead to the discovery that 
the further matter is investigated the less like matter it becomes. 
In other words, what we call 'matter' is only a special aspect of 
something much greater than matter. Matter is not a complete 
entity, but a selection of properties from something that may pos- 
sess an indefinite number of further properties, many of them quite 
unlike the properties that we perceive. If this is the case, the problem 
of psycho-physical relations is quite altered; for mind and matter 
may be united behind the scenes, where matter has ceased to be 
matter-like and perhaps has properties of a partly mental kind. 
The lower, instinctive phases of mind, and what we call 'life', 
may also have properties which are closely assimilated to the un- 
detected properties of matter. In fact, the whole problem of 
mind and matter is entirely altered if we refuse to accept the 
illusion that both are self-contained entities as the sense-world 
presents them. 

The sordid phenomena of physical mediumship, despite the 
difficulty of securing good evidence for them, need not, on this 
view be regarded as a fantastic improbability. They would mean 
that the established laws of physics hold only in a certain region 
where the background-properties of matter do not interfere. But 
in the presence of an abnormal psycho-physical combination, 
these laws no longer hold. The region in which they hold has been 
temporarily invaded. 

The assumption that the external world embraces everything 
flies in the face of every probability; so that the first step we have 
to take in order to gain true knowledge is to realize our own 
situation. The probability that we are right in accepting the 
sense-world as the one and only starting point in an attempt to 
discover the nature of the universe is very slight. The boundary 
of our world is not to be found in seeking the limits of space 
or time; it lies in the limitations that have been imposed upon 



THE PHYSICAL SIDE 69 

ourselves. There is, in fact, no boundary to the universe. The 
properties of matter that we do not perceive are integral 
with those we do, but are rendered imperceptible and, in fact, 
obviously non-existent to us by the way in which our minds are 
constituted. 

The illustration of the cricket-ball shows the subtlety of the 
trap which Nature has laid for us. What could have been rendered 
more obvious than that the cricket-ball is a complete object? 
How can it possess unseen properties which render it continuous 
with everything? It can and probably does; but it must appear 
discontinuous if the world made up of objects like it is to be 
sufficiently simple for limited beings to live in. Separate entities, 
falling naturally into separate categories and having simple space 
and time relations with one another, form a suitable home for 
simple man and a prepared school for elementary thought. If the 
underlying continuity of everything were obvious, the world 
would not present clear-cut issues and all would be too difficult 
to comprehend. 

Matter in molar masses lends itself to the illusions of dis- 
continuity and self-completeness, which are a necessity for the 
mind of simple man; and the way in which his mind and senses 
were evolved force this illusion upon him with tremendous 
power. Even when the human intellect begins to form, these basic 
features of adaptation condition the growing mind. That is why 
there is a universal tendency to dismiss as rubbish evidence for 
anything at variance with what the senses reveal. 

When this situation is realized, we begin to see where the real 
boundary of our world lies. It is not in the abysses of space, 
nor can the theory of space-time reveal it, nor is it to be found 
in the ultra-microscopical world of protons and electrons. 
There is no boundary intrinsically existent in the universe. All is 
continuous ad infinitum; but the way we are ourselves constructed 
limits what we perceive and forces upon us the necessary illusion 
that we perceive the whole. Actually we perceive a very special 
and limited aspect of reality in a very special way. This should be 
the initial starting point of every science and of all philosophy; but 
it is not taken into account because it is unperceived. 



7O THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

Let us think over the situation. We can see what the human 
mind is doing. It is acting on an innate impulse to reject anything 
strange; for that which does not fit easily into the familiar world 
seems to it fantastic and bizarre. It does not adopt this attitude 
only towards the paranormal. Its attitude to the paranormal is 
merely one telling example of the way in which the mind is 
constructed. 



CHAPTER VI 

Our Mental Attitude in Science and Thought 

ONCE it is realized that the human mind was impregnated with 
invisible factors during its evolution, which prevent it from 
viewing everything from an impartial standpoint, its attitude 
towards the unexpected becomes a matter of supreme importance. 
On the level of practical thought, the mind thinks in accordance 
with the plan of its surroundings: but it is blind to its own 
specialized structure. If it were suggested to a scientific specialist 
that the structure of his mind prevents him from seeing the whole 
scope of things as they are, he would probably reply that this 
cannot be so or science would not have made the successful 
progress it has done. Its outstanding achievements, he would say, 
afford the clearest possible proof that all that human mind 
discovers is true. The answer to this is that the greater part of 
scientific success has been achieved in the practical field, where 
success results from the basic fact that the mind is an instrument 
previously adapted by nature to work in unison with its subject- 
matter. In the theoretical field, progress in discovery has also 
been made; but there the progress has been of a different kind 
from that in the practical field. For one hypothesis after another 
has been put forward, only to be discarded later on. This was 
because the hypotheses were founded partly on facts discovered' 
but not wholly understood and partly on the structure of the 
investigator's mind. The result has been that in the field of 
theoretical science, investigation does not reach finality as in the 
practical sphere, but goes on indefinitely; and as it goes on it 
becomes less and less intelligible. The mind and its structure is 
the central factor in this. 

The paranormal phenomena investigated by psychical research 
lie further outside the field which the mind is capable of exploring 
than does the subject-matter of other sciences; therefore the 
attitude which the human mind adopts towards the paranormal 

71 
6 



72 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

is of the highest interest and importance. Examples of this 
attitude were given in chapters 26 and 27 in The Personality of 
Man. 

When one considers how far-reaching and important the con- 
sequences of this paranormal evidence are, one immediately asks 
why every inquiring mind has not been filled with a desire to 
probe them to the limit. Evidence collected in psychical research 
points to a whole vista of highly significant things knowledge 
conveyed without the help of the senses; the future in some in- 
scrutable way open to human knowledge; depths of the sub- 
conscious which extend human personality indefinitely. Why does 
not even the barest hint of such things excite the interest of every 
intelligent person and fill him with an urge to explore? The 
evidence already collected is far more than a bare hint. For three 
quarters of a century evidence has been carefully collected and 
reinforced by experiment; yet the reaction to it is not an eager 
desire to carry the work further and learn all that can be learnt 
from it. Such interest as there is is casual and the majority tend 
to explain the evidence away rather than to augment it. There is 
not the slightest tendency to regard it as a foundation on which to 
build some of the most important products of human knowledge. 
Extra-sensory perception illuminates in two directions. It 
shows that the human being transcends its everyday consciousness 
very widely; and it shows also that the universe extends beyond 
the space-time framework, which is open to the senses. It thus 
provides two fundamental starting points for discovering more 
about the universe and about ourselves. Why does not this 
opportunity raise tremendous enthusiasm in the mind of every 
pure scientist and of every philosopher and, indeed, in the mind of 
anyone who thinks at all? These two points are very relevant to 
many branches of science and to a host of philosophical problems. 
We cannot explain this lack of enthusiasm by saying that the 
evidence for the paranormal is too poor to merit serious attention; 
for that is certainly not the case. The Proceedings and Journal 
of the Society for Psychical Research, as well as the literature of 
certain other bodies, are full of evidence that has been collected 
with the utmost care. Besides, the evidence that reached the 



OUR MENTAL ATTITUDE IN SCIENCE AND THOUGHT 73 

standard needed for publication there are files full of interesting 
cases that have never seen the light because the evidence was 
regarded as not being fully up to standard. The unenthusiastic 
behaviour of those who belittle the paranormal is not the result 
of the quality of the evidence; for, even if the evidence were in 
fact poor, the rational thing to do would be to spend effort in 
improving it. Reflection on this strange situation inevitably fixes 
the inquirer's attention on the minds of the critics. It is there that 
the root of the paranormal problem lies and possibly the root of 
other problems as well. Something is obviously influencing their 
minds without their knowing it. What is that 'something'? A very 
illuminating fact about the attitude of those who reject or ignore 
evidence for the paranormal is that they are perfectly logical and 
rational about matters in ordinary life and in the departments in 
which they are specialists; but they become vague and irrational 
when confronted with the paranormal. They do not weigh the 
evidence in a balanced manner, but shape their arguments so as to 
explain it away. Innuendo, suggestion and hints as to what may 
have happened take the place of an even judgement on what did 
happen. Concrete work with positive results is not accepted as 
conclusive evidence. Some minor flaw which does not affect the 
work as a whole or some derogatory incident in the life of the 
experimenter will be inflated and turned by innuendo into a sug- 
gestion that something is wrong with the work somewhere. 

The critic who adopts this procedure with the paranormal 
would not dream o c applying it to anything normal. If he did, he 
would be ridiculed and ignored; but it is regarded as rational to 
treat the paranormal as a kind of joke. The scientific methods 
employing impartial judgement and close observation are treated 
as being applicable only to what is called the 'normal': they are 
not treated as being applicable universally. 

Three instances were quoted on page 24.1 of The Personality of 
Man in which it was said that the scientific method when used in 
psychical research is 'trying to prove' something. Also on page 237 
Dr. Ivor L. Tuckett was quoted as saying: 'We know that the 
Society for Psychical Research was founded in order to establish 
the existence of telepathy. Therefore it is fair to consider that those 



74 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

early members of the Society for Psychical Research were biased 
in favour of telepathy/ 

People do not adopt this attitude with regard to research into 
the normal. When astronomers look through a powerful telescope 
and discover a new star, no one says that they are 'trying to 
prove' that a new star exists. It is the structure of the human mind 
which behaves differently in the field of so-called rational thought 
according to the asstmptions with which it starts. In a passage quoted on 
page 232 of The Personality of Man, Professor Jastrow, faced with 
the evidence for telepathy, piles up a grotesque conglomeration of 
normal factors in order to explain telepathy away. But all this is 
abstract and generalized; he does not attempt to show how these 
factors apply to actual facts. On page 238 it was pointed out that 
Dr. J. E. Coover and Professor L. T. Troland had carried out 
quantitative experiments in extra-sensory perception and reported 
that their results showed nothing but chance. A re-examination 
of their figures showed that the odds against chance reached some 
thousands to one. What is so interesting about this is that it was 
not a deliberate falsification of results, but the subconscious 
conviction in their minds that the paranormal could not exist 
caused them unconsciously to deflect their mathematical technique 
so that it would support their foregone conclusion. 

These are only a few examples of the reaction which evidence 
for the paranormal produces on the human mind. It can be seen 
at once that if such a reaction exists (and the evidence for it is 
overwhelming) a shaft of light is thrown on a factor of paramount 
importance. Reason, on the intellectual level, can be deflected by 
innate convictions which are deeply rooted in the mind but which 
remain hidden beneath the surface. Immediately the question 
arises as to whether this is confined to the field of the paranormal 
or whether it operates in other fields as well. Is it not possible that 
this factor is universally operative, playing a part in the world's 
perennial troubles? Could not truly balanced reason always avoid 
war by making negotiations of a sensible kind? But war has gone 
on throughout history because balanced reason is the possession 
only of a few. What is it, then, which unbalances it? The intellect 
is not an immaculate factor of the self, seated above the arena of 



OUR MENTAL ATTITUDE IN SCIENCE AND THOUGHT 75 

strife. It is down in the world of turmoil, assailed by animal 
instinct from below though also raised by intuition from above. 

This throws a new light on the common attitude to the para- 
normal; for it is not confined to the paranormal; its basis is far wider. 
The human mind tends to reject anything that removes it from its 
instinctive outlook. This is worthy of deep consideration. Why, 
if there is a psychological urge to reject evidence for anything 
unfamiliar, has it not been recognized by psychologists as one of 
the fundamental characteristics of mind? Such an urge must be 
based on instinct which is inherited from our animal predecessors 
in the beginning; but later incorporated into human mentality 
where unobtrusively it deflects reason in predetermined directions. 
It is a racial characteristic, whereas psychology for the most part 
deals with individual tendencies and complexes and has practical 
rather than exploratory ends in view. At first sight it might appear 
that the indoctrination of reason by instinct would be obvious or 
would at any rate be revealed by critical analysis of the human 
being. But would it, if the tendency were universally installed in 
everyone? For the conditioning factor would be at work in the 
critic's mind as well as in the subject of his criticism. 

One important point about instinctive reactions is that we 
respond to them unconsciously. The mind impelled by instinct 
would be convinced by that instinct that it was behaving in a per- 
fectly balanced manner, while all the time it was being swayed by 
a subjective influence leading it to a foregone conclusion. Only by 
rising to the intuitive level could the deflecting instinct be de- 
tected. The mind, on the intellectual level, unaware of its hidden 
controls, can evolve close arguments with a high degree of clever- 
ness, which seem to it to be perfectly balanced while they are not; 
but a single flash of intuition can show that all this reasoning is out 
of perspective. 

But there is another objection to the view that the paranormal 
is rejected because unperceived instinct is urging us to reject it. The 
attitude of nonchalance and the tendency to ignore the findings 
of psychical research and to explain them away does not apply 
to everyone. There has always been a minority which recognized 
their value. This, however, does not prove that to accept or to 



76 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

reject the paranormal is a purely individual matter. A racial 
tendency to reject it is present in all; a few individuals have 
succeeded in rising to a level of awareness sufficiently high to 
enable them to overcome this racial tendency. This mastering of 
the universal tendency of the mind in varying degrees by in- 
dividual illumination or awareness accounts for the differing 
attitudes of people towards the subject. But underneath these 
attitudes lies the universal structure of the mind, present in all. 

A number of people, notably those who call themselves 
Spiritualists, accept the paranormal with readiness, or at least 
appear to do so. This fact will naturally lead to the objection that 
the supposed racial instinct cannot exist because it is not universal. 
In Spiritualists, it would be said, it is obviously lacking. But is it? 
It is worth while to look into this a little more closely. A basic and 
unconscious resistance to the paranormal has more than one way 
of dealing with the evidence. The first and most usual way is to 
turn away from it and ignore it. The second way (when the evi- 
dence becomes strong) is to pick holes in it and explain it away 
by specious arguments. But there is a third method. That which is 
unacceptable to the mind because it does not fit in with the normal 
can be rendered acceptable by drawing it into the field of the normal. 
This is precisely what Spiritualists do, if we may speak of them in 
general terms without going into their differences. If a communi- 
cator through a medium can be thought of as a person little 
changed from what he was in this world, using the medium as a 
psychic telephone, and if he is conceived of as existing in a world 
similar in principle to this one, then the instinct which urges 
mankind to accept the physical universe as the whole is not affron- 
ted any more than it would be by the discovery of a new 
continent. 

An extraordinary compromise is effected by the mind which 
lies between the impact of instinct from below and intuition from 
above. While intuition causes the mind to be aware that reality 
extends beyond the sphere of the visible and makes it plain that 
there is a spiritual world and a genuine basis for religion, instinct 
draws this intuitive awareness into its own physical purview and 
turns the soul into a somatic conception and the continuation of 



OUR MENTAL ATTITUDE IN SCIENCE AND THOUGHT 77 

reality into a physical heaven and hell. If we desire to make real 
progress in this world, we must do our utmost to rise above the 
grip of instinct and to grasp the light of intuition. Also the whole 
conception of the advance of knowledge as presented by science 
becomes altered when we rise up and realize that the scientific 
mind is to a high degree specialized and fitted to deal only with 
one special corner of reality. 



CHAPTER VII 

//ow Improbable is the Paranormal ? 

Is it possible to adopt a standpoint of real detachment and to 
decide how improbable the paranormal really is? It should be 
possible when once we are aware that deflecting instincts are at 
work within us and can be on the look-out for tendencies which 
rise up in us and try to explain things away. 

Besides the modern and strictly scientific evidence for extra- 
sensory perception, there is, as has been mentioned above, the 
evidence of carefully conducted sittings with mediums; also of 
recorded automatic speech and writing; there is evidence of 
psychometry, in which contact with an object brings to the 
sensitive knowledge about its owner, or others who have 
touched it; there is the evidence for strange physical happenings 
in the presence of entranced mediums. And besides all this 
there is the very significant fact that throughout the history 
of the world there has been a belief in magic and divination; 
and the practice of astrology goes back four thousand years or 
more. 

Brushing aside the subtle instinct which tells us that all these 
things are merely the outcome of superstition, let us ask how 
improbable they really are. A perfectly rational standpoint to 
adopt is to demand that, before one can accept evidence for any 
alleged fact, the strength of the evidence must be proportional 
to the improbability of the alleged fact. The key-question is, then: 
How improbable is the paranormal? 

We are on firm ground so long as we are dealing with the 
physical world: we know its laws from generations of experience: 
science has examined these laws and analysed them. During the 
past three centuries it has confirmed them by means of countless 
experiments. It seems to us extremely unlikely that anything 
should break into or disrupt laws that keep on working so per- 
sistently and have been so clearly verified. 

78 



HOW IMPROBABLE IS THE PARANORMAL? 79 

But does the paranormal involve the disruption of physical 
laws? At first sight it appears to do so. If a table can rise from the 
floor when no perceptible force is lifting it, if solid matter can 
pass through matter as is alleged to happen in stances of the 
physical type, if an object can convey information by touch, 
if the future can be known when it is impossible to infer it 
rationally all these things seem flatly to disagree with the 
established laws of science. 

Yet a crucial question arises here. Do these things, if it be 
granted that they occur, disrupt the established laws of our world; 
or do they merely indicate that these laws hold only within 
a limited area? Do we know how far the laws of the physical 
universe extend? We have to remember that the region of the 
real which lies open to our bodily senses is limited to that which is 
essential for life in the body. In that life we have to react with 
inanimate matter and with other forms of incarnate life. The 
limited character of the region that is open to our perception is 
concealed from the mind so that we regard what we see and 
perceive as the whole universe: we are prompted by an innate 
impulse to do so. 

This is well worth thinking over. The world in which we live 
our daily lives is, in fact, in no way partitioned off or segregated 
from the universe as a whole. One thing after another indicates 
that it is continuous with the universe as a whole just as con- 
tinuous as is the whole surface of the globe beyond the horizon. 
But it would nevei do to allow this continuity to be visible to the 
practical mind; therefore when we were evolved in mind as well 
as in body to be thoroughly fitted to this material world we were 
so constructed that the continuity of extension of the world was 
rendered invisible. It was absolutely essential for practical effi- 
ciency that the scene of our life and action should be made to 
appear to us to be self-sufficient and all-inclusive and not con- 
tinuous with reaches of reality which fade away beyond our 
mental grasp. This was achieved by adapting our bodies and our 
minds, and by blending them together with subtle efficiency. 

If the laws of what we call the physical universe are not uni- 
versal in their scope, then there is no reason whatever why laws 



80 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

of quite a different kind should not exist beyond them: and if that 
is the case, why should not these laws that we do not know 
interpenetrate into the fringe along with those we do know and 
cause occasional modifications in them? 

This question, therefore, is fundamental: Why is it unlikely 
that strange and incomprehensible things should happen from 
time to time? If we try to consider this question with rational 
detachment, thrusting aside the enslaving control of assumptions 
prompted by instinct, which endeavour to persuade us that any- 
thing to which we are unaccustomed is impossible, the matter 
comes down to this. If any strange thing, alleged to occur in the 
field of the paranormal, does occur, is its origin within the world 
we know? 

If we are in fact dealing, in everyday life and in science, with a 
world that contains everything, then it is impossible that this 
world could be influenced by anything from outside; for there is 
nothing outside it. Everything that occurs in the cosmos must have 
its cause in the world we know. If any strange and inexplicable 
events were alleged to occur, we should be justified in refusing 
to accept the evidence for them. We should be right in asserting 
that everything that could possibly happen would be of an order 
known to us. If we were absolutely sure of this premise, we should 
be quite justified in refusing to accept even the most telling evi- 
dence for the paranormal. 

But if the case is different and the region of reality open to 
our senses (which we call the 'universe', thus asserting its all- 
inclusiveness) is related to further regions of reality with which we 
are not acquainted, we should not have the slightest justification in 
rejecting evidence for strange happenings originating beyond the 
scope of our senses and producing effects which sometimes came 
within that scope. However bizarre events belonging to the para- 
normal might seem to us, we should have no rational ground for 
rejecting them or even for regarding them as improbable. 

The whole question of whether or not the paranormal is 
improbable rests on whether the world with which we are ac- 
quainted embraces everything that exists and on whether its 
principles, which we know, apply universally and include every 



HOW IMPROBABLE IS THE PARANORMAL? 8l 

principle there is. The sceptic who tries to explain away sound 
evidence for the paranormal is urged to do so by this innate con- 
viction that the world he is acquainted with embraces everything; 
and therefore for him the improbability of the paranormal is 
practically infinite. He does not state this conviction: he acts upon 
it without being consciously aware that he holds it. The cause of 
his conviction is quite obviously non-rational, although he prob- 
ably calls himself a 'rationalist'. It arises from an instinctive urge 
inserted into the human mind during its evolution. It is worth 
while reiterating the true nature of the human being to which 
all paranormal evidence points; and also its situation, until we 
have fully grasped them. 

It was pointed out at the end of chapter II that psychical 
research is of great importance because it brings to light two 
salient facts, which are new to the modern outlook, but by no 
means new to ancient thought. One is that human beings extend 
far beyond the limits of the embodied self: the other is that the 
universe extends far beyond the limits of space and time. Every- 
thing points to the view that the happenings we call 'paranormal' 
originate beyond our everyday world and show through into it 
in a piece-meal and partial fashion. If we take all the evidence into 
account, telepathy is seen not to be the transference of an idea 
from one brain to another through space; clairvoyance not to be 
an extra-sensory perception of the spatial characteristics of matter; 
prccognition not to be a leap forward along the dimension of 
time; mediumistic Communications to be no more than a forcing 
of terrestrialized information through the bottle-neck of the 
incarnate mind. If we admit the laws of physics and the properties 
of matter as revealed by science and the senses to be partial, 
then the things that happen at sittings with physical mediums 
could well be no more than an intrusion of other laws and further 
characteristics outside the scope of our world but manifesting 
themselves occasionally within it. Indeed, what we call 'matter' 
may well be, not a self-complete and self-contained entity, 
but no more than a selection of practically useful characteristics 
of something that is far more pervasive; and perhaps ultimately 
at one with the infinite. Briefly, the evidence suggests that what is 



82 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

called the 'paranormal' consists of no more than sporadic in- 
filtration of laws and properties which originate outside the world 
we know. 

This brings us always back to the same question: Does the 
universe of space and time that our senses reveal include every- 
thing? Does it extend beyond these limits, perhaps neither in 
space nor in time? A subtly hidden impulse in ourselves which 
works upon us like a hypnotic suggestion, tries to persuade us that 
such an idea is nonsense and that there can be nothing beyond the 
space-time universe. Obviously, it whispers to us, space and time 
are the framework within which lies the whole of reality; what 
more can there be? And we meekly yield to this impulse. We do 
so by our actions; we make the spatio-temporal world our 
starting-point; that is to say, we take it for granted as the axio- 
matic beginning for every inquiry without asking any questions 
about it. Instinct jockeys us into it before we begin to act or to 
think at all: science and philosophy begin their inquiries after 
accepting these instinctive takings-for-granted. When we do this 
we unconsciously yield to a suggestion so deeply ingrained in the 
mind that it always succeeds in evading conscious criticism. 
Consequently we start to investigate the world always a step too 
late. 

The illustration of the cricket-ball in chapter V shows how 
'obvious' is the self-completeness of matter as perceived by the 
senses the extraordinarily subtle device by means of which our 
world is made to appear all-inclusive: and this is forced upon us 
as axiomatic. The entire doctrine of Materialism arises from this 
instinctive acceptance instilled into us by nature in order to render 
us practically efficient in action. It is indeed useful in practice; but 
it is a complete illusion. Its subtlety gives it the false appearance of 
being based on reason while in reality it is based on a self-concealed 
impulse. 

The study of psychical research, for those who can undertake 
it without bias, can lead to a discovery of the greatest importance, 
for it can act as the key to the situation in which we human beings 
are placed. The ordinary man has no idea that his intellectual range 
of thought, together with the range of his senses, are confined to 



HOW fMPROBABLE IS THE PARANORMAL? 8j 

a tiny fragment of the universe; and that even within this fragment 
they are specialized through and through so that they present the 
fragment in a special way. That reality, untouched and unknown, 
surrounds him on every side, is a fact which his mind can only 
very slowly come to realize. 

The key-question about the evidence for paranormal happen- 
ings is, then, this. How improbable are they? There is a clear and 
definite answer to this question; but few people are capable of 
attaining it, for few can view the world from an impartial 
standpoint. The answer which the vast majority of people accept 
arises from the non-rational factors with which their minds are 
filled. 



CHAPTER VIII 

The Occult 

THE age-old belief in magic and the occult arouses light-hearted 
scepticism and often derisive criticism. An almost irresistible 
impulse urges us to put down the whole of the occult to super- 
stition. But if we are able to deal with the voice within us that 
urges this in a critical manner, we can ask how improbable on 
strictly rational grounds the alleged facts of magical phenomena 
and the occult really are. Are they, in fact, improbable? Curiously 
enough modern investigations called 'psycho-somatic' are be- 
ginning to invade this ancient territory. Both the old magician 
and the modern psychosomatistician take seriously the view that a 
drop of blood, if treated in a certain way, can yield information 
about its owner. The modern mind reacts against anything of this 
kind, objecting that it is impossible; for a drop of blood, as we 
conceive it to-day, consists solely of a complex group of molecules 
existing in space. This is where we come to the point. The modern 
mind assumes that blood possesses only properties detectable by 
the human senses assisted by scientific methods that is to say, 
blood exists wholly in the spatio-temporal world. But how do we 
know that a drop of blood has no properties lying beyond the 
reach of our senses? Reflection shows that we do not; but we 
assume it because something innate within us urges us to reject 
everything that our senses do not reveal. When we laugh at the 
idea of magic and dismiss it as superstition, it is not rational 
thought that urges us to do so but something innately fixed in our 
adapted nature. We claim that the objective knowledge gained 
by science shows us the whole truth; but that is a pure assumption. 
There is not the slightest reason why matter should not have all 
kinds of properties which our senses do not reveal; in fact, pro- 
bability is in favour of its having them. Our senses are obviously 
not universal in their scope. Neither are our minds because they 
too have been indoctrinated so as to make the world appear much 

84 



THE OCCULT 85 

simpler than it is. Therefore there is likely to be a great deal that 
we do not perceive. 

If we look at the matter from a rational and not from an 
instinctive point of view, there is nothing improbable about 
magic or the occult or the paranormal. Take astrology as an 
example. This has been studied for at least four thousand years 
by persons who to-day are looked upon as pre-scientific ignor- 
amuses. Our assumption is that throughout this vast period 
they merely exercised their imagination and never obtained any 
results that would justify them in continuing the study. What 
moon-struck idiots they must have been! Is astrology improbable 
fron the rational standpoint? The answer 'Yes' is based on the 
assumption that the principle of causality which runs through the 
physical world we know extends throughout the entire universe. 
According to astrology, the positions of heavenly bodies as seen 
from the earth are correlated with the lives and characteristics 
of human beings. Nothing could seem more absurd when seen 
from the causal standpoint. But suppose that, besides or beyond the 
causal principle there is a pattern running through things in which 
sequences of events are related to one another without being 
causally connected. This strikes us as absurd. Why should one 
chain of events be correlated with another unless there is something 
to account for it? The simple answer is that there may be all 
kinds of things in the universe that we do not understand; prob- 
ability is strongly in favour of this, but our minds are so constituted 
that we reject it because we are basically urged to accept what we 
perceive as the whole. This assumption is purely subjective; but 
that is the last thing we realize. 

Thus, it is probable that magic, astrology and the occult in 
general are signs of an existing pattern in the universe beyond 
the range of sense-perception and beyond the compass of the mind 
which is adapted to it. This pattern can show through into the 
world we know. It is at this very point at which the subjective 
factor in us pulls down the shutter that the extension of the uni- 
verse begins. It does not follow, however, that the entire universe 
beyond the scope of our senses has the character of what we call 
the 'occult'. That may be only one section of it. Many other things, 



86 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

far higher in their nature and even more incomprehensible to our 
present minds, can exist beyond these marginal phenomena. In 
fact, the point to grasp is that the whole universe, inconceivably 
vast and, in fact, infinite is continuous with the portion we know. 
Once we endeavour to leave that portion, we leave the area 
to which we are adapted behind and at once we are out of our 
depth and we behave as if we had entered on enchanted ground. 

As long ago as 1896, William James, in his presidential address 
to the Society for Psychical Research, made with great insight the 
following comments: 'Science, taken in its essence, should stand 
only for a method, and not for any special beliefs, yet, as habi- 
tually taken by its votaries, Science has come to be identified with 
a certain fixed general belief, the belief that the deeper order of 
Nature is mechanical exclusively, and that non-mechanical 
categories are irrational ways of conceiving and explaining even 
such things as human life.' 

Owing to the advance in Physics since 1896, mechanical ex- 
planations have become somewhat outmoded; but if we substitute 
'mathematical' for 'mechanical', the above statement is still 
substantially true. 

With regard to our modern mental perspective, William James 
says: 'But our own Proceedings and Journals have, it seems to me, 
conclusively proved one thing to the candid reader, and that is 
that the verdict of pure insanity, of gratuitous preference for 
error, of superstition without an excuse, which the scientists 
of our day are led by their intellectual training to pronounce upon 
the entire thought of the past, is a most shallow verdict. . . . 
When from our present advanced standpoint we look back upon 
the past stages of human thought, we are amazed that a Universe 
which appears to be of so vast and mysterious a complication 
should ever have seemed to anyone so little and a plain thing. 
Whether it be Descartes' world or Newton's; whether it be that 
of the Materialists of the last century or that of the Bridgewater 
treatises of our own; it always looks the same to us incredibly 
perspectiveless and short.' 

William James was a man of insight. He saw through the con- 
viction which science had spread so widely in his day and which 



THE OCCULT 87 

still persists in our own the conviction that it is providing us 
with an outline picture of the entire universe. What lies within 
the range of our restricted senses, and still more what lies within 
the range of our specialized intellect, is indeed 'perspectiveless 
and short'! While science is genuinely unfolding one particular 
corner of the universe, it has succumbed to the great illusion that 
it is unfolding the whole. At the bottom of this illusion lies the 
adapted nature of the human being and the fact that its adaptation 
is hidden from its own consciousness. 

A very telling illustration of this was once brought out in a 
short story by H. G. Wells, entitled The Country of the Blind. 
This story reflects human nature as in a mirror, showing how it 
reacts to evidence that proves the universe to extend far beyond 
the known world and that proves also the existence of things 
that differ widely from those to which we are accustomed. 

This story tells how in the wilds of the Andes in Ecuador a 
fertile valley had for generations been cut off from the rest of the 
world by a gigantic landslide, which blocked the only means of 
approach from the outer world. The inhabitants of this valley 
managed to support themselves by what they grew; but as time 
went on a disease developed among them, which produced 
gradual blindness. As their sight faded generation by generation, 
their sense of hearing, touch and scent became intensely acute, 
so that they still succeeded in carrying on the tasks of daily life. 
They constructed paved paths across their fields, which were 
numbered by notches; and by means of these they found their 
way without difficulty to any point in their territory. 

One day a mountaineer named Nunez from the country near 
Quito acted as a guide to a party of Englishmen who were climb- 
ing the Andes. Suddenly Nunez disappeared. He had slipped and 
fallen down the vast slopes on the eastern side of the mountains 
and was precipitated down hundreds of feet of steep snow-slopes 
until finally he found himself in the fertile valley of the blind. 
Bewildered at first, he after a time gained confidence and began to 
explore the valley. He found huts were windowless and built with 
patchy walls of odd colours; and then, meeting some of the 
inhabitants, he realized that they were blind. In order to keep up 
7 



88 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

his courage in this strange environment, he kept on repeating to 
himself: In the country of the blind the one-eyed man is king! 
But as time went on he found that this was not the case. 

The blind inhabitants were not unfriendly, but the enormous 
advantage of his sight was not recognized by them. In fact, 
they treated him as an oddity. He explained to them as best he 
could that he possessed the sense of sight; but they replied that this 
word did not mean anything, and they asked him where he had 
come from. Obviously to them he came from the fringe of the 
world, somewhere beyond the rocks which bounded it: for the 
blind believed that their valley embraced the whole realm of 
existence. There was nothing beyond it: how could there be? 

Nunez tried to convince them that he could see all kinds of 
things around him, and in his explanation he argued desperately: 
but in his excitement he stumbled over a bucket that one of them 
had put down and this convinced them of the poor quality of his 
senses; for they themselves controlled their movements with the 
greatest precision. 'He is but newly formed', said one of them. 
'He stumbles as he walks and mingles words that mean nothing 
with his speech/ 

They took him to a conference in one of their houses to 
consider what his future status should be among them.The room 
was windowless and dark and Nunez stumbled over his com- 
panions. This confirmed the blind men in their opinion that he was 
abnormal and elementary. In no way could Nunez convey to them 
the nature of sight or convince them of its existence. Their whole 
conception of things was a product of their own sensory capacities, 
and nothing that he said to them did anything to change or 
enlarge it. 'Blind men of genius had arisen among them and had 
questioned the shreds of belief and tradition they had brought 
with them from their seeing days and had dismissed them all as 
idle fancies/ Nunez tried to convince them that they were not idle 
fancies but real. 'He spoke of the beauties of sight, of watching 
the mountains, of the sky and the sunrise, and they heard him with 
amused incredulity; but presently became condemnatory. They 
told him there were indeed no mountains at all but that the end of 
the rock where the llamas grazed was indeed the end of the world; 



THE OCCULT 89 

thence sprang a cavernous roof over the universe, from which the 
dew and the avalanches fell; and when he maintained stoutly that 
the world had neither end nor roof such as they supposed, they 
said his thoughts were wicked/ 

At last one of the ablest members of the blind community 
thought of a way in which the abnormalities of Nunez might be 
cured. There is something affecting his brain, he said. When 
the others asked what it was he replied that it was undoubtedly 
the queer things called eyes those soft depressions in the face. 
In the case of Nunez, he said, they are diseased: they are dis- 
tended and the eyelids move and this causes constant irritation to 
the brain. But a simple surgical operation could remove these 
irritant bodies and Nunez would then become sane. 

The wise man was universally applauded. 'Thank heaven for 
science', said one of the company. They told Nunez of the good 
fortune that was coming to him by means of the relieving opera- 
tion. Steeped in gloom, he went out to take a last look at the 
beauties of nature with which he was surrounded. There was the 
sunshine, the blue sky and the glory of the everlasting snow. 
Suddenly he made up his mind and, turning his face to the moun- 
tains, he began to climb. 

What an allegory this story is! It reflects the human race 
as in a mirror. Our whole conception of the universe is deter- 
mined as strictly as that of the blind people by our own characteris- 
tics, perceptions and limitations. Any evidence of more beyond 
those limits is rejected and explained away just as the blind 
people explained away evidence of an extended world beyond the 
rocky boundary of their valley. Anyone with a high faculty of 
intuition or mystical insight is dismissed as morbid just as Nunez 
was on account of his sight. Nunez's descriptions of the mountains 
that they could not see were treated as a fairy-tale because there 
was an innate conviction that forced upon them the conclusion 
that what they could experience was all. They thought of the sky 
as a smooth surface of rock because the end of all things must be 
something potentially accessible to the sense of touch. We do 
exactly the same when we look for the confines of the universe 
in that which appeals to the sense of sight the depths of space 



9O THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

explored by astronomy. It is important to note that it was not 
lack of evidence that made them refuse to believe that Nunez 
could see. The evidence was there, but they twisted it till they 
made it conform to their preconceived notions. That is just 
what we do. It is pure illusion to imagine that we can extend a 
balanced and poised mind to anything beyond the range of our 
senses. We force facts obtained by scientific methods to fit 
in with our common-sense outlook despite its obvious limitations, 
and only very gradually, as facts accumulate, does the scientific 
outlook become enlarged and force itself a little further away 
from that of common sense. Only with extreme slowness does it 
dawn upon us that our ordinary outlook is narrow, specialized 
and founded on our own mental and physical constitution. The 
current view about the nature of mind is a case in point. The 
brain is assumed to embrace the causes of the mind because the 
brain is accessible to our senses and therefore a field for ex- 
periment. Mind must be a function of brain, or at least in some 
way brain-dependent in its origin. If not, it would be isolable 
by experiment and detectable as a separate entity. This is the 
type of reasoning pressed upon us by the adapted nature of our 
minds which urges us to accept as obvious that the world of the 
senses contains the causes of everything and that anything which 
exists at all must be accessible and intelligible to us. It is the 
same kind of reasoning that the blind folk used to discredit 
the assertions of Nunez. They could not believe that there were 
things in principle perceptible far beyond the range of their 
limited senses of hearing and touch. If such things were there 
at all, they must be capable of being heard or felt. Telepathy 
and extra-sensory perception show that the mind can work in 
independence of the brain; but this evidence is brushed aside 
because it does not fit in with the general sense-picture necessary 
for practical life. 

All this shows how much that we believe to be impartially 
rational we accept on unconscious impulse and afterwards use as 
the premises of reason. It throws a vivid light on the fundamental 
irrationality which underlies the doctrine called 'Rationalism'. 
Once we have realized that many things do pass beyond our 



THE OCCULT pi 

powers of comprehension, it is vitally important that we should 
free our minds sufficiently to see clearly where this happens. 
If the apparent all-inclusiveness and self-completeness of the 
sensible world is realized to be an unconscious assumption of our 
own, the whole universe begins to fall into true perspective. This 
realization is the essential starting point from which to begin any 
exploration of reality which is to lead to truth. The flat, per- 
spectiveless picture which is produced by science then becomes 
three-dimensional; and only in this way can we truly understand 
what science is, what it is doing, what are its limitations and 
how much subjectivity it unconsciously includes. In fact, when 
it has been realized that our mental adaptation to our world is 
a fact and some glimpse of the vast consequences of this adaptation 
has been achieved, our entire conception of man and the universe 
is changed. At present, our world is like the lighted stage of a 
theatre, which rivets all attention upon itself and dismisses all 
thoughts of what lies beyond. 

A very instructive thing to note is that the blind men could 
not believe that the world extended beyond the rocky confines of 
their valley. The distant mountains and cities of which Nunez 
tried to convince them were dismissed as rubbish; and we do 
exactly the same kind of thing. If we look into it impartially 
we can see the reason for it; for success and whole-hearted con- 
fidence in everyday life depends on complete absorption in the 
world in which we have to act; there must be nothing to dis- 
tract us from it or "o give rise to disturbing arrtire pensees. This 
could only be achieved by making it appear obvious that this 
visible world includes everything. All must be clear-cut and self- 
complete. But merely to have this idea is not enough: it has to be 
forcibly embedded in the mind by the power of instinct, acting in 
a way similar to hypnotic suggestion. This mental fixation not 
only operates in practical life; it rises upwards and permeates the 
intellect, deeply influencing science and philosophy. 

Certain objections to the view that the tendency to reject the 
paranormal arises from primitive instinct are likely to be raised. 
One of these is that primitive man was presumably to a very 
large extent swayed by instinct; yet he accepted the paranormal 



92 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

more readily than we do. If instinct was urging him to accept the 
physical world about him as the all-in-all, how did his ready 
acceptance of the spirit world come about? But primitive man, 
as we know him from the records, was really man and had risen 
far above the animals. As man he therefore possessed the spectrum- 
like mind which we possess: that is to say, his mind, like ours, lay 
at the meeting point of instinct acting from below and intuition 
acting from above. He was under the influence of both; and 
perhaps in a way he was more open to intuition than we are: for 
intellectualized society has the effect of damping intuition down. 
We should probably have to go back half a million years or 
so to find man so near the animal world that he could not be 
influenced by intuition. 



CHAPTER IX 

Normal and Paranormal are One 

THE most fundamental fact to grasp about things called 'para- 
normal' is that they are not a segregated class of phenomena 
they are not isolated or existing alone, but arise from faculties 
which are universally present in mankind. It is true that they 
emerge in different degrees in different individuals; but, under the 
surface, they are part of the universal structure of all human 
beings. We regard them askance because they reveal things which 
do not wholly fit into this world; and we do not grasp the central 
fact that this world is no more than a tiny speck in the whole of 
reality. The apparent queerness of the things that filter through 
from beyond the confines of the ordinary world is not intrinsic 
queerness; it is solely relative, and seems queer to us only from our 
special point of view. Anything quite different from the things 
we are accustomed to is bound to seem queer and incredible to 
us. It is strictly irrational to reject evidence for anything because 
it seems queer; for the most unlikely thing from a truly rational 
standpoint is that the things we are accustomed to include the 
whole of the universe. Paranormal faculties and paranormal 
phenomena cannot be ignored if we wish to form a true notion 
of what man really is, for these are key-phenomena from the point 
of view of giving useful information. The study of the paranormal 
should be regarded as an attempt to gain a truly balanced picture 
of the human being and not as a ridiculous study of queer oddities, 
existing (if at all) apart from the things that matter in a little 
province of their own. By ignoring the paranormal we are in fact 
building a selective and not a truly comprehensive picture of 
ourselves. 

The object of the present little book is to estimate the sig- 
nificance of the paranormal, of which examples were given in 
The Personality of Man. The attempt to do this has inevitably 
carried us into a larger field and involved our entire outlook on the 

93 



94 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

universe. It is because the human mind is specially adapted to its 
world that it concentrates its attention like a search-light on that 
world and refuses to recognize it as being a parochial fringe of 
reality. Paranormal faculties and paranormal phenomena are just 
as 'normal' from the larger point of view as are the everyday 
faculties and phenomena we call normal; but these faculties 
belong to outlying regions of the self as it appears in this world 
and they act into this world more or less sporadically. The exis- 
tence of the paranormal points to a further reach of selfhood 
beyond the self of daily life and to an extension of the universe 
beyond the reach of science. 

The great value of psychical research is that it has begun to 
put perspective into the universe and to show us that neither 
we nor our world come to an end where we thought they did. 

It is not only the paranormal, however, which shows this. The 
higher faculties of intuition and inspiration show it too: so does 
the self that has achieved elevation to the heights of mysticism. 
The universal tendency in man in all ages and all places to turn 
to religion shows it also, however grotesquely the impulse may 
sometimes be crystallized when drawn down to the level of the 
adapted mind. Psychical research has shown with the utmost 
clearness that extra-sensory perception exists; but it shows a 
further thing of great importance, namely that its source lies 
deep in the self beyond the normal self and is beyond our 
reach and probably beyond our comprehension. It shows also 
that very striking communications sometimes arrive through 
mediums; but they are enigmatic when looked into and they 
invite many questions. They are divided into different grades. 
Psychical research shows also that material objects have some 
properties which enable a sensitive to make true statements about 
facts concerning them and their owners; but these properties of 
matter also lie outside the field of experimental science. This 
shows that something beyond ordinary physical laws must belong 
to matter. All these things undoubtedly occur; but they do not 
flatly contradict general experience or what science has discovered. 
They indicate only that general experience and scientific research 
are working within the confines of a limited field; and things 



NORMAL AND PARANORMAL ARE ONE 95 

which occur outside this field in certain circumstances intrude 
into it. 

What is of great importance is that we start with an ingrained 
conviction which causes us in the present day to do the same sort 
of things that medieval thinkers did when they formed a picture 
of the physical universe. They took it for granted that the earth 
was the centre of the universe and that the sun, moon and stars 
revolved around it as its attendants. We similarly take it for 
granted that our normal consciousness is the centre and the whole 
of us, and that the physical cosmos revealed by the senses and 
further explored by science constitutes the entire universe. In 
other words, what we are familiar with must be central. This 
natural assumption is forced upon us by our combined mental 
and physical constitution; and behind it lie all the adaptive forces 
of evolution. But science has strongly reinforced this instinctive 
assumption by accepting it as the basis on which to build. When 
this simplifying and (from the point of view of knowledge) 
illusory instinct begins to give way to the higher grades of aware- 
ness and insight, the true situation begins to dawn. Perspective, 
abolished from the world by Nature for practical reasons, makes 
its first appearance and our conception of the cosmos begins to 
fall into shape. This change of outlook is of a Copernican order, 
though on a vastly larger scale; for it does not deal with the 
spatial universe alone. 

The two following small cases from psychical research illus- 
trate the lack of any real distinction between normal and 
paranormal. The first is the case of a man who habitually 
went to a club-room in the evening and, in order to get there, 
had to pass through a field-gate. Time after time he saw the 
bars of the gate several feet before he came to it. His sense of 
sight was hallucinated. The second was the case of a person 
who was in bed and, on waking, saw the name of a relation 
written on the pillow. Soon afterwards news arrived of this 
relation's death; but the person who saw the name had had no 
reason to expect it. Both accounts rest on equally good first-hand 
evidence and both are examples of what is called hallucination of 
the senses. 



96 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

In spite of their similarity, our minds urge us to assign these 
two cases to quite different categories. The first we would call 
'normal' and we would accept it at once, even on slight evidence. 
The second we would call 'paranormal' and we would demand 
evidence of a much more stringent kind before accepting it. 
Many would, no doubt, try to explain the second case away while 
accepting the first case as a matter of course. This assignment of the 
two cases to different categories is due to a subjective cause in 
ourselves in this case to the degree of improbability we sub- 
jectively assign to telepathy. 

This behaviour of the human mind is not confined to the field 
of psychical research, although in that field it is strikingly 
illustrated. The mind always reacts to an impulse which pene- 
trates it through and through, forcing upon it the conviction that 
the sense-world is complete in itself. If we can rise above this 
innate conviction and see things more impartially, it becomes 
evident that there is no dividing boundary between the normal 
and the paranormal; and there is no reason (apart fron our in- 
stinctive urge) to regard the paranormal as less probable than the 
normal. The apparent boundary consists in the b'mited boundary 
of our senses, reinforced by the instinct which convinces us that 
that boundary is objective and not subjective. In point of fact, the 
division between normal and paranormal, or between the ordinary 
and the occult, or between the natural and the supernatural 
whatever terms we choose to use does not exist. It is our own 
mental constitution which creates for us the illusion that they are 
there. The universe is through and through a continuity; but our 
constitution fixes our attention upon one small fragment of it, 
and presents this fragment as the whole. There is no real boundary 
between the two no reason why we should try to explain the 
'supernatural' away: no reason why we should assign the source of 
religion to primitive imaginings. It is to ourselves that we should 
turn our attention; we should study the evolutionary formation of 
our minds if we wish to form a true outlook on the universe. 
Edwyn Bevan takes a wide survey of the paranormal or super- 
natural realm in his book, Sybils and Seers. He describes it, for the 
most part, as it appeared in classical times. Referring to the 



NORMAL AND PARANORMAL ARE ONE 97 

experiences of the Indian Christian, Sadhu Sundar as 'imagery 
made up of traditional material', he goes on to say: 'What it 
comes to is this: even if in such an experience there is an appre- 
hension of some reality beyond the mind of the visionary, his 
recollection of it, the account of it he gives to others, is fused 
with a mass of ideas and images which were in his mind whether 
by tradition or in some other way quite apart from the vision. 
An Orphic who had such an experience might tell afterwards of 
Charon, and the springs on either side of the road, and the tall 
cypress-tree, and so on; but that would be all imagery which he 
brought to the experience, not knowledge he had got from the 
experience. When you abstract all these ideas and images the 
form as Canon Streeter calls it what is left? I throw out as a 
suggestion that nothing is left which can properly be called 
knowledge, and yet that the experience has a value. It seems to be a 
characteristic of the mystical ecstasy of which, I take it, these 
apparent visits to the spirit-world are one variety that it gives an 
immense sense of knowing, of marvellous clarity, without any 
definite thing known. You will find it described in the last canto 
of the Paradiso: it appeared in recollection to Dante that in the 
supreme moment the whole universe had lain before him, an 
open book, but he believes that this was so not because he can 
state some definite truth about the universe he did not otherwise 
know, but because, as he speaks of that moment, he has a feeling 
of expansive joy: 

La forma universal di questo nodo 
credo ch'io vidi, perche piu di largo, 
dicendo questo, mi sento ch'io godo. 

If this is so, the experience may have an immense value for the 
person who has gone through it; it may give to his religious 
beliefs a vividness and power which nothing can afterwards 
shake: he knows he laid hold of reality. But it has a value for him, 
not for anyone else. It gives him no knowledge which he can 
formulate and communicate. So far as he purports to give to 
others, on the basis of such experience, information about the 
world, that is illusion' (pp. 64-5). 



98 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

The point is that paranormal experiences are not isolated into 
one separate category, while religious experiences are isolated 
in another; and at the same time the experiences of daily life 
are cut off and separate from both. The separation is due to our 
own way of looking at things. All human experiences are, in 
fact, graded and interwoven; but those of everyday life have 
been made to appear separate from everything else by a device 
of Nature, the object of which is to make the external world 
appear clear and to concentrate undivided attention upon every- 
day affairs. 

Psychical research thus shows that the subjective element 
plays a much larger part in our world that we realize. It is not 
that there is no objective world but that the latter is subtly inter- 
woven with subjective factors. We ourselves are a determining 
factor in almost all we perceive. Our way of thinking, our 
specialized senses, our mental and bodily constitution all these 
lie at the root of our knowledge and general outlook. The domi- 
nating factor in it all is subjective. The objective world is a 
skeleton clothed and given all that is important in its character 
by the subjective. 

Psychical research brings this subjectivity to light in a startling 
manner. One would expect, therefore, that no one would resist 
evidence for faculties which extend beyond the scope of this world 
without giving them careful and serious study; but the general 
attitude is exactly the opposite. People explain away such facul- 
ties and phenomena in the most light-hearted fashion, using argu- 
ments to dispose of them which would be merely laughed at if 
they applied to anything normal. Chance, for example, is widely 
held to be capable of explaining far more in the paranormal field 
than it could possibly explain in any other. This is quite irrational; 
but few question it. Again it is often said that no valid evidence 
for the paranormal exists, when all the time it does; but those 
who say this have not troubled to look for it. All this is clearly 
due to an inborn tendency in the mind to get rid of anything 
which does not square with what is familiar; and it is highly 
significant that this tendency does not adhere to rational rules. 
Any trumped up, illogical argument will serve to get rid of 



NORMAL AND PARANORMAL ARE ONE 99 

the paranormal because there is an instinctive urge behind it. 
This urge is universal (though individual factors vary it in 
degree); otherwise these arguments would be torn to pieces by 
criticism. Psychical research thus discloses a tendency in our 
selves, which, once recognized, is seen to be a matter of uni- 
versal importance. 

Viscount Haldane in his book, The Pathway to Reality, em- 
phasized this subjectivity of which we are unaware in the follow- 
ing sentence: 'The claim sometimes advanced on behalf of natural 
science that it deals with absolute reality, independent of man 
himself, cannot be maintained' (p. 118). His brother, the physio- 
logist and philosopher J. S. Haldane also referred to the 'super- 
stitions of common sense superstitions which arise when you 
try to apply what you have got in this fashion to speculative 
problems, which lie outside the scope of everyday reflection' 
(Mechanism, Life and Personality, p. 115). The factor behind this 
attitude is common sense; and common sense was brought into 
existence to promote an artificial clarity necessary for success in 
practical life. The boundary of this world, beyond which reality 
extends indefinitely, has been hidden from us by this subtle device 
of bringing the finite features of the world into prominence and 
concealing those which do not present the appearance of finality. 
The last thing that ever enters our minds is that the whole 
situation in which we live has been arranged in the course of our 
evolution. 

It may take a long time for this lesson revealed by psychical 
research to sink in, especially in an age when stress and turmoil 
do not encourage quiet reflection. But the lesson is that the aim 
of the human intellect should be, not to discover and understand 
all things without limit, but to see the point at which reality 
passes beyond the grasp of the intellect. 

What we have been considering in this book has had the effect 
of showing us that our real situation is quite different from that 
which common sense presents. Perhaps a little illustration will 
help still further to bring this home to us. We have to-day the 
wireless, the cinema and television; and progress with them all is 
going on apace. The cinema presents scenes in colour and attempts 



100 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

are already being made to produce the pictures in three dimensions 
so that they stand out like real places. Suppose that inventions of 
this kind had gone much further, so that by stepping into a suit 
something like a diving dress we could seem to be standing in a 
distant scene, its visible features conveyed by television and the 
sounds in it by radio, sensations of touch and smell being arti- 
ficially produced by complicated devices installed in the diving 
dress. When we put out our hand we should apparently touch 
what we could see, and we should feel the ground under our feet. 
We should, in fact, seem to ourselves to be transported to a distant 
scene; and if one more operation were performed on us by some- 
thing akin to a hypnotic suggestion and our memory of all that 
happened before we got into the suit were erased, we should not 
have the slightest doubt that we were actually in the scene pre- 
sented to us. We should in fact be living our life in another world 
and should be completely unaware that our body was where it 
actually stood. Suppose some very alarming adventure occurred 
in the televised scene an earthquake or a forest fire overtaking us 
causing us to make such frantic endeavours to escape that we 
tore the diving suit and forced our way out of it. What an over- 
whelming surprise we should have! We should have apparently 
been flashed into another world; and then, if our memory began 
to return, we should realize that we had been there all the time. 
There is probably some faint analogy between this imaginary 
happening and our situation in this present world; for the whole 
make-up of our body and its organs of sense, combined with the 
adapted character of our mind, concentrate our entire attention 
upon the field which our senses present, much as the diving suit 
and its paraphernalia would translate us, to all appearances, into 
another world. The non-physical reality, which in fact exists all 
around us, is hidden in much the same way as the actual place 
in which we were standing in our diving dress would be hidden 
by the devices of television and radio, etc. At the end of our life 
in this world, it is very unlikely that we shall be shot off into 
another, the location of which we cannot imagine. We are there 
already: for a change of worlds is not brought about by spatial 
travel but by a change in what we are aware of. Our bodily 



NORMAL AND PARANORMAL ARE ONE 101 

construction and mental indoctrination hide this fact from us 
with superb efficiency. 

The part played by the mind in adapting us for life in our 
world, and in making that world appear to include everything, is 
far greater than we realize. Professor J. Z. Young, in the fourth 
of his Reith Lectures, entitled Doubt and Certainty in Science, 1 
broadcast in November, 1950, gave a striking example of this 
when he described the experiences of persons born blind who later 
received their sight. He spoke as though the mental factor in 
seeing were purely a brain-process; but that we must expect from 
a scientific specialist, for the mind adapted to the physical world 
urges us to believe that matter is the causal centre of everything; 
and science has taken over this assumption without criticism. 

Professor Young said that the blind patient who opens his 
eyes to the world for the first time gets little or no enjoyment 
from his experience. 'Indeed he finds it painful/ No separate 
objects stand out in the visual field among the mass of coloured 
patches, which is all that is at first revealed. If asked what is the 
shape of an orange, the patient says: 'Let me touch it and I will 
tell you!' 'The real point is that what these people lack is the store 
of rules in the brain, rules usually learnt by the long years of 
exploration with the eyes during childhood/ But 'rules in the 
brain' stand for the mind's contribution to seeing. Until the mind 
sees a group of coloured patches as an object, to see the external 
world is impossible. It is true that the mind's action is normally 
closely associated with brain-processes. But brain-processes are 
not the 1 whole cause of our perceptions; for the activities of matter 
situated in space, however complex, are not identical with subjec- 
tive experience. Of course we cannot regard the brain as one 
entity and the mind as another, equally isolable and equally 
comprehensible. Mind is not identical with brain: but neither can 
it be trapped and pigeon-holed and made to become a quarry of 
scientific exploration. It is an entity belonging to a totally different 
category. 

The subjective factor in sense-perception is thus amazingly 
important. 'Many of our affairs are conducted on the assumption 
1 Oxford University Press. 



IO2 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

that our sense-organs provide us with an accurate record, in- 
dependent of ourselves. What we are now beginning to realize 
is that much of this is an illusion; that we have to learn to see the 
world as we do/ 

Again, Professor Young's view endorses what was said in 
chapter IV, pages 56, 60, about the immensely prolific possibili- 
ties of sensory hallucinations and their power of creating com- 
plete surroundings when the mind is not in a state of waking 
alertness. Environments which are completely realistic can be 
created by subconscious levels of the mind. To quote Professor 
Young's words: 'These ways of acting that we learn give us a 
rhythm of behaviour. Remember the brain is not a passive mass of 
tissue. Through all waking life it drives along. Woken in the 
morning by some stimulus, it immediately begins to run through 
sequences of activities, according to the rules it has learned. 
These sequences produce the actions by which the body lives. 
They are partly touched off by outside stimuli, but once started, 
they may run by themselves as independent trains in the brain, 
each combination starting another one.' 

This example of the effect of the acquisition of sight by an adult 
brings home to us the extraordinary thoroughness of our adapta- 
tion to our surroundings. It knocks out the conviction which 
nature has implanted in our minds that we perceive the universe 
quite simply and directly without intermediary processes. It 
reveals the fact that we only perceive a small corner of it and that 
in a highly specialized manner. But the important point to re- 
member is that we are not wholly adapted in this way; our minds 
do not lie wholly within the adapted area: they transcend the area 
of adaptation, level above level, by gradation, and in this way 
they leave adaptation gradually behind. To rise up as far as we can 
in these gradations is essential for freedom of thought and true 
understanding. All the upward steps in progress that the human 
intellect has made in the past have been the result of upward 
climbing towards higher awareness by the individual. What we 
should do is to turn to those individuals who have climbed 
highest and try to copy them. 



NORMAL AND PARANORMAL ARE ONE 103 

The whole of psychical research as well as the psychiatric 
branch of psychology point to a conclusion which is of enormous 
importance. They show that the human mind or self is not con- 
fined to that portion of it which operates in daily life, but extends 
far beyond its apparent limits. The boundary of the normal self 
is not an edge where the self comes to an end, but is the limit of an 
abstracted portion of the self that has been withdrawn from the 
whole and concentrated on the physical world. 

We usually think of ourselves as compact, little entities, 
neatly rounded off and entirely separated from others. The mind 
or self or being (whatever we choose to call it) is assumed to be as 
monadic in character as the body. But that is an illusion fostered 
by nature for the sake of clarity. We see, hear and feel from the 
isolated standpoint of the body; and our actual integration with 
others and with the universe at large is concealed from us as if 
by a shutter. 

Precognition appears quite naturally in all kinds of experience 
which originate outside the normal sphere of consciousness; and 
this suggests something further than an extension of ourselves. 
It suggests that the world we live in is as far from including the 
whole universe as our practical consciousness is from including 
the whole of ourselves. For precognition cannot originate in the 
world we know; nor can it be the consequence of brain-processes. 
In this world it is a misfit, incompatible with its principles, 
especially with that of temporal causality. Thus, when we pass 
beyond the range of our senses, we find evidence that both we and 
the world we live in have been given a specious appearance of 
self-completeness. This does not merely mean that the human 
senses are limited; it means that the practical mind has been formed 
in such a way that it reinforces the impression given by the 
senses and takes for granted things which are not true, but which 
make for simplicity and efficiency in practical life. This is not 
an exceptional tendency which shows itself in an individual here 
and there, but a general human tendency, although its power 
varies in different individuals according to their degrees of in- 
sight. It is important to notice that it is subjective and therefore 
undermines the principle of what is supposed to be objective 
8 



IO4 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

research, but it is part of its nature that this should be hidden 
from view. 

An interesting book by W. F. Prince, called The Enchanted 
Boundary, was referred to in The Personality of Man on page 232, 
and in this book it was held that evidence for the paranormal lies 
on the far side of the boundary, after crossing which the human 
mind behaves as though it were enchanted. I came to see that this 
boundary has no real, objective existence; it is a boundary created 
by our own mentality. In other words, it is only within the range 
of what we call the 'normal' that the human mind works in 
consonance with the world around it. Outside the province of the 
'normal' the mind is at sea. Rejecting the canons of evidence, it 
arrives at conclusions that are in accordance with its own nature 
and not with the facts with which it is confronted. If sound and 
solid evidence points to the occurrence of phenomena that are 
utterly strange, the mind at once tries to pull them into line with 
the familiar and to force upon them the kind of explanations with 
which it is fitted to deal. 

This powerful tendency in the mind which causes it to criticize 
the paranormal so rigorously that it explains it away, or, if the 
evidence is overwhelmingly strong to draw it into the ordinary 
world and normalize it, reminds one of party-political argu- 
ments: whatever the evidence may be, it has to be brought into 
line with the party outlook. The conclusion with which all 
evidence must conform is that the world our senses reveal contains 
everything there is. It was this tendency to reach foregone con- 
clusions on the part of critics of the paranormal which brought 
home to me the feature of the mind which works behind the 
scenes. Invisibility is part of the instinct which directs our reason. Why 
have not psychologists and psychiatrists realized that this universal 
instinct exists and concentrates all attention on the sense-world, 
while it blacks out the remainder or makes it seem unreal? The 
answer is simple. It is because of its universality; it is because 
psychologists and psychiatrists are under its influence too and have 
not detected it because of its invisibility. 

This gives rise to another point of view. Introspection is 
limited on the level of ordinary thought; but it is capable of 



NORMAL AND PARANORMAL ARE ONE 105 

penetrating more deeply when we rise in the scale of intuitive 
awareness. The mind is not a monad. It is more like a spectrum. 
We constantly change our level of thought. When we are wholly 
concentrated on doing something practical, our awareness con- 
tracts almost to a pin-point. When we are thinking about some 
common-sense affair, our awareness expands somewhat; but it is 
still in the grip of racial instinct. When we reflect on philosophy 
and religion, our awareness expands still more. But even this is not 
the limit. These levels do not exceed the range of our conscious- 
ness in this world. When we are seized by intuition or inspiration 
from beyond normal consciousness, the greater self acts into the 
lesser self. The spectrum of being extends beyond the boundary 
of what we commonly believe to be our total selves. 

This shows how it is possible to become aware of an instinctive 
element in us which is invisible on the lower planes where we are 
within its grip. 



CHAPTER X 

The Pathway to Religion 

WE have seen that none of the departments of psychical research, 
when we consider those findings in detail, yielded results which 
were intelligible through and through and in a final fashiorf. All 
were comprehensible up to a point; and in the foreground some 
were amenable to exact experiment; but beyond that point the 
root-causes of the phenomena went off into the blue. Mediumistic 
communications purporting to come in direct and simple fashion 
from the dead pointed to the dead as being a factor in their 
origin; but their complete origin still remained enigmatic. There 
was evidence which pointed to the medium's unconscious mind 
as being involved in the process; and there was the possibility 
that the mind of the sitter also played its part; and perhaps 
also the minds of others. How these factors are interwoven we 
have no means of determining. 

Telepathy appears at first sight to be a simple transference of 
thought from one conscious mind to another. Experiments of the 
card-guessing type reinforce this suggestion; but more informative 
evidence shows that in telepathy the information rises from the 
subconscious, or extra-normally conscious, region of the mind, 
where its original source is a mystery. 

The faculty called f clairvoyance' is similarly misleading, be- 
cause its very name suggests that it is akin to ordinary sense- 
perception a kind of paranormal sight; while precognition, 
which undoubtedly occurs, is entirely beyond our comprehension. 

The physical phenomena of the seance-room, though rendered 
uncertain by fraud, point on the whole to the occasional occurrence 
of genuine physical happenings which are entirely strange in their 
nature, and occur according to laws which differ widely from the 
established laws of physics. These strange physical phenomena 
occur only in the presence of a human being who is in a very 
unusual state. 

106 



THE PATHWAY TO RELIGION IO7 

Interesting and instructive as the phenomena of psychical 
research are, I would suggest to the reader that their principal 
importance is that they turn our gaze in an unusual direction. 
Psychical research acts as a pointer, showing that things existing 
beyond the limits of our world penetrate into it. We should 
constantly look back at these experiments and at all paranormal 
happenings; for the important things they imply sink into our 
minds very slowly. The build-up of our minds tries all the time 
to pass them by or to minimize their significance; and it is by no 
means easy to grasp the importance of what they point to. 

The evolutionary adaptation of the mind to its surroundings 
is extremely subtle, for it gives rise to convictions which are to a 
certain extent specious, although at the same time they are partly 
based on truth. Let us make an effort to grasp the situation. The 
external world is undoubtedly there! It is real and in its essence is 
independent of ourselves; there is no need to regard it as a wholly 
subjective creation in the sense in which Bishop Berkeley claimed 
it to be. But the part that is independent of ourselves is only a 
framework. On that objective framework, the subjective plays an 
enormous role far larger than our minds are constituted to 
realize for the subjective element is very skilfully concealed. 

Let us notice how it comes into action in everyday life. We see, 
hear and touch the real world: what is subjective about these 
processes? There is this remarkable fact. The less we think about 
the world the better we understand it. * Understand', however, is not 
quite the right wore 1 . Seem to understand is nearer the truth; 
but it is rather more than 'seems'; for the way in which we under- 
stand the physical world in practical life is in one sense true 
understanding. For it works: it renders us splendidly successful 
in action. And surely we must know the world as it is in order to 
be successful in dealing with it. 

We do in one sense know it as it is; but in a pragmatic sense only. 
Instead of saying that we understand the world in our daily contact 
with it, it would be truer to say that we are in mental contact with it 
in a limited and pragmatic way. This mental contact has been subtly 
pre-arranged so as to eliminate difficulties which would arise 
if we saw things as they literally are. I do not mean that the world 



108 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

offers no problems in practical life, for every practical man en- 
counters difficulties. The builder may be faced with swampy 
ground unsuitable for building and may have great difficulty in 
draining it; the agriculturist may be invaded with pests which 
damage his crops, and so on. But these, like all the difficulties and 
problems which arise in everyday life are of a special kind. They 
are, in principle, finally soluble. The artificiality of this situation 
does not occur to us; but it is a fact of vital importance. Practical 
difficulties all lie within our mental grasp and are within our power to 
solve. They are all soluble; they do not turn into will-o'-the-wisps 
which lead us further and further afield. They are what may be 
called convergent difficulties, coming to a final point after which 
they are settled and done with. The fact that they do come to a 
point never strikes us as being significant; but it is highly signifi- 
cant, for our difficulties would not have this 'convergent* character 
if it were not for the special construction of our bodies and 
minds. In fact, our difficulties in practical life converge because 
we have been so closely adapted in the course of evolution to our 
surroundings. 

There is no difficulty in understanding matter so long as we 
are actively dealing with it and not reflecting about its nature. 
Its structure, its spatial relations offer no difficulties. Time, also 
offers no difficulties to the practical mind. In fact, the whole 
world, the whole universe, is as simple as ABC so long as we do not 
ask questions about it. 

This brings us to a new view of truth. Can this everyday, 
pragmatic view of the universe be called 'true'? The answer is Yes 
and No. Certain aspects of it are specious although it is founded 
on reality. It is, in fact, a construction based on the intrinsic 
character of independent reality, and yet modified to suit our 
minds. Perhaps it is in some ways rather like a child's first history 
book. Does such a book contain true history? It is based on 
truth; yet it is adapted to the child's mind. But this is not quite 
a true analogy of the way in which we know the external world: 
for behind our pragmatic knowledge of it are features which we 
cannot in principle understand; while in history the real events 
can be understood, even to some extent by a child. 



THE PATHWAY TO RELIGION IOQ 

What seems so extraordinary is that it never strikes us as queer 
that the more closely we bring our intellect to bear on things 
that lie outside the practical sphere, the more puzzling they be- 
come and the less we understand them. This may be denied; and 
the statement does in fact require some modification. Physicists, 
chemists and astronomers have brought their intellects to bear 
on the physical world and it will be said that they have found 
out a great deal more about it. This is true. But the point is 
that they do not understand it in the final sense in which a 
practical man understands it (or makes pragmatic mental 
contact with it) through not thinking about it at all. The 
world as explored by scientists is surrounded by a forest of 
question-marks; while the same world seen by the practical man 
has no question-marks at all. It is completely understood by him 
if for 'understanding' we substitute pragmatic mental contact. 
This is the achievement of evolution. To sum up, everything 
that shows itself in the world of the practical man converges, 
while everything that shows itself in the world of the pure 
scientist diverges. 

Of course the scientist goes on exploring, convinced that his 
explorations will end in final convergence some day. But this 
belief is fostered only by the pragmatic instinct which has been 
instilled into the human mind for practical reasons. He accumu- 
lates knowledge: yet he is pursuing a will-o'-the-wisp. 

Simple as is the situation here described, we assimilate it very 
slowly, tending al! the while to reject it. Yet, until we have 
admitted it, our own nature and our true situation in the universe 
remain concealed. 

The realization of three factors is absolutely essential if we are 
to conceive the universe in any way that is akin to truth. The first 
is that the human being is graded and has no definite bound or 
confine. The second is that the world we live in extends in- 
definitely. The third is that the human being is adapted to 
physical environment with pragmatic thoroughness on the mental 
as well as on the physical level of action; and that its adapted 
characteristics enter and potently influence the mind on the 
intellectual level. 



110 THE NATURE OP HUMAN PERSONALITY 

These three key-factors in human existence, once they are 
realized, create a perspective which we have lost to-day, largely 
because science, by concentrating on the data of the senses, has 
reinforced the instinct implanted in us by Nature that our senses 
show us the whole. This new perspective throws a different light 
on religion from that which is widely current to-day. It illuminates 
the old hard and fast division between natural and supernatural. 
Every race of mankind since civilization began, and probably 
long before, was intuitively linked with the world which extends 
beyond the range of the senses; and all the leading religions of the 
world recognize the extension of the self beyond the phase which 
is manifest in this world. For in spite of the instinctive adaptation 
of the lower stratum of the mind to its surroundings, there has 
always been a higher and freer phase which reached upwards and 
outwards 'with thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls'. There 
was always this contact with reality beyond the senses. 

This reaching outwards and upwards of the mind was the 
original source of religion; and when these upward and outward 
searchings after the real were drawn into the sphere of the practical 
consciousness, they became assimilated to the sense-world and 
took on the crystallized forms of institutional religions. Thus a 
supernatural world was recognized and was conceived as being 
distinct from the natural, although in pre-scientific days the line 
between the two was not so definite as it is to-day. The charac- 
teristic feature of the epoch of science was a close analytical 
study of the data provided by the senses, and this examination 
brought to light innumerable facts about everything physical. 
This, in time, had the effect of producing the conviction that 
everything must be derived from physical sources. Thus it came 
about that the supernatural was swallowed up by the natural; 
and to-day the supernatural has retreated to the status of something 
ancient stored in a museum. It depends for its continued recogni- 
tion on the time-honoured tribute accorded to religious institu- 
tions. In this way the modern outlook came into being; and it is 
very important to remember that it did so not because science was 
drawing a true picture of the universe, but because the constitution 
of the human mind, produced by evolution, was the driving 



THE PATHWAY TO RELIGION III 

force behind science itself. That mind continually urged the in- 
tellect not to recognize anything beyond the presentations of the 
five senses. 

The truth is that supra-sensory experiences are overwhelmingly 
convincing to the individual, although in great part they are 
incommunicable in words. Supra-mundane experiences reach the 
ordinary consciousness by adapting and contracting themselves 
until they pass through the bottle-neck into the consciousness 
which is interwoven with the brain. They translate themselves, 
as far as it can be done, into the limited language that this con- 
sciousness understands. Certain individuals in all countries and in 
all ages have risen above the limited mentality of daily life and 
have realized higher things clearly; they have received what we 
call 'revelations'. But these revelations could be communicated 
to others only in terms of ideas current in the ordinary world; 
and these have to act as symbols. Thus, in ancient Hebrew times, 
revelations came through in the form of messages from Jehovah: 
in Greek times oracular messages were accepted as proceeding 
from the gods: in Christian times they lay within the Christian 
field and came as appearances of the Virgin, etc. That is to say, 
perceptions from beyond this world, when they reach through 
to the practical consciousness, adapt themselves to the form of 
religion that the particular normal consciousness in question 
accepts. In order to reach the ordinary mind, anything proceeding 
from a source beyond this world must clothe itself in the mind's 
current ideas. 

The field of psychical research is similarly brought within and 
fitted into the forms of contemporary thought. The fact that 
religion is spread universally over the world and that the human 
mind universally draws its intuitional grasp of it into this world, 
terrestrializing it in the process; and the further fact that the 
mind is blind to this symbolizing process and accepts institutional 
religion as literally true or literally untrue, throws immense light 
on the religious situation. The rationalist, who rejects formalized 
religion as a product of the imagination, is in a way himself 
testifying to the truth of what he doubts about this situation; 
he is testifying to the reality of religious insight, for he reveals 



112 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

the fact that he is himself under the influence of the adapted mind, 
which urges the belief that the common-sense picture of things 
is the whole. 

Psychical research, again, is a cogent pointer to this situation; 
for its evidence shows that reality undoubtedly extends beyond the 
range of the senses; and the attempt to reject this evidence also 
reveals the source of the opposition to religion. 

The solidarity of all consciousness with the real the oneness 
of our present scrap of selfhood with the core of existence is the 
foundation of all religion. Without it, we should be no more than 
ephemeral and temporal atoms of consciousness: we should be 
what the biologist thinks we are. With it, we are indissolubly one 
with the whole of reality. This fact, as is well known, has been 
proclaimed for centuries by the ancient philosophy of India; 
and mystics of every race and age have testified to the same. 

But, in the modern world to-day, the universal, illusory 
instinct, which convinces the mind that the visible world is the 
whole, has been reinforced by three centuries of science; and it is 
of the utmost importance for us to realize that the physical world 
is not the whole of reality. We must realize this if we are not to 
stray further and further into the realm of illusion and accept the 
specious doctrine instilled into the practical mind, which forms 
the basis of Materialism. This subtle factor in our evolution urges 
us to concentrate all our attention upon the sense-world as we do 
on the lighted stage of a theatre and to ignore everything that is 
off the stage. But we must, at all costs, resist the coercive force 
of instinct and struggle to gain an intelligent and balanced outlook 
from a higher and more intuitive standpoint. 

Religion has lost much of its power to-day because it does not 
seem to accord with reality as revealed by science. The founda- 
tion on which it rests is the limitless extension of the self and of 
reality far beyond the range of the bodily senses. This is recognized 
in the west to-day only by a few. Those under the influence of the 
scientifically reinforced instinct regard religion as no more than a 
useful fiction, to be tolerated because it has a stabilizing effect on 
conduct. Science, because of its success in practice, is accepted 
by many as being the sole reliable guide to truth. 



THE PATHWAY TO RELIGION 113 

Modern beliefs are thus at variance with the nature of reality; 
and from this false acceptance arises in large part the state of 
world-insecurity to-day the restlessness and absence of any 
peace of mind and the destructive doctrines arising from blinding 
illusions. The conscious mind is at loggerheads with its supra- 
conscious extension. 

The reader of this book is asked to pause and reflect. He need 
not necessarily study the subject-matter of psychical research; 
although he may find it useful to regard psychical research as a 
salient pointer, revealing the difference between truth and the 
goal to which our mind leads us in practice. It is of vital importance 
to reflect on this situation and to realize the deeply rooted and 
hidden factors in the human mind which are misleading our 
thought to-day. 

Once the universal landscape is seen in something like its 
true perspective, everything changes its appearance. The argument 
that life is an accidental product of material complexity dis- 
appears; for that argument is based upon our innate tendency to 
assume that the parochial world we live in is the whole. The 
argument that human immortality is a fiction, incompatible with 
the character of the universe, is again the result of seeing that 
universe in false perspective. That the whole universe can be 
explored by investigating the regions of space and time rests 
upon the illusory assumption that our senses show us the whole 
realm of existence in principle. 

The key-factor, which it is of such paramount importance to 
realize, is that behind all our thoughts and actions lie invisible 
impulses of racial extent, which subtly invade and influence our 
powers of reasoning from below. They urge upon us premises 
which appear to our adapted minds to be unquestionably true, 
but which are, in fact, pragmatic assumptions created in order to 
provide us with the best outlook for practical action. The great 
illusion, widely accepted without question or criticism, is that 
human reason is inviolable and immaculate at all levels of thought. 
Reason, indeed, is not even a faculty which is complete in itself; 
for it rests upon accepted premises, which, in the long run, 
must be prior to reason. At the same time, truth of an intuitional 



114 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

nature reaches downwards and enters the mind from above; 
and if we rise to the intuitive level, the pragmatic and often 
illusory nature of the impulses rising from below is clearly 
seen. 

The doctrine of Materialism rests entirely on two supporting 
pillars, both of which are subjective assumptions. One is that 
the embodied consciousness comprises the entire self. The other 
is that the world presented by the senses comprises the entire 
universe. Both these views have been instilled into the mind at the 
level of common sense because they are necessary for practical 
efficiency. But when once we succeed in rising above the level 
of common sense and free ourselves from the domination of 
instinct it becomes evident that the facts do not point towards 
Materialism. They no more point to the empirical self as the 
whole self or the physical world as the whole universe than they 
point to the planet earth as the centre of the solar and stellar 
systems. The Materialist has not been able to detect the subjec- 
tivism which underlies his doctrine. 

The fact that progress in thought is, for the most part, due 
to intuition shows that the ordinary conscious mind is not a 
self-contained monad. The fact that consciousness is expansive 
even within its somatic binding, shrinking to animal smalhiess 
when purely engaged in action, but expanding as it rises in the 
scale of reflection, points emphatically against the view that the 
mind is a monad. Some philosophers, in particular the religious 
empiricists of ancient India, went much further in exploration 
of the self than we have ever done and they came to the con- 
clusion that, beyond its incarnate range, the human self is one 
with the core of reality. They hold that we are rays shot out 
from the infinite. 

This type of conclusion is not confined to the religions of the 
East: it is the universal experience of those called mystics in all 
countries and ages. The higher anyone succeeds in climbing the 
rungs of the ladder of awareness, the more the self opens out and 
is filled with knowledge of reality . This process cannot be expressed 
in words by our limited intellect. Thus actual experience vin- 
dicates the view that selfhood is indefinable, inexpressible in 



THE PATHWAY TO RELIGION 115 

words, incomprehensible to the intellect and integral with the 
whole, which we can no more grasp than an animal can grasp the 
differential calculus. The monadic view of the self is a pragmatic 
illusion forced upon the practical mind. 

It is impossible in a short book of this kind to go deeply 
into the religious teaching of ancient India; but a few cogent 
sentences from Sir S. Radhakrishnan's book, Eastern Religions and 
Western Thought, may serve to emphasize the difference between 
the view seen from a point of heightened awareness and that of 
common sense, reinforced by science. 

The key-fact is this: 'if there is one doctrine more than another 
which is characteristic of Hindu thought, it is the belief that there 
is an interior depth to the human soul, which, in its essence, is 
uncreated and deathless and absolutely real' (p. 83). In the first 
place he points out that the Materialistic view of man the view 
that his consciousness is merely a throw-off of the activities of the 
brain, and therefore an ephemeral phenomenon with no firm 
foundation is negatived by everyday experience. If the conscious 
being had no background, no 'interior depth', it would be com- 
pletely satisfied by material success and comforts. But that is not 
the case. 'The rich of the world are among those who find life 
stale, flat and unprofitable' (p. 80). To realize this fact alone is to 
see that Utopian schemes based on Materialism, such as Com- 
munism and Materialistic Humanism, are bound inevitably to 
head towards disaster and not towards success. A true view of the 
nature of man is the first indispensable for any social improvement 
in the world. 

Given this view, the illusion of the monadic atom of conscious- 
ness disappears and we begin to see ourselves as graded beings and 
the empirical self as an abstraction from the whole. The higher we 
rise the more clearly we see this. 'Our conceptions of the universe 
answer to our degrees of consciousness. As our consciousness 
increases in its scope, we see more clearly. We now see partly 
as an animal and partly as a human being. Sometimes the world 
is viewed as one of self-satisfaction, at other times as an object 
of curiosity and contemplation. To see it in truth, one has to free 
oneself from sense-addiction and concentrate the whole energy of 



Il6 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

one's consciousness on the nature of reality' (p. 88). 'Compared 
with those who have seen the truth of things, the awakened 
spirits, we are sleep-walkers' (p. 95). 

Again, the discontinuity, which is such a conspicuous feature 
of our world, necessary as it is for clear thinking, is a superficial 
appearance. Underneath there is a continuity and unity. 'The 
view which regards the multiplicity as ultimate is deceptive 
(Maya), for it causes the desire to live separate and independent 
lives' (p. 94). We shall not understand anything aright until we 
have grasped the fundamental fact that the human being, as 
manifest in the flesh, is an outlying abstraction of the uncompre- 
hended whole. The common-sense outlook might be called senso- 
centric. We cling to it in spite of the fact that if it is examined 
impartially the facts point away from it. We cling to it because it 
is almost indispensable for use in practical life. If the sense-world 
is taken to be obviously the centre and source of everything, 
and if the self of daily life is taken to be the entire self, we see at 
once how clear-cut and intelligible everything becomes, how easy 
to deal with. If these clear boundaries, although specious, were 
not made to seem obvious; if categories of external things merged 
into one another; if all were visibly continuous and inter- 
connected, and if questions once asked, were never finally an- 
swered, how impossible it would be to live in our world. Science 
is bringing to light to-day the universal continuity that underlies 
the apparent discontinuity on the surface. But it would never do if 
this were visible to the intelligence which is active in ordinary 
practical life. 

Thus we see the outlook which seems so clear and obvious, so 
obviously real in ordinary life, is to a very large extent the result 
of the constitution of our minds. Even in what are apparently 
the most objective quests, our minds are unobtrusively operating, 
projecting their own idiosyncrasies into the planning and inter- 
pretation of scientific experiments. And this tendency is univer- 
sally hidden from consciousness. 

Once we realize that we are being made to accept things in a 
particular fashion without being aware of it, this automatic 
tendency in the mind can be seen to play its part in religion. It 



THE PATHWAY TO RELIGION 117 

will be well to consider this. The religion of the practical level 
of the mind bears a close resemblance in its make-up to the mind's 
conception of the ordinary world. Both appear to be concrete and 
final, and all questions at that level converge to satisfactory 
answers. It may be based on truth, just as our conception of the 
physical world is based on fact. But when the intellectual level 
of the mind embarks on religion and attempts, in parallel with the 
physical scientist, to clarify the situation and to understand it 
better, the problems of religion become divergent and become 
less and less comprehensible. In the same way the problems of 
physical science do this. 

The mind adapted to its environment creates apparent sim- 
plicity in religion just as it does in its view of the external world; 
but this simplicity is in one sense specious, although it is ultimately 
based on truth. The modern outlook on the world, and that pro- 
vided by the dogmas of institutional religion are so widely 
different that they are separated by an abyss. The idea is widely 
prevalent that modern thought and scientific exploration have 
revealed the universe as it literally is, while religion is a fiction 
whose specious roots have been laid bare by modern psychology. 
But the fact is that religion enshrined in dogmas and crystallized 
in institutions is an effigy of truth adapted to the ordinary human 
mind, just as the external world revealed by the senses is a re- 
presentative effigy. It is no use asking whether the Christian creed 
is true or false. That is, to demand a convergent answer. Such an 
answer is possible only in the field of practical affairs in daily life, 
and religious doctrine does not fall into that category. In religion 
we can have clear-cut, simple and wholly intelligible beliefs only 
so long as they are symbols fitted to our practical ways of think- 
ing. If we investigate these symbols intellectually in an attempt to 
understand them better, their symbolical nature appears on the 
surface, their clarity and apparent intelligibility recede further and 
further away and the truth they stand for passes beyond our 
grasp. This is precisely what happens also when science tries to 
understand the external world, or, indeed, the human being. 
The finality which seemed to be there at the beginning becomes 
diaphanous and vanishes. 



Il8 THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

If we grasp this situation, the conflict between science and re- 
ligion disappears. Both are founded on fact, that is to say, on initial 
data which spring from the psycho-physical constitution of the 
human being. Both are trying to bring the unbounded down to 
finally comprehensible convergence, which exists only in the 
world of practical affairs; and even there it is the consequence of 
very special conditions, largely brought into existence during the 
course of evolution. Religion on the one hand and the modern 
scientific outlook on the other are at loggerheads because neither 
side had realized the true situation. 

Within the everyday world we can increase our knowledge 
quantitatively by employing the methods of common sense; but 
when we try to do the same thing outside the range of common 
sense, it is no longer a question of amassing definite knowledge 
in quantity but of endeavouring to understand qualitatively that 
which goes beyond the intellectual scope: yet the intellect is 
so constructed as to be blind to the change from the one to the 
other. The endless disagreements, discussions and perplexities 
of which theology and other subjects are full are the result of 
intellectual attempts to pour the ocean into a bucket. This 
does not mean, however, that the mind adapted to its surround- 
ings is entirely static. Instinctively fitted to react with its sur- 
roundings, it is nevertheless expanded by intuition and thus can 
achieve a limited amount of success in its attempt to understand 
things which at first lie beyond its capacity. The intellect can 
widen its scope; but the extent to which it can do so is severely 
limited. 

The immense importance of realizing the two fundamental 
facts, that the incarnated human being is a specialized abstraction 
from its greater self, and that it is adapted to react with the physical 
world, is that this alone enables us to see things in true perspective. 
Until these facts are grasped, the basic situation which underlies 
science, philosophy and religion escapes us. Accepting uncon- 
sciously as its starting point the axioms thrust upon it by Nature, 
the intellect begins all its researches a step too late. The only way 
of escape from this situation lies in intuition or some form of 
direct perception of the real. 



THE PATHWAY TO RELIGION 

Religious awareness is based on these same uprisings of in- 
tuition carried to a higher degree. Dim awareness of reality of a 
much higher kind than that presented by the sense-world brings 
reverence and veneration into the heart and makes religion a 
revelation of the utmost vividness. The graded or spectrum- 
like character of man, the continuation of the self beyond the 
empirical self, forms the basis of religion for the human being; 
and this grading reaches indefinitely upwards beyond the power of 
our present conception. 

In the present age, the expanded view of the physical universe, 
which is due to science, is incompatible with the fixed picture 
of the universe which is part and parcel of institutional religion. 
The scientific view also claims to embrace the whole, and the 
whole from its standpoint is an inanimate cosmos in which life has 
arisen by chance. The institutional religious view, on the other 
hand, is entirely a human view, presenting God and man as a 
united family wholly within the capacity of the intellect to grasp. 
The incompatibility of these two views has driven a large part of 
the thinking world away from religion. 

But apart from religion in its crystallized and institutional 
form, the mainspring and origin of Religion in a universal sense 
is definitely there. The universe extends far beyond the range of 
the human senses and the capacity of science to explore it. The 
great and central fact is that the higher we ascend in the scale of 
awareness the more reality opens to us. Ascension in this way 
brings direct awa/eness; and this is, and always has, been the 
immortal road to Truth. This pathway soars indefinitely above 
us; and it is the road to what, in institutional religion, is called 
God. 

From this point of view, the study of psychical research or of 
the human faculties we call 'paranormal' enables us to achieve two 
things of great value. In the first place, it throws valuable light 
on what we really are in contradistinction to what common sense 
urges us to believe that we are. In the second place, it begins to 
clarify our situation in the universe by showing that selfhood 
is not an ephemeral product of the brain but is linked in un- 
comprehended fashion with the core of reality. To realize these 



I2O THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 

two things is the first step towards bringing life and immortality 
to light. 

The study of psychical research has therefore a peculiar value 
which is far from being widely recognized. It shows with vivid 
conclusiveness that certain things happen, but their origin, their 
explanation and their inmost character are not revealed. These 
lie beyond our comprehension, and the implication is that the 
most needed factor in our outlook to-day is perspective. The 
word PERSPECTIVE should be written in large characters and hung 
on the study wall of every philosopher, every pure scientist and 
every theologian; it should in fact become the key-thought in the 
mind of everyone who thinks at all. The scientific method has had 
the result of concealing it; yet it is cardinal for any realization of 
truth outside the field of practical affairs. Without it, we can form 
no valid conception of ourselves nor of the world in which we 
live. 

The vital need of to-day is to see our world and the universe 
behind it in realistic fashion, unwarped by the distortions of our 
pragmatically constructed minds. Science, because it is 'organized 
common sense', has not achieved this. Only by rising above the 
common-sense level can a true view of ourselves and of the 
universe be attained. 



INDEX 



Apparition, the perfect, 56 
Apparitions 

collectively perceived, 46-7, 49, 52-3 

crisis cases, 44-6 

experimental, 42-4 

haunting, 47-50 
Astrology, 78, 85 
Awareness 

higher, 76, 102, no 

religious, 119 

See also Intuition 

Balfour, Lord, 21, 23, 24, 27, 32 

Berkeley, Bishop, 107 

Bevan, Edwyn, 96-7 

Binet, 3 

'Bottle-neck', 33, 36, in 

Boundary 

of our world, 66, 69, 96, 99, 1 16 

of the self, 81, 103, 116 

Charcot, 3 

Clairvoyance, 12, 13, 62, 81, 106 

Communications, mediumistic 

high-grade, 19-40, 106 

low-grade, 17-18, 34, 39 
Communicator, status of, 34-6 
'Convergent* difficulties, 108, 116-17 
Coover, Dr.J. E., 74 
Cricket ball illustration, 66-7 
Cross-correspondences, 35 
'Crystallisation' of ideas 

in institutional religions, no 

in mediumistic communications, 31, 33, 
36 

'Daylight Impressions' (Mrs.Willett), 20, 
21, 25 

Evolution, achievement of, 109 

See also Mind, adaptation of 
Ewing, Dr. A. C., 16 
External world 

a framework, 107 

apparent simplicity of, 108, 117 
Extra-sensory Perception, importance of, 
9-16, 72 

Freud, Sigmund, 3, 4 

Geocentric view of the universe, 95 
Gurney, E., in Willett communication 
scripts, 15, 21 et seq. 

Haldane,J. S., 99 
Haldane, Viscount, 99 



Hallucinations, 41, 52, 54, 95 
Haunting, 47-50 
Human reason, 113 

Instinct 

and instinctive beliefs, 7-8, 75, 91, 96, 
104, 105, 112 

and intuition in religion, 76 

pragmatic character of, 109 
Intuition, 5, 39, 75, 76, 92, 94, no, 114, 118 

James, William, 38, 86 
Janet, Paul and Pierre, 3 
Jastrow, Professor, 74 
Jung, C. G., 4 

Laws of physics and properties of matter, 
partial nature of, 81 

Materialism, doctrine of, 82, 112, 114, 115 
Matter 

insensible properties of, 62-9, 81, 84 

ultimate nature of, 68 
Mental constitution 

part played by, in religion, 116-17 

subtlety of, 7 
Mesmerism, 3 
Mind 

adaptation of, 6, 37, 60, 63, 69, 79, 83 
8? 90, 91, 96, 102, 107, 109, 112, 118 

assumed to be a function of the brain, 
39,90 

evolutionary formation of, 96 

its structure, 71 

limited sphere of, 2, 36-8, 61, 71, 118 

part played by, in adaptation, 101 

ultimate character of, 38-40 
Morel, Mme., 65 
Morton case (haunting), 47-50 
Myers, F. W. H., 3 
Mystics, 114 

Nunez (in Wells' Country of the Blind), 
87-9 

Occult, the, 84-92 
Osty, Dr. Eugene, 64, 65 

Paranormal 
and normal, no boundary between them, 

93-105 

attitude to, 73-5 
does it involve the disruption of physical 

laws ? 79 



122 



THE NATURE OF HUMAN PERSONALITY 



Paranormal 

evidence for the, 72-4, 76, 78 
how improbable is it ? 78-83 
is its origin within the world we know ? 
80 

Personality of Man, referred to, 9, 10, 13, 
17, 19, 20, 41, 52, 60, 63, 64, 72, 73, 
74, 93, 104 

Perspective 

new, 36, 68-9, 91, 94, no, 118, 120 
the key factor, 113 

Physical phenomena of mediumship, 68, 
106 

Physical World 
not the whole, 112 
pragmatic mental contact with, 109 

Precognition, 4, 13, 39, 62, 81, 103, 106 

Prince, W. F., 104 

Principle of causality, 85 

Psychiatry, 3-4, 17, 103 

Psychical Research as a pointer, 107, 112 
attitude towards, 64, 71-4, 81, 95-6, 98-9 
importance of, 61, 63, 71-5, 81, 94, 99, 
107 

Paychometry, 62, 64-6 

Psycho-somatics, 68 

Qualitative experiments by Miss C. Miles 

and Miss H. Ramsden, 14 
Qualitative and quantitative experiments 

compared, 10, 13-15, 62 
Quantitative experiments by G. N. M. 

Tyrrell, 10-12, 13 

Radhakrishnan, Sir S., 115 
Rational standpoint, 78, 85, 93 
Rationalism, 90 

Rationalist, influenced by the adapted 
mind, 81, 111-12 



Religion, 94, 112, 117 

institutional, in 

and science, 112, 118 
'Revelation', in 

Sadhu Sundar, 97 
Self, 
greater versus limited, 7, 8, 15, 34, 39, 

60, 72, 8 1, 94, 114 
monadic view of, 114, 115 
'normal', a specialised abstraction, 7, 

103, 116 

one with the core of existence, 112, 114 
Sense-Imagery, 60 

'Sensory construct', apparition as, 58 
Spectrum of light, self compared with, 7, 

92, 105 

Spiritualists, 39, 76 
Subliminal self, 3 

Telaesthesia, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33 
Telepathy, 13-15, 39, 62, 73, 81, 106 
Troland, Professor L. T., 74 
Truth, new view of, 108 
Tuckett, Dr. Ivor L., 73 

'Unconscious', The, 4 
Universe 

non-causal pattern in the, 85 

our conception of, 82, 89, 95 

true conception of, 109 

Versailles case (Miss Moberley and Miss 
Jourdain), 54 

Wells. H. G. (The Country of the Blind), 87 
Willett, Mrs., 17-36, 56 

Young, Professor]. Z., 101, 102 



