Marcel Siegler
Needful Structures
Edition panta rei
The series is edited by Christoph Hubig.
Board: Christoph Halbig, Christoph Hubig, Angelica Nuzzo, Volker Schürmann,
Pirmin Stekeler-Weithofer, Michael Weingarten and Jörg Zimmer
Marcel Siegler (né Müller) is a philosopher of technology and an alumnus of the
research training group KRITIS, Technische Universität Darmstadt, on networked
urban infrastructures. His research focuses on the dialectical interrelation between
human agency, technology, and society, as well as the transformation of sociotechnical
systems.
Marcel Siegler
Needful Structures
The Dialectics of Action, Technology, and Society
in Sartre’s Later Philosophy
Extended PhD thesis, originally titled Needful Structures: The Dialectics of Practical Ensembles
and their Significance for Understanding Urban Mobility
Supervisors: Alfred Nordmann and Christoph Hubig (TU Darmstadt)
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie;
detailed bibliographic data are available in the Internet at http://dnb.d-n
b.de
© 2023 transcript Verlag, Bielefeld
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage
or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Cover concept: Kordula Röckenhaus, Bielefeld
Copy-editing: LexAcademic
Printed by: Majuskel Medienproduktion GmbH, Wetzlar
https://doi.org/10.14361/9783839462829
Print-ISBN 978-3-8376-6282-5
PDF-ISBN 978-3-8394-6282-9
ISSN of series: 2702-9034
eISSN of series: 2702-9042
Printed on permanent acid-free text paper.
Contents
Introduction...............................................................................7
I Dialectical Foundations
1. From Individual Project to Historical Praxis........................................ 23
1.1 Introduction ......................................................................... 23
1.2 Being and Nothingness .............................................................. 24
1.3 Search for a Method ................................................................. 29
1.4 Critique of Dialectical Reason ........................................................ 32
1.5 Concluding Remarks ................................................................. 44
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process .............................................. 47
2.1 Introduction ......................................................................... 47
2.2 Modes of Being and their Synthesis .................................................. 49
2.3 Action as Totalization ................................................................ 62
2.4 Existence as Praxis-Process .......................................................... 81
2.5 Concluding Remarks ................................................................. 87
3. Existence and Technology.......................................................... 89
3.1 Introduction ......................................................................... 89
3.2 Dialectical Instrumentality ........................................................... 90
3.3 The Social Side of Things ............................................................ 99
3.4 The Practical Inertia of Technological Objects ........................................104
3.5 Technologically Mediated Existence .................................................. 112
3.6 Concluding Remarks ................................................................. 114
II The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action .............................. 121
4.1 Introduction ......................................................................... 121
4.2 Scarcity and Society .................................................................124
4.3 Formation, Reinforcement, and Stabilization ......................................... 132
4.4 Transformation ......................................................................142
4.5 Persistence ........................................................................ 148
4.6 Crisis and Disruption ............................................................... 163
4.7 Concluding Remarks .................................................................169
5. Praxis of Practical Ensembles: Bodies in Motion...................................175
5.1 Introduction .........................................................................175
5.2 Urban Mobility as Practical Ensemble.................................................175
5.3 Disturbances, Disruptions, and Crises ............................................... 182
5.4 Infrastructures as Needful Structures ............................................... 185
5.5 Concluding Remarks ................................................................ 193
Conclusion ..............................................................................195
References..............................................................................199
Introduction
Needful Structures
It is a constant of the human condition to be intricately situated amid other people,
material things, and systems that are structured in myriad organizational
forms—some of which are incredibly complex and others of which are simpler.
Every human being is born into structures that contextualize and scaffold how
humans act, and why they do so. These structures include their place and time
of birth, their sex and gender, their sociocultural and economic background, the
general constitution of their material environment, and so on. The interplay of these
structures enables human beings to realize certain possibilities of their existence
while constraining the realization of others.
It is also a constant of the human condition to be burdened with both basic and
more complex material and immaterial requirements, wants, and wishes that need
regular satisfaction. These requirements, wants, and wishes are due not only to the
organic materiality of the human body but also to the position people adopt in the
constellations of society. Humans are inherently needful beings. They require, among
other things, water, clothing, shelter, food, the possibility to move around, and a
caring community. They may also desire individual meaning, fairness, and a societal
purpose. Paradoxically, these constants of the human condition are fundamental
for understanding the process-based, or processual, character of human existence.
Through these requirements, wants, and wishes, as well as through people’s actions
to satisfy them, humans can be understood as inherently goal-directed beings. How
people may get whatever they require or wish for themselves strongly depends on
the contexts and structures in which they are situated, as well as on their exact place
within them. The requirements for water or mobility, for instance, can be rather easily
tackled in the confines of one’s own home or an urban environment. However,
in a deserted area, or without the necessary means—instrumental, financial, and
infrastructural—the satisfaction of physical requirements and other more complex
wishes can be a somewhat intricate matter.
The relation between what humans need, on the one hand, and the structures
giving rise to both possibilities and constraints to fulfill those needs, on the other
8 Needful Structures
hand, is an intriguing one. This fascinating relation is particularly evident in the
large-scale provision of infrastructure services in urban spaces. Enormous structures,
such as drinking water and waste-water disposal, roads, traffic, and transit
systems, as well as information technologies and other facilities with similar importance
for individual and societal thriving, are considered by some to be the indispensable
lifelines of modern societies (BMI 2009, 3).
Urban infrastructures represent structured constellations of people, material
things, norms, regulations, and practices that enable societies to address some of
their basic and more complex needs in the long run. Simultaneously, infrastructures
seem to be inherently needful themselves, in the full range of the term’s meanings.
Infrastructures are “precarious achievements” (Graham 2010, 10), full of demands,
technical requirements, and practical constraints. These structures require constant
maintenance to ensure proper functionality. Furthermore, critical events such as
technical malfunctions, extreme weather, natural disasters, and also health crises
like the COVID-19 pandemic, may disrupt the provision of infrastructure services.
Hence, operating these structures on a large scale requires the employment of various
preparedness and prevention measures to avoid or at least mitigate potential
harm (Crespo et al. 2018). The war in Ukraine and the concomitant energy crisis further
highlight the needfulness of modern societies and their infrastructures.
Infrastructures are not only full of demands and requirements—they are also
rendered necessary by the essential services they provide to society, which is another
aspect of their inherent needfulness. In light of the provision of these services, one
way to understand infrastructures is in terms of their functional criticality. Infrastructures
can be considered critical when the disruption of their functionality affects
the functional interrelations of the larger form of organization of modern societies
in which these infrastructures are situated (Lukitsch et al. 2018, 16–17). The inherent
connection between infrastructures and society is also the root of infrastructural
vulnerability. Because the continued existence of modern societies and the provision
of critical infrastructure services depend on each other, these infrastructures
represent vulnerable points in the larger organizational form of societies (Eifert et
al. 2018).
Urban infrastructures may be exceptional examples of inherently needful structures,
but this particular form of needfulness seems to pervade all of the human sociality
in its myriad organizational forms. The exact composition of larger constellations
between people and things may take many forms, but they are all grounded—in
one way or another—in people’s material and immaterial requirements and wishes,
as well as in the inability of these people to satisfy them on their own. Whether in
the case of families, political parties, factories, or urban spaces, all these constellations
are permeated by goal-directed human actions to satisfy these requirements
and wishes.
Introduction 9
This work seeks to explore the close relationship between human needs and desires,
their material and immaterial requirements, wants, and wishes, the demands
and requirements of the built world, and the forms of organization that hold both
humans and the built world together. The central claim is that the complexity of
societal constellations must be understood through the requirements, wants, and
wishes of individuals, as well as through the actions that these individuals perform
to satisfy them. Such an understanding allows one to understand the practical constraints
that pervade these constellations as a result of human action itself. Eventually,
this understanding will also allow for the reassessment of the inseparable relation
between human existence, technology, and forms of organization throughout
human history. To achieve its aims, this work reconstructs the foundations and inner
workings of social organization that Jean-Paul Sartre explores and outlines in
his philosophical writings, and, in particular, his theories on practical ensembles.
Research Problem
In his later work Critique of Dialectical Reason,1 Sartre concerns himself with the
situation of historically situated individuals and the claim that these individuals
are both products and (re-)producers of their sociocultural and material situation
(Sartre 1978, 97). Sartre’s later works, especially Critique, represent a fusion of his
existentialist philosophy with Marxist thought. Although the later Sartre advocates
a material monism, he objects to the dominant Marxist beliefs of his time,
especially those that claim the world to be subject to materially dialectical laws of
nature. Opposed as he is to the belief that matter is dialectical in itself, Sartre claims
that free, individual human action, in confrontation with the physicochemical
world, to be that which manifests a dialectical progression of history in the first
place. Consequently, to understand history, it must be examined based on human
action and experience (Sartre 1978, 40–43). To analyze this entanglement, Sartre
undertakes a complex argument about the dialectical character of human existence
and the products and structures that arise owing to humanity’s engagement with
their material surroundings. He applies a specific mode of dialectical thinking,
which, at its core, seeks to depict processes in which initially contradicting, incompatible,
or categorically different aspects of a certain thing in question are brought
together toward a more holistic and actionable understanding of the said thing. He
1 The current work relies mostly on Volume I of Critique of Dialectical Reason, because it is there
that Sartre outlines his theories on practical ensembles. For this reason, Volume I will simply
be referred to as Critique. Critique II—subtitled The Intelligibility of History—remains unfinished
but has been edited by Elkaïm-Sartre (1991). Although it contains other insights into
practical ensembles, its unfinished status means that quotations and passages from the second
volume are used sparingly throughout this work.
10 Needful Structures
advocates a processual understanding of human existence, reality, and history as
driven by the dialectical character of human experience and action. Both must be
understood as inherently dialectical and synthetic interrelations between humans
and their surroundings.
Throughout his philosophical oeuvre, Sartre conceives human action as ontologically
free and intentional. At the same time, human action is fundamentally driven
by how basic and more complex requirements, wants, and wishes project toward
certain intended ends; these ends somewhat abstractly outline how courses of action
are to be realized. Sartre’s understanding of these requirements, wants, and
wishes changes across his works. In Being and Nothingness, Sartre conceives of them
as desires, whereas in Critique he conceives of them as needs. However, the distinction
between desire and need must be understood in terms of neither a difference between
immaterial wishes and material requirements nor a more conscious or more affective
relation to a certain object. Rather, in Sartre’s case, the difference between needs
and desires is one between the level of abstractness or concreteness in how human
beings relate to their material surroundings based on what and how they require,
want, or wish for something. In this understanding, desires, translated from Sartre’s
French term désir, represent concrete and socially structured modes in which human
beings relate to their surroundings based on their material and immaterial requirements,
wants, and wishes. Needs, based on Sartre’s French term besoin, represent abstract
and initially unstructured ways in which human beings make these relations.
Through peoples’ active and practical membership in societal constellations, their
abstract needs (as besoins) are transformed and concretized into desires (as désirs).
This means that human beings are fundamentally adapted to the societal constellations
they are situated in, and the adaptation occurs by how these constellations
enable them to relate to and satisfy their requirements, wants, and wishes through
actions. Performing such actions is a synthetic act that unites materially physical aspects—
requirements, wants, bodily activity, instrumental means—and mental aspects—
wishes, intentions, ends—by causing effects in the material surroundings to
transform them following some intended result.
Due to its synthetic character, Sartre claims human action to be an instantiation
of a rather abstract dialectical principle which he refers to as dialectical totalization. A
totalization represents a synthetic activity in which individual (physical or mental)
aspects of a thing or moments of a process are actively brought together as parts
of a whole—a so-called totality—thus giving rise to this totality in the first place.
Totalization proceeds in a dialectical three-step of position, negation, and negation of
the negation, also known as sublation. Sartre derives this principle by questioning the
process of how human experience and action come to their respective results. These
results are totalities comprising different aspects. In the case of experience, it is sensory
input, expectations, practical aspects, etc. In the case of action, these aspects
are an agent’s intentions, bodily requirements or wants, attitudes, etc. Owing to its
Introduction 11
totalizing nature, action must be understood as situated in socioculturally and materially
structured constellations that co-constitute the frame in which this action
takes place. These situated actions can be understood as structural moments in the
overall processing of human existence and history. Although human beings might
thus not be practically free to do as they please, they are nevertheless ontologically
free. This freedom cannot be taken from them, as it is the abstract foundation they
use to realize themselves by conducting concrete, totalizing actions for themselves
as ends in themselves in the first place.
Sartre claims that to understand the full extent of human existence and reality,
the larger constellations and historical transformations in which human action and
existence are situated must themselves be understood to mirror this totalizing process.
Through this understanding, human reality in its entirety becomes intelligible
as a dialectical totalization that is fundamentally driven by the ontologically free
and goal-directed actions of human beings to satisfy their requirements, wants, and
wishes; they do so by concretizing their abstract needs into desires. In the course of
Critique, Sartre further outlines this understanding.
In this later work, Sartre analyzes societal constellations of human and non-human
elements in dialectical interrelation with each other—such as societal classes,
revolutionary groups, national economies, or people at a bus stop—and scrutinizes
the dynamics of their formation and transformation from what is now known as a
praxeological perspective. Despite the subtitle of Critique (Sartre 1978)—Theory of Practical
Ensembles (French Théorie des ensembles pratiques)—, Sartre does not use the pair
of terms practical ensemble very often to describe such constellations. He frequently
uses pairs of terms such as social ensemble or serial ensemble (e.g. 55), human ensemble
(e.g. 65), society as complex ensemble (e.g. 121), the world as ensemble (e.g. 128), material
ensemble (e.g. 185), and technical ensemble (e.g. 193). He does so depending on the
elements and interrelations he intends to foreground. Since this work explores the
conditions of possibility for the formation of such constellations, it uses the general
term practical ensemble. Understanding societal constellations as practical ensembles
reveals two facts: first, these constellations are permeated by human actions and,
therefore, by needful individuals; second, these constellations consist of at least two
elements in practical interrelation to each other. In this regard, any ensemble in the
Sartrean sense, whether social, serial, communal, technical, natural and so on, must
be understood as a practical ensemble.
This praxeological and dialectical perspective can be applied to the central claim
of this current work. Understanding the dialectical interrelation between human existence
and practical ensembles reveals both the conditions, possibilities, and constraints
of goal-directed human action, and the inner workings, demands, and requirements
of the forms of organization in which this action is situated. However,
three factors complicate the understanding of Sartre’s theories on practical ensembles.
The three factors must be discussed in detail.
12 Needful Structures
First, despite the subtitle of Critique, Sartre himself does not provide a systematic
theory of practical ensembles. The main reason for Sartre’s analyses of practical
ensembles is to uncover the very conditions of possibility by which a dialectical progression
of human history becomes intelligible in the first place. Sartre claims that
this basis must be sought in the dialectical processes that pervade human action and
experience. Consequently, he is much more concerned with the significance of human
action and freedom than he is with the actual composition of practical ensembles.
Despite his broad perspective on societal constellations and his nuanced descriptions
of formation and transformation processes, individual action represents
Sartre’s methodological lens and his principal subject of inquiry. For this reason,
Sartre’s Critique can only with reservations be called a social ontology. Rather, it can
be more properly understood as a dialectical and praxeological philosophy that examines
the conditions of individual human existence in larger constellations by accentuating
the social aspects of the practical relations between the elements of these
constellations. Thus, the dynamics of social constellations such as social groups, societal
classes, institutions, and society as a whole, as well as their role in historical
processes, are at the heart of Critique.
Second, Sartre’s early works have received much more attention than his later
philosophy. Discussions on the implications of Sartre’s later social thought can be
found in Hartmann (1966), Young (1994), Boyle (2005), Rae (2011), and Richter (2011).
The role of things in the constitution of social groups has been analyzed by Blättler
(2012) and Kleinherenbrink and Gusman (2018). Sartre’s general approach in Critique
is analyzed by Flynn (1997; 2005), and by Simont and Trezise (1985). Approaches
toward more specific aspects of Sartre’s later philosophy, such as action, value, totalization,
and counter-finality, can be found in Catalano (2007), Tomlinson (2014),
Turner (2014), and Boria (2015). A broader conception of the practico-inert is provided
by K. S. Engels (2018). More general approaches to Sartre’s thoughts on technology
can be found in Bonnemann (2009) and Weismüller (1999), to name but a few.
Cannon (1991; 1992) provides an extensive psychological reading of Sartre’s later philosophy.
This work draws on Cannon’s previous work on Sartre’s conception of needs
and desires. Ally (2012; 2017) applies Sartre’s theses to ecological processes and understandings.
This list of authors is in no way complete; it is merely intended to illustrate the
wide variety of topics covered by Sartre and his exegetes. Although some literature
deals with various aspects of Sartre’s later works, nothing specifically highlights
Sartre’s theoretical considerations about the fundamental structures of practical
ensembles. This may be a result of the inconsistency of his examples. The underlying
principles of Sartre’s structural considerations about practical constellations are
obscured by the social focus and by the general use of the term ensemble. The fact that
a systematic theory of practical ensembles remains largely unexplored by Sartre
Introduction 13
and his scholars presents both a major challenge and a great opportunity for the
current work.
Third, Sartre’s often multilayered philosophical ideas and concepts can be hard
to grasp, which complicates an understanding of their interplay within practical ensembles.
Practical ensembles must be understood as historically transformational
processes, as permeated and fundamentally driven by the free actions of individuals,
and as inherently mediated by technology in the form of material objects and structures.
Therefore, a full understanding of the inner workings of practical ensembles
requires insight into their historical, action-theoretical, and technico-philosophical
foundations. These foundations, however, have to be built up first, especially in
the case of Sartre’s different conceptions of action and his dialectical conception of
technology.
Research Approach
This work aims to explore and systematize the theoretical foundations, principles,
and dynamics of practical ensembles in Sartre’s philosophy, to outline a theoretical
framework about them, and to apply that framework for an understanding of societal
constellations—in this case, urban mobility—as needful structures. To achieve
this goal, this work will examine three fundamental aspects of Sartre’s philosophy.
First, it is necessary to understand and reconstruct Sartre’s general philosophical
outlook, as well as the development of his ideas throughout his works. This work
advocates for a complementary reading of Sartre’s philosophical oeuvre and for the
fact that a more complete understanding of his philosophical concepts requires a reconstruction
of how certain concepts change and other concepts mutually complement
each other. Borrowing Sartre’s words, this means that the totality of his philosophy
must be understood by reconstructing its totalization. This complementary
reading and reconstruction is of central importance. In Being and Nothingness, Sartre
lays down the existentialist foundations of his philosophy. Here, he introduces his
idea of ontological freedom and develops a general conception of human action. Although
the early Sartre already uses the concept of totalization to refer to the synthetic
character of human existence as a unity of being and nothingness, he is much more
concerned with the question of why this unity can never become a completed totality.
In Critique, he builds on these thoughts and elevates the concept of totalization
to the materially dialectical basic principle of human existence, experience, and action.
According to Sartre, human existence is a constant mediation of internal and
external dialectics. He claims that understanding this constant mediation makes it
possible to understand history. History, in this regard, is ultimately understood to
progress through material transformations of socioculturally and materially structured
constellations that consist of practical relations between humans and non14
Needful Structures
human elements in a certain environment. It is here one finds Sartre’s thoughts on
practical ensembles.
However, before addressing Sartre’s thoughts on practical ensembles, the second
fundamental aspect of his philosophy, namely his view on the structures of human
action and existence as a praxis-process, must be explored and further developed
from an action-theoretical point of view. The reason for this perspective is the
importance Sartre gives to human action in general, and to instrumental means in
the formation of practical ensembles in particular. Despite the fundamental role of
human action throughout Sartre’s philosophy, and his general remarks about human
action and history, there is no unified action-theoretical conception in his philosophy
or in that of his exegetes that provides a structural understanding of action
as both a mediation of internal and external dialectics and a goal-directed and
totalizing endeavor driven by the dialectic of need and desire. The reason for this
conceptual lack may be attributed to the fact that Sartre proposes two seemingly
irreconcilable action concepts in his philosophy—the free action as self-projection
in Being and Nothingness and the materially constrained, historically situated praxis
in Critique. Only an action-theoretical understanding that unifies these action concepts
based on the dialectical principle of totalization can provide the foundation
for outlining the inner workings and overall structure of practical ensembles. Furthermore,
Sartre provides many examples of how instrumental means mediate human
actions and how this mediation, in turn, affects the larger structure of societal
constellations. Thus, to understand the intricacies of human-technology relations
in Sartre’s philosophy, this action-theoretical approach is also needed.
Practical ensembles are societal constellations in the constant process of totalization.
This process is driven by the structured relations between individual historical
agents, other agents, and instrumental means. These agents engage in constellations
to satisfy their requirements, wants, and wishes. How agents are motivated
to take up goal-directed behavior stems from how these agents totalize themselves
and their world through their needful interrelation with their environment
and how their abstract needs are concretized as desires. This again returns to the
overall form of organization of practical ensembles as needful structures. To develop
an understanding of practical ensembles, it is not enough to state that human beings
have certain physical or mental necessities and urges, or that they act in specific
ways to satisfy them. Rather, the exact role of these needs and desires in the motivational
structure of action, as well as the concrete course of these actions, must be
demonstrated. Although this exposition eventually has some thematic overlaps with
Sartre’s broader historical account of action, it approaches the structure of action
from a different angle. This does not just render the very course of action intelligible
as a mediation of internal and external dialectics; it also lays the foundation for the
third fundamental aspect of Sartre’s philosophy.
Introduction 15
That third fundamental aspect is his dialectical conception of technology.
Throughout his works, Sartre concerns himself with the relationship, similarities,
and fundamental differences between human beings and things. Here, Sartre has a
dialectical understanding of instrumentality: he claims that a thing only becomes an
instrumental object in the totalizing relation between agent and end. Furthermore,
he says that human existence is technologically mediated. However, this form of
mediation only becomes intelligible through an action-theoretical understanding
of human existence.
Despite the social emphasis of Sartre’s later work, reflections on the relationship
between human action and technology, such as tools, machines, and consumer
goods, provide the theoretical background for his philosophy. Insofar as material entities
are manufactured, they must be considered practico-inert. As such, they must
be understood as results of former actions. Practico-inert objects have specific material
properties by virtue of which these objects not only signify possible options for
action but also mediate and manifest human interrelations—and thus mediate and
manifest the structure of societal constellations as well. According to Sartre, “these
heavy, inert objects lie at the basis of a community whose bonds are, in part, bonds
of interiority. It is through this interiority that one material element can act on another
from a distance […] social facts are things in so far as all things are, directly or
indirectly, social facts” (Sartre 1978, 179).2
Foregrounding and further developing Sartre’s reflections on human-technology
relations from a philosophical perspective on technology helps to better capture
some of his fundamental insights and to apply them to understanding practical ensembles.
This is especially true for the multifarious ways in which human agency and
technology interrelate and influence each other in these systems. Rather than accentuating
social dynamics and understanding practical ensembles primarily as social
ensembles, this work highlights the interrelations of humans and technology in
these ensembles and demonstrates that technological artifacts must be given equal
significance for the totalizing processing of practical ensembles.
Based on a general notion of these fundamental aspects, one can engage
Sartre’s understanding of societal constellations as practical ensembles. Such an
understanding has deconstructive and reconstructive aspects. First of all, it reveals
societal constellations to be in the constant process of totalization based on human
actions. Therefore, this understanding allows one either to examine the function
2 Sartre comes to this conclusion by accepting both Durkheim’s maxim to treat social facts as
things and Weber’s response according to which social facts are not things. In recognizing that
social relations represent material interactions that are always mediated by matter, either
in the form of the human body or material objects, he takes a middle position between
Durkheim and Weber. However, a comparative analysis of these views cannot be provided
in this work.
16 Needful Structures
of the organizational form of societal constellations and scrutinize the structural
elements—i.e. partial totalities—, which this organizational form consists of; or to
reconstruct the nature of interrelations between these partial totalities as structural
moments in the overall totalization. In this regard, a practical ensemble resembles a
system (Ropohl 2009, 75). Furthermore, conceiving such constellations as practical
ensembles allows one to understand how the partial totalities in these constellations
become mutually adapted to the overall form of organization the constellations take
over time. According to Sartre, such adaptations take place through material
change, technological development, habit formation, and habituation. Eventually,
the formation of habits and concomitant attitudes towards actions entails an association
of instrumental means with the continued existence of human beings
within these constellations. Therefore, when analyzing them, it is paramount to
not lose track of the fundamental significance of human requirements, wants, and
wishes, the way abstract needs are concretized into desires, and the way human
action is technologically mediated.
Eventually, the general framework of practical ensembles can be applied to
societal constellations of human and non-human elements to reveal their structural
interrelations. A factory, for instance, when conceived as a practical ensemble,
presents itself as a constellation of laborers, directors, machines, and work routines,
among other things. The overall function of this constellation is to produce goods.
Scrutinizing the partial totalities as structural elements of this overall totalizing
process, it becomes obvious that human requirements, wants, and wishes, as well
as the dialectic of need and desire, pervade this organizational form. Laborers work
for wages to reproduce themselves as laborers. Directors employ laborers for profit
when selling goods for a higher price than their production required owing to the
surplus value of the laborers’ work. These goods themselves are needed or desired
by others who are willing to pay for them. Machines and work routines support,
manifest, and stabilize these labor processes by material inertia, both in the features
and characteristics of machines and in the habituated and thus incorporated
institutional rules and labor processes within the laborer’s bodies. In this regard,
a practical ensemble resembles a system in which the interaction of subsystems
(laborer, director, machine) define the mode of operation of the system (factory) in
relation to the system’s environment (a societal system in demand for goods).
The fundamental tenet of this research approach is comparable to the one mentioned
by Ally (2017). He writes that the task of his book Ecology and Existence—a fusion
of Sartrean thought and ecology—is not so much to think about Sartre but “to
think with and beyond him, and even to stretch and bend his thought here and there,
without breaking it” (5, emphasis in original). The same also applies to this work,
insofar as it advocates for a novel reading of Sartre as a praxeologist, an action theorist,
a philosopher of technology, and a quasi-system theorist.
Introduction 17
Motivation and Research Context
The personal motivation for this work is a long-standing interest in the conditions
of human existence, the bonds and boundaries of human freedom, the potential
for self-realization, and the possibilities and constraints of a technologically mediated
life. Against this motivational background, it stands the question why Sartre’s
thoughts still have relevance for the contemporary challenges of the human condition.
Current global, social, and technological developments—global warming,
increasing social conflicts and disparities, and the rise of digital technologies and
AI—make it necessary to take a particular look at the mechanisms by which the social
systems in which one is situated come into being, the role that technology plays
in them, and whether the ways in which these systems are organized actually meet
one’s underlying needs. Sartre’s decidedly existentialist perspective on technology,
society, and history allows one to understand and reassess one’s position and role
within social dynamics and systems and to reorient how one may engage with the
world to make a change.
Academically, the work itself is situated within the research training group
KRITIS at TU Darmstadt and represents an extended version of the author’s PhD
thesis that was titled Needful Structures: The Dialectics of Practical Ensembles and their
Significance for Understanding Urban Mobility. KRITIS is concerned with a general understanding
of networked urban infrastructures, the critical significance of these
structures for modern societies, and the potential challenges and risks resulting
from their composition. Concerning the research program of KRITIS, this work
emphasizes the construction and transformation of the conditions of possibility for
critical infrastructures. However, this must not be understood in a purely technical
way. Within the research program of KRITIS, urban infrastructures are considered
sociotechnical systems, or systems of systems, that comprise a functional interplay
of people, things, large built structures, rules, regulations, and so on (Engels et al.
2021).
Sartre’s approach lends itself to such an understanding. It too conceives of societal
constellations as structured interrelations between partial totalities, which can
again be scrutinized for their composition. Furthermore, it emphasizes the fundamental
role of material and immaterial requirements, wants, and wishes in the dialectic
of need and desire for understanding the inner workings of these constellations.
Lastly, Sartre’s conception of the practico-inert allows one to conceive of urban
infrastructures as materially inert residuals of former actions, which manifest
certain strategies of tackling supraindividual needfulness by concretizing abstract
needs into desires.
This work intends to make a theoretical contribution to the study of Sartre’s philosophy
by providing new perspectives on various aspects of Sartre’s works and pro18
Needful Structures
moting interest in Sartre’s historical and theoretical ideas on action, his philosophical
thoughts on technology, and his understanding of societal constellations.
Beyond that, this work is also located in the larger field of approaches toward
the study of science, technology, and society (STS). It is especially applicable to
approaches that assume a dependence between practice and materiality (Schatzki
2010) or a sociomaterial interweaving of practice, materiality, and forms of organization
(Pickering 1995; Orlikowski & Scott 2008), or that deal with the research
of infrastructures (Shove 2016; Shove & Trentmann 2019). In terms of the philosophy
of technology, the work is situated in debates about a dialectical philosophy
of technology (Hubig 2006) and the supposed power of and through technology
(Hubig 2015), as well as postphenomenological approaches toward technological
mediation (Ihde 1990; Rosenberger & Verbeek 2015). In addition, problems of habit
formation are taken up as well (Sparrow & Hutchinson 2013). This work intends
to make a practical contribution to infrastructure research, as it seeks to develop
a sociomaterial understanding of larger forms of societal constellation from a
philosophical and anthropological perspective. It is also meant to sharpen views on
usually obscured modes of structuring that affect human existence and action.
How Sartre conceives of structured compositions of human and non-human elements,
which practically interrelate to perform actions, has thematic overlaps with
other approaches, such as Foucault’s analyses of dispositifs and Latour’s conception of
hybrid action in actor-network constellations (Richter 2011; Hubig 2015) and other
approaches that investigate the relation between agents, action, and structure (Giddens
1986). However, this work does not engage in comparative discussions about
these approaches. Another related line of research that will not be examined here is
assemblage theory (Deleuze & Guattari 2005; DeLanda 2006). However, the current
work aims to be a foundation for future research in this regard.
Structure of this Work
This work is divided into two parts. Part I, containing the first three chapters, deals
with the dialectical foundations of practical ensembles. Part II, in Chapters 4 and 5,
then deals with the theory and praxis of practical ensembles.
Chapter 1 approaches the first fundamental aspect of Sartre’s philosophy. It
explores the core themes of Sartre’s works Being and Nothingness, Search for a Method,
and Critique of Dialectical Reason to reconstruct Sartre’s philosophical development.
The chapter leads chronologically through Sartre’s works and demonstrates that
Sartre consistently concerned himself with the dialectic of human existence.
Whereas Sartre’s early works lean more toward internal dialectics (section 1.2), his
later works represent approaches to examine (section 1.3) and even unify the internal
and external dialectics of human existence (section 1.4). The last section of the
chapter examines some of Sartre’s thoughts on the dialectical progression of history
Introduction 19
to illustrate the fundamental significance of human action in that process. The first
chapter as a whole, therefore, aims to clarify the fundamental role of human action
in Sartre’s philosophy by reconstructing the complementary nature of his works.
However, merely a historical account of the significance of action is provided at this
point. This account lays the foundation for Chapter 2.
Chapter 2 turns the focus from the significance of human action for the progression
and intelligibility of history to the structural characteristics of the action
itself. The different foci of Sartre’s works mean that a unified conception of action
can hardly be identified on the surface of his philosophy. In Being and Nothingness,
Sartre provides a relatively technical definition of action as the realization of ends
through the employment of means, both in the form of the body and in the form
of instruments. In his early work, individual action represents the situated realization
of individual existence. In Critique, the praxis of historical human beings is emphasized
as a socioculturally situated activity that takes place within a mediating
material milieu. However, in Critique, Sartre also points toward totalization as the
underlying principle of action. Therefore, the chapter is preceded by a technical reconstruction
of Sartre’s concept of totalization as the basic principle of human-world
interrelation, and totality as the (temporal) outcome of totalization (section 2.2). The
remainder of the chapter brings together action-theoretical thoughts from Being and
Nothingness and Critique to develop a conception of situated action based on the dialectic
of need and desire. The analysis begins with a closer look at the existentialist
roots of Sartre’s action-theoretical thoughts. Here, human existence becomes comprehensible
as an existential lack that seeks completion. Based on this existential
foundation, a Sartrean conception of situated action is developed. According to this
conception, human action is an ontologically free, intentional, yet inherently needand
desire-oriented endeavor (section 2.3). This conception will be further developed
and integrated into Sartre’s understanding of human existence as an ongoing,
autopoietic, and totalizing praxis-process (section 2.4).
Chapter 3 explores Sartre’s philosophical thoughts on technology. The chapter
proceeds less chronologically than it does thematically. From the dialectical character
of action in Sartre, it follows that the use of instrumental means must be understood
as a dialectical totalization as well. In this context, Sartre’s understanding
of the body as the center of an individual field of possibilities and how he links his
thoughts to Heidegger’s concept of equipmentality are introduced and scrutinized
(section 3.2). According to Sartre, manufactured objects and body techniques not
only serve as instruments but also signify certain forms of conduct by virtue of their
materiality. They also refer to larger supraindividual forms of organization and history
(section 3.3). The chapter concludes with a technology-focused exploration of
Sartre’s understanding of the practico-inert (section 3.4). The practico-inert is a fundamental
concept in Sartre’s later philosophy. It is significant for the formation of
20 Needful Structures
practical ensembles. It describes the fact that certain forms of conduct become materially
inert in instrumental means.
Chapter 4 forms the thematic focus of this current work. Here, the theoretical
framework of practical ensembles is developed based on the previous findings. The
chapter begins with an examination of Sartre’s conception of humanity’s struggle
against scarcity. This concept is rather important in Sartre’s later work, as it represents
the fundamental condition for humanity’s needful relationship with its surroundings.
According to Sartre, all forms of societal organization arise in a scarce
material milieu. This means that societies emerge in an attempt to deal with the fact
that there are not enough resources for everyone’s survival at a given time. Therefore,
resources must be gathered, rationed, and distributed in a certain socially organized
way. Furthermore, access to certain resources must be secured (section 4.2).
The analysis of this conception is followed by more focused analyses of processes
according to which practical ensembles coalesce through serial modes of structuring
(section 4.3), and of how these serial modes transform into communal modes of
structuring (section 4.4) based on how individuals can satisfy their requirements,
wants, and wishes. Following this, the persistence of practical ensembles is examined
through Sartre’s conception of hexis. This concept is neither well developed by
Sartre himself, nor is it well researched in Sartre studies. Its significance is shown,
however, for understanding how societal constellations stabilize and persist over
time (section 4.5). This is followed by a more thorough examination of how the workings
of practical ensembles generate external effects that act back on them in the
form of counter-finalities (section 4.6). The chapter concludes with a discussion about
the general understanding of the practical ensemble framework (section 4.7).
Chapter 5 applies Sartre’s theories to urban mobility systems. It explores how
urban mobility systems can be understood as practical ensembles, how the flow of
urban mobility results from the structured interrelations between different users of
urban infrastructure systems, how their interrelations are mediated by each other,
and how urban dwellers escape the serial structuring of their practical ensembles
through desire paths (section 5.2). In light of this, anthropogenic climate change is
re-read as a Sartrean counter-finality (section 5.3). After this, infrastructures are
scrutinized regarding their critical function for society among others (section 5.4).
The chapter concludes with a more focused analysis of urban infrastructures as
needful structures with the help of three key concepts in infrastructure research:
resilience, criticality, and vulnerability.
I Dialectical Foundations

1. From Individual Project to Historical Praxis
1.1 Introduction
In this chapter, fundamental lines of thought from Sartre’s early and later philosophy
are introduced as foundational for his theoretical conception of practical ensembles.
This is done to generate a general understanding of Sartre’s philosophy and
to introduce some of the considerations to be further developed in this work. The
reason for the broader scale of this analysis lies in the fact that this work considers
Sartre’s early and later works to be complementary. To understand his later concepts,
some earlier ones must be clarified first. In this way, conceptual transitions
between Sartre’s works can be reconstructed. Moreover, Sartre gives the theoretical
basis for some of his earlier concepts in his later works, while changing his general
perspective toward the social, cultural, and, most importantly, material conditions
in which human beings find themselves.
Considering the specific focus of his philosophical writings, Sartre’s philosophy
can be divided roughly into his early, more existentialist works, which are more
focused on human existence as an individual and free project, and his later, more
Marxist works, which are more focused on the interplay between individual praxis
and dialectical history. Throughout them all, Sartre takes an anthropocentric and
deeply humanist view. His principal interest lies in the scope of human reality, freedom,
and action. In an interview with New Left Review in 1969, Sartre stated that the
quintessential problem at the heart of his philosophy is “how to give man both his autonomy
and his reality among real objects, avoiding idealism without lapsing into a
mechanistic materialism” (Sartre 1969, 46). Although Sartre approaches different aspects
of this problem throughout his work, his principal methodology consists in analyzing
the nature of human-world relations while taking ontological, phenomenological,
dialectical, and praxeological considerations into account.
His two major works, Being and Nothingness and Critique of Dialectical Reason (in
connection with Search for a Method), represent attempts to depict two apparently
mutually exclusive aspects of human life—the internal perspective of an ontologically
free agent and the external perspective on this agent as a needful material being
in interrelation with sociocultural and material factors. These aspects, however, rep24
Dialectical Foundations
resent two interconnected planes of the existential reality of human beings. Human
existence unites the lived experience of oneself as a free agent and of oneself as a
socially dependent, material being. By reconstructing the changing foci of Sartre’s
philosophy and how he develops his philosophical concepts, this work intends to
demonstrate how Sartre mediates between these two aspects.
1.2 Being and Nothingness
This section deals with the philosophical outlook of Sartre’s first major work, Being
and Nothingness. The main focus of this work lies in what can be called the internal
dialectic of human existence, namely the fact that human existence is a dialectically
synthetic relationship between being and consciousness. His later works are more
focused on the external dialectic of human existence, or, rather, on the fact that human
existence itself represents a mediation of the internal and external dialectic—a
constant and mutually affecting interplay of these dialectical processes.
To understand the dialectically synthetic relationship of being and consciousness,
“the moments of this synthesis” (Sartre 2021, 34, emphasis in original)—namely
being and consciousness—have to be examined in the various ways they interrelate.
Concerning being, Sartre explicitly differentiates between humans as exceptional
beings that constantly relate to themselves and their surroundings and non-human
entities. Ontologically, both humans and non-human entities are in the sense that
both are existent by virtue of their ontological foundation in the materiality of being
(Sartre 2021, 24). This being, Sartre claims, must be understood as follows: “Being
is. Being is in itself. Being is what it is” (Sartre 2021, 29). However, Sartre identifies
a difference in how humans and things relate to being. This is a differentiation of
their respective modes of being.
Sartre refers to the human mode of being as being-for-itself, or just for-itself
(French pour-soi). He refers to the mode of being of those non-human entities that
comprise the physicochemical world as being-in-itself, or in-itself (French en-soi).
Although his philosophical thinking is deeply influenced by Hegel, Sartre deviates
from Hegel’s concept of ideality in this regard (Bernstein 1980, 130).1 Sartre justifies
his distinction between modes of being with the claim that there is “an ontological
chasm that cannot be mediated” (Bernstein 1980, 131) between being and human
consciousness. Phenomenologically, according to Sartre, the consciousness of being
can never be identical with being, because consciousness is characterized by relationality.
He claims that the being of consciousness is to exist “at a distance from
itself ” (Sartre 2021, 128, emphasis in original).
1 A more thorough examination of Sartre’s modes of being follows in section 2.2.
1. From Individual Project to Historical Praxis 25
As a consequence, Sartre agrees with Heidegger on the fact that human existence
is being-in-the-world (German In-der-Welt-sein). In Sartre’s case, being-in-the-world
must be understood as an ongoing, dialectical synthesis of being and consciousness.
To exhaustively represent the nature of human existence, the fundamentally
dialectical relation between humans and being must be the basis for all analyses.
From this fundamental relationship, Sartre examines various aspects of human existence,
such as bad faith, the conditions of the possibility of intersubjectivity, the
situation of the individual, and the effects of the look or gaze of others. He does so by
focusing on the internal perspective of a situated human existent. Such a perspective
accounts for what it means to act in, experience, and engage the world based
on a synthetic relationship of being and consciousness. Out of all the themes analyzed
in Being and Nothingness, the most important ones for this work can be found
in Sartre’s conception of the nature of human agency, and his considerations about
the quality of human freedom.
Action and Existence
Human action plays a central role in Sartre’s philosophy. Sartre states that “being,
in its case, is acting, and to cease to act is to cease to be” (Sartre 2021, 623). Action is
decisive for being and not-being; it is an activity in which humans realize the possibilities
that arise from their existential situation. Any human possibility not realized
through action simply does not exist. Sartre gives three express conditions of action,
namely freedom of the acting being, the intention to act, and the discovery of the world as a
lacking state of things (Sartre 2021, 569–573). The freedom of the acting being represents
the fundamental condition for action from which the other two conditions are derived.
Sartre locates the freedom of the acting being, i.e. the human agent, in the aforementioned
fact that human beings exist in relation to being, or, more precisely, exist
as a dialectical relating of being which is just given, or posited, as it is on one side and
negating consciousness on the other. This dialectical relating must be understood in
a rather practical way. Qua being, humans are material, organic, and necessarily social.
They have basic and more complex needs and requirements that derive from
physicochemical and psychological processes within themselves and their mediating
milieu, i.e. their material surroundings, as well as from how these surroundings
are socioculturally structured within forms of societal constellation.2 Section
2 In Being and Nothingness, Sartre uses terms like entours (e.g. Sartre 1943, 549) and milieu (e.g.
Sartre 1943, 618) to refer to a person’s surroundings, whereas the terms environnement (e.g.
Sartre 1960, 167) and milieu (e.g. Sartre 1960, 196–199) are more prominently used throughout
Critique. According to Petit and Gillaume (2018), there is a somewhat clear distinction
between the terms milieu and environnement in French intellectual discourse: “The French
term ‘milieu’ designates (i) the middle or center and its surroundings; (ii) the ‘in-between two
26 Dialectical Foundations
4.2 discusses what it means for the materiality that surrounds human beings to be
socioculturally structured. Sartre’s understanding of the structure of forms of organization
between human beings and non-human things refers to the set of rules, regulations,
and expectations that mediates and thus shapes how a person’s possible
options for action are enabled.
All these factors—physicochemical, psychological, sociocultural—which culminate
in a human’s corporeality and lived experience, belong to what Sartre refers to
as facticity (Sartre 2021, 133). Qua consciousness, however, human existence does not
coincide with its facticity, but, rather, relates to it (Sartre 2021, 622–628). Although
this relational gap between being and consciousness is practically nil, Sartre claims
it to be the decisive factor for the fundamental freedom of human existence (Sartre
2021, 128). Sartre refers to this fundamental freedom as ontological freedom. It describes
the fact that human existence represents the dialectical mediation of being
and consciousness. Human existence is a relation to and not an identity with being.
This fundamental relationality of being and consciousness is the condition of possibility
for recognizing that all forms of human conduct are, at their core, intentional
and goal-directed actions. These actions are based on the inherent needfulness of
human existence, i.e. the fact that human existence always strives for something
places’ (mi-lieu); (iii) the ambient atmosphere; and (iv) the medium (middle-term, intermediate
or mediator) […] The term ‘milieu’ says both more and less than the term ‘environment.’
It says more, because it is not on the outside, but between the inside and the outside. It says
less, because it refers to the unique experience of a living organism in a place, whereas the
‘environment’ is identical for all beings which find themselves in a place, and it stays outside
the living beings. While the environment is objective, the milieu is ‘trajective.’” (88). Petit’s
and Guillaume’s first and second glosses for the term milieu can be found in the French phrase
au milieu du monde, which Sartre often uses. This phrase does not at all refer to a supposed
milieu of the world. It simply means within, in the midst of, or in the middle of the world. Their
fourth understanding of milieu can be found in Sartre’s conceptualization of totalization as
a synthetic activity through which humans and what surrounds them become what they are
in their interrelation in the first place. Agents interiorize the things, structural features, and
people that surround them and totalize them as their world. However, this totalization is
again shaped by the way the material surrounding is socioculturally structured, which again
mediates and thus shapes an agent’s actions. In Being and Nothingness, Sartre explicitly states:
“My ‘surroundings’ [French mes entours] should not be confused with the place I occupy […] My
surroundings are the implement-things that surround me, with their coefficient of adversity
and their equipmentality. Of course, by occupying my place I am founding my discovery of
my surroundings […] Thus I am thrown, from the moment I exist, in the midst of existences
that differ from me, and whose potentialities are unfolding, for and against me” (Sartre 2021,
657; Sartre 1943, 549). In this regard, in Sartre’s philosophy there is a conceptual equivalence
between surroundings as the whole of people, things, structures, and systems, and milieu, in
the sense of a mediating milieu that predisposes the conditions of possibility for action in
the first place.
1. From Individual Project to Historical Praxis 27
it requires, wants, or wishes (section 2.3). Dialectically speaking, material requirements
or mental wants and wishes represent positings that are negated through an
active engagement between agents and themselves, or between agents and their milieu.
Under the freedom of the acting being, i.e. ontological freedom, human beings can
be understood as agents. In Sartre’s understanding, the freedom of the acting being thus
represents the necessary condition of possibility for human agency.
At this stage, the two other express conditions for action, namely the intention to
act and the discovery of the world as a lacking state of things, come into play. For Sartre,
human action must be conceived as an intentional and ontologically free undertaking
that modifies the “way the world is figured” (Sartre 2021, 569, emphasis in original)
according to certain ends arising within concrete situations. The condition of
intention to act refers to the motivational and directional aspect of human action,
namely the fact that human beings have certain ends that they intend to attain. The
condition discovery of the world as a lacking state of things refers both to the ontological
and to the epistemological aspect of human action, namely the fact that the concrete
outline of those ends is relative both to how agents apprehend their action situation
based on what their surroundings provide them, and to how this provision is assessed
regarding an agent’s requirements, wants, and wishes at the onset of action.
Both conditions, however, dialectically interrelate. The ends that agents intend to attain
through their actions are relative to the attainability of these ends as provided
by the agents’ capabilities on the one hand, and environmental factors such as the
right means and other action conditions on the other.
The early Sartre explains the dialectical nature of action most evidently through
the concept of désirs (Sartre 1943, 123), which can be translated simply as desires. In
Sartre’s dialectical understanding, a desire in the form of thirst, for instance, initially
makes itself known as a complex of physical symptoms like a dry mouth or a
slight headache (Sartre 2021, 139). As mentioned above, in Sartre’s dialectical understanding,
these physical symptoms represent positings of human being that express
themselves through the body. However, owing to the fact of ontological freedom, human
beings do not coincide with their being. They relate to their being. This means
that they, for instance, examine what they feel and how they feel it. They try to explain
why they feel the way they do or how to rid themselves of certain feelings. In this
way, they relate to their physical symptoms rather than purely being their symptoms.
By questioning and challenging these symptoms, by attempting to understand and
even change them, these human beings engage with their facticity and temporality.
They refer back to their existence, their experiences, and past actions in similar situations
and discover their symptoms as uncomfortable in relation to a possible but
as yet unrealized future self that is relieved of these symptoms. These human beings
thus discover themselves to be in a lacking state of things that simultaneously outlines,
anticipates, and projects toward a potentially satisfied future state of things (Sartre
2021, 511). Furthermore, these human beings recognize themselves as the very ones
28 Dialectical Foundations
who intend to transform their uncomfortable symptoms through action. They thus
have the intention to act for themselves as ends in themselves. They are autotelic, in
that they always, in some form or another, represent the end of their actions; their
self (Greek autos) is their end (Greek telos).
Within this process of projecting toward a future state of things, together with
the intention to act and the discovery of lacking something for themselves, the uncomfortable
physical symptoms are disclosed to them as the desire of thirst. Sartre
states that “[d]esire is a lack of being, and is haunted in its innermost being by the
being that it desires. In this way, desire testifies to the existence of a lack in humanreality’s
being” (Sartre 2021, 140, emphasis added).
Desires bestow a fundamental directedness upon human existence because they
project toward something that a human being lacks. For Sartre, desire is somewhat
attached to an object of desire (Sartre 2021, 508–509). However, Sartre states that it
would be “quite wrong to say that what is desired, in desiring, is our ‘physical possession’
of the desired object” (Sartre 2021, 508). Rather, a desire has a concrete direction
toward an already familiar thing or toward a process in the world that represents
the general context of its satisfaction. Thirst, as a desire for a glass of water or a cup
of tea, for instance, represents a particular mode in which a specific, socioculturally
situated, human subjectivity transcends toward and engages with the world for
themselves in very specific ways (Sartre 2021, 510). In desiring, human beings not
only simultaneously exist as what is lacking and as what is lacked; they also project
toward themselves as a potential future self that is the end of their actions (Sartre
2021, 146–149).
Sartre’s thoughts on desires render more clearly his conception of what it means
to act. Acting, according to the early Sartre, “is to modify the way the world is figured
[French la figure du monde], to arrange the means in view of an end” (Sartre 2021,
569, emphasis in original; Sartre 1943, 477). The term figure here refers beyond the
material shape of the world and the things it comprises to the way these things are
phenomenally given based on their being. To act based on the ends projected toward
by an agent’s desires thus means to modify the materiality of the world in such a way
that the lacking state of things may become a satisfied state of things for these agents. In
this way, acting does not merely mean acting based on one’s desires. Rather, acting
means to realize a subject-dependent, potential future state of the world in which
one is involved for oneself. This realized state can be satisfying, but it does not have
to. What is important is that such a state has been realized through action. By interiorizing
said state of the world, agents may assess whether they realized their intended
ends or not. An action, in this regard, is more than a goal-directed activity.
It is also the realization of individual existence, understood as a free self-projection
toward the future, which is directed through desires. Although Sartre emphasizes
ontological freedom as a basis for human existence, he is not ignorant of the various
interferences between an individual’s action and their surrounding sociality,
1. From Individual Project to Historical Praxis 29
culture, and materiality. Sartre mentions the role of other people, for instance, the
abstract sociocultural structures of the societal constellations in which individuals
are situated, and the utility and adversity coefficients of the things that may be used as
means to an individual’s ends. All of these factors potentially shape an individual’s
course of action. Nevertheless, although the facticity and the situation-dependent
outline of desires mean that human beings are not the originators of their existence,
they are the authors since they decide how they realize themselves through their actions.
3
1.3 Search for a Method
This section deals with topics from Search for a Method, a work that marks the transition
between Sartre’s early, more existentialist works and his later, more Marxist
ones. Sartre’s Questions de méthode, translated as Search for a Method in English and
Fragen der Methode in German, was released as a standalone work in 1957, three years
before Critique de la raison dialectique. Although it was reprinted as the introductory
essay to Critique de la raison dialectique in 1960, Sartre himself mentions a thematic
shift of perspective between this essay and the main text of Critique (Sartre 1978, 15).
In Search for a Method, and even more so in Critique of Dialectical Reason I and II,
Sartre not only shifts the tone but also the general focus of his philosophy. He begins
to concern himself mostly with what can be called the external dialectic of human existence,
namely the fact that human existence is a dialectically synthetic relationship
between individuals and history. History, in this regard, is understood as the common
actions of other individuals, groups, and collectives in relation to sociocultural
and material factors. In the interview with New Left Review, Sartre states that the reason
for the fundamental change in his philosophical outlook lies in the fact that life
has taught him la force des choses, which can be translated as force/strength/might/potency
of things. In this interview, Sartre also refers to la force des choses as the “power of
circumstances” (Sartre 1969, 44).4
Compared with his earlier philosophy, the later Sartre is much more aware of the
practical necessity of materiality and the individual’s place in societal constellations
that constrain and enable individual action. This is mostly a result of ongoing debates
between Sartre and other French intellectuals on the role of Marxism in philos-
3 Section 2.4 expands this earlier conception of action in Sartre’s philosophy by incorporating
the dialectical principle of totalization, the relationship of forms of need and desire, and the
instrumentalization of means to ends.
4 This term already implies that in Sartre’s understanding, things develop a certain force or
power under specific conditions and circumstances; the alternative would be primarily conceiving
of things as having or exerting this power on their own. This idea is further developed
in section 4.3.
30 Dialectical Foundations
ophy and society, the principal relationship between Western Marxism, Stalinism,
and the Soviet Union, and basic questions surrounding the significance of the individual
in historical processes (Jay 1984, 347–350). Jay also reconstructs the impact of
Heidegger’s Brief über den ‘Humanismus’ from 1947 on Sartre’s philosophy. In this text,
Heidegger principally critiqued French philosophers, especially Sartre, for misunderstanding
and misrepresenting his existential philosophy. According to Jay, the
fact that Heidegger pointed toward Marx’s understanding of history as one way of
recognizing the historical in being led to Sartre’s engagement with Marxist thinking,
which again paved the way for incorporating materiality and history into his philosophy
(Jay 1984, 346–347). Whereas Sartre’s early philosophy is an expression of his
experience of heroic individuality in Nazi-occupied France, his later works express
his confrontation with societal collectivity and the processes of upheaval, revolution,
and transformation that took place in the aftermath of World War II. Sartre claims
that his earlier focus on individual freedom, paired with his negligence regarding
la force des choses, is rooted in his emphasis on an “interior experience, without any
coordination with the exterior experience of a petty-bourgeois intellectual” (Sartre
1969, 45).
To account for the fact that things and circumstances can develop a certain force,
in his later works Sartre seeks a deeper understanding of the historical situation of
individuals and the inner logic of historical processes. He does so by examining the
various ways in which individuals, through their actions, practically (re-)produce the
very historical situation that produced those individuals in the first place (Richter
2011, 198). The main point of Sartre’s later works is that human existence is an expression
of society and that history is a constant circle of liberation and necessitation,
propelled by the actions of individuals within larger groupings. Nevertheless—and
despite the implications of his later philosophical outlook—Sartre still defends his
conception of human freedom. He claims that everyone “in a period of exploitation
is at once both the product of his own product and a historical agent who can under
no circumstances be taken as a product” (Sartre 1963, 87, emphasis in original). In
this regard, Sartre’s early and later works are complementary. The externalities of
human existence become comprehensible based on the internalities of human existence,
whereas the functional principles of the internalities become clearer based
on the general dialectical conditions of historical human existence. Similar to his approach
in Being and Nothingness, to understand the externalities of human existence,
the later Sartre focuses on the moments of a dialectical synthesis: individual and
history, as well as the nature of their interrelation. Sartre believes this examination
to be possible by fusing his existentialist philosophy with Marxist thought.5
5 For discussions about whether Sartre can be called an existential Marxist, see Betschart (2019)
and Aronson (2019).
1. From Individual Project to Historical Praxis 31
Regressive-Progressive Method
Search for a Method marks this transition between early and later Sartre. In this work,
Sartre fully agrees with Marx’s materialism, according to which “[t]he mode of production
of material life generally dominates the development of social, political, and
intellectual life” (Sartre 1963, 33–34). However, according to Sartre, Marxist theory in
his time had become dogmatic. Rather than attempting to represent the reality of
human life as a materially dialectical struggle driven by individuals, Sartre laments
that Marxist philosophers conceive human life to be subject to supposed dialectical
laws of nature and history. Sartre claims that Marxism itself had become a tool of
oppression, especially in the U.S.S.R., rather than a tool of liberation (Sartre 1963,
21–22). He complains that the dogmatic reduction of human life to a mere expression
of historical totalities undermines the significance of individual action and existence.
As an existentialist philosopher, Sartre affirms:
the specificity of the human act, which cuts across the social milieu while still holding
on to its determinations, and which transforms the world on the basis of given
conditions. For us man is characterized above all by his going beyond a situation,
and by what he succeeds in making of what he has been made—even if he never
recognizes himself in his objectification. (Sartre 1963, 91)
With his strong emphasis on individual action, Sartre reinterprets Marxist materialism.
Using his later works, it could be said that for Sartre, materially conditioned action
is the primary mode of production of human reality and history. Sartre claims that
human existence can only be understood as an expression of history when history
itself becomes understandable as an expression of human existence (Sartre 1963, 57).
To account for his claim, Sartre borrows Lefebvre’s methodology and further develops
it into what he calls the regressive-progressive method (Sartre 1963, 51–52). He employs
it to dialectically de- and reconstruct all relevant factors constituting the progression
of history based on individual action (Simont & Trezise 1985, 109).
Rather than conforming to dogmatic Marxism, and anchoring human beings
within dialectical laws of nature, Search for a Method stays in line with his early works
and emphasizes the significance of individual action as self-projection and self-realization.
However, because this self-projection is situated in sociocultural and material
conditions, the historical situation of the individual(s) in question must be analyzed
as well. This means that “[f]or any given period, we shall attempt to determine
the field of possibles, the field of instruments, etc. […] we shall determine (among
other things) the area of intellectual instruments” (Sartre 1963, 135, emphasis in original).
All these factors structure the historical situation according to which the actions
of individuals and their role in the progression of history can be understood
in their entirety. The regressive-progressive method is thus “at the same time an
enriching cross-reference between the object […] and the period” (Sartre 1963, 148).
32 Dialectical Foundations
Sartre’s method can be understood as a back-and-forth between historical and existentialist
analyses that inform each other.
The regressive, analytical moment of this method is the analysis of certain historical,
i.e. temporal, sociocultural, and material conditions. According to Sartre,
these historical conditions scaffold the actions of individuals in meaningful ways
(Hubig 1978, 127). In this regard, however, Sartre is careful not to postulate an insurmountable
past and does not wish to make human beings a mere expression of
their class (Dahlmann 2013, 139). Rather, he illustrates the fact that sociocultural and
material factors are constitutive elements of human existence understood as a dialectical
synthesis in progress.
The analysis of this progression is the subject of the progressive, synthetic moment
of Sartre’s theory. Here, Sartre intends to examine the interplay of constraints
and possibilities, along with their significance for how individuals realize themselves
as practical and sense-making beings. In this way, he claims himself able to
depict the reality of an individual human not as stable, but as “a perpetual disequilibrium,
a wrenching away from itself with all its body” (Sartre 1963, 151). Human
existence is a free but historically situated, dialectical progression. From each individual’s
confrontation, overcoming, and reconciliation, in one way or another, with
seemingly overpowering and all-encompassing processes and structures, these processes
and structures not only derive their power and significance but are also instantiated
as such in the first place. Unsurprisingly, a complete analysis depicting
the entirety of an individual’s existence would be extensive. Sartre’s studies on Gustave
Flaubert are a testimony to this extensiveness. In Family Idiot, Sartre meticulously
studies the life of Flaubert, as well as his family and class relations. Sartre
then tries to explain how Flaubert’s literary oeuvre came about, which as Flaubert’s
life’s work throws light on Flaubert’s existence. With four books and over 2500 pages,
Sartre’s Flaubert studies remain unfinished.6
1.4 Critique of Dialectical Reason
This section aims to introduce the essentials of Sartre’s Critique of Dialectical Reason.
The methodology Sartre lays down in Search for a Method serves as the theoretical
point of departure for Critique of Dialectical Reason. In the latter work, Sartre’s
thoughts on the scope of human freedom, the significance of individual action and
experience, and his claims about historical situatedness culminate. His theoretical
considerations about practical ensembles can be found here as well.
6 A more theoretical and phenomenologically grounded analysis of Sartre’s regressive-progressive
method can be found in Smith (1979).
1. From Individual Project to Historical Praxis 33
Whereas the internal dialectic of human existence was at the heart of Sartre’s
early works, especially regarding change and development in the course of practical
self-projection and self-realization, in Search for a Method his main concern is to emphasize
the necessity and possibility of addressing the external dialectic of human
existence. Although Critique thus represents a logical development of those earlier
works, it is not the case that Sartre merely adds to or further develops his earlier
philosophy. With Critique, Sartre fundamentally shifts his philosophical perspective,
going from ontological and phenomenological questions surrounding being, freedom,
action, and existence to the conditions of the possibility for understanding
what it means to be a material human organism both among other such organisms
and in engagement with spatiotemporally structured materiality.
The Foundations of Dialectical Reason
To engage with these conditions of possibility, Sartre stresses the tension between
human existence and history. This history, according to him, becomes comprehensible
only through a dialectical mediation of the internal and external dialectic; or,
more concretely, through the dialectical and mutually affecting interplay between
interiority and exteriority. Sartre not only adds a material, social, and historical
component to his research but also underpins his earlier thoughts with a theoretical
analysis of the conditions of possibility for dialectical science and experience in
general. At its core, Critique represents Sartre’s attempt to provide a critical theory
of society in the form of a social ontology that takes a dialectical conception of
human existence, action, and experience as its theoretical point of departure. Consequently,
the human perspective remains front and center in Sartre’s philosophical
thought. What changes, however, is Sartre’s focus on the internal perspective of a
situated human existent.
The later Sartre is less interested in what it means to act, experience, and engage
the world based on a synthetic relationship of being and consciousness, and more
interested in how individual action, experience, and world engagement, based on a
synthetic relationship between individual and history, are both constituted by and
constitutive of their social, cultural, political, and, most importantly, material conditions.
Consequently, Sartre alters slightly his analytical perspective. In Critique, he
focuses on human existence as a mediation of internal and external dialectics. For
Sartre’s philosophical endeavor, this change of perspective means that the internal
dialectic of human existence that renders human beings ontologically free and goaldirected
must be reconciled with the external dialectic of human existence through
which human beings are both producers and products of their historical situation.
Sartre’s golden path toward this reconciliation is to advocate for a dialectical reason
that allows him to incorporate the individual within the dialectical consummation
of history, and vice versa, based on the historical praxis of individuals.
34 Dialectical Foundations
To understand Sartre’s approach, it is necessary to be familiar with some of the
assumptions he develops in this introductory discussion to Critique. However, the
broad scope of his argument means that only a few central thoughts can be briefly
addressed here.7
Sartre’s discussion in Critique’s introductory chapter revolves around the status,
significance, and validity of Marxist dialectic as a scientific method for analyzing
natural and historical processes. The discussion begins with general assumptions
about the nature of the scientific method. About analytical science and the induction
of scientific laws, Sartre claims that “[w]hatever the object of his research, whatever
its orientation, the scientist, in his activity, assumes that reality will always manifest
itself in such a way that a provisional and fluid rationality can be constituted in and
through it” (Sartre 1978, 19). Sartre claims that scientific laws are not facts; they remain
external to their research object and represent general assumptions that must
be falsifiable. Sartre argues that the dialectic, on the contrary, is “both a method and a
movement in the object. For the dialectician, it is grounded on a fundamental claim
both about the structure of the real and about that of our praxis” (Sartre 1978, 20,
emphasis in original).
According to Sartre, applying dialectical thinking to a research object allows one
to demonstrate whether the object in question is dialectical or not by experiencing
dialectical principles to be at work in the object. Therefore, the dialectic also represents
the principle of its own intelligibility. Thus, for dialectical science to be valid,
it must verify whether the movement, i.e. the behavior and internal processing, of its
research object, is dialectical, and it must also substantiate its own methodological
validity regarding the object in question. Based on these assumptions, Sartre discusses
some Marxist paradigms of his time. He criticizes Engels’ Dialektik der Natur
in particular and accuses Engels’ philosophical outlook on the dialectics of nature of
ultimately failing in accounting for the research object in question. Engels intends to
provide the most elementary dialectical laws of nature that govern not only natural
but also historical and mental processes. He does so to ground dialectical materialism,
i.e. a dialectic of matter, and to ultimately verify it as fundamental science
(Engels 1975, 348–349; Remley 2012, 23–25). According to the conception of dialectical
materialism, history, and human thought represent outcomes of nature, which
is itself understood as the constant dialectical interpenetration of physicochemical
processes and substances.
Sartre does not deny that natural processes can be conceived as dialectical. On
the contrary, he agrees that given technological progress and the refinement of scientific
methods and technologies, nature might indeed be proven dialectical (Sartre
1978, 33). Nevertheless, he insists that dialectical conceptions of nature do not necessarily
confirm whether natural processes are in fact dialectical. Sartre claims that
7 For a nuanced analysis of the discussion and its historical background, see Remley (2012).
1. From Individual Project to Historical Praxis 35
the experience of dialectical lawfulness in nature represents a specific point of view
on nature. Such a dialectical experiencing is possible only because human reason
itself conforms to dialectical principles. Sartre states that a dialectical notion of nature
is itself a dialectical conception of nature by the human mind.8 Given that the
dialectic is not only a method but also the principle of its intelligibility, “the only dialectic
one will find in Nature is a dialectic that one has put there oneself ” (Sartre
1978, 31). Consequently, Sartre states:
The procedure of discovering dialectical rationality in praxis, and then projecting
it, as an unconditional law, on to the inorganic world, and then returning to the
study of societies and claiming that this opaquely irrational law of nature conditions
them, seems to us to be a complete aberration. (Sartre 1978, 33, emphasis in
original)
Sartre argues that it would be fallacious to derive dialectical laws of nature from a dialectical
understanding of natural processes and then use those dialectical laws for
an understanding of human society and history. Sartre’s rejection of Engel’s theses
culminates in his central point of criticism regarding the dialectic of nature. Sartre
states that the only appropriate research objects for dialectical thinking are those
that can be shown to process dialectically when these research objects are experienced
as such from within their processing. Nature, however, cannot be experienced
dialectically from the inside but only analyzed from the outside (Remley 2012, 36).
Sartre claims that Engels fails to ground a dialectic of matter as a foundation for
understanding history because he grounds it on an object toward which he must
remain analytical and thus external. This means that he cannot substantiate the validity
of his method regarding the research object in question.
Human Existence as Practical Mediation of Internal and External Dialectic
Rather than locating the dialectic of history in nature, Sartre thus locates it in human
existence, which he understands as an ongoing mediation of individual action
and experience. These two inherently interconnected processes represent practical
ways of how humans relate to their physicochemical milieu. They are also fundamental
for the constitution and intelligibility of human reality and history in the
8 In this regard, Sartre argues in similar ways to Kant in Kritik der Urteilskraft. Regarding the
technology of nature, Kant states that a statement such as “nature processes purposively” must
be distinguished from a statement such as “due to the purposive structure of human experience
and reason, natural processes must be conceived to be purposive in order to be intelligible.”
For the formulation of scientific laws to be possible, nature itself must be conceived as if
it was purposeful (Kant 1974, 349–350; also Hubig 2010). Sartre states that Engels’ idea that
nature is dialectical has similarities to a Kantian regulative idea that is “incapable of being
corroborated by any particular experience” (Sartre 1978, 29).
36 Dialectical Foundations
first place (Remley 2012, 39). In dealing with material conditions, humans not only
make history but can also understand history and thus themselves as being the results
of their actions. Although this conception of the dialectic is also material, it
must be understood as a dialectic in matter as opposed to Engels’ dialectic of matter
(Hartmann 1966, 71). For Sartre, the mediation of action and experience represents
an expression of what he calls dialectical reason; a reason that constitutes “itself in and
through the world, dissolving in itself all constituted Reasons in order to constitute
new ones which it transcends and dissolves in turn” (Sartre 1978, 21). The entirety
of Critique fundamentally rests on the premise that to understand the dialectic of
history, history itself must be understood based on human existence; this happens
by apprehending the dialectic that is at work in individual, world-directed actions,
aimed at modifying physicochemical surroundings (Sartre 1978, 40–43). Only in this
way can the dialectical method account for both the dialectical movement of its research
object and its methodological validity.
With his strong emphasis on individual action and experience, Sartre stays true
to his existentialist roots while also accounting for the constraints that material circumstances
impose on the individual. Humans are organic entities that make history
through free and active confrontation with material conditions. These conditions
necessitate and enable their actions. In this regard, ontological freedom must
be understood in its unfolding as the constant self-liberation from lacking states
of things that are nevertheless rendered necessary as the milieus in which human
beings realize themselves. According to Sartre, this dialectic of liberation and necessitation
is the basic principle of understanding history. At the same time, history
is the basic process through which the dialectic of liberation and necessitation can
be understood.
To simplify this conjuncture, it is useful to analyze the basic dialectical principle
that the later Sartre identifies to be at work in both action and experience:
namely, the principle of totalization. This principle describes a “developing unification”
(Sartre 1978, 46) of parts into a wholeness, which is called the totality. The
principle of totalization represents a succession of the three dialectical moments:
positing, negation, and negation of the negation, i.e. affirmation or sublation. Sartre
uses the principle of totalization to explicate the dialectical process at play within
the course of action and experience. Both represent complex interrelations between
human and non-human things in which an initially meaningless, and contingent
but objectively given, is negated in its positing through the transforming, identifying,
concretizing, and qualifying practical relating of a human subject. Because totalization
represents a synthetic activity, however, relation-specific objectivity and
subjectivity are produced within the totalizing relation itself. This human negation
of objective positing results in a contradiction that is fundamentally sublated in the
form of a meaningful and practical relation in which both subject and object represent
totalities. Sublation means that the initially separate aspects remain present as
1. From Individual Project to Historical Praxis 37
unified aspects of the totality in question. This relation comes about in this meaningful
and practical way because of the structural dynamics of human action and
experience on the one hand, and the structural characteristics and properties of objective
reality on the other. For this reason, Sartre identifies action and experience as
interplays of exteriorization and interiorization. More precisely, he identifies every
totalization to be an exteriorization of interiority and an interiorization of exteriority.
Through action and experience, humans transform interiority (a meaningful
relation to the world, intended actions, subjective goals, etc.) into exteriority (the
materiality of the world, realized actions, objective goals, etc., as totalities) and vice
versa (by apprehending the givenness of being, identifying certain objects, and thus
constituting meaningful relations with these objects as totalities). They do so by actively
mediating between themselves and the world (Sartre 1978, 45–48). Sartre identifies
individual action and experience at the heart of human existence to be totalizing
processes that, to ultimately constitute human reality and history, dialectically
unite interior and exterior aspects. He thus identifies human existence, as being-inthe-
world, to be a lived contradiction with itself that continuously sublates itself to
contradict itself anew.
Before the lived contradiction that is human existence can be explained in more
detail, it is worthwhile examining the conceptual relation between Sartre’s early and
later works once more. It has been mentioned that Sartre emphasizes the internal
dialectic of human existence in Being and Nothingness. The early Sartre focuses on the
significance of human action as a self-projection and self-realization. Agents not
only realize themselves through action but also modify the current state of things
and even practically constitute an altered state through their actions. The later Sartre
is mostly concerned with the relation between internal and external dialectic in Critique.
He uses the concept of totalization to describe the relationship between human
beings and their milieu as an inherently practical one. The concept of totalization incorporates
the processes of human action and experience within an explicitly dialectical
conception of the practical world-relatedness of individuals. Along these lines,
Cannon (1991) identifies a conceptual similarity between an individual’s world- and
self-making action in Being and Nothingness, and totalization in Critique. She states
that Sartre’s earlier conception of action emphasizes the internal, mental processes
of wanting, longing, and projecting, whereas Sartre’s later conception of totalization
emphasizes the external and more practical aspects of action (170–173). The current
work agrees with Cannon’s observation but argues for a conceptual development
in Sartre’s philosophy. Sartre retroactively explicates the internally dialectical processes
underlying his earlier conception of human action and experience and then
unites them with the externally dialectical processes that underlie the material embeddedness
of human agents within societal constellations. In this regard, Sartre’s
early and later works are complementary. The processes outlined in Being and Nothingness
are substantiated with dialectical principles and incorporated into a materi38
Dialectical Foundations
alist conception of history—without losing the significance of Sartre’s existentialist
thoughts.
However, as a consequence of his later Marxism, the significance attributed to
the materiality of human existence changes. In Critique, Sartre emphasizes the fact
that human existence, although still understood as ontologically free, is strongly
conditioned by its inert material conditions: the material requirements of one’s
physicality, one’s education and upbringing, one’s inborn or acquired features,
abilities and capabilities, one’s position within forms of societal constellation, and
the concrete material circumstances of one’s existence. According to Sartre, humans
are materially inert organisms situated in equally inert socioculturally structured
conditions that are characterized by scarcity. Most importantly, humans have concrete
physical requirements, wants, and wishes that necessitate them to confront
and modify their inert conditions to their satisfaction. Here, four interrelated
concepts can be identified that are fundamental for understanding Sartre’s later
philosophical outlook, namely inertia (French inertie), scarcity (rareté), need (besoin),
and praxis.
Inertia and Scarcity
Regarding the larger context of material conditions in which individuals find themselves,
the concept of inertia refers to the pure givenness and recalcitrance of matter
in the form of the human body and the material world on one hand, and the plasticity
of both on the other (Hartmann 1966, 100). Inertia is closely connected to the concept
of scarcity, which means the limited availability of commodities. Scarcity is understood
as a “basic human relation, both to Nature and to men” (Sartre 1978, 123). It is
inherent to the human condition to exist as an inert, organic entity that has certain
material needs. Humans require certain forms of nutrition, access to water, protection
from harsh weather conditions, and so on. To satisfy these needs, humans must
work with and against inert matter. They must change themselves and the materiality
around them to overcome the fact that their resources are scarce (see section
4.2).
From Desire to Need
Section 1.2 discussed how the early Sartre exemplifies and concretizes his idea of
the lack of being in human existence through the fact that human beings have desires
(French désir). Such desires bestow human existence with a certain directedness,
practical intentionality, and finality toward the future. In desiring, human beings
transcend the given toward the possible by projecting from the concrete facticity of
their existence toward a potential future self. Despite his earlier reflections about
the restraining factors of an agent’s situation, and despite the significance he at1.
From Individual Project to Historical Praxis 39
tributes to human desire as a specific mode of subjectively relating to the world in
Being and Nothingness, Sartre does not reflect on how agents’ individual histories fundamentally
shape the ways those agents relate to the world by virtue of their desires.
The early Sartre engages in intricate discussions about what it means to be moved
and motivated by desires (Sartre 2021, 139–143) and to sexually desire the body of
another human being in particular (Sartre 2021, 505, 511). He also analyzes the fundamental
structures of desire alongside the existential dimensions of doing, having,
and possessing (Sartre 2021, 746–777). However, by accepting the individualist nature
of a person’s structures of desire as a given fact, the early Sartre is ignorant of how
these structures of desire are themselves shaped by an agent’s lived experience. This
experience necessarily takes place in a socioculturally structured and materially predisposed
milieu. This milieu fundamentally affects an agent’s upbringing, education,
and experience. The desire of thirst, for instance, given as it may be, does not
abstractly project toward water in general, but to a more or less concrete outline of
action toward a familiar horizon of ends (Sartre 2021, 730, 747). Depending on how
agents were socialized, how these agents have satiated their thirst in the past, and
what their environments provide, different drinking actions will be projected. A person
who grew up in an urban environment, for instance, initially projects toward
different ends and thus, connectedly, to different courses of action than a person
who grew up as a nomad in a desert area with no infrastructure. The urbanite may
project towards taking a cup or a glass and filling it up at their faucet when at home.
The desert dweller may have a completely different relationship with water because
water is a rare resource in the desert. When thirsty, these people may project toward
different ways of finding, preserving, and consuming water owing to their specific
situation and experience. However, if both have a water bottle readily at hand or if
there is the option to simply buy water, they may both do so.
In Being and Nothingness, Sartre does not reflect on the reason why desires express
themselves differently based on a person’s facticity. He simply accepts that
human beings have desires as specific modes of subjectivity toward the world. However,
the concrete outline of desires, and thus the ends toward which these desires
project, as well as the actions that potentially ensue from them, must be understood
as having been shaped by the agent’s facticity, i.e. the whole of the material, social,
and cultural conditions that gave rise to this specific form of human existence up to
the point of the present action.
One can argue that Sartre must have recognized the fact that focusing on desires,
without criticizing how the concrete outline of these desires is itself shaped
by society, culture, matter, and the processing of history throughout a person’s existence,
does not provide a solid foundation for a critical theory of society. This is
even more true because the dialectical interrelation between action and experience
has to be considered as the very foundation of such a theory. To allow for structural
40 Dialectical Foundations
analysis of the processing of history, the later Sartre thus introduces the concept of
need (French besoin), stating:
Everything is to be explained though need (le besoin); need is the first totalising
relation between the material being, man, and the material ensemble of which
he is part. This relation is univocal, and of interiority. Indeed, it is through need that
the first negation of the negation and the first totalisation appear in matter. Need
is a negation of the negation in so far as it expresses itself as a lack within the
organism; and need is a positivity in so far as the organic totality tends to preserve
itself as such through it. (Sartre 1978, 80, emphasis in original)
The lack of being that the early Sartre has located in human desire thus gains a much
more prominent and much more fundamental significance in his later works. In Critique,
need represents a fundamental affirmation of the synthetic, human being-inthe-
world in its corporeality. Through their fundamental needfulness, humans necessarily
engage in an interior relation to their exterior world. They lack whatever
they manifest through their needs. Consequently, humans urge satisfaction in the
future.
At first glance, Sartre’s later conception of need as besoin is similar to his earlier
conception of desire as désir. In her study of Sartre’s philosophical works in the context
of psychoanalysis, Cannon also remarks that Sartre’s shift from structures of
desire to structures of need might suggest that “the later Sartre has embraced some
kind of instinctualism” (Cannon 1991, 172) and simply shifted his perspective from a
person’s internality to their externality. This, as Cannon rightly remarks, is not the
case. Sartre’s conception of need is not reduced to a mere physical drive toward the
material world. It does not represent just a switch from the mental to the physical
foundations of a human’s world-relatedness. Rather, it remains a totalizing relation
between a person and their surroundings. Furthermore, need is also not some totalizing
relation, it is the first one. Given that human existence is a material endeavor,
need, in its initially pure and simple form, is fundamental for human existence because
it grounds the necessity for a person to practically relate with their surroundings
to survive (Cannon 1991, 172–173). For Sartre, need, or, more precisely, the fact of
being needy, grounds the possibility of a human being’s continued existence, action,
experience, and, most of all, freedom.9 Need represents both the fundamental and
abstract relation between a human being and that being’s socioculturally structured
material surroundings. Furthermore, this abstract relation of need is what instantiates
concrete desires in the first place. Part of the current work is to further investigate
how this instantiation takes place within forms of societal organization.
9 For a more prosaic approach to the relationship between needs and human freedom, see
Sartre (2001).
1. From Individual Project to Historical Praxis 41
The change in focus from desires in Being and Nothingness to needs in Critique fundamentally
changes the conceptual grounding of Sartre’s philosophical perspective,
thereby opening up Sartre’s philosophy toward those practical constraints, material
potentials, and societal dynamics that condition human existence beyond the borders
of the concrete action situation. Against the concept of need as the fundamental,
abstract relation of a human’s engagement with the world, Sartre can analyze how
human desiring is shaped and thus potentially transformed in its concrete form by
and through the larger form of societal organization in which individuals are situated.
This allows him to reconstruct how forms of societal constellation, which began
in the attempt to systematically provide for material requirements, wants, and
wishes, transform in such a way that they change how individuals do so. Needs thus
represent fundamental, abstract, and, most importantly, immediate ways of how
people relate to their material surroundings for themselves. Without dismissing his
earlier thoughts on desires, the later Sartre predominantly conceptualizes the lack of
being as a lack of resources, commodities, skills, rights, knowledge, etc., that agents
require to survive and persist in one way or another (Cannon 1992, 132). As a consequence,
Sartre shifts his focus from the analysis of the internal structures of action
to the concrete, historically situated praxis of individuals.
Cannon, referring to an unpublished manuscript by Sartre10, claims that Sartre
again developed his thoughts regarding the relation of needs and desires after Critique.
According to Cannon, in this manuscript Sartre considers desires to be “socialized
need” (Cannon 1992, 134), i.e. need that is transformed into desire “through relations
with others in the socio-material world” (Cannon 1992, 135). According to this
understanding, nutrition, for instance, as a person’s physical requirement, which
owes itself to the corporeality of human existence, is only ever a pure and simple
need in the form of besoin in an infant state. Since this need can be satisfied through
a number of different practical interrelations between the infant and whoever nourishes
them, Sartre assumes that how this need is satisfied, socializes this need, and
connects it to a larger societal form of organization. In this understanding, infants
who lack nutrition cry initially because of an unpleasant physical symptom complex
that is attributable to an abstract, undirected need in the form of besoin. However,
as soon as this need has been taken care of a few times in a row, for instance through
breastfeeding or a bottle, the abstract and undirected need is rendered into a concrete
desire in the form of désir. These infants still cry because of the same unpleasant
symptom complex resulting from a physical lack of nutrition. However, they no
longer cry as a result of an abstract and undirected need but because of a concrete
10 Cannon refers to a manuscript of 589 pages of unorganized notes. According to Stone and
Bowman (1986) this manuscript contains Sartre’s unpublished notes for a lecture called
Morality and Society (Bowman & Stone 1992; 2004) and other notes about ethics.
42 Dialectical Foundations
desire for their caregiver’s breast or the bottle as a means to gain nutrition. In mutual
interaction with their caregiver’s action, these infants’ need has been socialized
so that it has become a structurally dependent desire relative to the form of societal
organization in which both caregiver and infant are situated (Cannon 1992).
Throughout a person’s life, abstract forms of initially undirected need may arise,
for instance on account of changes in understanding or living conditions, or because
of the larger dynamics of societal constellations themselves. Still, these forms
of need will always be socialized and concretized into desires, because their satisfaction
necessarily takes place within sociocultural surroundings that already scaffold
a practical, instrumental horizon of possibilities. Most importantly, because human
existence represents a constant struggle with scarcity, Sartre’s conception of the dialectical
relationship between needs and desires is constitutive for understanding
the formation of societal constellations (see section 4.2).
Despite his thoughts on socialized need in his later manuscript, Cannon states
that in Critique Sartre is already “careful to point out that need is always socialized”
(Cannon 1992, 134), because how a person produces themselves “conditions not only
the satisfaction of his need but also need itself ” (Sartre 1978, 95). Throughout Critique,
Sartre sporadically argues that how people suffer their need, become acquainted
with and learn certain modes of behavior can itself become interiorized and habituated
in the form of hexis, i.e. an acquired disposition that shapes a person’s actions
in relation to their position within forms of societal organization. In this context,
Sartre discusses the intricacies of habit formation, the socialization of needs into
desires, and the role of habits, or hexeis (which is the Greek plural of hexis), in the
perpetuation of societal organization. However, because these discussions require
an understanding of the course of human action, and because it is irrelevant for that
course of action whether it takes place based on a need or a desire, the socialization
of need into desire is discussed in more detail in section 4.5.
Based on these thoughts, a conceptual distinction between the notions of need
and desire in Sartre’s philosophy can be made. Desires, understood as désirs, represent
concrete, directed, socioculturally shaped, and mediated as well as subjectively
qualified modes in which human beings exteriorize themselves. They do so by relating
to and engaging with their surroundings for themselves based on their requirements,
wants, and wishes. Needs, understood as besoins, represent abstract and initially
undirected modes in which these human beings relate to their surroundings.
The way in which human beings practically do so is through praxis.
Praxis and History
Praxis is understood as “an organising project which transcends material conditions
towards an end and inscribes itself, through labour, in inorganic matter as a rearrangement
of the practical field and a reunification of means in the light of the end”
1. From Individual Project to Historical Praxis 43
(Sartre 1978, 734). Sartre uses the notion of praxis to describe both individual actions
in concrete situations, as well as the historically situated realization of human existence
as a whole.11 Sartre states that every praxis “presupposes a material agent (the
organic individual) and the material organisation of an operation on and by matter”
(Sartre 1978, 71). In this regard, praxis is the function of human existence, and human
existence represents the form from which praxis is instantiated. As material entities,
human beings are both agents and end. They are the ones who act for themselves
within their material surroundings to satisfy themselves in and through their surrounding
materiality. Accordingly, Sartre claims that human reality, as constituted
by praxis, is fundamentally mediated by material reality. Furthermore, every praxis
primarily is an “instrumentalisation of material reality” (Sartre 1978, 161). Breathing
instrumentalizes air, walking instrumentalizes the soil, and so on, and owing to the
materiality of human existence, action, and experience take place between material
entities.
With the notion of praxis, Sartre emphasizes that humans must simultaneously
be understood as the concrete quasi-product and the effective (re-)producer of their
social and material situation and, concomitantly, their form of societal organization.
Sartre claims that “[n]othing happens to men or to objects except in their material
being and through the materiality of Being. But man is precisely the material
reality from which matter gets its human functions” (Sartre 1978, 182). Through his
conception of praxis, the interrelation between interiorization and exteriorization
becomes clearer. As aspects of action and experience, interiorization and exteriorization
represent two sides of the same coin. Sartre states that
the human relation of exteriority is based on the direct bond of interiority as the
basic type of human relation. Man lives in a universe where the future is a thing,
where the idea is an object and where the violence of matter is the ‘midwife of
History’. But it is man who invests things with his own praxis, his own future and
his own knowledge. (Sartre 1978, 181, emphasis in original)
In this context, the dialectic of liberation and necessitation becomes clearer. Human
existence is a lived contradiction: it represents an irresolvable tension between the
needs of an organic being that necessitate praxis, and the fact that this praxis, as a
relation between human being and world, is based on ontological freedom through
which the tension of liberation and necessitation becomes intelligible as unsolvable
in the first place. Neither freedom nor necessity can be understood as facts that
somehow condition human existence as a totality. Human existence is itself a totalizing
activity in which human beings enact and promote their freedom in the pro-
11 By way of example, the individual praxis of writing this sentence takes place as a structural
moment of the praxis of writing this section, this chapter, this work. All represent practical
moments of the praxis or practical realization that is the author’s existence.
44 Dialectical Foundations
cess of enacting and promoting their materiality and thus their structures of necessity
(Sartre 1978, 70–71). By focusing on the concept of totalization, the later Sartre
places more emphasis on the synthetic process itself and less on its resulting totality.
Thus, even if individuals appear to be somewhat determined by certain factors
such as material, social, or historical constellations and conditions, these factors
are themselves totalities that result from human action and experience in the first
place. This processual understanding allows Sartre to retrace the historicity of these
factors and to explain the entanglement of liberation and necessitation in practical
life. Furthermore, when human existence is understood as a totalizing process, the
significance of individual situations within the process changes. Rather than illustrating
ontological freedom through individual choice and action within concrete
situations, every situation is itself a moment in a larger interlocking process that
proceeds from moment to moment and from situation to situation. A situation is
not something that individuals constitute anew each time they act by negating the
given and transcending it toward the possible. Rather, a situation is a concrete sublation
of past situations that again represent concrete ways in which individuals have
(re-)produced themselves and the larger structures they are situated in through their
actions. Although situations are still understood to be transcended and surpassed,
the mode of how this happens is retained as well. Consequently, individual action
situations can only be entirely understood in relation to the historically produced
and history-producing process that is human existence.12
1.5 Concluding Remarks
The development of Sartre’s philosophical thought throughout his works accounts
for the fundamental reality of human existence. All human beings find themselves
in relatively fixed sociocultural and material conditions and constellations, which
constrain their choices and influence their actions. Furthermore, to live their lives,
humans must act based on the conditions they find themselves in, which means that
these individuals must actively engage with the facticity of their lives. At first glance
human existence seems to be determined by a wide variety of factors that might inhibit
or eliminate their agency, seemingly rendering them passive objects or cogs in
a machine, perhaps even to a point where there are zero choices and only one possible
course of action. In the contemporary, highly technological world, this worry
12 Since this section is mainly intended as an introduction to certain fundamentals of Sartre’s
philosophy, a deeper discussion about the concepts totalization and totality cannot be engaged
here. Jay (1984) and Tomlinson (2014) give more theoretical insight into the significance
of these concepts in Sartre’s philosophy. However, a more technical analysis of these
concepts focusing on experience and action as totalizations can be found in section 2.2.
1. From Individual Project to Historical Praxis 45
may be prevalent. However, the fact that action and experience represent relations
with the world means that these relations ultimately express the ontological freedom
of the human being. Human beings are not identical to being but exist as a
relation to it. However slight it may be, there is always the chance for them to become
aware of their situation. Given enough insight and self-reflection, they can
analyze their constraints and possibilities so that they may take responsibility and
understand the scope of their agency.
Sartre’s way of further analyzing this scope leads to his theories on practical
ensembles. Every instance of praxis necessarily takes place in connection to other
material entities that support and/or challenge its outcome. By focusing on both
praxis and context, Sartre can retrace, from a dialectical and praxeological point of
view, the nature of predominant interrelations in certain constellations. According
to Sartre, the dialectical progression of history mirrors the dialectical progression of
individual human existence. Both progress as ongoing totalizations that are driven
by lived contradictions. In the case of human existence, this contradiction is the oscillation
of practical freedom and material necessity. However, in the case of history,
it is the oscillation between serial and communal structures (see sections 4.3 and 4.4).
Because human beings satisfy their needs and desires in different ways as situated
in larger constellations, these constellations exhibit different forms of organization
that are functionally differentiated and interrelated. Technology in the form of manufactured
objects and structures, but also in the form of body techniques, plays an
important part in the structuring of these constellations.
However, before these larger theoretical considerations can be engaged, it
is necessary to analyze more thoroughly the concrete course of human action.
Sartre claims that the processing totalization of practical ensembles is fundamentally
driven by goal-directed human activities based on requirements, wants, and
wishes. However, from the larger dialectical, materialist, and historical context of
Critique, it does not become clear what this means on the exact level of action. If
human action and experience are supposed to render the progression of history
intelligible from the inside, the structural course of action and experience must be
scrutinized first. This may require previously mentioned principles and dynamics
to be analyzed again from an action-theoretical perspective, but the overall
approach of this work benefits from a more thorough reconstruction and further
development of Sartre’s understanding of the course of action. This reconstruction
is the subject of the next chapter.

2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process
2.1 Introduction
This chapter develops a unified account of human action and existence as a praxisprocess
in Sartre’s philosophical works by combining action-theoretical thoughts
from Being and Nothingness, Search for a Method, and Critique.1
Chapter 1 indicated the fundamental role of human action in the larger theoretical
framework of Sartre’s philosophy. Whereas Sartre’s earlier philosophical focus
mainly considers the internal dialectic of action, the later Sartre tries to account
for the fact that human existence is a mediation of internal and external dialectics
through action. This is due to a claim by Sartre that human existence becomes only
truly intelligible based on how it dialectically processes through societal constellations
based on its ontological freedom. Sartre refers to these constellations as practical
ensembles. However, from these assumptions, it has not yet become clear how
such a conception of action—as the practical mediation of internal and external dialectics—
presents itself on the action level, i.e. in the concrete structural course of
action.
The previous chapter introduced Sartre’s early conception of free action and his
later conception of praxis. Both, although initially similar, emphasize different aspects
of human action. In Being and Nothingness, Sartre describes action as the ontologically
free, intentional, material arrangement of means to ends. These ends arise
in human desiring (désir) as a relation between human beings and the world. This
perspective on action is predominantly focused on the internal dialectic of human
action because it accounts for what it means to act, experience, and engage the world
from a perspective on the synthetic relationship of being and consciousness. Based
on this earlier conception of action, human existence appears to be fundamentally
grounded in itself as a free project.
In Critique, in contrast, Sartre focuses on the historical praxis of individuals,
which is best understood as an active, material modification of a state of the world
1 For a more condensed version of Sartre’s dialectical conception of action as totalization, see
Siegler (2022b).
48 Dialectical Foundations
that was deemed unsatisfactory into a potentially satisfying state of the world
based on human needs (besoin). Although Sartre highlights the material aspects
of human action and experience in his later work, his perspective on historical
praxis captures human action as a mediation of the internal and external dialectics
of human existence. It accounts for what it means to act as a goal-directed and
intentional biological organism, necessarily confronted with and reliant on other
such organisms and material entities, and for what it means to engage with oftentimes
recalcitrant physicochemical surroundings in the long run. In contrast to his
earlier conception of action, Sartre’s later conception presents human existence
as an inherently dependent, material, and, most importantly, socially determined
process.
However, both the early and late perspectives highlight different yet inherently
intertwined aspects of what it means to act, and these must be incorporated into
a unified account of action in Sartre’s philosophy. Among these aspects are the ontological
freedom of human agents; the intentionality of their actions; the specific
experience of the state of the physicochemical surroundings in the outset of action
in relation to the motivational role of requirements, wants, and wishes; the relationship
itself between needs as besoins and desires as désirs; the fact that human beings
are biological organisms with an embodied consciousness; and the influence of sociocultural
and material conditions on the course of actions. Notwithstanding the
complex interrelations between these factors and the aforementioned mediation of
internal and external perspectives on action, a unified account of human action in
Sartre’s philosophy is not only possible but also necessary for understanding human
action as the foundation of his philosophical system in general, and for understanding
his theories on the dialectics of technology and society in particular.
The key to developing such a unified account of action in Sartre is the functional
principle of totalization. As mentioned in section 1.4, for Sartre totalization is the
underlying dialectical principle of human action and experience. The later Sartre
uses the principle of totalization to capture the internal dialectical dynamics of human
existence that he mentioned in Being and Nothingness, while further developing
those dynamics by adding a materially dialectical and external perspective. Through
totalization as the underlying principle of human action and experience, human existence
becomes intelligible throughout Sartre’s works as a mediation of internal
and external dialectics. In this regard, Sartre’s philosophical works must be considered
inherently complementary. By combining this unified account of action with
Sartre’s understanding of existence as a praxis-process, every situated action can be
either understood on its own, as a material and totalizing process or as a structural
moment in the larger totalization of human existence as a praxis-process.
To develop a unified account of action—as the ontologically free, intentional,
sociomaterially dependent, material arrangement of means to ends based on besoins
and désirs, through which human beings totalize themselves and their world—it
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 49
must be shown to what extent human action and existence themselves represent
totalizations. This means that the unified conception of action must not only account
for the external synthetic relation between material agents and the world. It
must also account for the internal synthetic relation between being-for-itself and
being-in-itself. Consequently, the course of action must represent a mediation of
action and experience that is entangled with the agent’s corporeality and physicochemical
surroundings. In this way, the ontological freedom and intentionality of
action, the motivational role of requirements, wants, and wishes, the materiality of
these agents themselves, and the situatedness of these agents in sociocultural and
material constellations can all be accounted for. However, this means that some of
Sartre’s more existentialist thoughts about the different modes of being of humans
and non-human things must be taken into consideration as well. Also, it means
that some of the concepts that were introduced in Chapter 1 must be brought up
again and reinterpreted. This conception of action will be integrated into Sartre’s
understanding of existence as a praxis-process.
To lay the foundations for developing a unified conception of action, the chapter
begins with a theoretical preface about Sartre’s understanding of modes of being,
and a focused reconstruction of the principles of totalization and totality in the context
of human experience.
2.2 Modes of Being and their Synthesis
The overall aim of this section is to prepare the theoretical ground for the rest of
the chapter. The section first introduces Sartre’s thoughts on the different modes of
being of humans and non-human things. Then, the section explicates Sartre’s basic
dialectical principle of totalization along with its implications by demonstrating
how this principle plays out in the way humans experience the objective world.
Modes of Being
A fundamental point for understanding Sartre’s philosophy is his basic differentiation
between the modes of being for human beings and those for non-human things.
The human mode of being is treated first. As discussed in section 1.2, human beings
constitute meaningful relations with being for themselves, as ends in themselves, in
virtue of their goal-directed relations with the world. For this reason, Sartre refers
to the human mode of being as being-for-itself or for-itself. Sartre’s phenomenological
considerations are important for understanding this mode of being. Sartre claims
that, unlike non-human things, humans are not only conscious of the world around
them, but they also necessarily practically relate to and encounter it. For Sartre, consciousness
is not a contemplative state of analyzing the world. Rather, consciousness
50 Dialectical Foundations
has to be understood as an immediate connection between humans and other entities
that are outside consciousness. This connection can be physical or mental.
Proponents of this view include Brentano and Husserl, the latter being the main
representative of the phenomenological school. Husserl claims that consciousness
is mainly characterized by its directedness toward something else. This directedness
is referred to as intentionality. In Husserl’s traditional transcendental phenomenology,
the intentionality of consciousness is analyzed to draw conclusions about the
conditions of the possibility of experience. Husserl’s focus is on the structure of human
experience as a result of perception and awareness. Hence he uses the terms
subject and object as fixed points to describe how humans relate to things. Although a
relation between subject and object—from active to passive—seems unidirectional
at first, Husserl means quite the opposite. Within this conception of consciousness,
subjectivity is possible only on the grounding of objectivity, and vice versa. There
is no experiencing instance without an appearing one. Phenomenology derives its
name from this appearing instance, the phenomenon (Greek phainomenon, a thing appearing
to view). Sartre mostly follows this approach. However, he is less interested
in the conditions of the possibility of experience. Combined with his ontological
thinking, Sartre tries to uncover the conditions of the possibility of human existence
(see section 1.2). With the introduction of his later concept of totalization, Sartre intends
also to uncover the intricacies of how forms of human world-relatedness are
constituted.
In Sartre’s philosophy, every relation humans maintain to the world is itself a
directed reference between subjective consciousness (for-itself) and the positive
givenness of the objective phenomenal world (in-itself). Sartre does not proclaim
a separation between body and mind. According to him, “[i]t is in its entirety that
being-for-itself has to be body, and in its entirety that it has to be consciousness:
it cannot be joined to a body” (Sartre 2021, 412, emphasis in original). Human existence
is necessarily embodied and manifested in the materiality of being. Seeing,
hearing, analyzing, categorizing, and acting, among others, are directed processes
of human consciousness that produce subjective meaning by rendering meaningful
the relations between subject and object. This directedness is not a choice; it is the
structural characteristic of consciousness. To put it bluntly, human beings cannot
decide not to see, hear, feel, or process information. They can merely decide to close
their eyes and ears, to avoid tactile sensation, or to direct their awareness to something
else. In this regard, the mode of being-for-itself is inherently characterized
by transcendence. Human consciousness is “a project of itself beyond” (Sartre 2021,
53) as it reaches toward the world and envelops it in its spatiotemporal becoming.
On the basis of materiality, consciousness represents a radical openness to the
world. Furthermore, the structure of consciousness means that the for-itself also
represents a relation to the world in a receptive, directed, and focused way. This
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 51
will become clearer as it concerns human corporeality, as the focal point of human
existence (see section 2.3).
Sartre’s approach toward the phenomenal structure of human consciousness is
innovative in that he differentiates between two modes of consciousness: the pre-reflective
consciousness of something, and a second-order, reflective consciousness of
one’s consciousness of something. Intentional relations toward objects are constituted
by pre-reflective consciousness. Depending on the level of technological mediation,
these relations are relatively immediate. Touching, writing, and observing
are typical pre-reflective relations of embodied consciousness. During writing, for
instance, the act of writing itself is usually neither reflected upon nor said to be performed.
One is simply writing (see section 3.2). Similarly, reflecting on a metaphysical
concept means being pre-reflectively conscious of this concept. Reflective consciousness
is pre-reflective consciousness of one’s intentional processes. This means
that human consciousness is always directed toward something, even if it does not
reflect upon this directedness (Sartre 2021, 9–10).
Sartre argues that the processes of human consciousness have a double character.
He states that “any positional consciousness of an object is at the same time
a non-positional consciousness of itself ” (Sartre 2021, 11). Among intentional relations,
human consciousness pre-reflectively posits itself as the subject within its
relation toward an object. Reflectively, consciousness is directed to its intentional
directedness toward something. Although Sartre differentiates between pre-reflective
and reflective consciousness, they together constitute a unity. The knowledge
of pre-reflective relations is possible only on the grounding of reflective consciousness,
and vice versa. As a consequence, Sartre concludes that human beings are selfconscious
and that this self-consciousness is mediated as such through the interrelation
between pre-reflective and reflective consciousness. Human beings relate to
themselves by virtue of relating to their relating-to-the-world (Sartre 2021, 11–12).
The look of others and the various ways in which human beings objectify themselves
in the material world are significant for how humans may reflect their existence (see
section 4.3).
Human existence structurally exists as both self-consciousness and embodied
directedness. It is never contained in itself, but always outside itself, always engaging
the material world. Due to the transcendent character of their existence, human
beings are always in the process of existing. Even though they can be neither
identical with nor completely free from being, they can modify their relation with
being (Sartre 2021, 60–61). Sartre identifies this modifiability as ontological freedom—
freedom of attitude, stance, or bearing. It is not a property of human consciousness,
but a condition of human existence (Barata 2018, 125–126). By existing,
human beings necessarily relate to being. Even though they are self-conscious, their
self is defined as “a constantly unstable equilibrium between identity as a state of absolute
cohesion without any trace of diversity, and unity as the synthesis of a mul52
Dialectical Foundations
tiplicity” (Sartre 2021, 126). In Sartre’s existentialism, human existence must be understood
as a temporal, future-oriented process comprising the various ways human
beings exist in the world with and against the full givenness of being (see section
2.3). Within the process of existing, human beings realize themselves through
their experiences and actions. However, they can never fully become the selves they
strive to be. A fully synthesized being-in-and-for-itself would mean that directed
consciousness for-itself ceases to exist (Sartre 2021, 143). Human existence must
project toward itself over and over again. Human beings are, therefore, condemned
to be free (Sartre 2021, 577). This condemnation is a constitutive aspect of the lived
contradiction that human existence represents (see section 1.4).
In contrast to humans in the mode of being-for-itself, things are not selfconscious.
Sartre mentions that “the constant reflection that constitutes any ‘itself ’
merges into identity” (Sartre 2021, 27) in the case of things. Things thus exist in the
mode of being-in-itself. In Being and Nothingness, Sartre identifies three distinct
characteristics of being—Being is, Being is in itself, Being is what it is.
For human beings to relate to being, being itself must have a certain structure.
Sartre then argues that being is neither active nor passive. According to him, because
activity and passivity are human categories, being can appear only as active
or passive within the scope of human experience or action. Being is also beyond affirmation,
because affirmation would suggest an affirming act carried out by human
consciousness. Yet Sartre claims that being is, even independent of human reality.
Because being cannot be the product of any activity, Sartre deduces the first
characteristic: “being is in itself ” (Sartre 2021, 27, emphasis in original). Since being
neither self-reflects nor acts with intention, it cannot constitute a self in any meaningful
way. It follows that its structural integrity is not a product of deliberation, but
is given as it is. From this fact, Sartre derives the second characteristic: “being is what
it is” (Sartre 2021, 27, emphasis in original), and nothing else. Because being is what
it is, it “can neither be, nor be derived from, the possible, nor can it be equated with
the necessary” (Sartre 2021, 28). It is given in pure contingent positivity, devoid of
time or meaning. Sartre expresses this in the third characteristic: “being-in-itself is”
(Sartre 2021, 28, emphasis in original).
Owing to these three characteristics, Sartre considers things in the mode of being-
in-itself to be transcendent, much like being-for-itself (Sartre 2021, 21–22). It
seems that Sartre’s conception of the transcendent being of objective phenomena is
deliberately ambivalent. Things must be what they are and must be how they appear.
To conceptualize them as transcendent implies something toward which they transcend.
But unlike the transcendent for-itself, being-in-itself can be understood as
transcendent in that it appears the way it does due to the characteristics of being and
not as a directed and focused consciousness. In Sartre’s case, this means that things
present themselves as they are. Sartre criticizes various epistemological approaches
that propose a “dualism of being and appearing” (Sartre 2021, 2). Rather than assum2.
Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 53
ing that a phenomenal thing “indicates behind its shoulder some true being” (Sartre
2021, 2) that is somehow concealed, such as Kant’s thing-in-itself, Sartre concludes
that how things appear discloses their being. He writes that the essence of the objective
world is an “‘appearing’ that is no longer opposed to being but which is, on the
contrary, its measure” (Sartre 2021, 2). This does not mean that things only exist insofar
as they appear (Sartre 2021, 22), but that the objective world can be experienced
in its phenomenality without missing any essential features. In the case of things,
existence is essence. In the case of humans, existence precedes essence. In section 2.3,
this is shown to be the most crucial difference between humans and things.
The ontological foundation of the materiality of being is omnipresent in Sartre’s
early philosophy and has been shown to carry over to his later philosophical works
(see Chapter 1). Even in his later philosophy, Sartre implicitly incorporates the
modes of being-in-itself and for-itself into his considerations. From Sartre’s considerations
about the different modes of being of humans and non-human things,
his primacy of the human perspective, and his considerations about the significance
of experience and action as the analytical ground for understanding history, it follows
that humans typically are the active parts of human-world relations, whereas
things represent the passive parts. However, under specific circumstances, the dynamics
between humans and things can change (see section 4.3). As Sartre remarks,
both modes of being may be analyzed on their own as moments of a synthesis. But a
more complete comprehension of both is made possible only by analyzing how they
interrelate.
The Basic Principle of Totalization
Distinguishing between the modes of being-for-itself and being-in-itself can be
misleading, in that both modes of being seemingly refer to fixed and initially separated
object areas in which human subjects remain on one side of the relationship
and the objective world on the other. In the case of Sartre’s philosophy, however,
such a separation cannot easily be made. Being-for-itself and being-in-itself must
not be considered as initially separated but instead as moments of a synthesis
(Sartre 2021, 34), or, more precisely, as relata within an actively processing interrelation.
In Critique, Sartre refers to this actively processing and synthetic interrelation
as totalization, a process that produces totalities. With this view, Sartre stands in
a thought tradition of philosophers concerned with the ideas and assumptions
surrounding the concept of totality.
The concept of totality is one moment in a long history of assumptions, observations,
and intuitions concerning the idea of a somewhat organized and self-contained
whole: a holon, a Ganzheit, a composition larger than the sum of its parts, a
system exhibiting more qualities than the mere sum of its elements would imply,
etc. This concept has troubled thinkers throughout the entire history of philosophy.
54 Dialectical Foundations
In Marxism and Totality, Jay (1984) reconstructs the history of the concept of totality
in Western thought, along with the never-ending struggle to formulate a coherent
idea of what it means. In the aftermath of Hegel and Marx, the concept of totality rose
to special prominence in Western Marxism. Among the most prominent thinkers
who concerned themselves with totalities was Georg Lukács. For him, totality represents
the “eigentliche Wirklichkeitskategorie” (Lukács 1923, 42)—the actual category
of reality—through which a dialectical method can acquire an understanding of the
complex interrelation between society and a capitalist mode of production. Following
Marx, Lukács argues that the contradictions of capitalist societies can only be
properly unveiled when society itself is understood through the category of totality.
Processes of production, distribution, exchange, and consumption cannot be understood
only as affecting each other. Rather, the fact that a process is understood
as one of production or consumption is possible only when it is understood dialectically,
as a moment in the processing of a capitalist society considered as an allencompassing
totality (Lukács 1923, 44; Burmann 2018, 22). The category of totality
thus represents the condition of possibility for a dialectical understanding of society
and history.
In Search for a Method, Sartre broadly criticizes the Western Marxist understanding
of the concept of totality as a misattribution of cause and effect in historical processes.
Rather than attempting to understand how totalities—such as individuals,
specific societal constellations, or societal processes—come about through the actions
of historically situated individuals, Sartre criticizes the Marxist understanding
of totality as “heuristic; its principles and its prior knowledge appear as regulative in
relation to its concrete research” (Sartre 1963, 26). Sartre’s solution for this problem
is his own modified version of Lefebvre’s regressive-progressive method (see section 1.3).
This methodology allows him to dialectically deconstruct and then reconstruct how
specific totalities, like individuals, larger groupings of individuals, societal subsystems,
and even society as a whole, have become what they are through the synthetic
activities of human beings. These synthetic activities, such as experience and action,
fundamentally follow the dialectical principle of totalization. To grasp this principle,
Sartre employs a broader, more fluid, and most importantly, more open conception
of totalities. He states:
A totality is defined as a being which, while radically distinct from the sum of its
parts, is present in its entirety, in one form or another, in each of these parts, and
which relates to itself either through its relation to one or more of its parts or
through its relation to the relations between all or some of them. If this reality
is created (a painting or a symphony are examples, if one takes integration to an
extreme), it can exist only in the imaginary (l’imaginaire) […] Thus, as the active
power of holding together its parts, the totality is only the correlative of an act of
imagination […] In the case of practical objects – machines, tools, consumer goods,
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 55
etc. – our present action makes them seem like totalities by resuscitating, in some
way, the praxis which attempted to totalise their inertia […] the totality, despite
what one might think, is only a regulative principle of the totalisation (Sartre 1978,
45–46)
Things like a painting or a hammer can only be considered totalities through the synthetic
act of experiencing, apprehending, or practically utilizing them. The meaning
and practical significance of these things are not given per se but through the totalizing
interrelation between humans and their material surroundings. According to
Sartre, this totalizing interrelation fundamentally represents a synthesis of beingfor-
itself and being-in-itself. The synthesis plays out in the interlocking of human
experience and action in relation to the corresponding socioculturally structured,
material surroundings.
Unfortunately, Sartre does not provide a clear and all-encompassing definition
of totalization. In Critique II, he states that a totalization is “simply a praxis achieving
unity on the basis of specific circumstances, and in relation to a goal to be attained”
(Sartre 1991, 3), which more or less equates totalization with a successful goal-directed
activity. Throughout Critique, Sartre points out that totalizations, such as requiring
something, experiencing specific environmental features, or realizing oneself
through action, represent dialectical activities that play out as a succession of
the three dialectical moments discussed previously (Sartre 1978, 47, 60, 80, 85, 89).
Need, for instance, represents “the first totalizing relation between the material being,
man, and the material ensemble from which he is part […] it is through need
that the first negation of the negation and the first totalisation appear in matter”
(Sartre 1978, 80). In its abstractness, need projects toward a future state of the world
in which an agent’s requirements, wants, and wishes are satisfied. When an agent
practically realizes this project by satisfying their need through action, this action
fundamentally represents a sublation of this need for the acting subject. Also, totalizations
proceed through an interlocking series of exteriorizations of interiority
and interiorizations of exteriority between humans and their surrounding matter.
To stay within the example of need and its projection toward an end, Sartre states:
The project […] is merely the exteriorisation of immanence; transcendence itself is
already present in the functional fact of nutrition and excretion, since what we
find here is a relation of univocal interiority between two states of materiality.
And, conversely, transcendence contains immanence within itself in that its link
with its purpose and with the environment remains one of exteriorised interiority.
(Sartre 1978, 83, emphasis in original)
Sartre’s understanding of dialectical totalization can be illustrated by how he conceives
the process of experience. Experience is inherent to all forms of human worldrelations.
It is a unifying and synthetic activity of embodied self-consciousness in
56 Dialectical Foundations
which the meaning of an initially exterior phenomenal object is constituted for an
experiencing subject based on a relationship that also constitutes object and subject
in the first place. In this way, human beings constitute themselves as subjects
within an objective world that corresponds to their horizon of reality and possibility.
According to Sartre, the process of experiencing is dialectical. Subject, object,
and meaning are outcomes of a synthesis of being and consciousness.
Structurally, the synthetic process of experiencing consists of directed human
consciousness, i.e. being-for-itself, and phenomenon, i.e. being-in-itself with its
aforementioned three characteristics. This being is transcendent in that it appears
just as it is. It is given in the full positivity of its being. On its own, it is inert matter
without any meaning whatsoever. From a phenomenological point of view, being
cannot even be considered an object without a directed subject, and vice versa. This
pure givenness of being-in-itself is a material presupposition for the experience. By
virtue of its structure, being is posited as it is. It is present in its entirety as what it
is. This positing is the first moment of dialectical totalization.2
2 In this regard, Sartre’s understanding of being-in-itself differs from that of Hegel. For Sartre,
being-in-itself represents a material positing for consciousness owing to the phenomenal
structure of both matter and consciousness. For Hegel, being-in-itself is already a positing of
consciousness. The difference here between Sartre’s and Hegel’s understanding of being-initself
might be traced back to the slightly different intensions of Hegel’s concept An sich and
its French translation en-soi. In English, both concepts are simply translated as in-itself. The
Hegelian concept An sich refers to an immediate and more general way in which an object
is given so as to be potentially identified as something. The potential character is important
here, as it represents the condition of possibility for any form of identification in the first place
(Hubig 2016, 139). Sartre’s understanding of en-soi, however, as proposed in L’être et le néant,
does not refer to the potential character of an object but to the inner structure of the being
of that object. It is more focused on what is within being that provides the condition of possibility
for experience and action. The English translation of both concepts simply as in-itself
obscures this difference in meaning. However, this difference has consequences for Hegel’s
and Sartre’s philosophical outlook. Since An sich already represents a positing of consciousness,
Hegel’s dialectic takes place as a conceptual development within the human mind. In
Sartre’s case, being posits itself en-soi—within and through its material givenness—and is encountered
by human consciousness. Consequently, Sartre’s dialectic takes place as a synthetic
process of being and consciousness within matter through experience and action. Therefore,
Hegel can be called an idealist whereas Sartre must be called a materialist in this regard.
Similarly, the translation of Hegel’s German Für sich as pour-soi in French alters its Hegelian
meaning and stresses a more proactive mode of being. In German, the term Für sich generally
refers to something that is taken on its own. In Hegel’s use, Für sich refers to the human mind
which remains somewhat analytical as the instance that qualifies objects An sich through determination.
Sartre’s pour-soi is practical and engaged in the world for (French pour) its own
sake. Again, the English translation of Für sich and pour-soi as for-itself obscures this slight
yet crucial terminological difference. The author’s appreciation goes to Christoph Hubig for
these insights.
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 57
Embodied self-consciousness can encounter this positing of being-in-itself
through its sensory organs. Initially, this encountering is an external relation.
Within such a sensory relationship, consciousness can be regarded as subjective in
relation to being-in-itself, which in this regard can now be called an object. Given
that this object is transcendent and thus appears to a subject, the object can be
considered a phenomenon in phenomenological terms. In this phenomenological
relation, subjective consciousness both interiorizes and identifies certain characteristics
that derive from how the phenomenal object appears based on its being.
This object is not a sum of individual qualities. Rather, it is “simply experienced […]
as having a structure” (Føllesdal 2010, 10). This means that the object is an entity that
nevertheless appears as having different interrelated characteristics. Depending
on how consciousness relates to this object, some of these characteristics can be
experienced and thus interiorized through its sensory organs. The embodied selfconsciousness
can see, feel, and hear among others. Its eyes are directed toward
color and shape, its ears are directed toward sound, and so on. This leads to a
series of concrete appearances of the object for the subject. After careful perceptive
examination, for instance, the phenomenon may appear as colored, blue, far away,
polished, with a handle, and cold. When the embodied self-consciousness interacts
with the thing or reflects upon its practical use, practical implications of the thing
in question can be found. It may turn out to be suitable for holding liquid, or that it
breaks when it falls off the table. Moreover, because all these experiences take place
in larger socioculturally structured material constellations, additional information
can be gathered about the phenomenon. Depending on factors like culture, conventions
of language, education, level of reflection about one’s consciousness of the
thing, and others, a common term can be derived that describes the phenomenon as
a cup that is used for holding warm or even hot liquids. Sartre mentions that the being
of this cup is transphenomenal. This means that it is present in relation to other
phenomena, to which the cup refers: it is in the kitchen, next to the coffee maker,
and so on (Sartre 2021, 23). In short, it has a specific location within hodological
space, i.e. the space of relations in which a person finds the phenomenon in relation
to themselves (Sartre 2021, 415, 432). The relations between objects constitute this
person’s field of equipmentality (see section 3.2). This Heideggerian concept describes
the sum of a person’s practical relations to the things that a person may use as
means toward their ends.3
3 What is described here in terms of material objects works in similar ways for immaterial
things. For instance, in their everyday lives humans may encounter the concept of justice.
These humans may come to know that this concept describes certain ways of distributing
wealth, social benefits, opportunities, possibilities, etc. This concept comprises a somewhat
fixed object area, in that it describes a very special set of practices as well as the (moral) judgement
regarding actions. Owing to how it presents itself in the corresponding actions, human
consciousness can reflect on what the concept means for it by singling out what character58
Dialectical Foundations
This process of interiorizing and identifying individual aspects of the phenomenal
object is rooted in the intentional structure of being-for-itself. Sartre claims
that it is impossible for the full positivity of being to be present to consciousness
(Sartre 2021, 20–23). According to him, human consciousness necessarily abstracts
from the full positivity of objective being. Sartre identifies this relation between foritself
and in-itself to be a negation. Human consciousness introduces nothingness
into being (Sartre 2021, 58–59). No single determination ever completely captures
the full, positive givenness of being; within the intentional structure of human consciousness,
any determination is perspectival and one-sided. Determinations as uttered
in sentences like “This thing is blue,” “This thing is polished,” “This thing is
a cup,” or “The concept of X means...” might be appropriate for specific aspects of
being, but they necessarily negate or stand against, other equally suitable determinations.
None of these determinations, however, exhausts the full positivity of the
thing in question. At this point of the totalizing process, experience is not yet a complete
totalizing synthesis. Rather, it remains an opposition between two poles—so
far, there is merely the givenness of being as a material positing and its pure negation
carried out by consciousness without any refined representation of meaning.
This is merely the second moment of experience as dialectical totalization.
It was mentioned before that in Sartre’s philosophy, meaning is neither a quality
of things nor a product of pure consciousness. Rather, how things appear as objective
phenomena and how subjective consciousness is directed toward them constitutes
meaningful relations as such. Meaning is the product of singling out aspects
of the phenomenon and thus determining what the phenomenon as a determined
one means for consciousness. From the visual perception of a polished, blue, faraway
thing, to its practical implementation as a suitable container for holding liquids,
and then to the name cup—the different ways of experiencing and handling this
object represent possible determinations of being-in-itself. As such, these possible
determinations abstract from and thus negate the full positive givenness of being.
Such determinations become meaningful in that they may correspond to the object’s
essence or not. For Sartre, the essence of non-human things “understood as the principle
of a series, is no more than the connection between the appearances—which
means it is itself an appearance” (Sartre 2021, 3). This means that phenomena in the
mode of being-in-itself can be determined from the outside. Their essence is their
existence. How phenomena appear implies their essence as that which is meaningful
for consciousness based on the being of these phenomena. Although Sartre is not
a strict essentialist who considers things to have a human-independent essence, certain
things still have intrinsic features or result from constitutive processes that give
izes a just act and what does not. Sartre exemplifies this with the color concept red, which
can be experienced in the ways consciousness encounters things that reflect red light in the
physicochemical world (Sartre 2021, 2–3).
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 59
the things shape. Sartre’s concept of essence is linked to the conditions of the possibility
of experience, which can be found in consciousness and the materiality of being.
For him, essence is the sum of possible ways of conceiving and apprehending phenomenal
objects.4
Yet, there are no ways of conceiving an object in such an essential way unless it
is determined for consciousness within human reality. Every determination of being-
in-itself is simultaneously a negation of positivity and a negation of that very
negation. Determining thus means abstracting from—i.e. negation—the positivity
of being-in-itself by affirming—i.e. negation of the negation—the phenomenon’s
being as that which manifests meaning in the form of an organized totality of qualities
within human reality (Sartre 2021, 6–7). Regarding the title of Sartre’s first major
work, phenomena can be understood as the nothingness of positive being for human
consciousness.
In this context, the inherent dialectic of experience becomes apparent. Rather
than considering meaning to be in things or in consciousness, meaning must be
understood in terms of a meaningful relation between things and consciousness,
through which respective structures of subjectivity and objectivity become what
they are in the first place. Human beings have meaningful mental conceptions of
things because humans impart meaning both by how they relate to things and how
things appear to them based on the things’ material characteristics. Within these
relations, action, and experience are closely linked. According to Sartre, there is
no such thing as a purely contemplative consciousness. If there were, it would fail
to reveal the practical implications of objects. Such a consciousness would not be
able to make a practical connection between, for instance, hammers and nails, or
between the physical symptoms of a lack of water in the organism and a glass of
water (Sartre 2021, 432) (see Chapter 3).
Human beings affirm both the structure of their relatedness and the way this
structure corresponds to the structure of being in every one of their relations to the
phenomenal world. Within the lived experience of individual human beings, a phenomenal
object is a cup because this object has a material structure that appears in
a certain way, so that it may be used as the thing that is known and used as a cup.
In dialectical terms, such a constituted meaningful relation is the ongoing sublation
of the contingency of being and the negating determinations for human consciousness.
Furthermore, this meaningful relation is either pre-reflectively or reflectively
interiorized by human consciousness. In this third moment of dialectical experience,
the negation of negations represents an affirmation of being as a manifested
4 This conception is somewhat reminiscent of a variant of Peirce’s pragmatic maxim: “Consider
what effects, which might conceivably have practical bearings, we conceive the object of our
conception to have. Then, our conception of these effects is the whole of our conception of
the object” (Peirce 1878, 293).
60 Dialectical Foundations
meaning for consciousness. Both subject and object, human and thing, exist relative
to how they relate and transcend toward each other. With this affirmation, the
process of experience as totalization has resulted in both a subject-totality, an I, and
an object-totality, a this.
Object-Totality and World
The dialectical totalization of subject and object occurs in every relation between humans
and things. It is at once a subjectification of for-itself and an objectification of
in-itself. In the act of experience, the specific subjectivity of being-for-itself is constituted
within its interrelation with specific phenomenal entities as objects. In this
way, both subject and object are moments of a synthesis and both are constituted as
totalities. To quote Sartre’s definition of a totality again:
A totality is defined as a being which, while radically distinct from the sum of
its parts, is present in its entirety, in one form or another, in each of these parts,
and which relates to itself either through its relation to one or more of its parts or
through its relation to the relations between all or some of them. (Sartre 1978, 45)
The dialectic of totalization outlined above now allows slightly modifying Sartre’s
understanding of totality in comparison to that of Lukács. For Sartre, totality is a
category describing entities understood as produced through a synthetic activity,
or, more precisely, as results of a totalization. They are externally organized and
have meaning only within human reality. Totality is thus a category that is onto-phenomenological,
dialectical, and material. Sartre’s example is electric current. He describes
it as the “collection of physicochemical actions […] that manifest it” (Sartre
2021, 2). Comprehending electric current as a totality means uniting various manifestations,
effects, and other aspects and synthesizing them in the concept of electric
current. This concept again instantiates its aspects.
The aforementioned cup can also be understood as a totality. It is the product of
a totalization of relating human consciousness manifested in a material entity. The
parts of the cup, i.e. its color, shape, weight, and utility, are manifested in the same
being. The cup is more than the mere sum of its parts; it is not only blue, far away,
with a handle, and so on. Each appearance of the objective phenomenon coincides
with a subjective impression throughout consciousness from which information is
deduced beyond what is presented. Within human reality, the cup is also not red, not
coarse, not close, etc. Being thus does not include its negation within itself. Rather,
this negation is an abstracting capacity of human consciousness. Within cup-being,
each part relates to other parts. The blue of the cup has a specific extension, human
beings have a specific distance to the cup’s shape and weight, and so on. All of
these appearances are manifested in the same being to which a meaningful relation
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 61
is constituted.5 However, this meaning does not change the cup’s being—rather, it
changes how human beings relate to it. In this regard, the object-totality cup exists as
the correlative of an act of imagination within human reality. Its ontological status
is that of being-in-itself (Sartre 1978, 45).
It Is important to note that Sartre’s conception of totality must be understood as
“only a regulative principle of the totalisation” (Sartre 1978, 46). Human beings refer
to things as totalities as if these totalities were self-contained, completed, or completely
independent of human activities or purposes. Once the totalizing subjects
vanish, the interiorized meaning of the object vanishes as well. In this case the totality
again is “reduced to itself, it reverts to the multiplicity of inertia” (Sartre 1978,
46).
Because object totalities are constituted through how human beings relate to
them in their practical lives, object totalities represent totalized byproducts of human
self-totalization. Object-totalities appear in spatiotemporal relation to each
other. This adds an aspect of externality both to any object-totality within the ongoing
totalization of consciousness and ultimately to the unification of external object-
totalities into an organized whole. This organized whole can be referred to as
world. As such, it is the synthetic unity of a subject-totality’s meaningful relations to
totalities that are experienced and thus totalized as in relation to each other.
Human beings are not outside a world that they examine from afar. Rather, human
existence can be grasped only as an inherently dialectical totalization of a world
comprising meaningful relations with constituted totalities. Humans engage with
the world based on the meaning that they confer on it through their actions, whether
these actions are perceptive, reflective, or practical. In this regard, human beings
constitute their world as an organized totality to encounter. Human reality is thus
a practically qualified reality (Sartre 2021, 127), a totality of human-world relations.
It is the product of a dialectical synthesis between the full positivity of being and
the negating structure of consciousness as that which determines this sheer positive
givenness. In that regard, Sartre claims that “[m]an and the world are relative beings,
and relation is the principle of their being” (Sartre 2021, 415, emphasis in original).
To be in-the-world is to be an embodied self in confrontation with “things-whichexist-
at-a-distance-from-me” (Sartre 2021, 415).
5 Sartre exemplifies this relation with the taste of a lemon and that of a cake: “[T]he lemon’s yellow
is not a subjective mode of apprehension of the lemon: it is the lemon. And nor is it true
that the object-X appears as the empty form that holds the disparate qualities together. In
fact, the lemon extends throughout its qualities, and each of these qualities extends throughout
each of the others. It is the lemon’s acidity that is yellow, and the lemon’s yellowness that
is acidic; we eat the color of a cake, and the taste of that cake is the instrument that discloses
its form and its color to what we may call our ‘alimentary intuition’ (Sartre 2021, 263).
62 Dialectical Foundations
This confrontation between human beings and the objective world is the starting
point for the next section. To identify human action both as a free and materially
conditioned endeavor, the existential relation between facticity and freedom is analyzed.
2.3 Action as Totalization
This section unites Sartre’s early understanding of action and his later understanding
of praxis and develops a conception of totalizing action as a constant mediation of
the internal and external dialectic of human existence. To do so, the section builds on
the previous findings and reconstructs the consummation of action as a totalizing
process in which human beings realize themselves by seeking to practically attain
the ends that arise from their inherent needfulness.
Human beings realize themselves through their actions the ends of which arise
from certain forms of need and desire (section 1.4). These actions follow the basic
principle of totalization. Similar to how consciousness abstracts from the positivity
of being, thus singles out certain concrete aspects of things, and imparts meaning
to them as totalities, an action abstracts from the positivity of a person’s facticity as
situated in a socioculturally structured material milieu, strives toward an individual
project as a certain concrete possibility of a person’s future self, and modifies said
person’s material state of things to realize this individual project. The root for this
totalizing process, that engages in the external dialectic of human existence, can be
found in the internal dialectic of human existence.
Human Existence Between Facticity and Freedom
According to Sartre, human existence is a lived contradiction between being-foritself
and being-in-itself, and this contradiction is the first and most fundamental
moment in the totalization of human existence. It is represented by the synthetic
relation between the givenness of materiality as a material positing and a negating
human consciousness.
Section 2.2 already mentioned that, structurally, the being of humans is the
same being as that of things—it has the same tripartite structure. According to
Sartre, this means that human existence is contingent to the extent that no human
being can choose the conditions of their existence before actually existing. Human
beings can neither choose their place of birth, nor whether they want to be born
small or tall, with blond or black hair, in France or Germany, working- or upperclass.
Despite the totalizing capacity of human consciousness, no change of relation
or reflection toward their being can enable humans to fly by flapping their arms
or to use their lungs for breathing under water. Because human consciousness is
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 63
necessarily embodied, the human condition is ineluctable and at the same time
without any necessity whatsoever, because it is founded in the contingency of being.
The limitations that a priori define the situation of human beings consist of how the
being of human existence is fundamentally structured (Sartre 2021, 133–134; Sartre
2005).
However, unlike things in the mode of being-in-itself, human consciousness is
relational and can never exist in full identity with its contingent being (Sartre 2021,
61). Human beings always relate to themselves and their contingency in every single
intentional relation, whether pre-reflective or reflective. Consequently, every relation
of human consciousness is also a self-relation (see section 2.2).
Nevertheless, Sartre claims that this relation, although a presence to being,
is an empty distance. The self is a constant, albeit at times pre-reflective, relation
with, and therefore determination of, itself as manifested in its being. In Sartre’s
own words, “[t]he for-itself is the being that determines itself to exist, insofar as it
is unable to coincide with itself ” (Sartre 2021, 128). Embodied human consciousness
thus exists as a still contingent and embodied self-relation without any necessity
or meaning. Section 1.4 introduced this contingency of being-for-itself as facticity
(Sartre 2021, 133).
Facticity not only includes the human condition and the bodily limitations of
birth but also one’s entire past. For Sartre, “‘[f]acticity’ and ‘the past’ are two words
to refer to one and the same thing” (Sartre 2021, 178). By being an empty distance to
themselves, human beings simultaneously exist and do not exist as their past. On the
one hand, human beings represent the living embodiment of all their past decisions
and actions. Everything they did comprises their past and has led to the way their
existence is structured in the present. On the other hand, human beings can never
fully be their past in the mode of being-in-itself. Owing to the temporal structure
of embodied self-consciousness, human beings necessarily relate to their decisions
and actions in retrospect. This means that they always relate to themselves as past
selves.
Sartre admits that a human essence can be identified in retrospect. He accepts
Hegel’s statement: “Wesen ist was gewesen ist” (Sartre 2021, 180, emphasis in original),
which translates to essence is what has been. In Sartre’s interpretation of this statement,
human essence can be conceived as the whole of actions and decisions according
to which human existence was structured up until the present moment in
which an action may take place. This givenness of being-in-itself as human facticity
is the first moment of dialectical existence. It is the positing of human existence as
a material fact, an “unjustifiable presence to the world” (Sartre 2021, 135), that already
surpasses itself toward the future.
Inseparably rooted within this facticity is the seed of its constant transformation.
As embodied self-consciousness and as empty distance, human beings can
never exist in the factual state of being. They cannot be reduced to their physical
64 Dialectical Foundations
and social origin, their sex or gender, the living limitations of their facticity. Rather,
each human being exists as a self-relational attitude toward these factors. More
precisely, contingent facticity appears only as a positing with regard to this selfrelational
attitude.
Sartre considers this self-relational attitude to be a negation of the givenness of
being. Positing through facticity, and negating through consciousness, are simultaneously
given. Human existence is constantly directed toward its being without the
chance to fully identify with it. In referring to their past, human beings may only
understand themselves as who they were and no longer are. Any attempt to identify
with this past essence is a case of what Sartre calls bad faith. It is a vain attempt to
stop existence in a fixed state of past identity and is a denial of ontological freedom.
Claiming to be their facticity renders human beings entities in the mode of beingin-
itself, i.e. a closed and timeless totality. Such claims are tantamount to a denial
of the ontological freedom of human existence (Sartre 2021, 88–89).
However, according to Sartre, humans can never truly be. This is rendered impossible
by the structure of their self-relational consciousness. Therefore, humans
are condemned to actively become someone or something that they are not, solely by
virtue of being. In this regard, any claim to unchangeably be someone or something
is a false belief about human freedom. Nevertheless, this false belief is necessarily a
human attitude toward being in that “consciousness is what it is not and is not what
it is, in its being and simultaneously” (Sartre 2021, 117).
This internal contradiction of being and consciousness, of materiality and
meaning, of facticity and freedom, manifests in human existence as a lack of being.
It is a dynamic self-relation that results in an intricate interplay of requirements,
wants, wishes, emotions, moods, possibilities, and their realizations in the world
through goal-directed activity—that is, through the employment of available means
to attain specific ends. This lack of being, a lived simultaneity as both lacking and
lacked, transcends toward completion on account of the relationship of being and
consciousness (Sartre 2021, 137).
The Lack of Being Toward Completion: Needs, Desires, and Ends
The most obvious way this lack of being manifests in human existence is in the form
of certain material requirements, wants, and wishes that derive from human physicality,
psychology, and sociality.
Chapter 1 has already mentioned that Sartre reconceptualizes the significance of
these requirements, wants, and wishes between his earlier and later works. In Being
and Nothingness, Sartre conceptualizes them as desires (désir) and reflects on what it
means to act in concrete action situations based on these desires. He does so by accepting
the facticity of certain structures of desire in human existence (Sartre 2021,
140–143) while granting that these structures themselves are understood as socially
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 65
dependent. In Critique, Sartre reflects on the underlying structures of these desires
themselves through the concept of need (besoin). He does so to reveal the conditions
of possibility for human action, sociality, and historical transformation. In accordance
with the materialistic and Marxist focus of his later works, the later Sartre attempts
to analyze the most basic relations between human organisms and their material
surroundings from the perspective of need to incorporate the common ground
of all societal classes (Cannon 1992, 133).
Sartre states that “value arrives in the world” (Sartre 2021, 147) through human
existence. Through the dialectic of need and desire, human beings are disclosed
as incomplete totalities that should be brought into being (Anderson 2013, 198).
The process for doing so is self-totalization through action. Action thus represents
a (temporal) sublation of need or desire through the practical realization of the
ends that are projected toward by certain requirements, wants, and wishes. Consequently,
owing to their needs and desires, human beings are directed toward
completion for their own sake (Sartre 2021, 140). In so doing, they pre-reflectively
and/or reflectively recognize themselves as ends in themselves (Sartre 2021,
157–159). This means that human beings either non-consciously strive toward
satisfaction or consciously reflect on how to act for themselves.
Whether needs are socialized into desires through engaging with the world, or
whether needs are always socialized with regard to future needs and their surroundings,
in Sartre’s philosophy both perspectives represent two sides of the same coin.
Both must be seen in a dynamic interrelation to an agent’s socioculturally and materially
structured societal constellations. In such constellations, new abstract needs
arise while other already concretized desires are satisfied. Human beings can have
undirected feelings of physical and mental lacks that can be redirected and overwritten
with other, concrete plans for action.
Still, no matter how efficiently or enduringly human beings may satisfy their
needs and desires through action, they exist as an imbalance that is impossible to
smooth out. Lacks of being, such as the requirement for food and water or other
practical wants arise again and again, in slight variations, because the human condition
is ineluctable. Consequently, the inherent contradiction at the heart of human
existence can never be fully resolved. Referring to section 2.2, humans can never
sublate themselves so as to exist as being-in-and-for-itself. Human reality, according
to Sartre, is thus “in its nature an unhappy consciousness, without any possibility
of surpassing its state of unhappiness” (Sartre 2021, 143). With regard to Hegel’s
concept of the unhappy consciousness (Hegel 1986, 163–165), Sartre emphasizes that the
only constant of human existence is a constant struggle, which facilitates an equally
constant change. Structurally, this constant struggle derives from the lived contradiction
at the heart of human existence and grounds its fundamental needfulness.
It is due to this fundamental needfulness that human existence engages the world
for itself.
66 Dialectical Foundations
In Sein und Zeit, Heidegger interprets the fact that being-in-the-world is always
engaged in the world for itself as care (German Sorge, French souci). According to Heidegger,
being-in-the-world is always in a movement of concern about itself (German Besorgen)
and others (German Fürsorge). Heidegger’s conception of care is ontological.
He states that care represents the basic state of being-in-the-world which grounds
all other human modes of being. Because care is the state of Being of Dasein, humans
project toward the future and act for themselves (Heidegger 2006, 191–214; Merker
2015). Sartre, however, rejects Heidegger’s ontological conception of care. He holds
that “positive terms for Dasein […] disguise implicit negations” (Sartre 2021, 53, emphasis
in original) that take place in human existence. This means that a conception
of being-in-the-world as care already ontologizes and thus synthesis the lived contradiction
of positing being and negating consciousness at the heart of human existence.
Sartre argues, that this contradiction is irresolvable. It is what grounds the
ontological freedom of human existence as the condition of possibility for agents to
commence actions for themselves. Sartre does not explicitly use Heidegger’s conception
of care in his works. However, the broader scope of Heidegger’s thoughts
concerning this concept is implicitly there, especially in Being and Nothingness. It can
be argued that due to Sartre’s focus on the lived contradiction at the heart of human
existence and the negating character of human consciousness, he is more interested
in the way human needfulness affects how human beings realize themselves than he
is with care itself.
Human beings realize themselves by relating to the world through their actions.
However, to satisfy their needs and desires, not just any random action will suffice.
Thirst has to be satiated by seeking, finding, and drinking water; knowledge gaps
have to be filled through reflection and communication. Even moods like boredom
demand some sort of change in the way people encounter the world. Sartre remarks
that “need […] is in fact the lived revelation of a goal to aim at” (Sartre 1978, 90).
This means that the modes of need and desire project toward certain goals or ends.
Because they demand action, needs and desires thus have a specific existential urgency.
Furthermore, they also provide an outline of the course of their associated
actions. Because action is thus characterized by finality, which is “causality in reverse”
(Sartre 2021, 187), it is first necessary to examine the existential urgency and
motivational force of needs and desires.
The early and later Sartre differ in the nature of this existential urgency. In
Sartre’s early works, all ends as goals of action are relative to human beings as ends
in themselves. In Being and Nothingness, human existence is considered as always
striving for self-realization. What these human beings lack through their needs and
desires is themselves as satisfied selves. In Sartre’s later philosophy, the fact that
human beings represent ends in themselves is less prominent. It is more important
here that the needs of these human beings are ineluctable. Human beings thus
always have specific ends that they attempt to attain through their actions.
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 67
Ends derive their urgency from how needs and desires both pre-reflectively
and/or reflectively motivate human beings to attempt to attain those ends. Prereflectively,
needs and desires may appear as mobiles, a French term.6 These are
subjective facts that consist of “the collection of desires, emotions, and passions
that drive me to perform a certain act” (Sartre 2021, 586), and which urge human
beings to perform actions. These subjective facts include physical feelings like thirst
and hunger, but also other psychic phenomena (moods or emotions) like boredom.
Human beings may fear starving, yearn for affection, be ashamed for not knowing
something, physically require nutrition, or simply want to show off. In any of these
cases, needs and desires manifest in these human beings in such a way that they
pre-reflectively feel the urge to engage in goal-directed activities.
Reflectively, needs and desires may appear as motifs, a French term that can be
translated as reasons for action. These motifs must be understood more objectively
as “the set of rational considerations” (Sartre 2021, 585) that justify certain acts for
agents themselves. Here, Sartre has in mind a more conscious way of tackling requirements,
wants, and wishes. Whereas mobiles belong to human passions, motifs
belong to human will, which Sartre understands as positing itself “as a reflective decision
in relation to certain ends” (Sartre 2021, 582). By virtue of their will, human
beings can reflect their needs and desires rather than just being affected by them.
This is due to the relation of positing being and negating consciousness.
For Sartre, an ideal rational action would be one “whose motives are practically
non-existent and whose sole inspiration is an objective assessment of the situation”
(Sartre 2021, 586). However, similar to the relation between needs and desires, a clear
distinction between mobiles and motifs can hardly be made. In the same way that ends
are revealed through both needs and desires, concrete mobiles and motifs that eventually
lead to action must be understood as correlative (Barata 2018, 128). According to
Sartre, an affective act is a “purely unreflected [i.e. pre-reflective] consciousness of
its reasons, through the pure and simple project of its act” (Sartre 2021, 591), whereas
a voluntary act “requires the appearance of a reflective consciousness that grasps its
motive as a quasi-object” (Sartre 2021, 591). As a consequence, there can be no ideal
rational act. Every action is structured according to a dynamic hierarchy of personal
preferences, emotions, and experience and the structure of ends. What is important
to note, however, is that human beings can be understood as agents through
6 In Barnes’ English translation of L’être et le néant, the French terms mobile and motif are translated
as motive and cause (Sartre 2003, 467). In Richmond’s translation, on which the current
work mainly relies, these terms are translated as motive and reason. Richmond remarks that
the French terms mobile and motif represent a pair of terms in French academic discourse
where mobile refers to subjective motivational forces and motif to objective motivational
forces (Sartre 2021, xlix). Owing to the action-theoretical implications of terms like cause and
reason, and to keep the broader distinction between subjective and objective motivational
forces in mind, the original French terms are used.
68 Dialectical Foundations
how their needs and desires mobilize or motivate them to attain certain ends based
on being ends in themselves.
Needs and desires and the associated mobiles and motifs can have a rather spontaneous
nature. Sartre exemplifies this with regard to sexual desire in Being and Nothingness.
He writes that “[d]esire is a lived pro-ject that does not require any preliminary
deliberation; rather it carries its meaning and its interpretation within itself ”
(Sartre 2021, 521). The structure of this desire determines how it must be satisfied.
Because humans manifest this desire, they project toward specific ends in relation
to it. With other structures of need and desire, these humans would project toward
different ends. An example of a less spontaneous motivation would be the recognition
of a knowledge-gap. Here, knowledge is not just missing in the structure of
human consciousness. With the recognition of missing knowledge, the structure of
consciousness is now shown to be incomplete with regard to a certain topic. It lacks
itself as a more complete consciousness of the topic in question. A person may be
ashamed about this, feel a sense of competition and eagerness to learn, experience
a mixture of both, or react in some other way. Nevertheless, they must actively seek
knowledge by interacting with the world and with other people. This example shows
that the need to know something about the world can hardly be separated from the
desire to know something. The motivation is itself a merger of mobiles and motifs.
Conceptions of Action
The structure of ends, and the way they pre-reflectively and/or reflectively mobilize
and motivate human beings, give a sometimes clear and sometimes obscured outline
of the course an action demands to attain these ends. It was mentioned before
that action is the temporal sublation of needs and desires through the practical realization
of the very ends these needs and desires project toward. In Being and Nothingness,
Sartre describes this practical realization as follows:
to act is to modify the way the world is figured, to arrange the means in view of
an end; it is to produce an organized, instrumental structure such that, through a
series of sequences and connections, the modification brought about in one of the
links brings in its wake modifications in the entire series and, in the end, produces
some foreseen result […] The point we should note at the outset is that an action
is, by definition, intentional. (Sartre 2021, 569, emphasis in original)
According to this definition, action is an intentional process in which an agent aims
to modify and thus transform their exterior material world through the production
of operational chains and the arrangement of instrumental means. These agents do
so to attain certain previously set interior ends. Without needs and desires, there is
no foreseen result, i.e. no end or goal, and thus no necessity for action nor an outline
of how to act to attain the end. Given that, an agent’s world is a totality comprising
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 69
the material structure of being and the way agents relate to it, the action to modify it
cannot only be understood as physical activity. It is also any mental modification of
a world-relation through reflection, consideration, or any other activity of human
consciousness.
However, owing to his conception of human existence as embodied self-consciousness,
there is no clear distinction between physical and mental activities in
Sartre’s earlier conception of action. Physical and mental activities either happen
within an agent’s material relation to the world or they build on this relation. In
Sartre’s philosophy, there are no higher-tier immediate and reflective activities
without a material base. Every action is a process in which physical and mental
activities are performed in correspondence with the material, social, and cultural
surroundings to transform them in accordance with certain ends projected by needs
and desires. On account of human existence being a mediation of both internal and
external dialectics, experience and action are inherently intertwined (Bonnemann
2009, 16–17). Every action is itself a complex process of sub-actions, in which
embodied self-consciousness enacts the course of action in a series of sequences and
connections toward a projected end (see section 2.4).
In this earlier definition of action, Sartre already briefly mentions both the arrangement
of means in view of an end and the production of an organized, instrumental
structure through which desired effects are caused. He states that “[w]e should
understand acts as all of a person’s synthetic activity, i.e. every ordering of means
in view of ends” (Sartre 2021, 233, emphasis in original). In his earlier conception,
Sartre observes that human action primarily instrumentalizes various things, which
are practically located in an agent’s field of equipmentality (section 3.2). In this regard,
all human action is mediated through matter, either through the agent’s own
inert body or through the inertia of material objects. This emphasis on the exteriorities
of a person’s action becomes more evident in his later conception of action as
praxis.
Section 1.4 mentioned that Sartre redefines his conception of action between Being
and Nothingness and Critique. In his later works, action—now understood as historical
praxis—is defined as “an organising project which transcends material conditions
towards an end and inscribes itself, through labour, in inorganic matter as
a rearrangement of the practical field and a reunification of means in the light of
the end” (Sartre 1978, 734). Despite the later changes, all the necessary components
of Sartre’s earlier conception of action can be found in his definition of praxis. Action
remains a transformative endeavor through which agents modify their material
conditions, according to their ends, through a reorganization of their field of equipmentality.
However, the later Sartre adds the fact that such an action leaves material
traces both in an agent’s material surroundings and in their bodily inertia.
Sartre’s conception of instrumentalization can be derived from his earlier and
later conceptions of action. As briefly mentioned in section 1.4, Sartre claims that
70 Dialectical Foundations
every action is “primarily an instrumentalisation [French instrumentalisation] of
material reality” (Sartre 1978, 161; Sartre 1960, 231). Given Sartre’s materialist focus
(see section 1.4), every action is understood as a relation between material agents
and the material world. An agent’s ends result from the intention to attain their
needs and desires relative to themselves as ends in themselves. Consequently,
agents use material things, such as their bodies or instrumental means, to act on
matter. Accordingly, instrumentalization means the purposeful unification of matter
by, through, and, most essentially, for the agents themselves. How actions are
mediated through the body or instrumental means directs the somewhat abstract
and theoretical course of action into concrete paths. It thus changes the way agents
encounter the world. It also changes how needs and desires project toward certain
ends, and how the world appears to these agents based on those ends.
From Sartre’s action concepts, it follows that action is itself a complex totalizing
endeavor. It is a complex existential engagement with the world that unites physical
and mental aspects by causing certain effects through instrumental means to transform
the world according to certain ends. This causation necessarily has a temporal
course that can be understood as a practical transition from a present lacking to a
future satisfied state of things, abstractly determined by an intended end.
Freedom
Disregarding whether needs and desires are more subjective, emotional, and affective
mobiles, more objective, consciously reflected and volitional motifs, or something
in between, they project toward ends. With this in mind, it could be argued that
agents are materialistically determined by how forms of need and desire consciously
or non-consciously cause these agents to attempt to perform goal-directed activities,
according to Sartre. However, the opposite is true. Sartre is neither a determinist,
a compatibilist, nor a libertarian with regard to the freedom of agents. Barata
mentions that for Sartre “freedom as an ontological concept is rather removed from
the idea of free will. Consciousness is free regardless of human will. Freedom is a
transcendental condition for conscious being” (Barata 2018, 126) (see section 1.2).
According to Sartre, this ontological freedom of the acting being represents the first express
condition that must be given so that human behavior can be identified as an
action (Sartre 2021, 570).
Even though human life is inevitably grounded in its past and its bodily and social
limitations, it is a relation to itself. Agents only recognize themselves in this selfrelation;
if not as originators, then as authors of their existence. This is the source
of the ontological freedom of human existence. Sartre himself emphasizes this by
distinguishing his technical and philosophical concept of freedom from what he calls
the empirical and popular concept of freedom. He says that “‘to be free’ does not mean
‘to obtain what one wanted’ but ‘to be determined in one’s wanting’ (in the broad
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 71
sense of ‘choosing’) by oneself ” (Sartre 2021, 631). Sartre advocates for a freedom that
is synonymous with the autonomy of choice regarding a resisting world (Sartre 2021,
631).
Existence is not a mechanical process. Needs and desires do not force agents to
satisfy them, and they do not make agents behave like automatons. Rather, needs
and desires have a revealing function in that they project toward what agents require,
want, or wish for themselves. According to Sartre, whether agents act passionately
or out of will is itself a matter of choice, which is taken through action
based on ontologically free existence. Only after attempting to perform certain actions
can agents know whether mobiles or motifs had more motivational force with regard
to their ends. It is also only after action is taken that agents know whether they
realized the intended ends or not. Nonetheless, whatever agents realized or did not
realize, the product of their action belongs to their facticity. This is because agents
already surpass the result of their actions toward themselves in the future. Nothing
can mechanically determine them to act again in the same way because their negating
consciousness is characterized by its relation to and not its identity with being.
Human freedom is as such not the freedom of will, but the condition of possibility
for agents to commence actions for themselves. Freedom is thus identical with existence,
in that it is “the foundation of the ends that I will try to accomplish either
through my will or through my impassioned efforts” (Sartre 2021, 583).
Intention
Regarding this first condition, every goal-directed activity, whether passionate or
volitional, must be understood as intentional, because the agent’s “intention, by
choosing the end that announces it, makes itself be” (Sartre 2021, 623). In the very
instant in which ends are given as goals for actions, the intention is also given to
attain these ends against the backdrop of human existence. Sartre believes that
ends are “state[s] of the world to be obtained, and not already in existence” (Sartre
2021, 624, emphasis in original). However, with regard to the intention of action,
projected ends and intended actions have to be distinguished from ends realized
through action.
The ends that agents initially strive toward, and the intention to perform these
actions, do not depend on their actual realization. Sartre claims that “since any
choice [to act emotionally or willingly] is identical to some doing, it presupposes, in
order for it to be distinct from a dream or a wish, that its actualization has begun”
(Sartre 2021, 631, emphasis in original). Intentions are thus relative to human existence
as self-totalization, i.e. self-realization through action. Sartre exemplifies
this with the relation between an attempted meal and actually eating the meal. He
states:
72 Dialectical Foundations
my end may be a good meal, if I am hungry. But this meal, projected […] can only
be grasped as the correlative of my […] project toward my own possibility of eating
this meal. In this way, through its twofold but unitary arising, the intention lights
up the world on the basis of an end that does not yet exist and which defines itself
through the choice of its possible. My end is a specific objective state of the
world, and my possible is a specific structure of my subjectivity. (Sartre 2021, 624,
emphasis in original)
Both projected ends and realized ends are relative to their possible realization. Here,
Sartre seems to borrow from Hegel’s conception of action. Subjective or abstract ends
and the associated intended actions must be distinguished from objective or concrete
ends and the actual, realized actions themselves. This means that intended ends, as
abstract ends, are relative to their possible attainability as concrete ends. Furthermore,
intended actions are relative to their possible realizability as realized actions
(Hubig 2006, 125–135).
Applied to Sartre’s conception of intention, ends are the traces of an agent’s intentions;
this, in Sartre’s case, means that both ends and intentions are correlative.
This connection again illustrates Sartre’s dialectical conception of human existence.
The positing of contingent facticity is negated by consciousness. Agents thus exist as
an ontologically free synthetic unity of being and nothingness. This unity manifests
as a lack of being in the form of needs and desires, which again project toward ends
and the associated actions to attain them. These ends exist based on agents who are
both the ones needy and/or desiring and the ones intentionally striving toward satisfaction.
Sartre’s second express condition for action—the intention of action—is seen here.
Ends imply the intention to attempt to attain them (Sartre 2021, 573).
Sartre’s conception of the dialectical interplay of needs, desires, requirements,
wants, wishes, mobiles, motifs, actions, and ends, in connection to the freedom of the
acting being and the intention of action, has enough explanatory strength to illuminate
the whole spectrum of intriguing and contradictory aspects of human life. It allows
one to conceive human existence as self-preservation because it illustrates how
needs and desires motivate human beings to attempt to exteriorize their interior
intentions by performing certain actions. It also explains instances in which agents
can directly act against their self-preserving impulses. They can willingly stare
into the sun, for instance, or sacrifice their lives for others. Sartre’s thoughts also
highlight indeterminate areas of human action and intention. Although agents
want something and could possibly attain it, they can still reflect on their actions
and decide not to. A problematic point here, though, is the fact that the ontological
freedom of human existence is not always congruent with how agents experience
and even recognize themselves as free. In more concrete terms, the problem boils
down to the fact that agents sometimes feel forced to do something, or they believe
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 73
they lack alternative options for action. This feeling relates to an agent’s awareness
regarding the situatedness of their actions and the nature of their situation.
This conjunction—between what is objectively given and how this given is subjectively
and socioculturally structured and interiorized—will be further investigated
throughout this work.
Sartre’s first express condition, freedom of the acting being, was shown to be the
fundamental condition of the possibility of action. The second express condition,
the intention of acting, is necessarily given as an outcome of his first condition. Action
is not a determined or purely material process but an intentional and goal-oriented
engagement with the world.
The Lacking State of Things
When agents intentionally attempt to attain the ends that their needs and desires
project toward, they transform how they totalize themselves and the world. In this
context, needs, desires, and the associated ends must not only be understood as pure
self-relations; they must also be taken as totalizing relations between agents and the
larger societal constellations they are situated in. Sartre states that
need is a link of univocal immanence with surrounding materiality in so far as the organism
tries to sustain itself with it; it is already totalising […] for it is nothing other
than the living totality, manifesting itself as a totality and revealing the material
environment […] as the total field of possibilities of satisfaction. (Sartre 1978, 80,
emphasis in original)
By intending to practically attain the ends toward which needs and desires project,
agents mentally anticipate the world-directed action through which they may realize
themselves as satisfied selves. In this regard, the intention itself already represents
a totalizing relation with the world. In the course of action, the agents’ intention
to act for themselves constitutes these agents as fixed entities in relation to
their world as their objective counterpart. This relation subjectifies these agents as
needy or desiring in a specific way, with the intention to satisfy their requirements,
wants, and wishes in relation to the world. At the same time, the world as totality,
i.e. as synthetic unity of an agent’s subjective relations to object-totalities, is objectified
and thus determined as a specific lacking state of things. In this way, agents discover
themselves to be in a state of exigency,7 which requires action to be transformed
7 In Critique, Sartre uses the term exigency in two distinct ways. First, it can refer to entities and
actions that are needed, desired, demanded, required, or must otherwise be taken care of
as result of situational factors. When thirsty, for instance, water represents an exigency. In
case of fire, both a fire extinguisher and the fire itself represent exigencies. Second, exigency
can also refer to a certain needy, desiring, demanding, or requiring state in which human
74 Dialectical Foundations
(Sartre 1978, 165). This state of exigency represents the external correlate of the existential
urgency of human existence that was mentioned above. For these agents,
their world, as a meaningful totality of material things and subjective relations, represents
a concrete lacking state of things regarding the satisfaction of their needs
and desires (Sartre 1978, 90).
This discovery of the world as a lacking state of things represents the third express condition
of action. However, neither agents nor the world alone constitute this state.
Rather, the world’s meaning is theoretically transformed through the agent’s intention
to attain their ends. This also means that needs and desires only generate their
motivational force in relation to the agents’ world.
The Practical Field of Possibilities
Correlatively, through the revelation of ends, the world as “surrounding matter is
endowed with a passive unity” (Sartre 1978, 81) in which agents seek to find potential
sources of satisfaction. Without any intention to attain ends, the world (as a totality
of object-totalities and subjective relations) appears in-itself as structured by
being. Agents impose meaning on it by how they practically relate to and thus totalize
being (see section 2.2). However, the way this totalization occurs is transformed
through ends. Depending on the concrete structures of need and desire, an artifact
is totalized as a water fountain, which, for instance, may appear as a potential water
source, a potential place to sit and rest, a potential landmark to use as orientation
for a city trip, and so on.
Through needs and desires, agents interiorize their exterior surroundings as
a practical field of possibilities for their attempted actions (Sartre 1978, 71). These
surroundings become a “practical field with a quasi-synthetic unity” (Sartre 1978,
90) that serves as the foundation and mediating milieu of possible satisfaction. Although
the water fountain or any other thing affords to be used in a certain way, the
possibility of this specific use arises from how agents interiorize the exterior world
through their needs, desires, and ends. Sartre explicates what this means in an analogy.
He mentions that
[t]he possibility of being stopped by a fold in the carpet belongs neither to the
rolling marble nor to the carpet: it can arise only within a system in which the marble
and the carpet are organized by a being who has an understanding of the possibles.
But this understanding cannot come from outside, from the in-itself, and
it cannot be limited to being only a thought, as a subjective mode of consciousbeings
and non-human entities find themselves. In both cases, exigencies point to the fact
that urgent action is required to transform the situation in which they arise.
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 75
ness: it must coincide with the objective structure of the being who understands
possibles. (Sartre 2021, 155, emphasis in original)
Agents intend to perform actions based on how their needs and desires project toward
their ends; once again, this transforms their world so that they apprehend it as
both exigency and as a practical field of possibility for their actions against the background
of the world’s materiality. Hence it becomes clear that agents are neither the
sole originators of their actions nor are they the originators of the specific structure
of their ends. Their mediating milieu and the things within it do not play this role
alone either. Instead, both agent and milieu constitute and possibilize each other.
They do so within the totalizing interrelation of projected, attainable ends, in relation
to available means in the practical field of possibilities, based on surrounding
materiality.
The ends that agents seek to attain, the needs and desires that project toward
these ends, the course of associated actions to satisfy these needs and desires, the
relation between agents and the world as an exigency, and the apprehension of the
world as a practical field in which agents may realize themselves by realizing their
actions, are all direct outcomes of human existence as an ongoing, materially dependent
process of totalization. In the course of this totalization, agents unify vastly
different yet interrelated material, social, and cultural factors for and through themselves.
Through their interior physical and psychological urges, convictions, and expectations,
agents are ready to act to tend to whatever they require, want, or wish for
themselves. In getting or being ready, agents already totalize their world as a state
of exigency, because it is the very world in which these agents manifest as requiring,
wanting, or wishing.
Simultaneously, these agents interiorize the world as a practical field of possibilities
to tend to their lacks of being. Although the agents may be the ones who
initiate the associated actions to tend to these lacks, the lacks themselves, as well
as their satisfaction and the specific structure of their ends, determine the course
of actions in the form of practical constraints and physical or mental stimuli. As a
consequence, action-specific possibilities become objective realities that affirm the
agent’s surroundings to be the whole of the conditions necessary for action. In this
way, contingent being first becomes the agent’s possibility, and then the necessary
presupposition for their intended actions. Action is, therefore, an active, practical,
and transformative engagement with the world, as well as the recognition of the
world as the necessary horizon of action. The actual action, as the practical realization
of the intended and anticipated result, is thus a totalization that then “practically
makes the environment into a totality” (Sartre 1978, 85, emphasis in original). Given
that human beings exist as material entities within a physicochemical universe, this
practical realization necessarily involves their bodily inertia as a material mediator.
76 Dialectical Foundations
Corporeal Inertia and Materiality
Sartre assigns a central position to the human body in action. According to Sartre,
human existence is the practical, spatiotemporal perpetuation of a self-totalizing
synthetic unity, i.e. a totality of body and consciousness. Human beings are not fleeting,
abstract existences but material entities, sectors of materiality in an exterior relation
to other material entities (Sartre 1978, 95). Self-totalization takes place in goaldirected
and thus intentional engagement with the world based on bodily materiality.
Needs and desires manifest in human existence based on the human body and
must be engaged through more or less intense interaction with the world’s materiality.
Basic physical requirements like hunger, thirst, or safety translate into abstract
needs for food, water, or shelter, and then into concrete desires for a piece of bread,
a glass of lemonade, or a warm room. How agents interiorize the world as a practical
field of possibilities depends on how their physicochemical surroundings are
equipped.
Especially in the case of physical requirements, the “living body [corps vivant] is
[…] in danger in the universe, and the universe harbours the possibility of the nonbeing
of the organism” (Sartre 1978, 81–82, emphasis in original; Sartre 1960, 167).
As a consequence, agents always encounter nature in a humanized form as a false
organism (Sartre 1978, 81), i.e. as synthetic world-totality, that is revealed as either
abundant or scarce regarding certain needs and desires. The world is thus structured
according to the agents’ practical field of possibilities (see section 4.2). In this
regard, material agents are subject to all the forces that govern the physicochemical
universe.
Sartre believes that the human body is the very medium through which agents
interface with their surrounding materiality. Through their bodily actions, agents
totalize themselves in their interrelation with matter. They do so in virtue of their
bodily inertia, which is used “to overcome the inertia of things” (Sartre 1978, 82), and
to cause modifications so that desired effects (and, necessarily, side effects) may be
caused. Agents thus actively mediate between the present exigent material state and
the future satisfying one. Sartre argues that:
The man of need is an organic totality […] [that] acts on inert bodies through the
medium of the inert body which it is and which it makes itself. It is inert in as much as
it is already subjected to all the physical forces which reveal it to itself as pure passivity;
it makes itself inert in its being in so far as it is only externally and through
inertia itself that a body can act on another body in the milieu of exteriority. (Sartre
1978, 82, emphasis in original)
Their bodily inertia not only renders agents “visible, tangible and audible, such that
we exist for others” (Crossley 2010, 215), but it also enables them to see, feel, hear, and
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 77
communicate with others. In short, it allows them to modify how the world is figured
based on situational factors, and thus mediate between present and future. Sartre
mentions that human beings exteriorize their interiority into the materiality of the
world in the course of their actions. Matter, in this regard, is ambivalent in this practical
interrelation. It supports and necessarily constrains human action at the same
time (Hartmann 1966, 98). Sartre states that
[w]ithin praxis […] there is a dialectical movement and dialectical relation between
action as the negation of matter (in its present organisation and on the
basis of a future re-organisation), and matter, as the real, docile support of the
developing re-organisation, as the negation of action. (Sartre 1978, 159, emphasis
in original)
Because they must abide by exterior forces, principles, and laws of nature, agents can
be efficacious in acting through and for themselves as an inert medium. Their situated
actions represent the intentional negation of their needs and desires, as well
as the practical transcending of a present exigent state of the world toward a future
satisfying state through material transformation and re-organization. The human
body reflects light for others to see, and when agents see in return, reflected light enters
their eyes. There it stimulates light-sensitive neurons in the retina, which then
transmit the signals through the optic nerve and to the brain to be processed and
interpreted. Because of this process, agents can see the phenomenal world and give
meaning to it. They use their hands to grasp things, manipulate levers, push buttons,
and work with tools. Agents sit in their cars and push the pedals with their feet
while manipulating the steering wheel to keep the car on track. Other actions, such
as drinking, are relations between agents as biological organisms and concrete organizations
of matter in the form of water. Agents reach for a glass or form a bowl
with their hands, bent toward the water source; they fill their vessel and guide it to
their mouth to quench their thirst. In this way, agents use their inert bodies either
to grasp a thing or to become a vessel themselves.
Bodily movement occurs through a combination of shifting one’s weight, moving
the legs, and creating friction between feet and ground. Another example is spoken
language. Seen against the background of materiality, it is a direct and guided
manipulation of air pressure as a result of a complex interplay between the lungs, diaphragm,
vocal tract, and various parts of the brain to create specific sounds. These
sounds are inert language, traveling in the medium of air through which they are
received by the ears of other people before being transduced into electric signals.
These are transmitted through nerves to the brain, then interpreted and comprehended
as a means of communication. This engagement with materiality through
the body also includes mental processes. Thinking, for instance, takes place within
the central nervous system of a human being who interprets themselves and the
world based on their embeddedness within larger societal constellations. In connec78
Dialectical Foundations
tion to Sartre’s understanding of instrumentalization, the human body represents a
tool (French outil) (Sartre 1943, 360; Sartre 1960, 167; Sartre 1978, 82; Sartre 2021, 434)
that is instrumentalized as a means to certain ends based on an agent as an end in
themselves (see section 3.2).
In the context of the human body, the term inertia suggests that the body does not
change its inherent features when it interacts with matter through action. Although
repeated interactions may leave hands callous or backs bent, the human body is fit
with a relatively high structural integrity and plasticity to withstand intense forces.
In this regard, inertia must be understood as positive passivity in terms of material
stability, durability, and permanence when facing outside forces (Hartmann 1966,
100). A similar approach can be found in James’ thoughts about the plasticity of inert
material objects and the central nervous system in terms of habit formation. He
states: “Plasticity […] in the wide sense of the word, means the possession of a structure
weak enough to yield to an influence, but strong enough not to yield all at once”
(James 1890, 105, emphasis in original).
Human beings act on the inertia of their material surroundings inasmuch as
this inertia works on them. In the course of their material lives, their material surroundings
slowly but steadily take the shape of their practical effects and products
and thus of themselves. This materiality bears a human mark because humans are
the medium that modified it (Hubig 2006, 128). At the same time, these humans bear
the mark of the world. They materially adapt to repeated interactions through growing
muscles, muscle memory, and calloused hands. They also develop certain bodily
skills and mental routines as action dispositions by interiorizing their use of certain
objects in the form of hexis (see section 4.5). To frame this in more Sartrean terms,
the human being-in-the-world is the product of its mutually consumptive, material
interrelation with the material things it instrumentalizes and thus appropriates for
itself within its bodily inertia.
The Dialectical Course of Action
To bring Sartre’s thoughts on action into a unified form it can be exemplified and
generalized how the motivational role of needs and desires, the ontological freedom
and intentional goal-directedness of agents, their specific experience of the state of
the physicochemical surroundings in the outset of action, and these agents’ corporeality
all interplay in the course of action.
Chapter 1 already introduced Sartre’s example of how thirst arises within the human
organism and the concomitant actions to satiate this thirst. This is a fitting example
in that it allows one to very generally depict how a concrete need and a potential
action to satisfy it arise in the totalizing mediation of the internal and external
dialectic of human existence. A human organism’s biological requirement for water
makes itself known through a series of interior physical symptoms. These symptoms
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 79
represent positings of being qua the human organism as a material entity. These
positings are given owing to the interior processes of human physicality. Simultaneously,
because these symptoms manifest within humans’ physicality, these humans
necessarily relate to their symptoms owing to the ontological freedom at the heart
of human existence. Such a relating can take place either pre-reflectively—by recognizing
unpleasant feelings or lust for water—or reflectively—by identifying their
symptoms as a lack of water in their body. Either way, to a dialectical understanding,
in striving toward satisfaction for themselves, a person negates the posited givenness
of their lack of being by transcending the current state of their self toward a
future self that is free of these physical symptoms. Their interior lack of being mobilizes
or motivates these people to exteriorize themselves by engaging their material
exteriority. In this way, requiring organisms totalize themselves as thirsty and
potentially acting subjects. These subjects relate to their physicochemical surroundings
with the intention to satiate their lack of water by exteriorizing their intention
through realizing it in the course of action.
However, it is not only these agents that are in the process of totalization. In
relating to their exterior milieu (Sartre 1978, 82), some of the material properties
and characteristics of this milieu, including the material entities within it,
are again dialectically interiorized. Similar to the interior physical symptoms of
thirst, the physicochemical surroundings are posited as a materially exterior fact
based on being for these potential agents. Upon interiorizing the properties of
the physicochemical surroundings, the intention to satiate their thirst represents
a negation of the positing of these properties and characteristics. Their material
surroundings are thus also enveloped in a totalizing process. With the lack of water
and the intention to attempt to satiate that lack of water, agents totalize themselves
and their surroundings as an exigent, lacking state of things that already projects
toward, and thus posits, a future state of things in which these agents are potentially
satisfied. Their world is thus relative to the structure of those requirements, wants,
and wishes in virtue of which agents have become engaged in it and in which they
seek their being by acting with and through it (Sartre 1978, 81). Consequently, the lack
of being that manifests itself in needs and desires is not just a mere negation of
posited interiorities of being; rather, it represents a negation of the negation as it
expresses itself as a commitment to dissolve itself (Sartre 1978, 83). It reveals an
agent’s surrounding as their practical field of possibilities that serves as a mediating
milieu through which they can act for themselves as ends in themselves (Sartre 1978,
90).
Through this revelation, a water fountain or a glass of water become instrumental
means because their material features enable them to be instrumentalized as potential
sources of satisfaction. It must be noted that the concrete structures of subjectivity
and objectivity of both agents and their surroundings are relative to each
other through the concrete end of getting water, which itself arises in this concrete
80 Dialectical Foundations
form within the interrelation between the two. Both their concrete subjectivity and
objectivity would be structured differently if the lack of being were, for instance, a
lack of food, information, or a place to sleep. Within each course of action, the concrete
shape of subjectivity and objectivity depends both on the interplay between
how needs and desires project agents toward ends and on what the surroundings
offer those agents.
Thirst, in this regard, only ever arises as a need in the form of a besoin in an infant
state (see section 1.4). An infant’s need for nourishment is not essentially determined
to be satiated by their mother’s breastmilk alone. When the infant’s mother’s milk,
for whatever reason, is not available, the infant can be nourished by other people who
are capable of breastfeeding, by a bottle, or by other means. In this understanding,
the infants’ thirst expresses itself in an abstract and undirected mode of relating to
their physicochemical surroundings. They cry and struggle because they feel thirsty.
When their abstract thirst as besoin is repeatedly satiated in certain ways by a caregiver,
infants become familiar with these strategies and cultivate certain individual
preferences in interrelation with the forms of societal constellation they situate
themselves in through their actions. After that, thirst arises as a desire in the form of
a désir and this desire represents the synthesis of physical symptoms and a longing
for something that satisfies them.
At this point, however, there is merely the intention to act and a fuzzy outline of
a course of action, not the actual realization of an intention through concrete action
itself. Consequently, to actually realize an intention to act, an agent must manipulate
matter “through the medium of the inert body which it is and which it makes
itself ” (Sartre 1978, 82, emphasis in original).
By crying, asking for water, accessing a water fountain, throwing coins into a
vending machine to buy a bottle of water, or turning faucets to fill glasses—and,
finally, by drinking something—agents materially transform their exigent state of
the world into a potentially satisfying state. In so doing, agents again exteriorize
their formerly interiorized relation to the world as a transient state based on their
needs and/or desires. They thus practically make their surrounding materiality into a totality
(Sartre 1978, 85). Exteriorizing interiorities by realizing intended ends necessarily
transforms the structure of those ends in relation to the material properties
and characteristics of the physicochemical surroundings.
The transformed state of things in which agents find themselves represents
a practical sublation in the dialectical course of action. This means that the antecedently
posited state of things is simultaneously overcome and contained by
being practically transcended and elevated in relation to the actually realized state
of things. As such, it represents another positing qua being in matter for the agents
to re-interiorize.
This re-interiorization is necessary for several reasons. It allows one to recognize
whether an action was realized in the exterior world in the first place and whether
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 81
this action has actually yielded intended or unintended results. Building on this, the
assessment also allows for an identification of the degree to which the realized action
corresponds to the agent’s intentions, satisfies their requirements, wants, and
wishes, and thus sublates their needs and desires. Furthermore, the assessment allows
one to analyze how the practical realization of intended ends in the course of
action was shaped by sociocultural and material factors, such as social norms or values,
instrumental means, body techniques, or hexeis (see sections 3.2, 4.3, and 4.5).
By re-interiorizing the material modifications they have caused, agents can reflectively
or pre-reflectively compare their outset of action with their endpoint of action,
so to speak. They may, for instance, still feel thirsty and desire more water or a different
drink, or even learn that they have flooded their kitchen while drinking water,
which affords them the opportunity to clean it up, and so on. In this regard, re-interiorizing
the modifications they have caused in their surrounding socioculturally
structured materiality represents another positing from which other actions may
ensue. It must be noted that this practical sublation is only temporal. As unhappy
and embodied consciousness, other requirements, wants, and wishes necessarily arise
in the course of human existence.
2.4 Existence as Praxis-Process
From the unified account of action in Sartre’s philosophy developed throughout this
chapter, two findings can be derived. First, every action takes place as a practical
interrelation between a human being and their socioculturally structured material
surroundings as a mediating milieu. Second, every action follows its dialectical circularity,
from positing through the course of realizing action and then again to another
positing.
This section extends these two findings by outlining Sartre’s thoughts about the
duality of action and situation, as well as by representing individual action situations
as moments within a larger conception of human existence as a praxis-process.
Action and Situation
According to Sartre, the practical totality of all meaningful factors that condition the
entire course of action comprise the situation of this action. Although Sartre struggles
to give a clear definition of the situation, he describes it rather poetically as follows:
The situation is the subject in his entirety (it is nothing other than his situation) and
it is also the ‘thing’ in its entirety (there is never anything more than the things). It
is, if you like, the subject lighting things up through his very surpassing—or it is
82 Dialectical Foundations
things sending back to the subject his image. (Sartre 2021, 713, emphasis in original)
Every action situation consists of the givenness of being, certain entities with practical
significance, the ontologically free agents themselves, their needs, desires, and
intentions, realized objective ends, and the recognition of potential differences between
subjective and objective ends—through which agents become aware of their
actions’ quality.
A situation is thus a totality of totalities (subject-totality, object-totality, worldtotality)
that is continuously constituted and theoretically synthesized by an agent’s
intentions. Furthermore, a situation is practically realized through actions in which
agents simultaneously realize themselves as in and beyond the situation. The situation
is neither purely subjective, as “the sum nor the unity of the impressions that
things make on us” (Sartre 2021, 712, emphasis in original), nor is it purely objective
“in the sense of a pure given which the subject could observe without being in
any way committed within the system thereby constituted” (Sartre 2021, 712). The
whole facticity of human existence, the place of birth, all actions taken so far, past
decisions, the current position that agents adopt in societal constellations—all are
contained in the situation that agents realize through their concrete totalizing actions.
At the same time, the concrete meaning of the existence of these agents is
derived from the constant confrontation between them and the conditions of their
situation.
The dialectical constitutiveness of the action situation is at the same time a requirement
and the product of human actions. Sartre mentions that
we are thrown into the world at every moment, and committed within it. We act,
therefore, before we have posited our possibles, and these possibles—which are
revealed as having been actualized, or as in the process of being actualized—direct
us to meaning that can be called into question only by some special action.
(Sartre 2021, 77)
The concrete action situation is dialectically posited by the action performed to surpass,
modify, and thus negate the current situation itself (Bourdieu 1977, 74). Action
and situation are mutually affirmed in the course of being realized.
Situated action is thus the goal-directed and intentional mediating activity of an
ontologically free agent, in which the agent dialectically totalizes both themselves,
as a practical totality in relation to the world, and the world, as a practical totality
in relation to themselves. The agent does so by modifying the present, lacking state
of the world through future-oriented use of means into a (temporarily) satisfying
state that is roughly outlined according to certain ends. These ends arise by how the
agent’s needs and desires, in relation to the agent’s material surroundings, affect
how the agent interiorizes these surroundings as a world, as an exigency, and as a
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 83
practical field. In short, situated action is the active, material negation of a materially
posited and socioculturally structured state of the world, which is perceived as
insufficient and exigent, toward a state of the world that was previously projected
as satisfactory. Within this course of action, the agent as subject-totality, the utilized
means as object-totalities, and the world as a totality are sublated in the totality
of the situation. This means that all of these present totalities are simultaneously
contained in the course of being transcended through the active, transformative engagement
toward a different future state of materiality.
Situated action is a free engagement. Although ends are posited through needs
and desires based on material or immaterial requirements, wants, and wishes,
agents can neither be fully determined by these needs and desires nor by their material
facticity. Human existence is a self-relational attitude toward these factors. It
is only in the becoming of existence that these factors are qualified by how agents
realize their possibilities. Sartre advocates that the freedom of human existence
has to be understood not as a negative freedom from the limitations of being and
materiality, but as an ontological freedom despite, because, with, and against these
limitations and the self-relational structure of embodied self-consciousness.
Enacting Existence and World
Although Sartre uses the term inertia to refer to the human body as a material entity,
it is not the case that actions have a straight trajectory and that agents push, so to say,
their inert body so that it performs the act. The examples above show that, although
only implicitly explained in Sartre’s philosophy, what are considered to be singular
actions must rather be considered more complex spatiotemporal relations of active
totalizations within totalizations. Embodied consciousness, needs and desires, intention,
ends, material entities, and the world as a totality do vaguely outline the
course of action. However, at its most basic level, the exact course of action—the exact
activity of an agent’s muscles, the loudness of their voice, or how hard they have
to push buttons, hit nails, and slam brake pedals—can only be known against the
background of an agent’s project. According to Sartre, “we cannot conceive of the
for-itself possessing the slightest possibility of any thematic prediction […] unless
it is the being that, on the basis of its future, returns to itself, the being that makes
itself exist as having its being outside itself, in the future” (Sartre 2021, 186).
Sartre’s example involves actions during a tennis game. Here, each movement
and position become meaningful in anticipation of the next one, all undertaken to
hit a tennis ball with a racket. According to Sartre, there neither is a “clear representation”
of each movement nor a “firm resolution” to exactly accomplish it. There is
only the “future movement which, without even being thematically presented, turns
backward to the positions I adopt, in order to illuminate, to connect and to modify
them” (Sartre 2021, 186). An action situation like playing tennis is not posited in its en84
Dialectical Foundations
tirety by reflective consciousness nor performed by pushing the inert body alongside
a prefabricated course of action toward the desired end.
Rather, the course of actions and the concomitant totalization of the action
situation must be understood as an active mediation that is enacted, each step of
the way, by the constant adaptive, interactive, self-totalizing world-engagement of
an inert material entity. In the tennis game example, this engagement involves the
player, the tennis racket, the tennis ball, the court, the net, the competitor (and the
player’s relation to the competitor), whether the agents want to win or just have
fun, the weather, the rules of the game, etc. Each positional change, as well as each
exchange of the ball and each of the competitor’s movements, alter the player’s
embodied relations to the material world, and thus the meaning each player gives
to the overall situation.
Consequently, players adapt all further movements and positions according
to what their finality roughly projects them toward—in this case, hitting the ball.
In every action, “the meaning of my [acts of] consciousness is always at a distance,
over there, outside” (Sartre 2021, 186).8 Although what happens on the tennis
court happens only as a result of the player’s intentional directedness toward the
world—maybe they play for fun or the win—the overall, concrete course of situated
action first emerges from the player’s mediating transformation.
In this regard, the course of situated action is the synthetic unity of various material
entities that occupy a specific space in the player agent’s organized practical
field of possibilities; the unity also includes the meaning these agents give these
entities, irrespective of a pre-reflective or reflective engagement. Against the background
of an agent’s embodied interrelation with the world, situated action must
thus be understood as initiated—either through will or passion—by the agents’ intention
to attain their ends. These ends are a result of the agents themselves being
needy/desiring in relation to the world. The exact course of action, although vaguely
outlined by ends and the world as an exigent practical field of possibilities, is enacted
by adapting each movement, position, and action in correspondence to the larger
roughly outlined course of action, as well as to the feedback agents get through their
intentional relation with the supporting and constraining entities in their practical
field. Situated actions, like hitting a ball with a racket, drinking water, or telling a
friend to reserve a table, comprise subactions in which agents make slight adaptations
according to their altered situation. These subactions are again smaller-scale
interrelations between themselves and the world, through which the whole action is
enacted and possibilized.
Especially regarding situated action based on needs and desires, Ally connects
Sartre’s views on the body in action to biological theories of autopoietic systems. He
8 The square brackets are in the original source and were not added by the author.
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 85
quotes the following passage from Sartre’s unfinished manuscript of part II of Critique
of Dialectical Reason:
For the organism, unity is actually the perpetual restoration of unity. From this
viewpoint, there is no difference between its synthetic reality—as a consistency at
the heart of temporalizations of envelopment—and the accomplishment of functions:
eating to live, and living to eat, are one and the same thing. For unity manifests
itself as the totalization of the functions that preserve it. These functions,
moreover, ceaselessly turn back upon themselves in a circularity that is only the
first temporalization of permanence, since their tasks are always similar and always
conditioned by the same ‘feedback’. (Sartre 1991, 344–345)
In this sense, embodied needs and desires, as well as an agent’s ongoing adaptation
to situational factors, reaffirm Sartre’s theoretical considerations about the impossibility
of fully being-in-and-for-itself (see section 2.3). By virtue of being a synthetic
unity of self-consciousness and body, human existence necessarily is a totalization
in progress, not a totality (Ally 2017, 445). In a human’s corporeal existence, situated
and goal-directed action is the active maintenance and preservation of itself as a
physicochemical, organic, social, and cultural unity, through its inertial progression
in a materially mediating milieu.
The constant and dynamic totalizing flow that is human existence necessarily
becomes inert in the concrete course of situated actions to be efficacious. Agents are
the adaptation to changing situational factors. They enact their possibilities through
their very actions. In reciprocity with their milieu, agents possibilize their existence
by realizing themselves. In doing so, agents disclose and thus synthesize their milieu
as a practical field through their practical engagement (Sartre 2021, 158).
Sartre strikingly summarizes the dialectical interplay of needs, desires, and
ends, as well as the existential urgency for action arising from human materiality
within a mediating milieu, in the following passage:
[M]an is a material being set in a material world; he wants to change the world
which crushes him, that is, to act on the world of materiality through the mediation
of matter and hence to change himself. His constant search is for a different
arrangement of the universe, and a different statute for man; and in terms of this
new order he is able to define himself as the Other whom he will become. Thus he
constantly makes himself the instrument, the means, of this future statute which
will realise him as other; and it is impossible for him to treat his own present as an
end. In other words, man as the future of man is the regulative schema of every
undertaking, but the end is always a remoulding of the material order which by
itself will make man possible. (Sartre 1978, 112, emphasis in original)
The regulative schema of human existence, as a constant undertaking, is an agent’s future
self. Because human actions are mediated by socioculturally conditioned ma86
Dialectical Foundations
teriality, and because the effects of this mediation are “embodied and manifested in
the actual and particular art” (Sartre 2021, 675, emphasis in original) of the situated
selves of agents, the practical realization of this regulative schema is based on the
constitutive principles of human becoming.
In this regard, human existence does not just become comprehensible as a constant
totalization. Each situated action can also be understood as a singular, structural
moment of this totalization. Consequently, human existence can itself be understood
either in its processing as a whole or with regard to the situated actions
that, as structural moments, represent totalizations themselves. Sartre states that
we can understand any common praxis because we are always an organic individuality
which realises a common individual: to exist, to act and to comprehend are
one and the same. This reveals a schema of universality which we can call constituted
dialectical Reason, because it governs the practical comprehension of a
specific reality which I shall call praxis-process, in so far as it is the rule both of its
construction and of my comprehension. (Sartre 1978, 558, emphasis in original)
Every situated action represents a structural moment in the temporal progression of
individual human existence. Individual existence is itself a praxis-process that perpetuates
itself through action (Flynn 2014, 345).
Fundamentally, the concrete subjectivity enacted throughout this process is continuously
transformed through the interrelation between human beings and their
surrounding materiality. From that materiality arise the situation-specific structures
of needs, desires, ends, and intentions, as well as the structures of the practical
field of possibility. Sartre’s understanding of this practical relationship between
human beings and objective materiality, and of how it constitutes both the concrete
shape of their subjectivity and objectivity, can be analyzed in terms of an intra-action,
i.e. an entangled interrelation between relata through which these relata are constituted
in the first place (Barad 2007, 136–137).
In Meeting the Universe Halfway, Barad engages in a discussion with Nils Bohr’s
philosophical-physical considerations for a revised understanding of discursive
practices. In such discursive practices, differences between phenomena are enacted
first and foremost through their relation, or intra-action. Barad focuses on sociocultural
factors that condition the discursive practice itself, which she refers to as
apparatus. This allows her to consider not only phenomena as such, but the way
they are perceived and the distinction that can potentially be made based on this
perception itself of these phenomena. Barad argues for a reworking of the notion
of causality so that it does not posit human beings front and center but also encompasses
the supposed agency of materiality in the consummation of causal events.
It is only within the larger perspective of the apparatus, i.e. “the material conditions
of possibility and impossibility of mattering” (Barad 2007, 148, emphasis in original),
that what matters is enacted and what does not matter is excluded. Against the
2. Totalizing Action and Praxis-Process 87
background of Sartre’s understanding of totalizing action developed throughout
this chapter, and against his conception of human existence as a praxis-process, it
becomes clear that there is a general and abstract form of human existence only
in relation to how it concretizes itself through action. Understanding human existence
as a praxis-process means understanding it as an intra-agential practice.
Through this practice, the cut between the subjectivity of human beings and the
objectivity of their surrounding materiality is enacted in the first place by their
mutual becoming within their interrelation. Individual human existence thus represents
the emergence of a situationally concretized, yet spatiotemporally coherent
subjective entity that is practically entangled with a thusly situationally concretized
and spatiotemporally coherent, objective materiality against the background of a
larger socioculturally structured material occurrence.
2.5 Concluding Remarks
The analysis in this chapter has substantiated the fundamental role of human action
in the course of human existence. The course of human existence is itself a complex
mediation of internal and external factors. Meaning, practical relevance, needs,
desires, and intentions interplay and together constitute a complex web of factors
that condition how agents realize themselves through their actions. Simultaneously,
each of these actions represents a structural moment in the overall totalizing processing
of human existence as praxis-process. Human beings represent material entities
that act for themselves, and thus they constitute their existential situation.
However, this situation is itself a constitutive factor for human existence. Depending
on the larger societal constellation and the concrete material conditions in
which actions take place, agents interiorize the world differently. They also subjectively
relate to the world differently and thus act differently. The mutual influence of
action and situation in Sartre’s philosophy reflects the significance he attributes to
both the individual and the societal context the individual is situated in.
Needs and desires are fundamental for the exact course of actions and even for
how individuals apprehend themselves and the world. The agents’ practical field is
co-constituted by their needs and desires. Given that the structure of these needs
and desires results from the agents’ situation within a larger societal constellation,
this constellation co-constitutes the agents’ needs and desires and thus their situationally
concretized subjectivity. Therefore, how needs and desires project toward
certain ends is, to a degree, an outcome of the structure of societal constellations.
The conceptions of situated action and praxis-process further elucidate the relationship
between individual and history addressed in section 1.4. The structural
dynamic between situated action and existence as praxis-process instantiates and
realizes the societal constellations that build the larger situational frame of individ88
Dialectical Foundations
ual action. Situated action on the micro-level is a structural moment of human existence
as a praxis-process on the meso-level, which is a structural moment of the processing
of larger societal constellations on the macro-level, which again affects the
course of situated action on the micro-level. Because history dialectically progresses
through material transformations of socioculturally and materially structured constellations,
and because human actions represent the basic structural moments in
these transformative processes, history itself becomes intelligible alongside the fundamental
dialectic of human experience and action. With the conception of situated
action and praxis-process, these transformative processes can now be represented by
retracing their structural dynamics.
Despite the inherent situatedness of human existence, this analysis proves that
action is ontologically free. Although practical freedom of choice might be limited by
the position that agents adopt in their respective constellations, agents must be understood
as remaining free to relate to themselves. This ontological freedom cannot
be taken from human existence. However, the inherently material character of human
existence already delimits an individual’s practical field. Both the human body
as well as the fact that actions must take place in the medium of matter affect human
agency.
Now, with regard to the material realization of action, Sartre is not blind to the
role of technology in human existence. In most of his works, Sartre illustrates certain
ontological differences between human beings and things with examples of tools,
instruments, and machines. He especially emphasizes the autotelic character of human
existence—i.e. the fact that human beings engage in goal-directed actions by
being ends in themselves—in contrast to the somewhat determined nature of technological
artifacts. Technology plays a crucial role in Sartre’s later works in particular.
Practico-inert things and structures manifest the relations between individuals.
These artifacts stabilize the structures of societal constellations and can even generate
their complex demands and requirements.
However, Critique represents a culmination of some of Sartre’s earlier thoughts.
His reflections on human action are followed by further reflections on the nature of
technical artifacts, their role as instrumental means, and the significance of these
constructed things for human existence. Given that this current work intends to outline
a theory of practical ensembles that can, with some modifications, be applied to
urban mobility infrastructures, Sartre’s philosophical thoughts on technology must
be laid down first. This will be done in the next chapter.
3. Existence and Technology
3.1 Introduction
This chapter aims to explore Sartre’s philosophical thoughts on technology. His theoretical
considerations about practical ensembles in Critique rest on a specific understanding
of the relationship between human agency and technology. This technology
occurs in the form of artificial objects that, owing to the fundamentally instrumentalizing
character of human action, serve not only as means to ends but also
as a reification and material manifestation of this means-ends relation. Throughout
his works, Sartre develops and refines his understanding of technological artifacts.
These, as practico-inert residuals of former actions, serve as a counterpoint to the
processual character of human existence within the scope of historical progression.
The current work focuses on technology to provide a Sartrean framework for analyzing
practical ensembles regarding human-technology relations.
Sartre’s theories on practical ensembles are based on his philosophy of technology.
He claims that social groups must be understood as practical interrelations between
individuals, and these interrelations are mediated by socialized matter in the
form of physical artifacts. These artifacts structure, scaffold, and manifest the practical
interrelations these social groups consist of because the artifacts are themselves
products of practical world interrelations with specific material properties.
Naturally, not all nuances of Sartre’s view can be treated, although a general narrative
is outlined according to which his philosophy of technology becomes understandable
as a dialectical philosophy of technology.
Thinking of Sartre as a philosopher of technology may seem far-fetched at first,
given that he does not explicitly engage in classical debates about technology. As is
the case for most of his philosophical ideas, with regard to humans and technology,
Sartre describes certain dynamics of their interrelation rather than providing
clear definitions of what he understands as technology. Sartre’s philosophy is neither
specifically about technology nor about the objective world; it is mostly about
human existence in relation to the world. In most of his works, however, Sartre discusses
various characteristics of artifacts, objects of utility, certain commodities,
and bodily techniques. On most occasions, these discussions serve to illustrate fun90
Dialectical Foundations
damental differences between humans and things on the one hand and the inherent
connection between humans and objective reality on the other. When Sartre compares
the autotelic nature of human existence with the seemingly predetermined
nature of the objective world—especially that of manufactured objects such as tools
and machines—he also makes a further observation: existence and objective reality
necessarily interconnect in how practical significance, purposiveness, and equipmentality
are constituted in a dialectical interrelation between humans and things.
In this connection is found the root of Sartre’s philosophy of technology.
However, it must be noted that Sartre’s thought as presented in this chapter necessarily
remains incomplete, especially regarding its implications for the forms of
societal organization. This is because Sartre’s thoughts presented here are constitutive
for and thus, on their own, somewhat detached from the implications of technology’s
use in societal constellations. This chapter, therefore, builds on the last and
focuses on the role of technological artifacts in the course of human action.
3.2 Dialectical Instrumentality
This section aims to reconstruct Sartre’s conception of dialectical instrumentality. To
do so, the section will introduce Sartre’s engagement with philosophical questions
surrounding the equipmentality of things and systems, their situation-specific utility
and adversity, and their interrelation. The section will then embed these into the
larger context of his dialectical philosophy.1
One of Sartre’s more uninspired yet often cited engagements with technology
can be found in his essay Existentialism is a Humanism. Here, Sartre uses a paper knife
or letter opener (French coupe-papier) to illustrate the essential difference between
human beings and technological artifacts. He claims that, because a paper knife is
an instrument constructed for a specific purpose, it can be understood as having
received its essence and telos from an external god-like artisan. In contrast, human
beings constitute their essence as free, autotelic, and future-oriented beings that realize
themselves through their actions (Sartre 2005, 148). This distinction is characteristic
of Sartre’s entire conception of technology. Human beings are active agents
that make sense of the world for themselves through their actions, whereas nonhuman
entities are passive things that are either completely devoid of meaning or
receive their meaning and purpose from the outside through active human engagement.
Although he revises this conception somewhat throughout his works, with
regard to existence and technology, Sartre always locates true praxis in human exis-
1 For a more condensed account of Sartre’s dialectical philosophy of technology, see Siegler
(2022b).
3. Existence and Technology 91
tence; any activity that might be attributed to non-human entities remains a false
praxis.
Primary Instrumentalization
However, in many ways, Sartre’s engagement with technology from Existentialism is
a Humanism takes a step backward in quality and nuance compared with his earlier
thoughts in Being and Nothingness and, most of all, his later thoughts in Critique. The
fundamental line of reasoning on which Sartre’s philosophical thoughts on technology
are grounded is his conception of human action as instrumentalization (French
instrumentalisation) (Sartre 1960, 231). Section 2.3 showed that human existence is
characterized by its autotelic and inherently practical orientation toward the material
world. Every human being is an agent that acts for itself as an end in itself.
Therefore, every action taking place in the course of human existence must be understood
as a goal-directed activity that is relative to the agent as an end in itself.
Because action necessarily takes place in relation to the material world, and because
every action is an instrumentalization of matter, “[e]very praxis is primarily an instrumentalisation
of material reality. It envelops the inanimate thing in a totalising
project which gives it a pseudo-organic unity” (Sartre 1978, 161, emphasis in original).
In this regard, every action must be understood as an implementation of means
to ends. It must be noted that this conception of instrumentalization does not only
refer to non-human entities but also, and most importantly, to the human body. Just
like a non-human thing, the human body represents an inert sector of materiality
that can be chained into “an organized, instrumental structure such that, through a
series of sequences and connections, the modification brought about in one of the
links brings in its wake modifications in the entire series and, in the end, produces
some foreseen result” (Sartre 2021, 569). As biological organisms, human agents are
material entities with complex needs and desires. As such, they rely on interacting
with physicochemical reality to sustain themselves, communicate, and socialize. Regarding
the human body within the course of action, Sartre states:
The man of need is an organic totality perpetually making itself into its own tool
[French outil] in the milieu of exteriority. The organic totality acts on inert bodies
through the medium of the inert body which it is and which it makes itself […]
The action of a living body on the inert can be exercised either directly or through
the mediation of another inert body, in which case we call the intermediary a tool
[outil]. (Sartre 1978, 82, emphasis in original; Sartre 1960, 167)
In the course of action, human beings either make themselves into tools to act on
matter or rely on tools to do so. Unfortunately, the English term tool obscures the
wider intension of the original French term outil. With regard to certain non-human
implements, such as hammers and knives or even machines and other more
92 Dialectical Foundations
complex technical systems that can be used as means toward ends, the term tool
rightly connotes a certain passivity and purposiveness. Regarding an agent’s living
body, the term tool is misleading. Section 2.4 showed that agents corporeally enact
the course of action from situation to situation. In the course of action, an agent’s
body is not at all passive. Sartre’s original use of the term outil both for the agent’s
living body in action and for non-human things used as intermediaries, i.e. means
toward ends, suggests that the term must be interpreted with his conceptions of totalizing
action and instrumentalization in mind. In the course of totalizing action,
agents principally instrumentalize themselves as well as non-human things toward
their ends. Both are thus totalized as outils because both are primarily posited into
the functional position of instrumental means within the dialectical means-to-ends
relation of totalizing action.
In accordance with his distinction between the modes of being for-itself and being
in-itself, Sartre has different conceptions of how human agents and non-human
things fulfill a functional role as means in the course of human existence. Whereas
things are always disclosed as means to ends within a field of equipmentality, human
agents exist as the individual center of this field to which practical references
refer and from which they equally radiate.
The Field of Equipmentality
Given the fundamentally practical character of human existence, human reality is always
“disclosed as haunted by absences to be actualized, and each this appears with
a retinue of absences indicating and determining it” (Sartre 2021, 279, emphasis in
original). This means that everything within individual human reality is always already
in the process of being totalized as meaningful. The meaning comes about
according to its practical and situation-specific relevance in dialectical relation to
certain ends (French fins) for which these things may be instrumentalized as means
(French moyens). In Being and Nothingness, Sartre states: “A thing is not first a thing, in
order later to be an implement [French ustensile]; it is not first an implement, in order
later to be disclosed as a thing: it is an implement-thing [French chose-ustensile]”
(Sartre 2021, 280; Sartre 1943, 236).
In Critique, Sartre refers to these things as practical objects (French objects pratiques).
This notion includes machines, tools, built structures, consumer goods, and
any other objects of utility (Sartre 1978, 45–46; Sartre 1960, 138). Sartre claims that
these things always appear as implement-things because they represent meaningful
totalities resulting from the practical relationship between the agent and the world.
Agents attribute meaning to objective reality by virtue of practically interrelating
with it. Given that every action is an instrumentalization of material reality, every
thing is totalized as an instrument by incorporating it into a potential course of action.
Beyond this totalization, implement-things/practical objects rest “in the calm
3. Existence and Technology 93
beatitude of indifference” (Sartre 2021, 280). In other words, without a practical interrelation,
the totalizing activity that makes these entities instruments ceases; the
instrument as a totality then disintegrates (Sartre 1978, 46). Their material being remains,
but the attributed meaning vanishes with the attributing agent.
Human existence is inherently practical and oriented toward self-realization
through action. Thus, implement-things always appear relative to individual agents.
Implements constitute a structure of equipment that is organized by “axes whose reference
is practical” (French axes de référence pratiques) (Sartre 2021, 431; Sartre 1943,
361). For this reason, Sartre refers to the original relation between instrumentalthings
within human reality as equipmentality (French ustensilité) (Sartre 2021, 280;
Sartre 1943, 236) in the sense of Heidegger’s Zeughaftigkeit of things (Heidegger
2006, 68). Implement-things are not isolated but comprise an equipment complex
or field of equipmentality (French champ d’ustensilité) (Sartre 1943, 363). In this field
of equipmentality, implement-things refer “to other implements: to the ones that
are its keys, and to those of which it is the key” (Sartre 2021, 432, emphasis in original).
Most importantly, regarding the practical reference for the user, implements
refer to specific tasks that can be performed with them. According to Sartre, “these
references would not be grasped by a purely contemplative consciousness” (Sartre
2021, 432), because that consciousness would fail to see the connection between
means, other things, and ends.2 In Heideggerian language, Sartre primarily conceives
of instrumental-things as equipment (German Zeug), which is disclosed as
always in-order-to (German um-zu) and which ultimately forms an equipmental whole
(German Zeugganzheit) that is relative to a specific human world-relation (Heidegger
2005, 232–233; Heidegger 2006, 71–74).3 An agent’s pen, for instance, refers to
paper, ink, or a table. By referring to the act of writing itself, a pen also refers back
to the writer. Human reality, specifically understood as a world of tasks, is thus
2 Here, Sartre seems to suggest that either only a practical consciousness, which discloses the
world as a field of instruments relative to itself as end in itself, or a not purely contemplative
but also practical consciousness, is responsible for connecting means to ends. It can be suggested
that an interrelated contemplative and practical consciousness corresponds to Sartre’s
conception of dialectical reason. However, the further investigation of this problem is reserved
for future research.
3 Despite the terminological and conceptual similarities and the similar implications of Heidegger’s
and Sartre’s thoughts on technology, however, Sartre’s understanding of equipmentality
implies a more engaged and proactive conception of a human’s world relationality
than the conceptual roots of his Heideggerian terminology initially convey. This is mostly
attributable to the totalizing character of human existence, experience, and action. Whereas
Heidegger’s Dasein is somewhat inserted into an equipmental complex through which a person’s
world is disclosed, Sartre’s being-for-itself more proactively constitutes and is constituted
by what their surrounding matter provides them with. For Sartre’s being-for-itself, their
equipmental complex is the product of totalization. See Siegler (2022b).
94 Dialectical Foundations
objectively articulated. The world of tasks is represented in the means toward these
tasks (Sartre 2021, 280, 432–433).
Consequently, because needs and desires project to individual ends based on
how an individual’s practical field of possibilities is equipped, an agent’s inferential
field of equipmentality correlates with their practical field of possibilities (Sartre
2021, 281, 432–433). An agent’s totalizing action must not only be understood as a
self-totalization and a totalization of the things around that agent and their world
but also as a totalizing structuring of the field of equipmentality according to practical
and situation-specific references toward certain ends (Sartre 2021, 431). Whenever
a specific yet subjectively structured desire arises, for instance, it projects toward
specific ends. Simultaneously, a vague outline of the course of action to attain
these ends is given in relation to the availability of means in the field of equipmentality.
When agents are thirsty, for instance, they practically structure their equipmental
field through their actions in such a way as to look for and drink water. When
there is no water available, however, these agents might structure their field so as to
search for other water sources. In any case, the resulting structure of equipment represents
the organized, instrumental structure that must be produced to eventually bring
about intended modifications of the state of things in the course of action (Sartre
2021, 569).
Given that to be efficacious, agents must materially chain their corporeality into
this organized instrumental structure, Sartre finds himself faced with what he calls
a twofold contradictory necessity. On the one hand, human reality is a materially
mediated world of tasks. This implies that agents must themselves be implements
in order to act. On the other hand, a field of equipmentality, practically structured
according to certain ends, must be structured and disclosed as such through a meaningful
center from which these goal-directed structures of equipment arise in the
first place. According to Sartre, the world “never refers to a creative subjectivity but
to the infinite structures of equipment” (Sartre 2021, 433). The key to these complexes,
i.e. the thing from which these complexes derive their meaning, is the human body
in action. The human body in action represents the center of the individual’s field of
equipmentality:
[T]his center is at the same time a tool [French outil] that is objectively defined by
the instrumental field that refers to it, and the tool we are unable to utilize because
we would be referred ad infinitum. We do not employ this instrument; we are it. It is
not given to us in any way other than through the equipmental order of the world
[…] through the univocal or reciprocal relations between machines, but it cannot
be given to my action: I do not have to adapt to it, or to adapt some other tool to
it; rather, it just is my adaptation to tools, the adaptation that I am. (Sartre 2021,
434–435, emphasis in original)
3. Existence and Technology 95
Sartre suggests that human beings exist as a tool to handle tools and that the action-
signifying qualities of implements have ultimately arisen from the fact that
agents make themselves into tools in order to act. In this quotation, Sartre’s use of
the French term outil becomes clearer. By occupying the position of means in the
means-end relation, agents can take part in the inert causality of matter (see sections
2.3 and 2.4). As such, the body in “its being-there is justified in part by the situation
that I create around me—as the presence of nails and the matting to be nailed
to the wall justify the existence of the hammer” (Sartre 2021, 533, emphasis in original).
The way humans become the tool to handle tools is thus an outcome of their free
intention to act and their self-totalization. At the same time, it is a given that the
only way to self-sustain is to act on the material world. In their totalizing world relation,
human beings exist as “an instrument in the midst of other instruments […]
as a tool for handling tools […] as a tool-machine [French machine-outil]” (Sartre 2021,
430, emphasis in original; Sartre 1943, 360). They exist as such at the center of a field
of equipmentality that is structured in accordance with practical references in relation
to certain tasks. It is the totalizing agent’s ends through which implementthings
refer to certain tasks within this field. These ends arise within practical human
existence based on needs and/or desires.
Although implement-things refer to specific tasks, they do not prescribe actions.
Sartre remains a vigorous defender of the fundamental significance of human freedom.
Therefore, the factors that influence how and why certain implement-things
are instrumentalized must be found within the course of totalizing action. Sartre
thus advocates for a situation-specific instrumentalization of things based on their
material properties.
The Coefficient of Utility and Adversity
As regards the integration of instrumental means in the course of actions, Sartre argues
in favor of a relative and situation-specific spectrum of utility and adversity over
which these instruments range. The same is true for the human body as a means
to handle tools. Both the body and various material entities have specific material
properties that enable certain actions when used, while simultaneously constraining
others. A pencil, for instance, can be instrumentalized as a writing tool because
it is thin, long, sharp, and pointed, with a pigment core that rubs on various materials
and can also be erased. Furthermore, the pencil has an established meaning
as a means for making erasable drafts. In the hands of a capable fighter or an angry
person, a pencil can also be a stabbing weapon or a dart. This makes it different
from other objects with similar properties. A bottle, for instance, is also long and
thin and has a small opening. The material from which it is made usually depends
on the kind of liquid it is meant to store. The bottle is thus built to store and pour
liquids. However, its relatively hard bottom means that it can also be used as a ham96
Dialectical Foundations
mer. A cup, in contrast, is made of porcelain and has a handle that allows the user to
hold it while it carries a warm beverage without the user touching its warm surface.
At the same time, a cup can be used to store other objects smaller than the cup itself.
The same is true of more complex machines such as cars or trains. Both are highly
specialized machines with specific material characteristics that render them useful
for certain purposes and adverse for others. In postphenomenology, this is known
as multistability, i.e. the potential of technological artifacts to support multiple practical
relations.4
To account for the situation-specific utility and adversity of things in the course
of action, Sartre borrows Bachelard’s concept of the coefficient of adversity and further
develops it into the so-called objective coefficient of utility and adversity (French coefficient
objectif d’utilité et d’adversité) (Sartre, 2021, 435, 455; Sartre 1943, 380). This development
stresses the fact that utility and adversity do not originate in things or the human
body but in the user’s specific status in relation to those things and the world. Sartre
states:
The screw is revealed as too big to be screwed into the nut, the support as too
fragile to support the weight that I want to support, the stone as too heavy to be
raised right up to the ridge of the wall, etc. Other objects appear as threatening
for an equipment-structure that has already been established: the storm and hail
for the harvest, phylloxera for the vine, the fire for the house. In this way, gradually
and through the structures of equipment that are already established, their threat
will extend right up to the center of reference that all these implements are indicating
and it, in its turn, will indicate the threat through them. In this sense every
means is at the same time favorable and adverse, but within the limits of the fundamental
project that is actualized by the for-itself’s arising in the world [French
tout moyen est à la fois favorable et adverse, mais dans les limites du projet fondamental
réalisé par le surgissement du pour -soi dans le monde]. (Sartre 2021, 436, emphasis in
original; Sartre 1943, 364)
4 Postphenomenological approaches differ in their conception of multistability. Ihde (1990),
for instance, deduces the multistability of technological artifacts from their initial ambiguity
and from the fact that the “‘same’ technology in another cultural context becomes quite a ‘different’
technology” (144). Rosenberger (2014) extends the concept of multistability and supplements
it with the conception of symmetry from Actor-Network-Theory, so that “it becomes
possible to consider the roles of user experience, and the role of technological multistability,
within the overall agency possessed by networks of actors” (381). In this context, Sartre’s
conception of instrumental things as ranging over a scale of utility and adversity represents
a pre-postphenomenological conception of multistability. His view considers the material
properties in relation to the situatedness of agents. A more detailed juxtaposition of Sartre’s
approach and postphenomenology can be found in Müller (2017).
3. Existence and Technology 97
It is in virtue of the principal goal-directedness at the heart of human existence that
things reveal their dispositional properties of utility and adversity. Things are not
useful or useless per se; their utility and adversity arise in concrete action situations.
When a person wants to commute between two distant places, for instance, a car’s
specific properties in connection to the properties of road infrastructure render it
more useful than the human legs, given that both places are sufficiently connected.
Of course, one’s legs can be used to walk the distance but the outcome and side-effects
of this action would be different if the same action were performed with a car.
Section 2.3 showed that Sartre’s theory of action takes the whole range of human
possibilities into account. Action situations are imaginable in which the agent’s very
intention is to show the possibility of walking said distance, for instance. In this regard,
the legs as means would have a higher utility than the car. Of course, in their
everyday life, a person’s intentions are more complex and interrelated. If the person
intends to commute while also using the travel time to work, or when the person
intends to commute more sustainably, a train may have a higher utility than a car.
In the context of using implements, Sartre plays on Heidegger’s concepts of
ready-to-hand (German Zuhandenheit) and present-to-hand (German Vorhandenheit). In
Heidegger’s philosophy of technology, these concepts refer to two modes in which
equipmental things are given to the being-in-the-world. An equipmental thing is
ready-to-hand when it is integrated into a person’s practical dealings. In this mode,
being-in-the-world does not reflect on the nature of the equipmental thing. When
the equipmental thing, for whatever reason, causes disturbances in a person’s practical
dealings, it becomes present-at-hand. Now, the equipmental thing is reflected
upon and disclosed as what it is, how it appears, etc. (Heidegger 2006, 66–76).
Sartre claims that the agent’s body is not usually present in certain actions. According
to him, in the act of writing, for instance, agents do not conceive themselves
as holding a pen. Rather, they conceive themselves as using the pen to write or even
as writing. This is because “[t]he consciousness of a man in action is unreflected consciousness”
(Sartre 2021, 75). Consequently, instrumental action must not be understood
as the mere use of an instrumental means with a fixed purpose. Rather, instrumental
action is an enaction of the utility and/or adversity that is rooted in the
materiality of the instrument as an inert medium in relation to an agent’s needs and
desires. Sartre states that “it is the chop of the axe that reveals the axe, the hammering
of the hammer that reveals the hammer” (Sartre 2021, 674–675). The tool-being of
the human body and instrumental things consists in the goal-directed and situated
implementation of things, whose utility and adversity are enacted through processual,
kinesthetic adaptation (see section 2.4). Hence, retracing and reversing instrumental
reference always leads to the user as an end in itself (Sartre 2021, 436–437).
Sartre’s understanding of how equipmentality and purposiveness are attributed
to instrumental means culminates in a conception of the world as an exact correlate
of individual possibilities that every agent actively enacts, in the course of practi98
Dialectical Foundations
cal existence (Sartre 2021, 436) (see section 2.4). The individual field of instruments
correlates with the individual field of possibilities. Given that each human being
is the center of an individual field of equipmentality that comprises instrumentalthings/
practical objects, and because this field is relative to the practical attribution
of meaning through action in relation to the agent as an end in itself, the equipmentality
of objects cannot be conceived as a solely objective property, nor can individual
possibilities be conceived as solely subjective structures. Action possibilities are not
something agents have, but rather something they enact by unifying their instrumental
field toward their ends. The instrumental field of possibilities is not provided
by the material world alone, nor is it constituted by the agent alone; it arises from
the practical projection of ends in relation to given means (see section 2.3). Sartre
states that:
In the organism, bonds of interiority overlay those of exteriority; in the instrumental
field, it is the other way round: a bond of internal unification underlies the
multiplicity of exteriority, and it is praxis which, in the light of the end, constantly
reshapes the order of exteriority on the basis of a deeper unity. (Sartre 1978, 87,
emphasis in original)
Individual action projects toward intended ends according to which available things
become instrumental means with situation-specific coefficients of adversity and
utility. At the same time, the ends that individual action projects toward derive their
attainability from the fact that there are instrumental means available through
which these ends can be attained. Accordingly, the field of instruments corresponds
to the field of possibilities, because the field of instruments as the unity of available
means is always transcended toward attainable ends. Instruments are material
potentials that require human action to be realized as such. Human action as a
goal-directed activity must simultaneously rely on potentials that both exist and are
available in order to be realized. Equipmentality is thus a result of dialectical human
existence. Ends are apprehended as such when they are conceived as attainable
through available means. Means in return are apprehended as available in relation
to attainable ends (Hubig 2006, 127, 173). Implement-things thus shape how agents
actually realize their intended ends in the course of action (see section 2.3). They
do so by enabling the practical realization of certain ends based on the relationship
between intended ends and their suitability and availability for practically attaining
these ends.
Owing to the principally practical character of human existence, agents instrumentalize
their surrounding materiality based on its situation-specific properties.
Therefore, Sartre states that human beings exist “in the form of being-an-instrument-
in-the-midst-of-the-world” (Sartre 2021, 436), which, in the original French,
reads “d’être-instrument-au-milieu-du-monde” (Sartre 1943, 365). Following this
understanding, human existence represents an instrumental mode of being ac3.
Existence and Technology 99
cording to which surrounding things are principally structured along “axes whose
reference is practical” (French axes de référence pratiques) (Sartre 2021, 431; Sartre 1943,
361). The world that is totalized in the course of action thus has an instrumental
character to it. It arises in relation to the intentional means-ends structures of
individuals.
3.3 The Social Side of Things
This section focuses on Sartre’s thoughts about the relationship between implements,
body techniques, and the social milieu in which these come to use. Although
Sartre advocates for the fact that equipmentality is dialectically attributed to things
in virtue of individual, practical world-directedness, he is not blind to the fact
that human beings necessarily find themselves engaged in a world of subjectindependent
meaning—meaning which they have not put there themselves, but
which nevertheless influences their mode of self-realization (Bonnemann 2009,
14). Sartre states that things have a fundamentally signifying character because
meaning is inscribed into them through human action. For him, human beings
relate to a larger social structure through the use of both technological artifacts and
body techniques.
Inscription
Sartre’s thoughts on inscription can be illustrated by how he distinguishes between
the experience of objects that have not been worked on, and the experience of objects
that have been worked on, i.e. manufactured objects. Again, the distinction Sartre has
in mind does not concern the ontological status of these objects in particular but the
nature of the relations that humans engage in by virtue of the objects’ features. It
is not a distinction between artificial and somewhat naturally occurring objects. He
states:
Faced with an inanimate and uncrafted object, whose operation I myself determine,
and to which I myself assign a new use (if, for example, I use a stone as a
hammer), I have [an immediate] consciousness of my person […] of my own ends
and my free inventiveness. (Sartre 2021, 561, emphasis in original)
Objects that have not been worked on initially refer to the agent who discovers them
and to whom these objects signify an individual possibility for action. The experience
of these objects is characterized by individuality (especially in terms of the
agent’s ends), inventiveness, and spontaneity. The meaning of these objects derives
from how they are incorporated into the agent’s project. Various meanings might
be, for instance, attributed to a rock. When the rock is discovered while strolling
100 Dialectical Foundations
or hiking on a path, it may be an obstacle to be circumvented or a landmark to be
contemplated; when discovered in an urgent situation where something has to be
shattered, the rock may be a hammer or a weapon, and so on. The rock is not an obstacle
or an object of contemplation by virtue of being but becomes those things in
relation to the agent’s course of action (Sartre 2021, 665). As such, this object influences
the course of action. However, the exact scope of this influence depends on the
agent’s apprehension of means and ends in relation to their self-realizing project.
The experience of manufactured objects is different from that of objects that
have not been worked on. According to Sartre,
any manufactured object must—in order to qualify as such—invoke the producers
who made it and the rules for using it which other people have determined
[…] As a matter of their essential structure, the rules for use, the ‘instructions’ for
manufactured objects—which in their simultaneous rigidity and ideality, resemble
taboos—place me in the other’s presence. (Sartre 2021, 561, emphasis in original)
In contrast to objects that have not been worked on, manufactured objects do not
initially refer to the agent but to the larger social milieu, the agent is part of. Although
the notion of manufactured implies artificial as an ontological quality of these
objects, Sartre emphasizes the fact that manufactured objects first and foremost express
a certain supraindividual purposiveness. This purposiveness precedes individual
action and manifests in these objects. Rather than signifying individual possibility
based on the agent as a free project, manufactured objects signify an opportunity
as a fixed and socially predetermined way of doing things. This can be understood
as an affordance, i.e. a material cue that solicits agents to interact with it in certain
ways (Gibson 1966; Rietveld & Kiverstein 2014; Dings 2018). In The Design of Everyday
Things, Norman states the following about affordances:
The term affordance refers to the relationship between a physical object and a person
(or for that matter, any interacting agent, whether animal or human, or even
machines and robots). An affordance is a relationship between the properties of
an object and the capabilities of the agent that determine just how the object
could possibly be used. A chair affords (‘is for’) support and, therefore, affords sitting.
Most chairs can also be carried by a single person (they afford lifting), but
some can only be lifted by a strong person or by a team of people. If young or relatively
weak people cannot lift a chair, then for these people, the chair does not
have that affordance, it does not afford lifting. The presence of an affordance is
jointly determined by the qualities of the object and the abilities of the agent that
is interacting. This relational definition of affordance gives considerable difficulty
to many people. We are used to thinking that properties are associated with objects.
But affordance is not a property. An affordance is a relationship. Whether an
3. Existence and Technology 101
affordance exists depends upon the properties of both the object and the agent.
(Norman 2013, 11, emphasis in original)
This passage brings the concept of affordance close to Sartre’s thoughts about the
coefficient of utility and adversity of things. In Sartre’s case, affordance must be extended
to the socioculturally established and accepted meaning and purpose of objects.
The shape of a handle or a button, for instance, affords it to be pushed because,
on the one hand, it is built so as to be pushed, and, on the other, it has an established
meaning as a thing that is to be pushed in an agent’s sociocultural milieu. The difference
here between possibility and opportunity is marginal only with regard to the
actual course of individual action, but the difference directly expresses a variability
in how the individual agent relates to the world and to the sociocultural milieu it is
part of by virtue of using manufactured objects. The use of manufactured objects
according to relatively fixed methods not only represents an individual action in the
sense of a means-end relation. It also represents a social relation to a larger societal
constellation already in place. The individual experience of manufactured objects is
thus characterized by (relative) uniformity and anonymity. Sartre claims that manufactured
objects address themselves to everyone in their field of equipmentality
and that “a human transcendence, guiding my transcendence, has already slipped
in between the object and myself; the object is already humanized, and signifies ‘the
human kingdom’” (Sartre 2021, 561, emphasis in original).
Sartre illustrates the fact that manufactured objects signify subject-independent
human ends by the various meanings discovered to have preceded individual
choice when walking through a lively city:
Consider, for example, the countless meanings, independent of my choice, that I
encounter if I live in a town: streets, shops, trams and buses, signposts, the sounds
of car horns, wireless music, etc […] When I encounter a house at a bend in the road
I do not reveal only a brute existent within the world; I do not make it the case
only that there is a ‘this,’ characterized in such and such a way. Rather, the meaning
of the object revealed to me here resists and remains independent of me: I
discover that the building is an apartment building if the offices of the Compagnie
du Gaz, or a prison, etc. Here the meaning is contingent, and independent of
my choice, and it is presented with the same indifference as the in-itself’s reality: it
has become a thing and cannot be distinguished from the in-itself’s quality. In the
same way, I encounter things’ coefficient of adversity before I experience it; a host
of notices warn me: ‘Slow down, dangerous bend,’ ‘Attention! School,’ ‘Danger of
Death,’ ‘100m to Cassis,’ etc. But the fact that these meanings are deeply inscribed
in things and share their indifferent externality—at least in appearance—does
not make them any less indicative of a mode of behavior to be adopted that concerns
me directly […] Do I not discover here some narrow limits to my freedom? […]
I submit to these directions: to the coefficient of adversity in things that is engen102
Dialectical Foundations
dered by me, they add a coefficient of adversity that is strictly human. In addition,
if I submit to this structure, I depend on it. (Sartre 2021, 664–665, emphasis in original)
Street signs, traffic lights, and buildings are not brute existents to which meaning is
conferred through individual action in the first place. These things already constitute
a world, a meaningful totality that informs, supports, and directs individual action.
Of course, the practical meaning, utility, and adversity of these things still arise
within the agent’s project, but this project itself must be understood less as a practically
free invention of the world and more as an ontologically free self-embedding.
The embedding happens into an already social, cultural, material, and thus historically
structured wholeness that is shared with others. This wholeness of things and
social expectations, norms, values, and opportunities scaffolds the agent a certain
socially formed way of practical interrelating and thus a certain way of existing.
Body Techniques
The same is true for the implementation of several body, social, and intellectual techniques.
5 The employment of these techniques, such as “to know how to walk, to know
how to pick something up, how to judge the relief and the relative size of perceived
objects, how to talk, how to distinguish, in general, between the true and the false,
etc.” (Sartre 2021, 667) further delimits and focuses actions. Such techniques as knowing
how to speak are not “an abstract and pure knowledge of the language, as it is defined
by dictionaries and academic grammars” (Sartre 2021, 667), but are the execution
of practical language competency with which agents both situate themselves
in a societal constellation and apprehend the world according to this constellation.
This can be applied to other techniques. In that people, for instance, ski like a Savoy,
talk like a German, work like a proletarian or an academic, and so on, they accordingly
disclose their world as Savoyens, Germans, proletarians, or academics. Furthermore,
they situate and embed themselves in these respective social milieus by
implementing the techniques that refer to these milieus. According to Sartre,
[t]hese techniques will determine my membership of communities: of the human
species, the national community, the professional and familial group […] the only
positive way in which I can exist my de facto membership of these communities is the
use that I constantly make of the techniques associated with them. (Sartre 2021,
666–667, emphasis in original)
5 Sartre’s thoughts on body techniques resemble those of Mauss’ Les techniques du corps (1934,
transl. 1973).
3. Existence and Technology 103
The way agents give meaning to the world through their actions is thus also conditioned
by the culture-specific techniques by which they embed themselves in it
(Bonnemann 2009, 16). This means not only that the nature of the agents’ meaningful
relations to the world depends on the way they interiorize the world as a practical
field of possibility, but also that this interiorization is itself technically mediated by
culture-specific bodily, social, and cultural techniques (Sartre 2021, 668). People neither
fully constitute these techniques nor can it be said that these techniques constitute
people. Sartre mentions that just as agents enact their existence in the course
of action by adapting their embodied self to their situation (see section 2.4), and just
as they enact the equipmentality of things (see section 3.2), these agents also enact
the effects of techniques—the existence of words, for instance, by speaking, or the
revelation of instruments through their practical use (Sartre 2021, 672–675).
In other words, agents realize the facticity of techniques and thus of the societal
milieu, these techniques arise from. Although belonging to such constellations is
contingent, agents enact this belonging through their actions. In this regard, these
agents establish the necessity of the technical connections between themselves and
their world in the self-totalizing course of their goal-directed actions. Through these
techniques, the supraindividual structure these agents are situated in conditions
the course of actions in fundamental ways. Through their situated actions, agents
are not only “thrown into a world that is working-class, French, with the character
of Lorraine or of the South, and which offers me its meanings when I have done
nothing to reveal them” (Sartre 2021, 668)—they also realize themselves as situated
in this world.
By employing such techniques, agents not only embed themselves in larger
societal constellations but also recognize the significance of these constellations as
action-guiding by acting according to the constellations’ structures (Sartre 2021,
665–668) (see section 2.4). The later Sartre refers to language and similar body
techniques as belonging to the practico-inert field; this is discussed in section
4.5. Although manufactured objects and certain body techniques seem to impose
structured and predisposed activities on the individual, instead of allowing it to
freely organize their situation according to its mediating milieu (Sartre 2021, 666),
Sartre makes clear that these activities and the dialectical instrumentality of manufactured
objects nevertheless have to be enacted through individual action to exist.
According to him, instrumental means and techniques have no validity outside
human reality (Sartre 2021, 674–675) (see section 2.4).6
6 In this context, Sartre offers an interesting argument on the nature and application of techniques.
He mentions that techniques do not apply themselves according to a fixed inner logic.
This means that techniques, as means, do not automatically provide the agents that employ
them with fixed ends. If it were so, these agents would resemble pilots who make “use of the
determined forces of the wind, the waves, the tides, in order to steer a ship” (Sartre 2021, 672).
104 Dialectical Foundations
3.4 The Practical Inertia of Technological Objects
The goal of this section is to examine how some of Sartre’s thoughts on technology,
such as dialectical instrumentality and the social side of things, find their conclusion
in his conception of the practico-inert for technological artifacts. The practicoinert
complements Sartre’s earlier thoughts about both the significance of instrumental
means in the course of action and the way these means propose certain action
potentials to their users. It plays a significant role in Sartre’s later philosophy
as it allows one to make more general assumptions about the role of technology in
human history. Therefore, it relates to the view that this work outlines for practical
ensembles.
The Practico-Inert
The practico-inert is a complex concept in Sartre’s philosophy. It combines assumptions
about the dynamics of human action, the relation between humans, materiality
in general, technology in the form of technological artifacts and body techniques
in particular, as well as the processual nature of history. According to Flynn, “‘[p]ractico-
inert’ denotes that realm of worked matter, sedimented praxis, passivity, and
counterfinality—matter as the negation of action” (Flynn 1997, 121). Although this
description represents the practico-inert in a seemingly negative light, all the factors
Flynn mentions ultimately illustrate why this concept is so significant for both
Sartre’s understanding of history and his theories on practical ensembles.
In its more general meaning, the practico-inert denotes a certain way in which
the meaning of an active practical world-relation is reified as a materially inert, passive
fact in the world. This fact, through its materiality, remains a material fact and
both faces and potentially outlasts human existence and action. In the context of
Sartre’s theory of history, the practico-inert enables historical transformation and
the stabilization of order in any regard. Despite the emphasis on inert matter, the
practico-inert is not limited to non-human entities such as technology in the form
of instrumental means or artificial objects. K. S. Engels (2018) identifies five layers
of the practico-inert in Sartre’s philosophy: physical artifacts, language, deeply ingrained
ideas or attitudes, social objects such as social formations and categories
that are stabilized by matter, and class-being, or collectively shared life conditions
This would require a technique of techniques which, if also applying itself, would end in a vicious
circle where “any possibility of meeting the technician” (Sartre 2021, 672) would be lost forever.
Consequently, it must be the agents themselves who enact these techniques and their
practical effects. This line of thought, as well as the example of a pilot steering a ship through
the use of techniques, resembles the art of steersmanship known as cybernetics (Ashby 1957,
1).
3. Existence and Technology 105
that predispose the actions of individuals belonging to the collective. All these layers
have certain practico-inert characteristics. However, fundamentally these layers can
be traced back to practical human interrelations with other material entities. These
interrelations are mediated by worked matter, either in the form of material objects
and structures that coerce humans to modify their actions under certain conditions
or in the form of the hexis of the human body itself, through which routinized actions
and societal norms are enacted (see section 4.5). For this reason, this analysis
puts less emphasis on all possible layers of the practico-inert as such and more on
the practico-inert as it is found in the practical inertia of technological artifacts as
well as on the way agents interrelate with these artifacts.
From a philosophical perspective toward technology, the appeal of Sartre’s conception
of the practical inertia of physical artifacts lies in how it allows one to more
generally reflect on the role of technology in human history. Practico-inert artifacts
are seen to interfere with the course of individual action in intricate ways. Sartre’s
entire theory of history is built on these slight interferences of action, and on the fact
that human beings necessarily have to come to terms with the interferences. Despite
the focus on technology, some of Sartre’s thoughts about history and society must
therefore be treated here to understand the full spectrum of the practical inertia of
physical artifacts.
With the practico-inert, Sartre underpins this fundamentally signifying character
of technological objects with a materialist and historical basis and explores how
history itself is manifested in the tools and machines humans use to tackle their
needs and desires.
Exteriorized Function
In his introductory passages on the concepts of totality and totalization in Critique,
Sartre claims that a material thing to which meaning has been fixed through totalization
is not entirely reduced to nothing when the totalization ceases—for instance
when it is no longer used, when the function for which it is supposed to be used is
forgotten, or when its usual use context has become obsolete. This thing remains a
material entity with specific built-in material properties. As such, it still lays claim
to the ontological status of the in-itself (Sartre 1978, 45). It still has a situation-specific
utility and adversity attributable to it based on its material properties and in
relation to the agent’s situation.
In the case of non-manufactured objects, the properties that render them useful
and adverse result from physicochemical processes of growth, decay, climate, tectonics,
etc.—a branch has grown in a specific way so as to be used as a pointer or
a weapon, yeast ferments complex carbohydrates into more digestible ones which
makes yeast useful for food processing, penicillium molds produce antibiotic substances
that can be used in medical production. Even chance plays an important role
106 Dialectical Foundations
in resulting in the properties that make non-manufactured things useful. A stone,
for instance, can roll off a hill, hit another rock, split, and thus have sharp edges
which makes the stone useful for cutting, stabbing, etc.
In the specific case of technological artifacts, such as tools, machines, and certain
built structures, the manufacturing process itself is responsible for the properties
that make them useful for aiding in certain tasks and for performing or enabling
certain actions. When it comes to tool construction, Sartre states that in human existence,
praxis “is function exteriorised” (Sartre 1978, 83) (see section 2.3). According
to Sartre, tools, machines, and other manufactured objects of utility serve three purposes.
First, they are the means by which human beings put their inertia into practice
to realize themselves in relation to their material surroundings. Second, tools
and machines support the inertia of the human body in performing specific tasks.
Third, tools and machines are materialized options for action and forms of conduct.
They represent the “passive unity of the practical relation between an undertaking
and its result” (Sartre 1978, 165).
According to Sartre, “[a] tool is in fact a praxis which has been crystallised and inverted
by the inertia which sustains it, and this praxis addresses itself in the tool to
anyone” (Sartre 1978, 186, emphasis in original). In Sartre’s understanding, the same
is true for any other practical object of utility. Through their practical interrelations,
both in terms of totalizing action and experience, human beings not only inscribe
their projects into matter through utilization and social significance. They also form
said matter so that it can be used as a means toward an end. Things are constructed
blunt, sharp, pointy, heavy, shining bright, with specific forms and shapes, with
drives, rotators, wheels, wings, analog and digital functions, and so on. As such, they
afford one the opportunity to smash, cut, sting, weigh down, illuminate, hold, accelerate,
drill, carry, lift off, calculate, and connect. All of these things represent materially
inert facts that are residuals of the prior exteriorizing and totalizing practical
interrelations between human beings and their surroundings.
According to Sartre, the fact that human action is materialized in inert matter
changes the character of the thusly engraved project:
In losing their human properties, human projects are engraved in Being, their
translucidity becomes opacity, their tenuousness thickness, their volatile lightness
permanence. They become Being by losing their quality as lived events; and
in so far as they are Being they cannot be dissolved into knowledge even if they
are deciphered and known. (Sartre 1978, 178, emphasis in original)
In becoming materialized, practical relations lose their human characteristics. Fluid
activity becomes a passive being (Sartre 1978, 161). Human action/praxis, as an inventive
and goal-directed process toward the future, becomes a materially manifested
entity. As it unfolds the action-signifying qualities that were discussed in section
3.3., the tool, the sign, and the machine “proposes itself to men and imposes itself
3. Existence and Technology 107
on them; it defines them and indicates to them how it is to be used […] the tool is a
signifier […] man here is signified” (Sartre 1978, 161, emphasis in original).
However, in becoming material facts, practical interrelations between humans
and their surroundings escape their control. Sartre states:
But precisely because signification takes on the character of materiality, it enters
into relation with the entire Universe. This means that infinitely many unforeseeable
relations are established, through the mediation of social practice, between
the matter which absorbs praxis and other materialised significations. (Sartre
1978, 161, emphasis in original)
Although technological artifacts imply their equipmentality and the social conditions
of their production, they are material facts detached from a factual course of
action. As such, they represent materialized action potentials that must be awakened
by an individual agent:
A project awakens significations; it momentarily restores their vigour and true
unity in the transcendence which finally engraves this totality in some completely
inert but already signifying material, which might be iron, marble or language,
and which others animate with their movement from beneath, like stage-hands
creating waves by crawling around under a piece of canvas. (Sartre 1987, 182,
emphasis in original)
Tools and machines are inert material entities that are open to being used as means
by whoever intends and can do so. They exist as such only at the outskirts of a person’s
concrete practical field of possibility and equipmentality: as an abstract, not
yet concretized and actualized potential for certain courses of action.
Sartre contrasts human tool construction with how, according to him, other
species “make tools of themselves” (Sartre 1978, 83). He mentions that certain
species of animals “make themselves permanently inert in order to protect their
lives […] instead of using their inertia they hide it behind a created inertia” (Sartre
1978, 83). With this statement, Sartre seems to suggest that, owing to their organic
functioning, certain animals are restricted to specific ways of life. They must satisfy
their organic requirements within specific habitats and ecological niches because
their particular bodily inertia (organs like lungs and gills; appendages like wings,
claws, beaks, trunks, etc.) has become adapted to this ecological niche. In contrast,
human beings do not make their inertia permanently inert. What becomes permanently
inert is their action, their praxis, as a function of human existence, when it is
reified and manifested in matter through the construction of tools, machines, and
other structures. In Sartre’s understanding, a tool, a machine, or any built structure
or practical object, for that matter, thus represents an exteriorized function of a
concrete human existence situated within a socioculturally structured mediating
milieu. In reverting to the strategy of situation-specific tool construction and use,
108 Dialectical Foundations
humans do not directly restrict themselves to specific ways of life. They can adapt
to given conditions as a result of their dialectical relation to a scarce environment
in the course of history. Human beings thus not only exist as the adaptation to tools
in the mode of being-an-instrument-in-the-midst-of-the-world (see section 3.2).
They also adapt themselves to the exigencies of their environment that result from
their inherent needfulness (see section 2.3).
Sartre’s reasoning about human tool construction and use allows for two anthropological
statements about human nature. Both are prominent in the philosophy of
technology. The first is that humans essentially are beings of excess, and the second is
that humans essentially are beings of deficiency. The idea that humans are excessive beings
can be found in Kapp’s Grundlinien einer Philosophie der Technik. The main thesis of
this book is that tools and machines must be understood as projections of human organs
and of the human body as such. Accordingly, a hammer, for instance, is understood
as a reinforced and exteriorized projection of the human hand (Kapp 2015, 52);
optical and acoustic technologies represent projections of eyes and ears (Kapp 2015,
84), and so on. Kapp claims that the whole of technological culture represents a continuation
of human evolution ultimately driven by the fact that human beings have
the urge to exceed the limitations of their milieu (Huning 2013, 216; Hubig 2006, 85).
In this regard, technology has to be comprehended as an exteriorization of human
nature. In tools and machines, humanity faces itself as Deus ex Machina, an ever-creative
being that emerges from its built environment (Kapp 2015, 311). In opposition
to such rather optimistic and appreciative thoughts about humans and technology,
Gehlen’s Die Seele im technischen Zeitalter goes in a different direction. Here, technology
is considered a supplement for human deficiency. According to Gehlen, humans
are senseless, weaponless, and naked, and thus dependent on action and technology
(Gehlen 2007, 6). Eventually, technological development leads to the application of
technological principles to social processes, which ultimately causes a general loss
of meaning regarding the way humans relate to the world in industrialized society
(Hubig 2013a, 152).
Sartre does not endorse such general statements about human essence, however.
Despite the anthropological agenda of his philosophical writings, Sartre rejects
general assumptions about human essence. Rather than conceiving tools, machines,
and other structures to be a necessity of human existence, either as a result of
excess or deficiency, Sartre considers these entities to simply be outcomes of the dialectical
character of human existence, human needfulness, and the plasticity of the
physicochemical universe in the process of history. Although smartphones, spaceships,
or the internet, for instance, are highly technological achievements, Sartre
would refrain from tracing them back to some essential human deficiency or ingenuity.
According to his understanding, humankind did not fly to the moon out of a
supposedly insatiable and general curiosity inherent to human beings. They did so
3. Existence and Technology 109
to demonstrate power and technological prowess in a given historical situation, or
to close gaps in their respective knowledge of the universe.
Technology and History
In every practical interrelation with surrounding, inert materiality, human actions
are exteriorized and translated into matter and thus inverted into a passivized form.
This passivized form represents a synthetic unity of its materiality, potential purposiveness
and equipmentality, and sociocultural history. In a rather dense passage
from Critique, Sartre brings these ideas together. He states:
Every praxis […] envelops the inanimate things in a totalising project which gives
it a pseudo-organic unity. By this I mean that this unity is indeed that of a whole,
but that it remains social and human; in itself it does not achieve the structures of
exteriority which constitute the molecular world. However, if the unity persists, it
does so through material inertia. But this unity is nothing other than the passive
reflection of praxis, that is to say, of a human enterprise undertaken in particular
circumstances, with well defined tools and in a historical society at a certain point
in its development, and therefore the object produced reflects the whole collectivity.
But it reflects it in the dimension of passivity. (Sartre 1978, 161, emphasis in
original)
In Sartre’s understanding, tools, machines, and practical objects, and any residuals
of human action, must not merely be understood as material objects plain and
simple. These residuals bear witness to the never-ending struggle against scarcity
that is human history. Like a wax seal, humans imprint their actions into the material
world, which then “returns (retourne) the act […] [and] reflects the doing as pure
being-there” (Sartre 1978, 161, emphasis in original). A trampled path, fingerprints,
chipped corners on a table, dog-eared pages and stains in much-read books, and
callous hands are only minor instances in which human actions resist these humans
by being passivized, factual, and material effects of past actions. Every tool and machine,
each part of the built environment, roads, and houses, straightened rivers,
domesticated animals, deforested and reforested woods, the organization of societies
around material symbols or their function carriers, the way institutions exert
their power as real relations between things, individuals, and collectives—all of
these represent human causality, cultural history, and finality in the form of passive,
material entities and their interrelations.
With this conception of the practico-inert, Sartre’s thoughts about the dialectic
of action and technology come full circle. They link a person’s individual and goal-directed
use of technology to the entire history of their becoming as well as to their existential
struggle with their surroundings. An implement-thing is always disclosed
as such owing to the practical character and finality of human existence. Through
110 Dialectical Foundations
these factors the material properties of the implement-thing have come to be produced
in a certain way, within a given historical situation; this again connects the
implement-thing as a potential implement to a certain course of action that can be
actualized with it.
These artifacts, in the wide sense of that term, reflect the actions, strategies, and
struggles through which individuals tackle their needs and desires. The inertia of
these artifacts has been constructed in correlation with these actions and strategies
and it is ongoing praxis that keeps these artifacts in the constant process of totalization.
Sartre states:
In the case of practical objects—machines, tools, consumer goods, etc.—our
present action makes them seem like totalities by resuscitating, in some way,
the praxis which attempted to totalise their inertia […] these inert totalities are
of crucial importance […] they create the kind of relation between men which
we will refer to, later, as the practico-inert. These human objects are worthy of
attention in the human world, for it is there that they attain their practico-inert
statute; that is to say, they lie heavy on our destiny because of the contradiction
which opposes praxis (the labour which made them and the labour which utilises
them) and inertia within them. But, as these remarks show, they are products.
(Sartre 1978, 45–46, emphasis in original)
The practical inertia of tools, machines, and practical objects reflects their artifactuality
and thus the societal conditions and constellations in which these artifacts
were produced. In the case of technological artifacts, the term practico-inert, therefore,
denotes the tension of their general becoming through human action and their
specific historical-practical becoming under certain sociocultural conditions. This is
because these artifacts are passive traces of past actions. In this regard, the practicoinert
is history’s counterpart to the essence of human existence. It is “the essence of
man in the sense that essence, as transcended past, is inert and becomes the transcended
objectification of the practical agent” (Sartre 1978, 72, emphasis in original)
(see section 2.3). It is factually given and retroactively relates the current course of
history, based on totalizing action through the instrumental means used, with the
way the course of history has unfolded up until a certain point in time. The practicoinert
is thus a dialectical and historical category rather than a material or ontological
one. As a discursive phenomenon, it expresses the fundamental contradiction of
human history—it represents humanity’s ongoing struggle against scarcity through
the oscillation of liberation and necessitation, based on totalizing action, in a more
or less self-contained, passive material totality.
Human activity inscribed into matter in the form of the practico-inert is neither
a social construction nor a mental addendum to lifeless materiality. Sartre writes, in
discussion with Hegel and Marx, that the idea of things that confront agents in their
practical existence is in these things themselves. Sartre agrees with Marx’s mate3.
Existence and Technology 111
rialistic reinterpretation of Hegel’s conception of thought or idea as the demiurge of
the world. According to Marx, the real world is not thought but the interiorized relation
to the material world (Marx & Engels 1962, 27). To this, Sartre adds that the
interiorized world is not a clear mirror image but rather a distorted picture of the
material world, because human beings apprehend the world through their practical
existence as a practico-inert residual of past actions. The material world is as much
an enabling as a constraining factor that transforms and translates praxis into inertia,
and because of this human beings recognize themselves and reflect their actions
as mediated by worked matter. Sartre claims that his idea of matter is thus both naturalistic,
because the natural properties of things are the source of their utility, and
materialistic because these things appear just how they are by virtue of being—but
“above all, it is praxis [and thus history] reverberating through a thing” (Sartre 1978,
171, emphasis in original).
Concretized Need
Technological artifacts are materialized, passive, and unrealized potentials for action
within a given form of societal organization at a certain time in history. These
artifacts are readily available, concrete means that enable the realization of concrete
ends. It is not the case that humans must always look for or even construct the material
means to attain the ends deriving from a person’s abstract structures of need
over and over. Technological artifacts simultaneously propose the already practically
concretized efficient and effective satisfaction of socioculturally accepted structures
of desire. Consequently, technological artifacts, in Sartre’s understanding, manifest
abstract structures of need in a concrete form. They thus scaffold the necessary conditions
for the possibility of satisfying human requirements, wants, and wishes by
opening up certain practical fields of equipmentality and possibility. By entering
their practical field of equipmentality and possibility through their totalizing action,
human beings thus leave their abstract structures of need for the sake of the materially
mediated and technologically manifested structures of desire that are prevalent
in their form of societal organization. They thus delimit their practical freedom in a
way that also includes the risk of total obliteration for the strategies that are proven
to be efficient, effective, socioculturally accepted, and, most importantly, ready at
hand.
Sartre thus mentions the practical inertia of technological artifacts in the context
of what he refers to as the field of passive activity. Although he does not give a
clear definition of what he means by this term, it seems to denote roughly the conditions
of possibility for potential courses of action, scaffolded and disposed by the
socioculturally structured arrangement of concrete materiality in historical situations
(Sartre 1978, 189, 199, 365). This passive sociomaterial disposition of the practico-
inert is specified and realized in the course of individual action in virtue of a
112 Dialectical Foundations
person’s active passivity, which occurs in the form of an action disposition within that
person’s corporeality. Sartre argues that this action disposition can be found in the
habituated routines of tool use known as hexis (see section 4.5).7
3.5 Technologically Mediated Existence
This section builds on the previous findings and explores how Sartre frames the way
human existence is inherently mediated by technology. This conception of a technologically
mediated existence is foundational for his theory of practical ensembles.
The close conjunction of self-realization and materiality shining through
Sartre’s thoughts on technology and the practico-inert illustrates the dialectical
interrelation between liberation and necessitation that characterizes human existence.
Ontologically free expression and self-realization through action afford
a somewhat pre-structured whole of instruments and sociocultural norms that
delimit options for action and thus enable action in the first place by providing a
manageable field of possibilities. As a consequence, Sartre claims that the relation
to the self and the relation to the world is ultimately modified by the objective world
in general, and by practico-inert instrumental means and body techniques in particular.
He states that every human being is the ends they have chosen to realize, on
the one hand, and the means that realize these ends through the implementation
of other means on the other. If both instrumental-things and body techniques
play a role in how individual ends are chosen and realized, then the self, as the
lived unity of realized ends, must be understood as objectively articulated and thus
mediated through sociocultural and material settings that scaffold, predispose,
7 Against this background, the creation of practico-inert objects represents a technological
path creation or path constitution in the sense of a path dependence. A path can be understood as
the result of a process in which multiple options for action are narrowed down to a fixed set
of options in the course of multiple interrelated events (Sydow et al. 2012). In Sartre’s case,
this means that the material properties put into these objects in the process of their creation
affect the potential context of their future use. Processes of path creation involve processes
of self-reinforcement (Garud et al. 2010). For Sartre this can be illustrated through the selfreinforcing
role of hexis as active passivity, in combination with the passively active practical
inertia of artificial objects. This is explained in more detail in section 4.5. Simultaneously,
the creation of practico-inert objects is path dependent itself, as it is based on the needs and
desires of their creators. When future agents use these objects as instrumental means, they
enact and perpetuate the same structures of need, desire, and satisfaction. Through the practical
inertia of material artifacts, the past works its way into the future in the form of materialized
strategies of satisfying needs and desires. This wider sense of path dependence can be
specified by analyzing concrete cases in which specific properties of objects, resulting from
how past agents responded to their needs and desires, affect future courses of action (Mayntz
2002). This is shown in section 4.3.
3. Existence and Technology 113
and hence enable and modify its realization (Sartre 2021, 665). The same is true for
the relationship between human beings and the world, as Sartre expresses in the
following quotation: “the world only ever appears to me through the techniques that
I use […] This world, seen through the use that I make of the bicycle, the car, or the
train to travel through it, shows me a face that is strictly correlative to the means I
am using” (Sartre 2021, 666).
Here, Sartre advocates for an understanding of self and world where these entities
are fundamentally mediated by the means employed to totalize and thus realize
both in the course of individual action.8
In Critique, Sartre states that “all matter conditions human praxis through the
passive unity of prefabricated meanings. There are no material objects which do not
communicate among themselves through the mediation of men, and there is no man
who is not born into a world of humanised materialities and materialised institutions”
(Sartre 1978, 169, emphasis in original). Since all praxis is conditioned by prefabricated
meanings of the practico-inert and since existence represents a praxisprocess,
existence itself is technologically mediated. Human action/praxis is thus
more than a self-realizing activity. It is a process deeply grounded in materially and
socioculturally structured constellations from which practical opportunities are derived
in the first place. However, owing to the fact that human existence, as a lived
reality, still rests on the foundation of ontological freedom, the system of meanings
into which human beings are thrown represents merely an abstract structure that
finds its concretization in individual self-realization (Sartre 2021, 677). By enacting
the equipmentality of objects and the reality of body techniques, human beings
appropriate and thus fix and reinforce the meaning of objects and techniques for
themselves and others. Through goal-directed use, objects and techniques are transcended
toward individual ends. The experience of attaining (or not attaining) individual
ends through objects and techniques (as means) represents an interiorization
of exteriority through which certain means are inherently associated with certain
8 Earlier, it was already mentioned that Sartre precedes the postphenomenological conception
of multistability. With his thoughts on a technologically mediated existence, he also precedes
one major postphenomenological conception, namely that of technological mediation.
Postphenomenologists claim that human experience and therefore human reality is fundamentally
mediated by technology in the form of material technology. By carefully retracing
human-technology-world relations, postphenomenology seeks a better understanding
of both human reality and technology (Ihde 1990; Rosenberger & Verbeek 2015). However,
Sartre does not limit himself to material technologies. He also incorporates how social, cultural,
and intellectual techniques mediate individual action and experience, and how these
techniques mediate the relation between an individual and the societal constellation from
which these techniques originate. His analysis therefore transcends the levels of experience
and action. For a juxtaposition of Sartre’s thoughts on mediation with those of Latour and
postphenomenology, see Siegler (2022b).
114 Dialectical Foundations
ends (Sartre 2021, 680). The same is true for the simple fact that human beings learn
from others which means to use for which ends. Either way, concrete actions and
thus social concepts are conceived to be inscribed into material entities or forms of
conduct. A guitar, for instance, represents the act of playing chords and music, a car
the act of driving, a road the act of walking or driving on, walking and talking in a
certain way represents a certain attitude or social membership, and so on.
Sartre develops this topic in his later works, claiming in Search for a Method that
things signify actions and thus guide behavior as a mediating milieu in concrete
situations. These mediated action situations represent abstract schemata that are insufficiently
determined without an action that unifies them toward the future (Sartre
1963, 153). However, owing to the fact that human existence is inherently practical,
human beings transcend every such abstract schema and relate it to themselves as
concrete, self-totalizing existents that do not exist yet. Hence, the entities comprising
these abstract action schemata represent signs that, as available means, indicate
attainable ends and thus action situations that can be realized by the individual. Because
this system of means and techniques is not a purely objective set of entities
but a constituted wholeness structured according to sociocultural factors, the system
not only signifies concrete actions but also reveals “men and relations among
men across the structures of our society” (Sartre 1963, 156). The manifold relations
between human beings and their technological means reveal the functional interrelations
of their form of societal organization.
3.6 Concluding Remarks
The exploration has shown the connections between Sartre’s action theory and his
philosophical thoughts on technology. Technology represents a fundamental aspect
of human reality. It must be understood against the background of human existence,
experience, and action. These processes represent ongoing and spatiotemporal
syntheses through which a human being enacts their existence (see Chapter 2).
Tools and machines are enveloped in these processes and it is this envelopment from
which these things derive their situation-specific meaning and equipmentality.
Sartre applies the same dialectical thinking to the material and artificial as he
does to human existence. Human existence is not first a mere occurrence of being
that is fused with consciousness. It is a synthetic process of the two and cannot be
reduced to either the realm of being and matter, or the realm of consciousness and
the mental. Tools, machines, and other practical objects also represent syntheses of
being and consciousness. They are material entities to which meaning and practical
relevance are ascribed in the course of human existence. These things are always
disclosed as implement-things, due to the fundamentally instrumentalizing character
of human action. Humans engage the material world in a practical and goal3.
Existence and Technology 115
directed manner and totalize it as their practical field of equipmentality and possibility.
Within this field, all things are already either bestowed with or questioned
about their practical relevance for the totalizing individual. In this regard, things are
always engaged against the background of the dialectic of means and ends.
The material properties of things and the social context in which these things
are instrumentalized are important. Tools, machines, and other practical objects are
constructed with specific material properties that render them useful for some and
adverse for other use contexts. The socioculturally established and accepted meaning
and purpose of these things also plays a role in how they are instrumentalized.
By using such things and by employing certain body techniques, agents enact their
equipmentality and effects. In doing so, agents also realize a social relation through
which they situate themselves in a certain form of social organization. Furthermore,
since technological objects result from goal-directed human actions in a specific historical
situation, these objects are the practico-inert residuals of the strategies that
human beings implemented to satisfy their needs and desires in the course of history.
When it comes to the role of implement-things in the course of action, Sartre is
careful not to grant too much power to the things themselves. On the one hand, he
argues that agents instrumentalize things based on their material properties and sociocultural
meaning, that things shape the course of human action, and that things
signify which use contexts they afford. Things thus not only directly influence how
agents realize their ends, but they can also alter an agent’s intended ends or enable
certain ends to arise in the first place simply by providing the opportunity to attain
them. On the other hand, he advocates that all of these effects of implement-things
are possibilized based on an agent’s ontological freedom and the practical directedness
of human existence. In accepting both the determinative character of implement-
things in a person’s practical interrelation with the world and the condition
of possibility for this determinative character in human freedom, Sartre points out
that the relationship between humans, technology, and the physicochemical environment
has a certain contradictory quality.
This tension between the somewhat determinative and action-shaping character
of things and the ontological freedom and self-realization of human beings must
be seen in the larger context of Sartre’s philosophy. Chapter 1 already explored how
Sartre’s works focus on two interconnected planes of the existential reality of human
beings: the internal perspective of an ontologically free agent in Being and Nothingness
and the external perspective on this agent as a needful material being in Search
for a Method and Critique. These two planes are dialectically mediated in the totalizing
character of human action as outlined in Chapter 2. Sartre’s philosophical thoughts
on technology further explore how these planes intertwine, without necessarily trying
to give a definitive answer to the contradictions of human action and technology.
116 Dialectical Foundations
In this regard, Sartre’s philosophy can be called a dialectical philosophy of
technology.9 It is situated between the dialectical accounts of technology that lean
toward a more Hegelian and a more Marxist dialectical school of thought. More
Hegelian accounts of technology reflect on the dialectic of means and ends. Rooted
in the Greek concept of techne—Greek for art, skill, but also a set of rules and the
right knowledge of how to make or produce something (Aristotle trans. 2015, 198;
LSJ n.d b)—such accounts expand the instrumental character of things toward the
realm of knowledge and explore how to practically orient oneself in the world by
reflecting on various aspects of technology. More Marxist accounts of technology
reflect and criticize the societal implications of technological artifacts and systems.
These accounts typically scrutinize the dynamics of power, society, and history with
regard to technology.
Whereas Marxist accounts of technology dialectically scrutinize the relationship
between society and technology, Hegelian accounts apply a dialectical thinking to
reflect on the conditions of possibility that allow for something to be understood as
technological. However, both accounts seek to do justice to the potentials and contingencies
between human action and technology, both in the form of technological
artifacts, processes, and rationales.
Based on his conception of totalizing action and dialectical instrumentality,
Sartre advocates for a specific understanding of how the dialectical interrelation
between human existence and physicochemical reality gives rise to its own
possibilities and practical constraints. His understanding of technology is not
specifically about technology in the sense of technological artifacts, structures,
or systems. Rather, it is about the principally instrumental mode of being of the
human condition.
Sartre uses the implications of his thoughts on technology to deconstruct and
criticize how the forms of societal organization predispose the basic existential conditions
of individuals throughout individual and collective history. The specific way
in which such forms of societal organization form, transform, persist, and eventually
disrupt, is fundamentally shaped by and manifested in the practico-inert technological
objects that human beings use to satisfy their requirements, wants, and
wishes. Also, la force des choses that was discussed in section 1.3 as the power of things
and circumstances arises, when individuals within such forms of organization are
coerced to satisfy their needs and desires and thus realize their concrete existence
in sociculturally pre-determined ways.
Part 1 of this work has explored and systematized the theoretical foundations
of practical ensembles. It provided an overview of Sartre’s philosophical themes,
outlined his change in perspective on the role of needs and desires throughout his
9 The following is condensed version of a discussion on Sartre’s dialectical philosophy of technology
that can be found in Siegler 2022b.
3. Existence and Technology 117
works, developed a unified account of totalizing action and existence as praxisprocess,
and explored Sartre’s dialectical philosophy of technology. Part 2 builds on
these foundations, outlines Sartre’s theory of practical ensembles, and applies it to
sociotechnical systems of urban mobility.

II The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles

4. Theory of Practical Ensembles:
Structures in Action
4.1 Introduction
The purpose of this chapter is to develop the theoretical framework of practical ensembles
based on some of Sartre’s central lines of thought regarding human agency,
technology, and the dialectical progression of history. The main difficulty with this
undertaking lies in grasping both the fundamentals of practical ensembles and their
inner workings, while not drifting too far into the details of Sartre’s thoughts on society
and history.
As mentioned in Chapter 1, Sartre’s Critique takes a dialectical and praxeological
perspective to reveal how human history, driven by free praxis, dialectically progresses
through material transformations of socioculturally and materially structured
constellations of human and non-human elements in a scarce milieu. With
this perspective, Sartre can unveil the mechanisms by which these constellations
form, the nature of practical interrelations the constellations consist of, and how
these interrelations are supported, mediated, and catalyzed by the practico-inert in
the form of artificial objects and the human body.
Sartre’s method to analyze the inner workings of these constellations is an interlocking
set of assumptions and considerations that together comprise a theoretical
framework for describing and analyzing practical ensembles. Any constellation
in which humans practically interrelate with other humans and/or non-human elements
in a scarce milieu can be understood as a practical ensemble. This includes,
for instance, traffic, the government, a family, or people at a train station. In understanding
any such constellation as a practical ensemble, its larger mode of organization
is seen to be the result of human action. By referring to these constellations
as ensembles, Sartre emphasizes the fact that the elements comprising them
practically interrelate but do not meld into a supposedly higher form of an organic
entity. Rather, they remain individual. This view does not just allow him to examine
the significance of individual action in the formation of these ensembles. It also
enables him to analyze how the ensembles’ larger form of organization affects and
conditions human action. Practical ensembles are constituted through the employ122
The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
ment of techniques and things. They are held together by the practico-inert. In this
regard, they are made rather than grown, which means that their mode of structuring
is not necessary but contingent; it could be otherwise.
According to Sartre, human beings enter “into ensembles of very different kinds,
for instance, into what are called groups and what I shall call series” (Sartre 1978, 65,
emphasis in original). This is due to the lived contradiction at the heart of human existence
(see section 1.4). Groups and series represent two essentially different modes
in which the practical interrelations of human and non-human elements in practical
ensembles can be structured. A seemingly contingent gathering of people waiting
for a bus, a societal class, or people sharing a road on their way to work, for instance,
can be shown to exhibit predominantly serial structures when understood as practical
ensembles. These constellations represent passive gatherings of individuals who
face the same contingent action conditions that are scaffolded by practico-inert objects
or structures. In practical ensembles with a serial structure, the satisfaction of
need is concretized in specific fixed means and forms of conduct. Practical freedom
of choice and self-realization is limited to a narrowed field of possibilities.
On the other hand, compare a political party or a task force, for instance. These
can be shown to exhibit predominantly communal or group structures when understood
as practical ensembles. These constellations consist of individuals who actively
form and organize themselves to overcome seemingly contingent action conditions
by transforming the scaffolding through practico-inert objects or structures.
Such constellations are, for instance, political parties, interest groups, or larger social
movements like Fridays for Future. Also, smaller constellations of people, who,
for instance, organize to grass or plant public spaces in cities represent communal
ensembles. However, according to Sartre, groups may become institutions in
the course of their undertaking. If this is the case, institutions then develop predominantly
serial structures through which the practical freedom of an individual
is again limited to certain options for action, while at the same time creating more
opportunities for those actions to be realized. It must be noted that in most practical
ensembles, serial and communal structures interplay.
Despite the examples Sartre uses to examine the structures of series and groups,
and despite the Marxist focus of Critique, Sartre’s thoughts must be understood to be
less specifically about the social interrelations of these ensembles, and more about
the way these social interrelations can be dialectically and praxeologically examined
to elucidate the historical action conditions of human beings. Sartre’s analysis of
how groups transform into institutions, for instance, can be applied to mass movements
during the French Revolution. These eventually turn into revolutionary tribunals
that reign with terror. The same analysis can be applied to the organization
and concomitant institutionalization of public traffic regulations governing road
traffic. This is because, for Sartre, historical processes in any form represent constant
oscillations between practical freedom and material necessity. As such, they
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 123
motivate and actively further transitions from series to groups and back. Practical
freedom exists in the process of transforming structures of seriality into structures
of communality, by negating given limiting conditions in accordance with the mode
of how individuals satisfy their needs and desires. This negating, however, entails
another transformational process in which groups organize and eventually ossify
into the very structures established to transform seriality into communality. Therefore,
history, much like human existence, must be understood as a lived contradiction
too. Its very processing consists of a never-ending oscillation between liberation
and necessitation (Sartre 1978, 72–74).
The potential of Sartre’s practical ensemble framework lies in its deconstructive
and reconstructive power toward the dynamics of complex constellations. When applied
to such constellations, the principles and processes of Sartre’s framework allow
one to disclose the various modes in which practical interrelations are structured in
them. This disclosure may reveal more fundamental interrelations and the modes
of their structuring, as well as the ways these structures again mediate, enable, and
constrain each other. Based on these interplays, the complexity of the constellations
in question can be reconstructed as functionally interdependent networks of structured
interrelations between humans and other material entities.
From a philosophical perspective on technology, Sartre’s theoretical view on such
constellations as practical ensembles offers the possibility to investigate how technology,
in the form of artificial objects and bodily techniques, affects human action
in various ways. According to Sartre, la force des choses arises as a consequence
of specific forms of supraindividual organization that determine how individuals
enter into certain constellations, reproduce themselves with limited practico-inert
means at their disposal within these constellations, adapt to the inner structure of
these constellations by cultivating hexeis—which represent a form of the practicoinert
(see section 4.5)—and potentially initiate transformations that further affect
these constellations. Despite the various connotations of the notion of force or the
phrasing of power of circumstances, it must be noted that this force or power does not
necessarily imply only negative consequences. Sartre points out numerous ways in
which individuals are coerced to modify their actions, owing, for instance, to the
position these individuals adopt within practical ensembles, or to the necessity that
these individuals feel to reproduce themselves with certain available instrumental
means. However, he also acknowledges that the same instrumental means that individuals
are somehow coerced to use also enable them to effectively satisfy their
needs and desires in some way. Furthermore, Sartre’s theory not only allows one to
focus on the immediate field of equipmentality but to reveal more profound ways
in which technological settings interconnect and mediate each other so as to enable
the realization of human action.
For Sartre, individual and supraindividual requirements, wants, and wishes in
the dialectic of need and desire provide the starting point and the basis for investi124
The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
gation. Needs and desires render human actions intelligible as situated in relation
to a socioculturally and materially structured surrounding as a mediating milieu. To
outline a general theory of practical ensembles that can be modified and applied to
analyze the possibilities and constraints of human agency as situated in large technological
systems, the general relation of scarcity and human agency must be analyzed
first.
4.2 Scarcity and Society
In this section, Sartre’s view on the human struggle against scarcity is examined.
This struggle represents the fundamental condition for the formation, reinforcement,
transformation, persistence, crisis, and potential disruption of practical ensembles.
The Struggle against Scarcity
On account of the specific understanding of the relationship between human existence
and history that is prominent in Sartre’s Critique, historically situated individuals
must first and foremost be understood as needful beings. Their requirements,
wants, and wishes derive from their socioculturally and materially mediated relation
to the material complex (or ensemble) they are situated in. According to Sartre,
every human being always exists in a state of exigency in relation to a world characterized
by scarcity (French rareté) (Sartre 1960, 200; Sartre 1978, 123). This exigent
state requires material modification to be transformed (see Chapter 2). Despite the
fundamental significance Sartre attributes to scarcity, he does not want it to be understood
as a statement about human nature or human essence. Rather, it is a conclusion
derived from the fact that every human being must necessarily sustain itself
by interacting with the material world. Scarcity is both a contingent fact of human
life and the sufficient cause of historical development (Monahan 2008, 50–51). Emphasizing
its significance for human existence illustrates the fundamental structures
of historical development as a “real and constant tension both between man
and his environment and between man and man” (Sartre 1978, 127). Based on this
tension, Sartre claims the “fundamental structures (techniques and institutions)”
can be explained not as immediate results of scarcity but because they were “produced
in the milieu of scarcity” (Sartre 1978, 127, emphasis in original).
Despite the focus on materiality, scarcity does not solely refer to a lack of material
goods, but also to any state in which individuals lack something they require,
want, and wish (Monahan 2008, 52). This could be any type of good or service, rights,
political representation, etc., as long as the lack represents an incentive for action.
The reason for Sartre’s focus on material action comes from the material character
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 125
of human existence (see section 1.4). The nature of scarcity is not only determined by
the requirements, wants, and wishes of individuals and supraindividual groupings
(see section 2.3), but also mediated by how technology in the form of practico-inert
means concretizes abstract structures of need into concrete structures of desire
(see section 3.4). When the abstract need for mobility in the form of the requirement
to be able to move, for instance, is partly satisfied by the concrete existence of some
modes of transportation, the requirement for other modes of transportation is itself
mediated by the relationship between supply and demand prevalent in the mediating
milieu. According to Monahan’s interpretation, scarcity so fundamentally structures
human existence that it represents the background condition of all human action,
not only for the present but also for future action. Because totalizing human
action is a materially transcending projection toward the future, and because the
relation between human beings and the material world is characterized by scarcity,
everything that presents itself as a possible option for action is seen as a good that
might be scarce in the future—and so it is to be secured and preserved. Monahan
phrases it like this: “If I think I have enough water for the present, but I believe I
could need more tomorrow, or next week, then it turns out that I really do not have
enough water—I have a scarcity of water despite the fact that I have ample supply for
my immediate needs” (Monahan 2008, 58, emphasis in original).
Sartre himself states that “[a]s soon as need appears, surrounding matter is endowed
with a passive unity, in that a developing totalisation is reflected in it as a
totality: matter revealed as passive totality by an organic being seeking its being
in it—this is Nature in its initial form” (Sartre 1978, 81). Ally (2012) points out that
Sartre’s use of the term nature is somewhat ambiguous throughout his philosophical
works. In the early Sartre, Nature—capitalized to highlight it as an abstract nominative,
according to Ally—is used to refer to passive being and exteriority in relation to
the interiority of human existence. The later Sartre sees nature as an inert and somewhat
opaque physicochemical complex surrounding human beings and governed by
its own dynamics and laws. This complex can never be fully understood in a dialectical
way from the inside but is subject only to analytical science (see section 1.4). The
reason is that the whole of nature, as physicochemical reality, becomes a synthetic
totality only as a result of the fact that human beings appropriate it by relating to it
in a dialectically practical way. Here is seen one instantiation of a three-step dialectical
relation. The givenness of physicochemical reality represents a positing that is
negated through need and thus disclosed and affirmed as a scarce source of sustenance
for human beings (see section 2.3).
However, this human-nature relation should not be seen as a purely rationalized,
unidirectional, or exploitative reduction of nature, in the sense of Heidegger’s
notion of Bestand (Heidegger 2000). Rather, Sartre’s conception of the human-nature
relation must be seen as a result of his focus on the dialectical and material
fundamentals of human existence. Sartre notes that, as biological organisms, hu126
The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
mans must necessarily practically engage with physicochemical reality and instrumentalize
it to provide for themselves. In this context, Ally defends Sartre’s conception
of instrumentalization, as it seems to be true for all self-sustaining organisms.
Ally states that in Sartre’s understanding of instrumentalization, “[b]eavers fell trees
to make their dams and they swim with the fishes who gather in the place. We mix
gravel and sand to make our dams, and we fell trees to make space and lumber and
pulp” (Ally 2017, 376).
Systematic Provision of Goods and Services
Sartre has a nuanced understanding of how individuals organize themselves in
historical situations and how they preserve these forms of organization with the
help of the practico-inert. His understanding goes beyond both general statements
about humanity’s instrumentalization of physicochemical reality and mere presumptions
about a supposed original relationship between humans and nature.
Some of Sartre’s main interests in Critique are the multiplicity of forms of organization
in human societies, and the many ways people have instrumentalized their
material surroundings in their struggle against scarcity throughout human history.
Sartre believes that although scarcity necessitates the instrumentalization of
physicochemical reality, and although individual action has a certain rationality, the
specific form of an organization through which this instrumentalization is realized
and preserved seems to be contingent. Forms of societal organization do not result
from an underlying rationality that is present before the dialectical rationality
of human action and experience (Sartre 1978, 124). This does not mean, however,
that the formation processes themselves are contingent as well. Sartre shows that
humanity’s relation to nature—in all the meanings of the term—takes place in a
sociocultural milieu that is enacted through individual and supraindividual action
as an ontologically free endeavor on the one hand and necessarily manifested in
a practico-inert way on the other. Organizational variation arises when human
freedom and creativity clash with material inertia. However, scarcity must always
be considered as the medium in which this clash takes place.
The fact that people must satisfy their needs and desires, in confrontation with
scarce material conditions, also puts these people in fundamental confrontation
with others. Scarcity means that “[t]here is not enough for everybody” (Sartre 1978,
128, emphasis in original). In this context, Sartre shows one application of his understanding
of practical ensembles. Regarding the way human beings relate to the
world, he states that “need is the first totalising relation between the material being,
man, and the material ensemble of which he is part” (Sartre 1978, 80). Furthermore,
“the world (the ensemble) exists for anyone insofar as the consumption of such
and such a product elsewhere, by others, deprives him here of the opportunity of
getting and consuming something of the same kind” (Sartre 1978, 128, emphasis
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 127
in original). Here, Sartre illustrates one of the advantages of conceiving certain
constellations between human and non-human entities as practical ensembles. By
referring to the world as a material ensemble in the context of individual action and
scarcity as well as in relation to others, Sartre illustrates that the world as a totality
can be deconstructed into the elements that totalize it. When reconstructed, it can
be understood as a wholeness that is continuously totalized by the functional interrelations
of self-reproducing individuals in a scarce milieu. In this regard, scarcity
is not only conceived as a material relation between individuals and surrounding
materiality; it is also disclosed as a social relation to others.
The social relation of scarcity is not necessarily characterized by hostility. People
are usually situated in larger, potentially overlapping, social constellations, such as
families, groupings, gatherings, political parties, corporations, institutions, societal
classes, and ultimately society as a whole. Conceiving these constellations as practical
ensembles deconstructs their alleged status as totalities, and reveals the dialectical
and praxeological conditions of their totalizing formation, the functional interrelationship
of their elements, the specific way this interrelationship is structured,
and the functional requirement this structured interrelation fulfills. Sartre refers to
these social constellations as social ensembles. Through the conceptual lens of practical
ensembles, the reasons for these constellations to form appear to be manifold,
but the reasons are all grounded in people’s needs and desires and in their inability
to satisfy them on their own in relation to their common sociocultural and material
conditions.
Sartre states that people (re-)produce themselves amid others who do the same.
As a consequence, they form larger constellations to systematically provide for their
needs and desires. These constellations “constitute and institutionalise themselves
not because scarcity appears to everyone in need through the need of Others, but
because it is negated, in the unified field, by praxis, by labour” (Sartre 1978, 136, emphasis
in original). Individual action represents the active attempt to negate scarcity
by affirming the individual as an end in itself. However, this action is not individual
action pure and simple. It is conditioned, in its entire course, by the structure of the
practical ensembles in which the action is situated. At the same time, this structure
is itself defined, manifested, and reinforced by the functional requirements of its elements
to satisfy their exigencies. This satisfaction takes place through actions undertaken
to transform these exigencies and by the practico-inert means that come
to use in this transformation.
A family with children, for instance, can, very generally, be understood as a practical
(social) ensemble structured to fulfill the functional requirement of raising children
and supporting each other. The structured interrelations of this ensemble consist
of an unequal spread of giving and demanding from its members in relation to
a sociocultural and material surrounding milieu. In terms of the material requirements
of the members of the family, parents contribute more, while children con128
The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
tribute less. In terms of the wants and wishes of its members, all members—parents
and children—invest love, emotional support, and energy. The inner structure and
logic of such ensembles are conditioned by the concrete social interrelations of all
members, their individual needs and desires, and their capacities.
This family, as a social ensemble, might live in a city, for instance. This city can
itself be understood as a practical ensemble. It consists of human and non-human
elements such as citizens, commuters, city government, buses, cars, roads, housing,
shopping malls, and so on. The actions of the human elements to satisfy their requirements
and wants are interrelated with other human and non-human elements.
This inner structure is again conditioned by sociocultural factors.
Both ensembles are in the constant process of totalization, as driven by the actions
of their human elements and their interrelations with the practico-inert. In
this way, the exigencies of individuals, their concomitant options for action, and
their practical constraints present themselves differently. If the family ensemble is
situated in the city ensemble—an ensemble of ensembles—the actions of this specific
family as a whole and its members individually can be understood in relation
to what possibilities and constraints their situation in the city provide them with.
Since practico-inert objects and structures mediate the functional interrelations
of their elements in relation to prevailing material conditions, these objects not only
represent exteriorized action potentials (see section 3.4) but also material manners
through which potentially scarce goods and services are secured and provisioned in
individual and supraindividual ways. However, these practico-inert objects are not
just advantageous. They also have certain demands and requirements themselves,
which can eventually invert the relationship between the user and the used (see 4.3).
The understanding of functionally interrelated constellations of human and
non-human elements, through the conceptual lens of practical ensembles, has
similarities to an understanding of such constellations as sociotechnical systems.
Both models reveal that the larger mode of interrelations between their elements
is structured according to the functional requirements of their human elements on
the one hand, and according to their mediation through non-human elements on
the other.1
Practical ensembles may indeed be understood as sociotechnical systems with
a fixed system status, an organizational structure, and forms of behavior that illustrate
their inner workings and portray their overall function. In this regard, the
structures of practical ensembles are seen to provide for the ends of their human
elements—such as the satisfaction of requirements, wants, and wishes—while also
preserving the mode in which this provision takes place as a strategic implementation
of technological means.
1 A short overview of the concept of sociotechnical system can be found in Karafyllis (2019). For
a more thorough analysis of the concept, see Ropohl (2009).
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 129
Although a system understanding of practical ensembles like this one thus
seems to fit, it neglects the inherent dialectical historicity of practical ensembles.
The theory of sociotechnical systems presupposes that the rationality of the system
corresponds to the rational structure of human action, especially in terms of instrumental
action. In most theoretical conceptions of sociotechnical systems, system
constraints result from conflicts of interest that can be transformed through communication,
technological development, and general optimization of the ensemble
as a sociotechnical system (Hubig 2007, 31).
Therefore, while it may account for functional interrelations of human and nonhuman
elements or even for the way their larger form of organization conditions and
constrains their respective operations, a system understanding remains ahistorical
with respect to Sartre’s theory of history. According to Sartre’s regressive-progressive
method (see section 1.3), how historical situations both constitute and are constituted
by individuals can only be fully understood through the dialectical conditions
of their becoming through action. In this regard, Sartre’s theory of practical
ensembles represents a deconstructive and reconstructive understanding of the becoming
of any form of societal constellation. According to him, this understanding
ultimately accounts for the significance of human action in the progression of history,
for the role of action in the formation of societal constellations, and for the conditions
in which this action eventually acts back on itself (see sections 1.4 and 3.4).
Furthermore, this strong focus on the role of action in the becoming of larger constellations
illustrates the inherent historicity of the dialectical interrelation between
action, scarcity, and the practico-inert.
Against this historical background, the entire collection of practico-inert objects
that can be found in a societal constellation at any given time represents the material
culture of this society at a certain stage. More precisely, practico-inert objects
represent the material side of strategies employed by individuals and larger constellations
to tackle needs and desires. They face these as a result of their specific
socioculturally structured relation to a scarce material environment. Ancient roads
and artifacts, stone tools and weapons, burial grounds, and grave goods, physical
remains of past civilizations—any form of material settings—represent ways that
past and present societies organize the provision of goods and the concomitant satisfaction
of individual and collective needs.
In this respect, Sartre’s understanding of practical ensembles shows thematic
similarities to Heidegger’s Ge-Stell. This is evident in the way in which, at different
stages of technological development, practico-inert objects condition how individuals
in practical ensembles disclose some goods to be scarce whereas the provision
of other goods can be effectively preserved with technological means. This point is
further developed in section 4.3.
130 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
Structural Features of Practical Ensembles
According to the deconstructive and reconstructive agenda of Sartre’s theory of
practical ensembles, the structural features of historical constellations are understood
to result from how individuals practically respond to and satisfy their
needs and desires in combination with practico-inert instrumental means. Such
interrelations are future-oriented and thus path dependent. Eventually, these interrelations
lead to multiple complex forms of organization. The exact constitution
of these forms of organization is contingent.
This work has discussed how Sartre conceives human action to be a practical engagement
with socioculturally structured materiality. Concerning the features of practical
ensembles, it becomes more clear, what it means for materiality to be socioculturally
structured in a certain way. The later Sartre somewhat develops his conception
of structure in response to Lévi-Strauss’ The Elementary Structures of Kinship. Structures
represent the material, social, cultural, and ideological foundations that give rise
to and shape the free actions of individuals. After discussing the genesis of groups,
Sartre recognizes Lévi-Strauss’ contribution to the analysis of structures and states:
“Function as lived praxis appears in the study of the group as objectivity in the objectified
form of structure. And we shall not understand anything of the intelligibility of
organised praxis as long as we do not raise the question of the intelligibility of structures”
(Sartre 1978, 480, emphasis in original). Sartre agrees with Lévi-Strauss in that
individuals shape their sociocultural and material milieu through action inasmuch
as they are shaped by it. The structures of this milieu, i.e. the situational factors that
scaffold, shape, and give rise to individuals’ practical fields (see section 2.4), represent
these individuals’ necessity of freedom to totalize themselves (Sartre 1978, 489). In
contrast to Lévi-Strauss, however, Sartre stresses the fact that “what we are dealing
with here is not a totality but a totalization […] a multiplicity which totalises itself
in order to totalise the practical field from a certain perspective” (Sartre 1978, 492).
Sartre’s most basic conclusion is that the existence of structures is not a presupposition
of action. Rather, structures emerge through the totalizing activity of historically
situated agents and further affect how these agents form practical relations.
In historical situations, individuals dialectically depend on and totalize their
available practico-inert practical field of equipmentality through their actions.
These totalizing actions are goal-oriented on the basis that these individuals are
ends in themselves. Needs and desires, as well as the respective ends of action,
arise in the interplay of individual requirements, wants, and wishes and what the
practical field of equipmentality provides as instrumental means. Sometimes these
individuals repeat the way they practically respond to and satisfy their inherent
needfulness because they repeatedly re-interiorize their specific practical field of
equipmentality and possibility. When this enables a practical response to be somewhat
successful, it can be said that the individuals’ actions are structured according
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 131
to their practical interrelation with their surrounding materiality. This means that
the abstract course of the totalizing actions of these individuals is scaffolded and
shaped by the fact that these individuals, as ends in themselves, must rely on the
practical field of equipmentality and possibility materially available to them—in the
relatively limited ways it is available to them—if they want to practically respond
to and satisfy their needs and desires. These individuals always enact the already
socially meaningful equipmentality of things and the effects of techniques in a
social milieu. Given that this social milieu consists of the practical interrelations
of other individuals and their surrounding materiality, the actions of individuals
thus take place in relation to their socioculturally structured materiality. Structure,
in this regard, represents an abstract, practically instantiated and thus concretized
set of rules, regulations, and expectations of practical fields of equipmentality and
possibility that normalize, mediate and thus shape how individuals realize their
intended ends (Hubig 2015, 74).2
According to Sartre, two ideal modes can be identified in which the practical responses
of individuals are structured: seriality and communality. Sartre also refers to
these modes of structuring as two types of human mediation (Sartre 1978, 170–171). A
practical ensemble can form based on how human beings respond to their needs
and desires individually in interrelation with a prefabricated field of equipmentality.
Such ensembles exhibit predominantly serial structures. A communally structured
ensemble forms when human beings unite to actively overcome how such a
prefabricated field of equipmentality is given to them.
Consequently, to examine the general conditions, possibilities, and practical
constraints of individual action, the structural features of constellations in which
this action is situated must be scrutinized through the conceptual lens of practical
ensembles. In the next section, this is done by examining some ways in which
historical constellations form and reinforce through technologically mediated
action.
2 In this regard, Sartre’s thoughts on action and structure resemble Giddens’ thoughts on the
duality of structure in The Constitution of Society. Giddens states: “Structure, as recursively organized
sets of rules and resources, is out of time and space, save in its instantiations and
co-ordination as memory traces, and is marked by an ‘absence of the subject’. The social systems
in which structure is recursively implicated, on the contrary, comprise the situated activities
of human agents, reproduced across time and space. Analysing the structuration of
social systems means studying the modes in which such systems, grounded in the knowledgeable
activities of situated actors who draw upon rules and resources in the diversity of
action contexts, are produced and reproduced in interaction” (Giddens 1986, 25).
132 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
4.3 Formation, Reinforcement, and Stabilization
In this section, some ways in which practical ensembles form and some ways in
which their inner structures are reinforced will be exemplified through constellations
that predominantly exhibit serial structures. Following this, the transformation
of practical ensembles is exemplified through the transition from ensembles
with predominantly serial structures to ensembles with predominantly communal
structures and back.
The Formation of Serial Structures
When a practical ensemble is united by isolated practical relations of human elements
to non-human, practico-inert objects and structures in dependence on prevalent
material conditions, and when this practical ensemble furthermore remains defined
by this conjunction, it is called a collective (Sartre 1978, 255). In collectives, each
member’s belonging to the ensemble is not a result of a conscious choice but comes
from their isolated practical relation based on their functional requirements/exigencies.
As a consequence of this mode of structuring, the human elements in these
ensembles remain in a pure exterior relation to each other without interior cohesion
(Blättler 2012, 71). Hence, not individuality but interchangeability and even competition
lie at the heart of these practical ensembles (Rae 2011, 191). For this reason,
Sartre refers to this mode of structuring as seriality. Because structures of seriality
result from an individual’s practical relations to given practico-inert objects and
structures, the unity of collectives is scaffolded and prefabricated. For this reason,
Sartre refrains from referring to practical ensembles with serial structures as organizations
or as being organized. In his understanding, organization implies that a
practical ensemble has interior cohesion as a result of an active synthesis through
its human elements (see section 4.4). By contrast, practical ensembles with a serial
structure result from passive synthesis. Nevertheless, because the practical ensemble
is united, it constitutes what Sartre calls a partial totality, which defines itself from
the inside through the specific mode that distinguishes it from its outside. In this
regard, any serially structured ensemble may represent a moment in the larger totalization
of another ensemble (Sartre 1978, 88).3
Sartre uses people waiting for the bus to exemplify serial structuring. Initially,
these people do not appear to be a structured totality. They look like a general gathering
consisting of a random number of individuals. However, when this gathering
is conceived in a dialectical and praxeological way, their “generality […] is just an abstract
appearance, for it is actually constituted in its very multiplicity by its transcendent
unity as a structured multiplicity” (Sartre 1978, 262). Although the gathering ap-
3 This is more thoroughly discussed in sections 4.4 and 4.6.
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 133
pears like a random number of people, the people are structured. What unites these
people is that they all gather at the bus stop in pursuit of getting a seat on the bus.
Through Sartre’s conceptual lens, this multiplicity can be reconstructed according to
the goal-oriented actions of its human elements. This means that the general gathering
of the multiplicity of individuals at the bus stop is indeed a structured gathering
that is united by the common individual goals of these people. In this regard, the
multiplicity of people presents itself as a practical ensemble with serially structured
functional interrelations between its human and non-human elements. The individuals
at the bus stop indeed represent a fixed constellation, because the human
elements of the ensemble are unified as isolated individuals whose praxis (waiting)
is equally conditioned by the same non-human, practico-inert element (bus). The
non-human element thus fulfills two functions. First, it functions as a common and
available means (of transportation) by which the human elements must satisfy their
needs and desires (for mobility in general or for reaching their workplace in particular,
etc.). Second, the means also functions as a concrete way in which the provision
of a required good or service is reliably preserved for future use. In that these
individuals have to rely on the repeated use of the same means of subsistence—understood
abstractly—they are subject to a passive synthesis. Although such a passive
synthesis is still enacted by individual praxis, the unity it represents must be dialectically
understood as the affirmation of a pre-established positing through sociocultural
and material conditions, instead of being an active engagement with these
conditions in the sense of dialectical negation. Passive synthesis is characterized by
the fact that it takes place in a historical context in which individuals necessarily
have to sustain themselves with prefabricated, fixed, and limited means and that
these individuals acquiesce to this fact. This means not only that individuals in serial
structures are not organized; they are also separated and atomized, and thus
represent competitors for the means at their disposal—in this case, a seat in the bus
(Sartre 1978, 130, 259). The competition between these individuals represents a contradiction
that is sublated insofar as the bus provides everyone with a seat.
The serial gathering of people at the bus station is thus revealed to be structured
by how exigencies gather individuals around a practico-inert object because all individuals
relate to this object in the same way while not questioning this relating.
The structure of the gathering fulfills the functional requirements of its elements in
a specific way. According to Kleinherenbrink and Gusman (2018), the bus represents
a social object, as it mediates the concrete relations of individuals.
The serial gathering of people at the bus station exemplifies what Sartre refers
to as a direct gathering, in which people are immediately present on-site. He distinguishes
different kinds of presence in predominantly serially structured ensembles
and links them to the possible kinds of interrelations between individuals. He defines
gatherings by the co-presence of their members in the sense that the possibility
of reciprocity and thus transformation is immediately given. In direct gatherings,
134 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
like at a bus stop or in front of a bakery, these people have the possibility to unite and
diffuse their serial structuring because they are directly present to each other on-site
(see section 4.4).
In contrast to such direct gatherings, technological artifacts and structures can
also condition the actions of individuals in such a way as to induce the constitution
of indirect gatherings. These are characterized by absence. In such gatherings, people
gather around a practico-inert object or structure serially while also being separated
from each other through their specific way of practical interrelating. Sartre’s example
is a radio broadcast in which each listener remains passive and singular with regard
to the broadcaster on the radio. Although the whole of listeners is a structured
ensemble that forms by people gathering around the radio in the act of listening,
their listening itself is what separates these listeners from one another (Sartre 1978,
270–271). More modern examples of such indirect gatherings are social networks.
Platforms like Facebook or Twitter claim to engender social exchange between individuals.
By design, however, such platforms must rather be seen to mediate such
an exchange. Platform users who like another user’s post or tweet interact with the
platform which then interacts with the other user. The instantaneous nature of this
mediation obscures the fact that users on social networks are situated in a serially
structured practical ensemble.
In both examples, one effect of technology via artificial objects or structures in
the formation of practical ensembles is revealed in how practico-inert instrumental
means passively gathering human beings around them. They do so by enabling these
individuals to repeatedly satisfy certain needs and desires within larger functionally
interrelated constellations.
Interest and the Demands of Things
This effect of technology can be further scrutinized regarding the material properties
of the practico-inert object. Insofar as the people in the serial gathering at the
bus stop depend on the bus to satisfy their need for mobility, the bus represents what
Sartre calls their interest to which he also refers their being-wholly-outside-oneself-ina-
thing (Sartre 1978, 259). According to Sartre, interest is a “relation between man
and thing in a social field […] it exists in a more or less developed form wherever
men live in the midst of a material set of tools which impose their techniques on
them” (Sartre 1978, 197). In that these people require the service provided by the bus,
they have to abide by the rules of the practico-inert object they use as means. Owing
to this predicament, the relation between agent and means is inverted. It is no
longer according to the needs and desires of individuals that actions are performed,
but according to the demands of the instrumental means that are supposed to support
these actions. In this way, the demands and requirements as well as the structural
integrity of practico-inert objects become associated and even equated with
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 135
the concrete possibility of these individuals to sustain themselves as organic entities
through these objects as means. The effect is that certain instrumental means
become critical for the individuals who must rely on them when these means are
associated as interests.4 This inverts the relation of equipmentality between the user
and means. Sartre mentions that for a house, for instance, to “preserve its reality as
a dwelling a house must be inhabited, that is to say, looked after, heated, swept, repainted,
etc.; otherwise it deteriorates. This vampire object constantly absorbs human
action, lives on blood taken from man and finally lives in symbiosis with him”
(Sartre 1978, 169, emphasis in original).
Sartre points out that this reversed designation, from means to user, can be more
abstract or concrete depending on the exact nature of the position individuals adopt
in specific practical ensembles with a serial structure. Reflecting on his position in
French society in the 1950s and 1960s, Sartre states the following:
a brace and bit and a monkey-wrench designate me as much as my neighbour. But
when these designations are addressed to me, they generally remain abstract and
purely logical, because I am a petty-bourgeois intellectual, or rather, because I am
designated as a petty bourgeois intellectual by the very fact that these relations
remain pure, dead possibilities. However, in the practical field of actual common
labour, the skilled worker is really and directly designated by the tool or the machine
to which he is assigned. (Sartre 1978, 186)
The structural integrity of practico-inert objects along with their strong association
as means of subsistence not only renders them critical for an individual’s mode of
reproduction—it also results in certain forms of coercion and necessitation. This can
be extrapolated to the practico-inert setting at the bus stop.
The bus, as a practico-inert object, is built to have certain material properties,
such as a limited seating capacity, among others. These properties represent materialized
ways in which past designers and creators responded to the needs and
desires of their historical situation. These needs and desires work their way into the
future in the form of the bus as practico-inert object (see section 3.4). The properties
of the bus refer to specific forms of conduct through which needs and desires can be
satisfied using the bus. In this example, the bus is useful for satisfying a set number
of people’s needs or desires for mobility. Through the conceptual lens of practical
ensembles, the operations revolving around the constellation of bus, bus driver, and
passengers can be further scrutinized regarding certain factors that enable them.
This scrutiny reveals that the bus itself requires another larger infrastructure, such
as a road and a system of traffic regulations, to fulfill its purpose. The road infrastructure
must be maintained by people, who require this form of labor to earn money
4 In section 4.6, it is argued that the association of instrumental means as interest generates
vulnerabilities in the case of crises and disruptions.
136 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
to satisfy their needs and desires. Thus, right away, layered forms of structured interrelations
are revealed, and they all interplay to enable the passive gathering at the
bus stop.
Not only the seating capacity but also the condition of the road infrastructure,
the distribution of stops, and other factors delimit both the number of people
who can take the bus and the route this bus can potentially take. This implies that
practico-inert objects and structures themselves not only passively gather a series
of needy/desiring people around them, whose social interrelations are arranged
by these very objects and structures. The way these objects and structures mediate
the social relations between individual human beings is also based on the ends
that were manifested in the material properties of these objects and structures.
Furthermore, besides the needs and desires of its human elements, the demands
and requirements of practico-inert objects and structures, as well as the way these
demands and requirements must be taken care of, affect how practical ensembles
are structured. Given those human and non-human elements contribute to the
overall praxis of the ensemble, either by adopting a functional role themselves or by
attributing a functional role to other elements, Sartre considers practical ensembles
to be functionally interrelated and mutually mediated. He states:
[P]raxis as the unification of inorganic plurality becomes the practical unity of matter.
Material forces gathered together in the passive unity of tools and machines
perform actions [French font des actes]: they unify other inorganic dispersals and
thereby impose a material unification on the plurality of men. The movement of
materiality, in fact, derives from men. But the praxis inscribed in the instrument
by past labour defines behaviour a priori [French définit apriori les conduites] by
sketching in its passive rigidity the outline of a sort of mechanical alterity which
culminates in a division of labour. Precisely because matter mediates between
men, men mediate between materialised praxes, and dispersal orders itself into
a sort of quasi-synthetic hierarchy reproducing the particular ordering imposed
on materiality by past labour in the form of a human order. (Sartre 1978, 184,
emphasis in original; Sartre 1960, 250–251)
How serial structures in practical ensembles are particularly ordered reflects the
mode in which the functional requirements or exigencies of their elements—in the
form of human needs and desires, as well as practico-inert demands and requirements—
are taken care of. Through the material properties established by others in
the practico-inert objects and systems that people rely on in serial gatherings, materialized
meaning intrudes on individual forms of conduct. As a result, the actions of
the human elements are transformed by the fact that an object or structure is used as
a means that has been constructed for a specific purpose. Although the means itself
does not strictly alter an action, the use of practico-inert objects still coerces the human
elements to deviate from their initially intended course of action (Sartre 1978,
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 137
223). Though individuals may realize their ends, this realization must be understood
as a transformation of subjective ends into objective ends through the means (Hubig
2006, 129).
For Sartre’s earlier theoretical conception of ontological freedom and human existence
(see section 2.3), this form of coercion initially poses no problem. If an ontologically
free and informed agent is assumed, whose choice of means is rational,
transparent, and directed toward the attainment of clearly defined individual ends,
this type of coercion through instrumental means is only hypothetical. Agents remain
ontologically free in the ends they choose by pursuing them, and in the means
they seek to employ toward these ends. Only when they wish to attain certain ends
must they adjust their actions and abide by the pre-established ways of performing
actions that others have manifested in the means at hand (Sartre 2021, 557). However,
in any given historical situation the attainment of ends is not a free choice but
a practical necessity. Consequently, these individuals face categorical coercions to
modify their actions.
Exigency, Necessitation of Action, and Structural Reinforcement
This becomes clearer through Sartre’s conception of how historical situations necessitate
individuals to rely on a limited instrumental field of possibilities. Sartre illustrates
this with class-being, in particular that of the working class. As is the case with
his entire later philosophy, Sartre’s view on societal classes is shaped by a Marxist
understanding of the social developments of the 1950s and 1960s. He claims that the
working class, when conceived as a practical ensemble, is revealed to be constituted
by the social stratification of capitalist societies, as it manifests in the shared exigencies
of individuals and the way these individuals must sustain themselves under
common sociocultural and material conditions.
Despite Sartre’s Marxist understanding, his assumptions prove to be adequate
beyond a Marxist class analysis. He summarizes his understanding of class-being
in a rather conclusive passage, stating that at the origin of class-membership, there
are
passive syntheses of materiality […] these syntheses represent both the general
conditions of social activity and our most immediate, crudest objective reality
[…] they are simply the crystallized practice of previous generations [French pratique
cristallisée des générations précédentes]: individuals find an existence already
sketched out [French préesquissée] for them at birth […] What is ‘assigned’ to them
is a type of work, and a material condition and a standard of living tied to this
activity; it is a fundamental attitude [French attitude fondamentale], as well as a
determinative provision of material and intellectual tools; it is a strictly limited
138 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
field of possibilities [un champ de possibilités rigoureusement limité]. (Sartre 1978,
232, emphasis in original; Sartre 1960, 289)
According to this understanding, a societal class can be conceived as a practical ensemble
with certain structures of seriality. The same applies to basically any constellation
in which individuals share similar life conditions. The human elements in
these ensembles are usually united not by a common, interior cause and undertaking,
but by their prefabricated means of subsistence on the one hand, and by the
attitude they adopt as a result of their shared material conditions on the other. This
section focuses on the interplay between practico-inert means and individual action
treated, especially regarding the inner structure of practical ensembles. How
attitude is formed and how it affects the inner structure of practical ensembles will
be analyzed in section 4.5.
According to Sartre, through membership in serial constellations, individual
freedom is mostly limited to the means provided by the general conditions and
possibilities predominant in those constellations. The layers of the practico-inert
that K. S. Engels (2018) identifies (see section 3.4) can all be found in class-being.
A certain group of physical artifacts represents the means of subsistence for every
class. Language as a body technique is enacted through various dialects and
sociolects that mark class-membership. This membership also comes with deeply
ingrained ideas or attitudes about the self and others in society. Here other body
techniques can also be found, such as specific modes of recreation or consumption.
These attitudes again represent social objects, or, more precisely, social modes of
interaction manifested in individuals.
Human beings are necessarily situated in socioculturally and materially structured
constellations that scaffold a field of possibilities for them; these individuals
must also practically satisfy their needs and desires with certain limited practico-inert
means available to them. From these facts, it follows that these individuals do not
face a hypothetical but rather what Sartre refers to as categorical coercion to modify
their course of action to reproduce themselves. This coercion is categorical because
it corresponds to the necessity of self-reproduction (Sartre 1978, 190). Given that instrumental
means represent practico-inert objects and structures, the meaning and
purpose of which have been established by others in the form of material properties
(see section 3.4), individuals who must rely on these means must necessarily acquiesce
to the fact that extrasubjective meaning intrudes into their practical interrelation
with their surroundings. Despite their ontological freedom, historically situated
individuals do not remain practically free to choose the ways they realize themselves
through their actions. Their course of action must necessarily be performed
with the means prescribed by the position that these individuals adopt within their
respective practical ensembles (Sartre 1978, 190). In this context, Sartre states:
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 139
Exigency, in fact, whether in the form of an order or a categorical imperative,
constitutes itself in everyone as other than him. (He cannot modify it, but simply
has to conform to it; it is beyond his control, and he may change entirely
without changing it; in short, it does not enter into the dialectical movement of
behaviour.) In this way, exigency constitutes him as other than himself, In so far
as he is characterised by praxis, his praxis does not originate in need or in desire
[French celle-ci ne prend pas sa source dans le besoin ou dans le désir]; it is not the
process of realizing his project, but in so far as it is constituted so as to achieve
an alien object, it is, in the agent himself, the praxis of another; and it is another
who objectifies himself in the result. (Sartre 1978, 187–188, emphasis in original;
Sartre 1960, 253)
Through exigencies, or the material claims prevalent in practical ensembles, individuals
exhibit certain forms of behavior. These forms no longer originate in their
free and self-totalizing interrelation with their sociocultural and material mediating
milieu, based on their needs and desires. Rather, these forms of behavior come
from the material necessity of another sector of materiality. In that the historical
situation of individuals, i.e. their position within practical ensembles, necessitates
their reliance on certain means of subsistence, their totalizing action no longer derives
directly from their exigencies. It comes instead from how the means at their
disposal are structured, and from how the utility of these means creates a new practical
setting that not only yields intended effects but also side effects (Sartre 1978,
183–186). This interplay—between the necessity for human beings to sustain themselves
within a strictly limited practical field of equipmentality, and the possibility
ascribed to them in virtue of their position in forms of societal organization—is the
root of la force des choses.
In the case of the working class, understood as a practical ensemble, their means
of subsistence are structured so as to produce laborers, products, and profit in a
capitalist mode of production. This mode of production can itself be understood
as a practical ensemble consisting of human and non-human elements, or even as
an ensemble of ensembles.5 These individuals persistently rely on a prefabricated
5 In this regard Sartre’s theories are somewhat limited. Although he acknowledges that groups
form sub-groups with differentiated functions (Sartre 1978, 417), he does not provide the terminology
to clearly differentiate between micro-, meso-, and macro-ensembles. The point of
Sartre’s practical ensembles is not primarily to illustrate the complexity of systems, but to examine
the possibilities and practical constraints individuals face in practical constellations.
For this reason, every larger functionally interrelated constellation of human and non-human
elements represents a practical ensemble; the analysis of its structures reveals the historical
situation of individuals. In section 4.6, it is shown that Sartre’s conception of counter-finalities
allows one to conceive of structures of coupled ensembles.
140 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
instrumental field of possibilities through which their needs and desires are effectively
taken care of, and the inner structure of practical ensembles is consolidated,
reinforced, and perpetuated based on the pre-established forms of conduct associated
with and affected by technology in the form of artificial objects and body techniques.
In Sartrean terms, individuals totalize the inner structure of their practical
ensembles and thus reinforce these ensembles as totalities. They do so based on the
practical interrelations between the elements of these ensembles. Sartre’s example
involves the processes in a factory:
[I]ndividuals in an organisation interiorise the exigency of matter and re-exteriorise
it as the exigency of man. Through supervisors and inspectors, machines demand
a particular rhythm of the worker: and it makes no difference whether the
producers are supervised by particular men or whether, when the equipment allows
it, the supervisors are replaced by a more or less automatic system of checks.
In either case, material exigency, whether it is expressed through a machine-man
or a human machine, comes to the machine through man to precisely the extent
that it comes to man through the machines. Whether in the machine, as imperative
expectation and as power, or in man, as mimicry (imitating the inert in giving
orders), as action and coercive power, exigency is always both man as a practical
agent and matter as worked product in an indivisible symbiosis. (Sartre 1978,
190–191, emphasis in original)
As a result, the totalizing activity of individuals or groups “ceases to be the free
organisation of the practical field and becomes the re-organisation of one sector
of materiality in accordance with the exigencies of another sector of materiality”
(Sartre 1978, 191). This furthers the divide between the concrete form of subjectivity
and objectivity realized through historically situated totalizing actions, as
mentioned in section 2.4. Furthermore, through this form of reinforcement, practical
ensembles actively resist change, and individuals associate the structure of
these ensembles with their interests. In this regard, practical ensembles generate a
certain functional criticality for the individuals situated in them.
Objectification and Alienation
Although what was described above is reminiscent of a Marxist understanding
of alienation, Sartre hesitates to recognize it as such. He states that in a classical
Marxist understanding, alienation comes with exploitation in capitalist societies.
However, the specific practical constraints he reveals to affect individuals in practical
ensembles go beyond capitalist exploitation. In all practical ensembles, practical
constraints arise as a result of the lived contradiction that is human existence. As
such, these constraints represent constitutive aspects of human existence, irrespective
of the overall societal mode of production. Sartre also struggles to recognize
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 141
this circumstance as alienation in a Hegelian sense, according to which all forms of
human objectification, through labor or otherwise, essentially represent forms of
alienation. Rather, Sartre reevaluates the relationship between objectification and
alienation in human existence.
According to Sartre, objectification must not be understood merely as an outcome
of human action clashing with the plasticity of physicochemical reality. It is
instead the root of the lived contradiction of human existence (see section 1.4) and
its consequence (Sartre 1978, 112). As such, it represents the condition of possibility
for self-recognition.
Through their actions, human beings exteriorize and objectify themselves in the
world. Although this is mostly evident in the larger effects of human actions—the
things they built and the structures they form—it is also present in the smaller, more
intricate traces humans leave through their actions, such as footsteps, grind marks,
and wear and tear. In that human beings re-interiorize their effects and traces as
objectified in matter, they discover themselves as “Other in the world of objectivity”
(Sartre 1978, 227, emphasis in original). According to Sartre, human beings may only
recognize themselves through detours. This means that they assess how they affect
the world through the effects they cause through their actions. Their interiority becomes
tangible to them in an oscillating process by which it is translated into exteriority
and hence must be re-interiorized as Other. This can be through the look, i.e. the
reactions and judgments of others (Sartre 2021, 401–408), or through the spotting
of differences between intended and realized ends (Sartre 2021, 249–250), among
other ways. Sartre summarizes this paradoxical fact in a rather poetic way: “All of
us spend our lives engraving our maleficent image on things, and it fascinates and
bewilders us if we try to understand ourselves through it, although we are ourselves
the totalising movement which results in this particular objectification” (Sartre 1978,
227, emphasis in original).
Alienation, however, is a result of specific forms of societal interrelations in
which individuals are forced to transform their exigencies according to the exigencies
of another material sector without necessarily realizing this to be the case
(Sartre 1978, 164).6 Consequently, Sartre’s notion of alienation is not limited to
capitalist modes of production but can be applied to all forms of constellations that
exhibit the characteristics mentioned above.
Historical Constellations as Ge-Stell
Sartre’s description of the situation of individuals in practical ensembles with predominantly
serial structures resembles Heidegger’s understanding of Ge-Stell. This
6 For a more thorough discussion of Sartre’s conception of alienation, see Birt (1986) and Collamati
(2016).
142 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
is evident not only in Sartre’s conception of scarcity and people’s demands for securing
potential goods, services, and other options for action; it also appears in how individuals
are challenged, for instance, to respond to the demands of the instrumental
means they use. In Die Frage nach der Technik, Heidegger analyzes the nature of
technology by contrasting the way human-world relations are mediated by ancient
and more modern technologies. He states that the actual essence of technology is
nothing technological at all (Heidegger 2000, 7–8). Rather, technology must be understood
as the very mode of disclosing and securing options for action regarding
the world (Luckner 2012, 61). Technology must thus be comprehended as a mode of
being that Heidegger calls Ge-Stell. In this mode of being, entities can appear as Bestand,
i.e. as mere standing reserves and means to ends. The problematic aspect of
this process is the threatening commitment to particular options for action and the
obscuring of other modes of being (Luckner 2012, 63).
Against the background of Sartre’s philosophy, it could be said that when constellations
of human and non-human elements are understood through the lens of
practical ensembles, they can be revealed to represent instantiations of Ge-Stell. Any
such constellations represent material and sociocultural settings that dispose the
actions of individuals by providing them with fixed options (or opportunities) for
action. While this form of commitment allows for increased efficiency and effectiveness
in the satisfaction and generation of needs, desires, and demands, it also obscures
other options for action. Furthermore, the fixation on specific forms of conduct
challenges individuals and physicochemical reality alike, as both become standing
reserve (German Bestand). In the case of individuals, this is evident in apersonal
structures of seriality, where each individual ultimately represents a competitor for
the means of subsistence (see above). However, according to Sartre, these individuals
can organize themselves and attempt to rise above the structures of their ensembles
(see 4.4). How physicochemical reality becomes standing reserve is similar to the
way instrumental means become interest. Because individuals satisfy their needs and
desires by instrumentalizing physicochemical reality (see section 4.2), specific goods
and resources become critical as they are associated with the continuation of certain
constellations. This may lead to excessive demands and an overload of ecosystems
and other constellations alike. Eventually, this overload can trigger counter-finalities,
through which the very structures of practical ensembles are threatened at their core
(see section 4.6).
4.4 Transformation
This section aims to identify processes through which the structures of practical ensembles
are transformed. This transformation occurs because agents identify a lack
of services or options for action in the current structure of their practical ensemble.
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 143
An illustration is the transformations from serially structured ensembles to communally
structured ensembles and back.
However, before that, it must be noted that the analysis in this work of how
Sartre conceives groups to form based on series in no way claims to be complete.
On the contrary, some essential aspects of Sartre’s analysis must be omitted to keep
the underlying dynamics of practical ensembles in view. Regarding these underlying
dynamics, Sartre’s line of thinking is not so much about the sociality of these groups
in particular; rather, it represents a dialectical and praxeological examination of the
conditions individuals generally face when organizing in historical situations. Although
Sartre uses terms like group-in-fusion, organized group, and institution, these
terms refer to more abstract forms of supraindividual responses that condition individual
actions.7
The Transformation from Serial to Communal Ensembles
At times a practical ensemble may form in the active attempt of its human elements
to eliminate or change how the conjunction of practico-inert objects and sociocultural/
material conditions scaffolds their serial unity. When this happens, and when
this new practical ensemble furthermore remains defined by its undertaking, this
ensemble represents a preliminary group called a group-in-fusion. It exhibits a communal
structure (Sartre 1978, 255). The initial attempt is to change either the functional
requirement the practical ensemble fulfills or how the practical ensemble fulfills
that requirement. It follows that any group-in-fusion presupposes structures
of seriality against which the group-in-fusion defines itself (Rae 2011, 192). Although
the communal structure of practical ensembles differs from that of serial structures,
they still reflect both the functional requirements of their elements and the fact that
communal structures define themselves against their outside (see section 4.3).
Owing to the limited field of possibilities prevalent in serially structured ensembles,
individuals situated in these ensembles can be threatened by the fact that some
of their needs and desires are not provided for—either because certain options for
action do not exist, or because the serial structures of their ensemble actively constrain
these individuals in satisfying their needs and desires. Concrete instances of
this can be the identification of exploitative labor conditions, a lack of political representation,
control, or governmental regulation, or an overall lack of certain options
for action. In a more abstract case, this limitation appears as the non-existence of
any form of organization through which individuals may exert power over themselves.
7 More theoretical analyses of Sartre’s theory of group formation can be found in Hartmann
(1966) and Rae (2011), among others.
144 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
When these individuals actively demand or promote change and transformation,
their response represents an active negation of the positing givenness prevalent
in their serially structured ensemble. The response can be a riot, a public outcry,
or any other spontaneous outburst of individuals who unite behind a common
cause. Through this active and communal response, serial, parallel, and essentially
competitive existence, as a purely exterior relation between human elements resulting
from a passive synthesis, is transformed into communal and synthetic coexistence.
The individuals of this group-in-fusion have interior, cohesive, and reciprocal
relations with each other. Therefore, contrary to a series, a group-in-fusion must be
understood as the result of an active synthesis through the spontaneous yet communal
and unified response of its members (Rae 2011, 193).
As long as the constraints of serial structures pose a threat to the individuals of
that group, the group-in-fusion may persist. If, on the contrary, the constraints no
longer threaten, either because of the spontaneous actions of the group-in-fusion
or because of other reasons, one of two things will happen to the group. Either it
disintegrates because its raison d’être has vanished, or it organizes itself, given that it
identifies the potential for similar threats to reappear (Rae 2011, 195).
When the group-in-fusion disintegrates, group members disperse into seriality.
However, when the group-in-fusion attempts to organize itself, it represents a
statutory group in the process of becoming an organized group. An organized group can
be a political party, a social movement, a workgroup, or a task force—any larger constellation
of people that actively attempts to organize itself. In this organized group,
the functional interrelations between the human elements are seen to be communally
structured, because groups act through the active mediation of their members.
A newly founded political party, for instance, represents the whole of the intersubjective
relations of its party members, both within the party and with people and
conditions outside the party.
In organized groups, practical interrelations are conditioned by what Sartre
refers to as the pledge of its members. As a “practical device” (Sartre 1978, 420, emphasis
in original), the pledge has different functions and affects group members in
multiple ways. It can be any group member’s explicit commitment to recognize their
role and the role of others for the functioning of the organized group. The pledge
generates group cohesion in that it “simply allows each individual to promise to
the other that he will act in a way that cares for and affirms the other’s practical
freedom” (Rae 2011, 196). Furthermore, by the pledge, each member is assigned a
specific function—a form of conduct—upon which the larger organization depends
as a functionally differentiated constellation. This allows an organized group to be
more effective. In this regard, a pledge can be an oath to abide by certain rules, a
creed featuring certain norms, or even the commitment to drive on the right side
of the street. Furthermore, the internal organization of groups grows over time in
response to the serially structured ensemble, as the functional requirements of the
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 145
organized group correlate negatively to the serial structures the group organizes
itself against. Rather than dispersing like the group-in-fusion when the exigencies
of the serially structured ensemble change, the organized group adapts itself to
these serial structures. The action of each member is “directly conditioned by his
functional relation to the other members of the group, as already established either
by the group […] or by its representatives” (Sartre 1978, 446, emphasis in original).
Like with the preliminary group-in-fusion, the human elements within organized
groups have interior, reciprocal relations to each other, but they also remain as
individuals, precisely because their commitment is what constitutes their group’s
form of organization. Therefore, no one is interchangeable in organized groups;
the group continues to define itself against the exigencies of its instrumental field
through the actions of the specific individuals that are its members. However, the
human elements within groups do not dissolve into the larger organic unity of
the group. Rather, a group is in the constant process of totalization as its unity
is actively constituted through individual action (Sartre 1978, 407). According to
Sartre, membership in organized groups enhances the practical freedom of each
individual, as this membership is defined both by a committed response to common
threats and by an affirmation of individual responsibility to protect the practical
freedom of others in the group (Rae 2011, 201).
Institutionalization as (Re-)Serialization
The longer the organized group works against the serially structured practical ensemble,
the stronger the group identifies itself through both its undertaking (as a
negation of serial structures) and the specific way its functionally differentiated interrelations
are structured. This eventually leads to an inversion of individual and
group praxis so that the function and structure of the organized group is superimposed
on the individuals who propelled the organization of the group through their
functional roles in the first place. According to Sartre, “function, positing itself for itself,
and producing individuals who will perpetuate it, becomes an institution” (Sartre
1978, 600, emphasis in original).
Members of institutionalized groups are passive function carriers rather than
active promoters of the group’s organizational structure. The pledge between members
is replaced by a dictum stipulating functions and the details of how those
functions are to be carried out. In this way, individual practical freedom is limited,
whereas the overall possibilities for the institution’s action may be increased. Consequently,
in the transition from organized group to the institution, the ensemble
transforms from a communally structured ensemble to an ensemble exhibiting
serial characteristics. The members of institutions are now defined only by their
functional role. Analogous to how practico-inert objects, as interest, designate their
user and dispose the user to act in a certain way in serially structured ensembles
146 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
(see section 4.3), in institutions individuals are designated to act in certain ways in
virtue of adopting a functional role (Sartre 1978, 602).
Rather than actively initiating and contributing to the overall form of organization
through their committed actions, members of institutions perpetuate the institutions’
organizational structure. This work is also accompanied by a concentration
of authority, so that the sovereign of the institution “dictates how the institution will
act, what it will be directed toward, and the manner in which each member will comport
himself ” (Rae 2011, 203). In political parties, for instance, individuals take the
positions of party leaders, speakers, treasurers, and so on, with their interrelations
governed by the party program; this arrangement occurs to streamline communication
and distribute competences.
Depending on the functional requirements of the institution, the direction dictated
by the sovereign, and the level of specialization necessary to fulfill their functions,
the members of institutions are functionally interchangeable. This implies
that the human elements in these ensembles need not be replaced with other human
elements, for they can also be replaced with non-human elements. Although Sartre
does not engage in this discussion in his analysis of institutions, he examines such a
replacement of workers in his look at Taylorism, i.e. the attempt to optimize modes
of production with the help of scientific analysis (Peaucelle 2000). Sartre claims that
optimizing the labor process for maximum profit entails a de-skilling of individual
laborers and their eventual replacement through what he refers to as specialized machines.
In the case of replacing workers with machines, the labor process itself must
no longer be understood as praxis in the form of human conduct, but as a mechanical
operation (Sartre 1978, 562).8
This replacement can take place in institutions as well. Considering the regulation
of traffic to be an institutionalized response to potentially dangerous modes
of traversing streets, for instance, each road user’s behavior is seen to be dictated
by rules delimiting individual options for action for the sake of safer travel. Traffic
lights function as active ways to control traffic, and street signs function as signifiers
reminding road users to abide by prescribed regulations. Speed bumps and
roundabouts function as passive, inert obstacles to which road users must adapt
their behavior (Rosenberger 2014). Misconduct is sanctioned by various authorities
who function as sovereigns.
8 In this context, Sartre also imagines the characteristics necessary for an electronic brain to control
labor processes. He states: “There is no action so complex that it cannot be decomposed,
dismembered, transformed, and infinitely varied by an ‘electronic brain’; it would be impossible
to construct or use an ‘electronic brain’ except within the perspective of a dialectical praxis
of which the operations under consideration were merely a moment” (Sartre 1978, 561–562).
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 147
Structured Interrelations as Structural Moments of Totalization
Sartre’s conceptual view on the transformation of practical ensembles does not only
highlight group formation as a liberating process in which human beings free themselves
from serially structured conditions. It also illustrates the compromises that
individuals must make to organize themselves against inertia and scarcity. For various
reasons, individuals may limit their practical freedom out of practical necessity.
They consolidate forms of organization, re-distribute competences, and settle down
to fixed strategies through which they satisfy their needs and desires. This allows
these individuals to liberate themselves again and again and practically enact their
ontological freedom. When nomad people, for instance, settle down to practice agriculture,
they commit to a certain way of life at a certain place. By committing in such
a way, these people gain the possibility to satisfy their requirements for food through
their localized mode of production. In committing to such an agricultural mode of
production, however, they also make it harder to leave, because their agricultural
mode of production is constrained to a fixed place. They thus have the chance to
liberate themselves from this coercion by, for instance, restructuring their mode of
production. Sartre’s way of framing this constant inversion from serial structures
to communal structures and back accounts for the larger dimensions of his claim,
that the dialectical progression of history must become intelligible—not as a natural
law that dictates this progression, but as the complex outcome of simple, singular
human interrelations with other human beings and their surroundings (see section
1.4).
At the same time, Sartre’s anthropological focus allows him to reveal the fact that
human existence is inherently situated in constellations in which serial and communally
structured interrelations interplay. Although people may free themselves from
structures that constrain their practical freedom, they must rely on other scaffolded,
serial structures to provide them with a limited but manageable instrumental field
of possibilities. Although extrasubjective forms of conduct have been poured into
practico-inert objects and structures (see section 3.4) by whose use serial systems
of interrelations are formed (see section 4.3), Sartre states that those who intend to
transform these systems “must therefore have a project with a double aim: to resolve
the existing contradictions by a wider totalisation, and to diminish the hold of materiality
by substituting tenuousness for opacity, and lightness for weight” (Sartre
1978, 183). In this regard, the organizational schema of practical ensembles always
involves worked and processually adapted matter as a “minimum of synthesized passivity
[…] that praxis must transcend towards the practical situation” (Sartre 1991,
128, emphasis in original).
Based on these considerations, it becomes evident that practical constellations
never exhibit purely serial or communal structures. Rather, in most constellations,
structures of seriality and communality can be understood to interconnect, inform,
148 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
and dialectically mediate each other in the constellations’ totalizing processing. The
institutionalized traffic regulations mentioned above, for instance, directly refer not
only to material elements (pedestrians, drivers, cars, road infrastructure) that are
governed but also to the fact that these elements are the ones whose interrelations,
as governed by traffic laws, enact and thus totalize those laws in the first place. However,
each of these elements exhibits different forms of structuring. The actions of
pedestrians are differently structured to those of drivers, simply because the practico-
inert objects and structures that pedestrians and drivers interrelate with mediate
their actions in different ways. In the case of pedestrians, these objects and/or
structures are the shoes they wear, the pavement they walk on, and the streetlights,
for instance. The actions of drivers are serially structured by their specific car models,
the road, other drivers, and so on. Although both pedestrians and drivers are
situated in serial structures, their structures are not the same. Both are defined as
structures by their specific forms of conduct, their material elements, and other factors.
However, the actions enabled through these respective modes of structuring
affect each other and thus contribute to the larger form of organization again.
According to Sartre, the fundamentally totalizing activities of human action and
experience represent the very conditions of possibility according to which the operations
of any larger form of organization must become intelligible in the first place.
Through Sartre’s practical ensemble framework, a political party, for instance,
can be analyzed as a structured whole that totalizes itself through its political work.
The same party can also be analyzed regarding the way its members communicate
via mobile phones, as these communicative processes represent structural moments
in the party’s overall processual totalization. Furthermore, the political party, understood
as a practical ensemble, can also be understood as a partial totality that
interrelates with other parties as partial totalities. The interrelations between these
parties can again be understood to represent structural moments in the larger totalizing
processing of the nationwide political discourse, for instance. This is further
discussed in section 4.6.
4.5 Persistence
This section examines the dynamics through which practical ensembles persist. According
to Sartre, there are two essential aspects affecting the persistence of practical
ensembles in the material properties of their non-human elements and the totalizing
actions of their human elements. The inertia and longevity of practico-inert
means represent major factors in how practical ensembles maintain themselves. In
that individuals identify instrumental means as their interest, both in the sense of
means of subsistence and means of liberation, these individuals keep on perpetuating
the inner structure of practical ensembles. This involves the maintenance of
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 149
current technological settings according to the demands and requirements of their
practico-inert elements on the one hand (see section 4.3), and technological innovation
and development on the other. However, Sartre does not discuss the historical
becoming of technology in particular. He is much more interested in the processes
involved in how people tackle scarcity or potentially adapt to it.
As mentioned before, Sartre claims that history “is born from a sudden imbalance
which disrupts all levels of society” (Sartre 1978, 126) whenever individuals recognize
that their exigencies are not taken care of through the practical ensembles
they are situated in. However, this recognition itself can be obscured through the
way human beings internally adapt to their role in practical ensembles, even if their
structure does not allow individuals to tackle their own needs and desires but instead
coerces them to abide by the exigencies of another material entity or collective.
In this way, the perpetual disequilibrium of scarcity can be lived as an equilibrium,
when it is preserved as hexis9 (Sartre 1978, 126).
The concept of hexis has its roots in Aristotelian philosophy, where it derives from
the Greek verb echein (English to have). The noun can be translated as habit, state, disposition,
(fundamental) attitude, or characteristic, although none of these translations
fully captures its Greek meaning.10 Hexis represents an “entrenched psychic condition
or state which develops through experience rather than congenitally” (Lockwood
2013, 22), and which disposes the actions of agents who have or hold (Greek
echein) this condition or state.
The conceptual dimensions of hexis in Sartre’s philosophy are hard to pinpoint.
The concept itself is not clearly defined by Sartre, nor is it well developed throughout
his works. Furthermore, Sartre’s conception of hexis changes from Being and Nothingness
to Critique. Sartre’s hexis-concept combines aspects of Aristotelian philosophy,
habits, Maussian habitus (Mauss 1934, 1973), and processes of habituation, among
other sources. Sartre discusses an individual’s “habits (in the Greek sense of ἕξις)”
(Sartre 2021, 232) in the context of the qualities of the Ego11 in Being and Nothingness.
In Critique he conceptualizes hexis as an action disposition that agents develop by
9 According to Barnes, the translator of the 2003 Routledge edition of Being and Nothingness,
Sartre seems to have ignored the rough breathing of the Greek term ἕξις (Sartre 2003, 2). In
L’être et le néant, Sartre uses the Greek spelling ἕξις. In Critique de la raison dialectique, he uses
the spelling exis. Given that ἕξις or hexis is not only a technical term in Greek philosophy but
also has become an established term in the philosophy of habits, the spelling hexis is used in
this work. In some quotations from Sartre’s works, where the term exis appears, it is replaced
with hexis in brackets.
10 These translations refer to Lockwood (2013) the German glossary provided by Wolf in Aristotle
(trans. 2015), and the LSJ entry on ἔχω (n.d a).
11 In Sartre’s philosophy, the Ego refers to a person as a psychological unity. Sartre states: “It is as
an Ego that we are subjects de facto and subjects de jure, active and passive, voluntary agents,
possible objects of evaluative judgment, or a judgment of responsibility” (Sartre 2021, 232).
150 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
interiorizing practical relations through repetition. It is here where Sartre explores
the societal significance of hexeis.
When agents develop a hexis by repeating certain practical relations, the course
of these relations, in combination with the instrumental means used in them as well
as the structural context they are situated in, pass into and become incarnated in the
agent’s corporeality. There they remain as passive residuals or imprints of former
actions. In this way, the practical relations themselves have become practico-inert
in the agent’s bodily inertia. The reason why agents repeat certain practical relations
is that these practical relations allow the agents to attain desired ends under certain
conditions. The action disposition developed this way disposes the agents who hold
it to perpetuate these practical relations in similar ways under similar conditions. In
this regard, hexis represents a condition of possibility for the persistence of practical
ensembles.
Unfortunately, Sartre studies have neglected the significance of hexis. This might
be because Sartre’s later work has gained considerably less academic attention than
his early works, or it could be because hexis has connotations of a passive and materially
inert behavior that contrasts with free and creative praxis (Flynn 1997, 94).
Another reason might be the predominance of Merleau-Ponty’s Phenomenology of Perception,
to which philosophers seem to resort to for phenomenological research on
habits and embodiment.12 However, despite this inattention, hexis not only represents
an important aspect of Sartre’s theoretical conception of practical ensembles,
but an ineluctable fact of human existence and reality more broadly.
To get a more general understanding of the mechanisms and principles underlying
Sartre’s conception of hexis, it is useful to reflect upon them against the context
of other philosophers who put a similar emphasis on the societal implications of a
person’s habituated actions.
The Societal Implications of Hexis and Habit
In Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle reflects upon a person’s hexis in the context of his
thoughts on praxis and poiesis. According to Aristotle, human action can be described
by the aspects of praxis and poiesis, among others. Depending on whether actions are
predominantly seen under the aspect of praxis or poiesis, different guiding principles
can be applied through which the course and results of these actions can be assessed
(Luckner 2005, 81–82). Under the aspect of praxis, an action is understood as a goaldirected
activity that has its end in itself. Such activities include political control and
regulation, law, and music, but also other activities aiming at the development and
preservation of one’s capacity to act (Hubig 2013b, 23). The guiding principle of praxis
12 For a juxtaposition of Sartre’s and Merleau-Ponty’s conceptions of habit and embodiment,
see Crossley (2010).
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 151
is phronesis, Greek for prudence. Phronesis can also be translated as practical reason or
practical wisdom. As such, it represents a hexis praktike, a disposition toward action
under the aspect of praxis, according to which agents can reflect on whether actions
are good or bad regarding their success in attaining certain ends under specific circumstances
(Lockwood 2013, 24; Aristotle trans. 2015, 199).
Under the aspect of poiesis, an action is understood as a making that has its end in
the effect or thing it brings into being. Such activities include productive processes
such as baking, tailoring, forging, writing, and so on, but also any applied sciences
that aim at producing or reproducing certain effects. Similarly to phronesis in the
case of praxis, techne serves as the guiding principle of poiesis. In this regard, techne,
as a hexis poietike (Lockwood 2013, 24), represents a disposition toward action (under
the aspect of poiesis) according to which agents can reflect on and act based on how
things could be brought into being, especially regarding the fact that these things
need not necessarily be constituted in one specific way, but could be constituted in
other ways (Aristotle trans. 2015, 198). Furthermore, Aristotle not only understands
techne as a reflective disposition but also as the right knowledge about the relation
of means and ends in the course of actions (Hubig 2006, 51–52). Good poiesis results
in the accordance of constitutive principles with the things or effects brought into
being.
Agents constitute such dispositions by repeating specific actions whose course
is oriented toward mediation of praxis and poiesis aspects, among others, regarding
the quality of attained ends (Hubig 2006, 52). Phronesis and techne represent intertwined
hexeis that agents develop over time as a result of internalizing constitutive
principles, the interplay of means and ends, and the situation-specific adequacy regarding
the quality of actions. Once developed, these hexeis guide the agent’s actions
according to internalized principles without strictly determining the actions’ exact
course. Lockwood mentions that the hexis of justice, which capacitates agents to act
in a just manner, does not imply that these agents always act in the same way (Lockwood
2013, 24). In this example, the interplay of different hexeis and their dispositional
qualities are illustrated by the fact that what is just in one instance might not
be just in another but must be adequately adapted to the respective situation. This
means that both phronesis and techne must inform the action.
Ultimately, the concept of hexis plays a significant role in Aristotle’s conception
of virtues. Given that hexeis develop over time—by repeating actions in correspondence
with certain principles, according to which these actions can be assessed for
their efficacy in attaining ends—agents are responsible for their hexeis. It is up to
them to develop dispositions according to which actions may be performed in a virtuous
manner (Lockwood 2013, 25). In this regard, Aristotelian hexis represents an
active and agent-driven condition, state, or disposition that capacitates the respective
agents to act in accordance with internalized principles and norms. However,
since a person’s practical conduct of life is always situated in a social context, the hex152
The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
eis necessarily have a social function as well. They enable individuals to adapt their
actions in situational dependence to the constitutive principles of their social context.
Thus, already in Aristotle, hexis has a social-constituting function through its
action-disposing function. It enables, to an extent, the harmony of action and social
order.
In James’ The Principles of Psychology I, habits—deriving from the Latin habitus
which is the Latin equivalent of Greek hexis—have similar implications for the relationship
between an individual and their social context. According to James, habits
have immediate ethical implications, as they enable individuals to consistently perform
those actions that mark their place in society. James has a wide understanding
of habits, which he claims to exist “due to the plasticity of the organic materials of which
[the bodies of material entities] are composed” (James 1890, 105, emphasis in original).
In this regard, an automated action learned through repetition is as much a habit
as callous hands are, caused by manual labor. According to James’ understanding,
habits have a certain bodily inertia through which societal dynamics are preserved
and perpetuated.
James describes the mechanics of habit formation analogous to the formation
of trample paths:
[A] simple habit, like every other nervous event […] is, mechanically, nothing but
a reflex discharge; and its anatomical substratum must be a path in the system.
The most complex habits, as we shall presently see more fully, are, from the same
point of view, nothing but concatenated discharges in the nerve-centers due to the
presence there of systems of reflex paths, so as to wake each other up successively.
(James 1890, 107–108, emphasis in original)
According to James, once habits are formed, they have concrete practical implications.
First, habits simplify “the movements required to achieve a given result, makes them
more accurate and diminishes fatigue” (James 1890, 112, emphasis in original). Second,
habits reduce “the conscious attention with which our acts are performed” (James
1890, 114, emphasis in original). Habituated actions are thus more efficient and unconscious.
Most importantly, James connects agents to their material environment
through their habits. He mentions that habituated actions are not preceded by conscious
choice or deliberation. Rather, “[i]n action grown habitual, what instigates
each new muscular contraction to take place in its appointed order is not a thought
or a perception, but the sensation occasioned by the muscular contraction just finished”
(James 1890, 115, emphasis in original).13
13 In the psychology of habit, habitual behavior is understood as an automatic and not goaldependent
response that activates by recurring context cues (Wood & Rünger 2016). Habit
formation is a form of learning that takes place when actions performed to attain certain
desired goals in different contexts—environmental settings, after certain other actions, in
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 153
Habits thus allow a person to cultivate a way of life that can be enacted without
much conscious thought or even effort. James also mentions another aspect of
habits that, although not present in Aristotle’s conception of hexis, seems to represent
an aspect of Sartre’s hexis-concept. James states that habits allow individuals
to withstand the hardships of their labor.14 James is convinced of the conservative
power of habits for society:
Habit is thus the enormous fly-wheel of society, its most precious conservative
agent. It alone is what keeps us all within the bounds of ordinance, and saves the
children of fortune from the envious uprisings of the poor. It alone prevents the
hardest and most repulsive walks of life from being deserted by those brought up
to tread therein. It keeps the fisherman and the deck-hand at sea through the winter;
it holds the miner in his darkness, and nails the countryman to his log-cabin
and his lonely farm through all the months of snow […] It dooms us all to fight out
the battle of life upon the lines of our nurture or our early choice, and to make the
best of a pursuit that disagrees, because there is no other for which we are fitted,
and it is too late to begin again. It keeps different social strata from mixing […] It
is well for the world that in most of us, by the age of thirty, the character has set
like plaster, and will never soften again. (James 1890, 121)
For both Aristotle and James, hexeis/habits result from how an individual agent repeatedly
conducts certain forms of behavior in a social context. Hexeis/habits form
connection to a specific person or group—repeatedly reward the agents who perform these
actions. Once habitual behavior is developed, the context, rather than the goal itself, triggers
the respective behavior (Wood & Neal 2007). This may not involve the agent’s intention to attain
their goals in the exact same way prior to performing the action (Neal et al. 2012). Lastly,
because habitual behavior is contextually triggered, inhibiting such behavior must involve
an active decision by an agent (Quinn et al. 2009). Changing contextual cues by changing the
material setting the behavior takes place in, for instance, is a major factor regarding whether
a habit can be broken or not (Verplanken & Wood 2006). As a consequence, habitual behavior
can persist when agents remain in the context in which the behavior is triggered, despite
the fact that this might directly conflict with the agents’ current motives (Neal et al. 2011).
However, the persistence of habitual behavior is not necessarily a bad thing, depending on
the way in which the outcome of the respective behavior is assessed. Eating habits that, for
instance, lead to a more consistent or healthier nutrition can be considered positive or good
habits for agents who engage in that behavior, whereas a habituated intake of high-calorie,
sugary drinks instead of water may yield negative consequences and can thus be considered
a bad habit (Wood & Neal 2016).
14 In behavioral psychology, the process he refers to is known as habituation. Habituation refers
to a process in which a repeated application of a stimulus results in a decreased response by
the agents subjected to that stimulus. Withholding the stimulus leads to an increase in response.
The intensity of stimuli affects the rate of decrease or increase in the agent’s response
(Thompson 2009).
154 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
over time in accordance with the norms and rules of this social context. In this way,
hexeis stabilize the practical interrelations between a person and their larger form of
societal constellation.15
Sartre’s Hexis as Action Disposition
The instances in which Sartre refers to hexis, and how he utilizes the concept, suggest
it to be a combination of aspects from Aristotelian philosophy, James’ habit formation,
habitual behavior, and processes of habituation. With this combination,
Sartrean hexis is closely connected to his conception of the practico-inert (see section
3.4), or, more precisely, to his thoughts surrounding the inertia of material entities
(see section 2.3). However, as regards hexis, the inertia in which certain forms of
conduct are imprinted is not provided by the materiality of artificial objects but by
the human body as a material entity itself. The practico-inert in peoples’ hexis refers
to the fact that this hexis expresses the mode of their production, i.e. the repeated
structured interrelations in certain forms of societal organization. The material inertia
of hexeis affects the persistence of practical ensembles, as the structure of these
ensembles is automatically perpetuated by internalized practical relations between
human beings, instrumental means, and scarce environments. As is the case with
many of his philosophical concepts, Sartre develops his outlook on the concept of
hexis throughout his early and later works.
In Being and Nothingness, Sartre briefly speaks about hexis in the context of his
description of the human psyche. He mentions that the Ego’s qualities (French qualité)
“represent the set of virtualities, latencies, and potentialities that constitute our
character and our habits (in the Greek sense of ἕξις).”16 Among these qualities, Sartre
mentions “to be quick-tempered, hardworking, jealous, ambitious, sensuous, etc.”
(Sartre 2021, 232). He also mentions qualities that originate from a human being’s
history, which he refers to as habitudes—French for habits—in Being and Nothingness:
I may be aged, weary, embittered, diminished, or making progress; I may appear to myself
as ‘having grown in confidence since my success’ or, on the contrary, as ‘gradually
developed the tastes, habits [French habitudes], and sexuality of a patient’
(after long illness). (Sartre 2021, 232, emphasis in original; Sartre 1943, 197)
With the French term habitude, he thus refers to both acquired qualities and to that
which is constituted by the interplay of these qualities—which Sartre calls hexis in
the Aristotelian sense. However, it is difficult to make a clear distinction between
15 For a more detailed juxtaposition of Sartre’s conception of hexis with that of Aristotle and
William James, see Siegler (2022a).
16 The original quotation reads as followed : “l’ensemble des virtualités, latences, puissances
qui constituent notre caractère et nos habitudes (au sens grec de ἕξις)” (Sartre 1943, 197).
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 155
Sartre’s understanding of acquired properties as habits and hexeis. This is because
these properties, in contrast to states of the Ego, do not exist in actu, i.e. in human
existence as a praxis-process through actions. Rather, they exist in potentia, as possibilities
of being and as innate mental dispositions (French disposition d’esprit innée)
which qualify a person (Sartre 1943, 197; Sartre 2021, 233).
Hexeis can thus not be explicitly experienced, but are implicitly revealed in the
way they condition actions. Against the background of Sartre’s primacy of human
action, and on account of his recourse to the Greek term hexis (ἕξις), the interaction
of certain properties of the Ego can thus be understood as hexeis in the sense of the
Aristotelian action disposition. For Sartre, a hexis represents an interiorized disposition
according to which agents, by virtue of their corporeality, psychic constitution,
and historicity, are inclined to perform their totalizing actions in a certain way. This
means that they satisfy their requirements, wants, and wishes according to established
strategies acquired from their age, experiences, and pathologies.
In Critique, Sartre illustrates his conception of hexis with the relation between
specialized laborers and instruments. He refers to this relation as a “technical bond
[French lien technique]” that involves both the instrument, as a practico-inert object
in which meaning has been imprinted (see section 3.4), and the “becoming-instrument
of the specialised agent [French devenir-instrument de l’agent spécialisé]” (Sartre
1978, 455; Sartre 1960, 467). Sartre explicitly mentions training and professional instruction
as forms of learning through which the instrument eventually “exists as
an [hexis] in the practical organism” (Sartre 1978, 455) of the specialized agent. This
form of imprinting in the very corporeality of agents who interrelate with the instrument
regularly is fundamental for instrument-agent interconnection. According
to Sartre, the “[hexis] of the specialist must correspond to the signifying interconnections
of the parts of a machine (or tool), as an inter-connection of assemblies”
(Sartre 1978, 455). In this regard, the hexis of specialized agents forms through practice,
training, and familiarization. It thus enables these agents to form assemblies
with instruments to perform actions as a unit. The fact that this hexis is supposed to
exist in the practical organism implies both a form of disposition these agents hold
(in the sense of Aristotelian hexis), as well as a habitually internalized way of handling
instruments as a human-machine hybrid (Weber 2020). However, what Sartre
exactly means with hexis can be scrutinized by juxtaposing it with praxis. According
to Sartre,
praxis is the temporalisation of [hexis] in a situation which is always individual […]
action defines itself here as the simultaneous transcendence of assemblies by the
tool [French des montages par l’outil, de l’outil par les montages, et de l’ensemble par un
processus orienté que des possibilités futures ont suscité du fond de l’avenir], of the tool by
assemblies, and of the whole by a directed process which future possibilities have
occasioned in the distant future. There can be no [hexis], no habit without practical
156 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
vigilance […] without a project to actualise them by specifying them. Thus [hexis],
as an enriching limitation of the common individual, manifests itself concretely
only in and through a free practical temporalisation. (Sartre 1978, 455–456, emphasis
in original; Sartre 1960, 467–468)
Sartre seems to use hexis and habit synonymously and describes them as something
that, although passively present in the corporeality of agents, capacitates
these agents to perform actions in certain ways—as inter-connected in assemblies,
for instance—while allowing them to maintain their ontological freedom to act
for themselves. Consequently, Sartrean hexis must be understood as a structured
and structuring disposition that guides the agents’ actions, rather than as a mere
pattern of habitual behavior that triggers in specific contexts. Although “[r]outine
opposes initiative” (Sartre 1978, 456) through hexis, this does not pose a problem
initially for the agents. Their hexis simply capacitates them to form assemblies
with the signifying parts of instruments to perform actions as an interconnected
or coupled unity. Sartre implies a dialectic between two things: an agent’s hexis,
understood as a vigilant capacitating disposition that lays dormant until it realizes
a goal-directed action with certain instrumental means; and the practical inertia
of those instrumental means that also lays dormant until realized in the course
of totalizing action. He frames this dialectic as an instantiation of the interplay
between active passivity, in the form of the agent’s action disposition, and passive
activity, in the form of the material disposition of the practico-inert (see section
3.4) through contextually structured action situated in practical ensembles (Sartre
1978, 449, 603). His example is a pilot steering an airplane. He mentions that, at
least in itself, the power of the airplane (as a practico-inert material disposition) is
not that of the pilot. However, the specialized praxis of the pilot, in connection with
the pilot’s hexis, capacitates them to practically realize the power of the airplane by
coupling with it. In this way, the airplane’s power becomes the pilot’s power on the
basis of the position the coupled assembly adopts in the larger structural context
of a practical ensemble like an airport, in which this assembly would be situated
(Sartre 1978, 454).
In their everyday lives, human beings form coupled assemblies with the implement-
things of which their practical field of equipmentality and possibility consists.
People sit on couches, drive cars, cook on their stoves, and swipe on their smartphones.
Their hexis enables these human beings to adapt to and routinize the very activities
through which they efficiently, effectively, and repeatedly satisfy their needs
and desires. A hexis thus represents a way in which individuals “maintain […] the
practical reality of [their] body as that of an instrument for directing instruments”
(Sartre 1991, 261); or, in another sense, hexis is a way for individuals to maintain and
possibly adapt their status as the center of a field of equipmentality within their re4.
Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 157
spective practical ensemble (see section 3.2).17 From Sartre’s statements, it is not exactly
clear whether hexis only applies to bodily actions or whether it encompasses
all forms of practical interrelations. However, Sartre’s insistence on the fundamental
materiality and equipmentality of human existence allows one to suggest that
Sartre’s hexis develops through all forms of practical human-world relations.
If this is the case, what Sartre refers to as the attitude certain groups have in virtue
of their class-being (see section 4.3) represents the whole of internalized practical
interrelations, as action dispositions, that have been structured through the historical
situation of the respective class. Through this class-hexis people are disposed
to act according to their class-structures. Section 4.3 mentioned that these classstructures
are the result of how a person’s strictly limited practical field, i.e. their
practical means of subsistence, are assigned to them by means of their situation in
practical ensembles. Individuals continuously act as structured by a hexis resulting
from how they realized themselves through their historically limited and practical
equipmental field of possibility in the past. Their hexis thus furthers the cut between
their concrete individual subjectivity and the concrete subjectivities and objectivities
of their surrounding elements, based on the properties of their material milieu
(see section 2.4).
Consequently, human beings are adapted to their socioculturally structured material
milieu through their hexeis in a fundamental way. A hexis, as active passivity,
results from their acquired modes of satisfying their needs and desires with their
passively active equipment at hand. This materially incarnated interplay between active
passivity and passive activity scaffolds a materially inert path for their existence
through which they not only agentially distinguish themselves from other people
within their practical ensemble, but also from other people outside their ensembles.
By enacting their concrete subjectivity, they also enact the structures of their practical
ensemble, because these structures enable their concrete agential enactment
in the first place. With these implications and their shared roots in Mauss’ thoughts
on body techniques and habitudes, Sartre’s hexis comes close to Bourdieu’s concept
of habitus.
Despite similarities between Sartre’s understanding of hexis and Bourdieu’s conception
of habitus (Latin for hexis, see above), however, Bourdieu himself seems to
overlook Sartre’s thoughts on the formation of habitual behavior. In Outline of a Theory
of Practice, Bourdieu criticizes Sartre’s apparent neglect of long-lasting action dispositions
(Bourdieu 1977, 73–76), while using the term hexis himself in the sense of
17 The fact that hexeis, as action dispositions, form over time and depend on a specific, historically
dependent practical field of equipmentality and possibility, puts them thematically
close to the formation of operational sequences of action in the sense of Leroi-Gourhan’s chaînes
opératoires. See Leroi-Gourhan (1988) and Schlanger (2020).
158 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
body hexis. A body hexis is a “pattern of postures that is both individual and systematic,
because linked to a whole system of techniques involving the body and tools,
and charged with a host of social meanings and values” (Bourdieu 1977, 87). In contrast,
Bourdieu defines habitus as a system of “durable, transposable dispositions […]
objectively adapted to their goals without presupposing a conscious aiming at ends
[…] collectively orchestrated without being the product of the orchestrating action
of a conductor” (Bourdieu 1977, 72). Bourdieu makes a more nuanced distinction between
the way agents are disposed to perform bodily actions and the way they situate
themselves in larger social constellations through their actions. He states:
The habitus is both the generative principle of objectively classifiable judgements
and the system of classification (principium divisionis) of these practices. It is in the
relationship between the two capacities which define the habitus, the capacity to
produce classifiable practices and works, and the capacity to differentiate and appreciate
these practices and products (taste), that the represented social world,
i.e., the space of life-styles, is constituted. (Bourdieu 1996, 170, emphasis in original)
Whereas the sociologist Bourdieu is more aware of the social principles, structures,
and classifications implied by a person’s habitus, the philosopher Sartre seems to
conceptualize a person’s hexis as a mediating moment between their practically totalizing
existence and the consummation of their mode of societal organization.
These express the fundamental attitude (French attitude fondamentale) of a person’s
class-being (Sartre 1978, 232; Sartre 1960, 289).
Transforming Needs into Desires and Perpetuating Practical Ensembles
Although the initial relation between praxis and hexis, between initiation and routinization,
might not pose a problem for individuals, the case is different when conceived
in the context of practical ensembles. The development of a hexis is not limited
to specialized agents but rather applies to all human beings that act regularly to satisfy
their needs and desires in differently structured practical ensembles. The process
through which hexeis form is accompanied by the transformation of abstract
needs as besoins into concrete desires as désirs. Through repeated interaction with
certain instrumental means, and repeated re-interiorization of the effects of the
performed courses of action, agents form bodily and practically inert action dispositions.
These correspond to the very means that enable them to attain their ends.
Thus, these agents are both predisposed to act in a specific way and also project toward
those strategies and courses of action that have allowed them to be successful
in their endeavors.
In this way, practical ensembles can establish a certain state of equilibrium in
terms of how the needs, desires, and demands of their elements are covered. This
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 159
can happen through political control and regulation, social stratification and unification,
technological development, and efficient use of means to ends, among other
manners, in a given mode of production or form of organization. The condition under
which this equilibrium may be preserved is the practical inertia of artificial objects
and the hexis, “both as a physiological and social determination of human organisms
and as a practical project of keeping institutions and physical corporate development
at the same level” (Sartre 1978, 126).
Consequently, hexis itself has practico-inert qualities, in that it manifests the
agential counterpart of certain forms of conduct. These forms express a certain
mode of how individuals incarnate their actions in their corporeality (Sartre 1978,
618). In the larger context of practical ensembles and their role in the struggle
against scarcity, hexeis can be understood as the immaterial culture, or, more
precisely, the immaterial side of strategies employed by individuals and constellations
to tackle needs and desires arising as a result of their specific socioculturally
structured relation to a scarce material environment (see section 4.2)
Hexeis thus play an essential role in the persistence of practical ensembles. By
forming stable, practical relations through their position in practical ensembles, individuals
can attain their ends. Given that these relations prove to be successful,
individuals tend to repeat such actions. In practical ensembles with a serial structure,
individuals may even be coerced to attain their ends in very specific and limited
ways. This, according to Sartre, leads to an internal adaptation in the form of
hexis through which historically situated individuals perpetuate those actions that
already reinforce the structures of practical ensembles (see section 4.3). In Critique II,
Sartre even refers to hexis as an “eternal return [French éternel retour] […] the permanent
unity of the organism inasmuch as it is living; it is life itself, creating for itself
its determinations of inertia. But this hexis […] rejects the dispersion of exteriority”
(Sartre 1991, 345, emphasis in original; Sartre 1985, 355).
Hexeis not only further stabilize the internal structure of practical ensembles;
they also establish norms for the way practical ensembles are supposed to be
structured. These structures can be passed on to later generations by maintenance
through practico-inert objects and routinized actions based on individuals’ hexeis.
However, for these later generations, the structures of their practical ensemble
are not intelligible as the result of the totalizing formation and transformation
processes at first. Rather, for these individuals, the inherited practical ensembles
present themselves as totalities, as fixed structures that dispose how needs and desires
are to be taken care of. According to Sartre, this “ideologically corresponds to
a decision about human ‘nature’” (Sartre 1978, 126). Later generations may perceive
the structures of their practical ensemble—such as their form of government, the
modalities of their labor processes, or the unequal treatment of men and women,
for instance—as if these structures were something that is somehow irrefutably
given by default. In this way, hexeis make various forms of distinction, injustice,
160 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
and unfairness within a society appear to be historically legitimized. Of course,
this perception is reinforced by the fact that the current way in which practical
ensembles are structured indeed provides individuals with efficient and effective
ways to attain their ends.
This perception may also lead to a perpetuation of conditions under which individuals
perform actions that do not necessarily allow them to do so. Individuals
may even perpetuate certain exigencies instead of dissolving them without realizing
it. Because individuals continuously face conditions of hardship, such as chronic
hunger, for instance, these conditions can become interiorized and structured. As a
consequence, need no longer represents “the violent negation which leads to praxis:
it has passed into physical generality as [hexis], as an inert, generalised lacuna to
which the whole organism tries to adapt by degrading itself, by idling so as to curtail
its exigencies” (Sartre 1978, 95, emphasis in original). The hexeis of historically
situated individuals systematically reproduce the negative side effects of the success
factors of practical ensembles, such as exploitative labor conditions and social
inequality. These negative side effects thus represent complex persistent problems that
are difficult to both grasp and manage, because they result directly from the way
that the systematic provision of goods and services in these ensembles—by which
individuals sustain themselves—is organized and practically realized (Schuitmaker
2012). Because such persistent problems result from the functioning of practical ensembles
themselves, tackling them is possible only by transforming how these ensembles
are structured (see section 4.4).
Through their hexeis, however, individuals adapt to these persistent problems.
Rather than questioning how the machinations of their practical ensemble produce
and reproduce specific modes of inequality and poverty, they accept that their historically
fabricated suffering is, despite its concretized form in practical ensembles,
an abstract given of the human condition. In this regard, Sartre’s hexis has conceptual
similarities to processes of habituation. He states that “[a]n integral praxis,
suffered (interiorization) and repeated (exteriorization) by thousands or millions of
agents […] becomes at once the being (serial impotence, relapse into hexis, fate as a
suffered future) and the act” (Sartre 1991, 282, emphasis in original).18
Contrary to James’ rather optimistic understanding of habit as the fly-wheel of
society, Sartre’s conception of hexis represents much more of a feedback loop of history.
Their relative success in attaining some ends in some ways, despite other exi-
18 There might also be a line of thought connecting Sartre’s view on hexis with that of Maine de
Biran and Ravaisson. In Being and Nothingness, Sartre quotes Maine de Biran’s 1803 Influence
de l’habitude sur la faculté de penser in discussing the sensation d’effort, i.e. the sensations of
one’s own action. In De l’habitude, Ravaisson mentions that he was influenced by the double
law of habit that Maine de Biran introduced in Influence (Ravaisson 2008). The double law
of habit connects processes of habit formation with habituation processes (Grosz 2013).
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 161
gencies, causes individuals to repeat these actions and thus reinforce the structures
of practical ensembles (see section 4.3). This repetition entails the development of
hexeis through which individuals adapt to their means of subsistence, to the strategies
to employ these means, and to the other exigencies they suffer from. As a result,
the practical ensembles they are situated in stabilize because individuals become
desensitized to those exigencies. After all, identifying them might cause them
to transform their ensembles, and individuals create even stronger associations between
some of their ends and the available means and strategies provided by their
ensemble.
Under the aspect of hexis, practical ensembles can be understood as autopoietic
systems that organize the reproduction of their elements so as to maintain themselves
through their elements (Ally 2017, 168–173). Ally shows that Sartre himself advocates
such an autopoietic understanding with regard to human beings as biological
organisms (Ally 2017, 444) (see section 2.4). However, as regards practical ensembles,
it can be assumed that Sartre himself would ultimately refrain from tracing
their autopoietic aspects back to a supposed organismal nature. Sartre’s whole argument
consists in showing that practical ensembles result from the praxis of their
human elements and eventually act back on them, through material inertia, both in
objects and the human body. Practical ensembles must thus be understood as cultural
techniques that dynamically develop on certain paths and adapt to enable the
provision of goods and services based on human praxis. Eventually, this generates
an inner logic that overwhelms the individuals who employed those techniques, so
that they become perpetuators and not initiators of practical relations.
However, even though these individuals are supposedly trapped in potentially
adverse circumstances through hexis, they must still be understood as ontologically
free. Although their hexis might “scarcely resemble a praxis […] in fact, it is a praxis:
habit is directed and organised, the end posited, the means chosen” (Sartre 1978,
325, emphasis in original). Without hexis every human action would be a creative
and revolutionary endeavor, but it would not be a praxis, as it would ultimately lack
the underlying structures qualifying it as a transcending negation of the given and
as a totalization toward the future. Although individuals might be locked into their
position in practical ensembles, they still can recognize that the structures of their
practical ensembles do not provide for some of their needs and desires (see section
4.4). In this regard, the structures of their hexeis may even capacitate them to effectively
change their situation.
Obscuring Existential Liberation and Necessitation
Even though hexis is an overlooked concept, neglected by Sartre and his scholars
alike, the significance of hexis for understanding the larger implications of Sartre’s
162 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
later philosophy must not be underestimated. To make this clearer, a larger argument
is formulated.
In Chapter 1, it was mentioned that Sartre’s early and later works attempt to
cover two aspects of human existence that seemingly exclude each other, but that
overlap, inform, and mediate each other. These aspects were referred to as the internal
and external dialectics of human existence. From a perspective on the internal
dialectic of human existence, human beings may perceive themselves as ontologically
free agents who choose how they realize themselves and thus give rise to structures
of practical necessity. Practical constraints represent merely hypothetical constraints
for these individuals, and the responsibility for their lives is theirs alone.
This experience corresponds to the thematic focus of Being and Nothingness. The internal
dialectic of human existence is involved in a constant process of mediation
with the external dialectic.
From a perspective on the external dialectic of human existence, human beings
must be understood as situated in practical ensembles that scaffold and partially
necessitate how these human beings can realize themselves. Although ontologically
free, practical freedom is delimited and potentially constrained in ways such that
it may result in categorical coercions. This experience corresponds to the thematic
foci of Search for a Method and Critique of Dialectical Reason. For Sartre, both levels of
lived experience—therefore, both planes of existential reality—represent the larger
existential tension in which human existence, as a lived contradiction (see section
1.4), is situated, and to which it further contributes through the situated mediation
of action and experience.
Against this background, the existential tension, as an oscillation between processes
of liberation and necessitation, is itself obscured by structures of hexis—by
the fact that human beings familiarize, routinize, and naturalize what is and what
works for them in some way or another so that it becomes something that should be
the way it is. In the spirit of Sartre’s force des choses, this process of how an is becomes
an ought through familiarization and naturalization is not that problematic on its
own. It allows consistency in terms of problem-solving in combination with more
efficient usage of cognitive capacities, such as deliberation and reflection. Furthermore,
it allows adaptation and an eventual increase in effectiveness, both in terms
of utilized means and the way these means are put to use, among other things. Not
only individuals but also societal constellations may benefit from these forms of relief
and optimization, especially because hexis allows for the stability of these constellations,
consistency in means-ends relations, and reproducibility of results.
However, it is precisely in combination with time that these larger constellations
manifest effects that may stabilize practical ensembles beyond a point where
they may easily be changed. The relatively simple practical relations, comprising the
processes through which the complex structures of practical ensembles are actually
formed and transformed, generate their own normativity over time through repe4.
Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 163
tition and internalization. The result is that the formation and, therefore, the principal
contingency of these structures is obscured. Ultimately, this obscures the underlying
oscillation of liberation and necessitation that human existence consists of.
This is the very core of Sartre’s point in his interview with New Left Review, where he
mentions that his view on the power of circumstances was obscured by his earlier
emphasis on the internalities of human existence without his coordinating—in the
sense of mediating—them with the externalities of historical situations (see section
1.3). Neglecting the fact that human beings, although ontologically free, create the
very patterns that lock them in their daily lifeworlds until these patterns become
humanized themselves, ultimately overestimates the interior self-relation while it
plays down the power of exterior circumstances.
In this regard, the true power of Sartre’s theory of practical ensembles lies in
its de- and reconstructive potential and its focus on the underlying dialectic of human
existence. Understanding a constellation of human and non-human elements
as a practical ensemble is to approach its constitutive factors, i.e. the role of human
agency in the formation and transformation of this ensemble, the exigencies of its
elements, and their possibilities and constraints. It allows one to deconstruct totalities
and reconstruct the synthetic processes through which those totalities came
to be. Furthermore, this approach illustrates how the inertia of these ensembles increases
over time and is preserved, both in the inert materiality of things and in the
human body. Lastly, Sartre’s theory shows that the changing inert structures and
routines that consolidate practical ensembles must involve some form of material
intervention. Because human actions “become Being […] they cannot be dissolved into
knowledge even if they are deciphered and known. Only matter itself, beating on
matter, can break them up” (Sartre 1978, 178, emphasis in original).
4.6 Crisis and Disruption
In this section, the last aspects of practical ensembles are discussed, namely their
crisis and potential disruption through what Sartre calls counter-finalities. In addition
to hexis, counter-finality is another concept of Sartre’s later philosophy that is
somewhat underrepresented in Sartre studies. It observes that the overall form of
organization of practical ensembles does not just affect the elements comprising
these ensembles. The overall totalizing processing of practical ensembles might also
generate external effects through which these ensembles act back on themselves in
what can be called an action at a distance.
A counter-finality occurs when external effects threaten the finality of practical
ensembles and their very mode of structural organization. The effects generated by
practical ensembles act back on the ensembles by proxy of another sector of ma164
The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
teriality. Whether this other material sector can itself be understood as a practical
ensemble depends on its mode and form of constitution.
Counter-Finality and Crisis
Sartre illustrates his understanding of counter-finalities with the historical situation
of Chinese farmers. As a practical ensemble, the farmers are organized around
an agricultural mode of production. This mode of production means that they deforest
the landscape they inhabit to prepare the soil for future agrarian use. In so doing,
the farmers eventually eliminate natural boundaries that would otherwise prevent
flooding. With these boundaries removed, the farmland is flooded. Eventually, the
farmers and their whole form of organization are in a critical situation.
Sartre derives three conditions for the formation of counter-finalities: the given
fact of a disposition of matter, the becoming-inert of human praxis, and the serial
ubiquity regarding this praxis (Turner 2014, 40). Based on these conditions, the formation
of counter-finalities can be reconstructed. The first and most obvious condition
is that the possibility of a counter-finality “should be adumbrated by a kind of
disposition of matter” (Sartre 1978, 162–163, emphasis in original). According to this
first condition, the material sector from which counter-final effects arise must be
disposed in such a way as to enable and facilitate these effects in the first place. In the
case of the Chinese farmers, this first condition is given by the geological and hydrographic
structure of the landscape they sustain themselves with. However, Sartre’s
use of the term disposition also implies that some forms of actualization through action
are required.
This leads to the second condition, according to which “human praxis has to become
a fatality and to be absorbed by inertia, taking both the strictness of physical
causation and the obstinate precision of human labour” (Sartre 1978, 163, emphasis
in original). Here, Sartre refers to instances in which the overall structure of practical
ensembles necessitates individuals to attain their ends in prefabricated and limited
ways (see sections 4.3 and 4.5). In Sartre’s example, this condition is given by the
farmer’s mode of production and how the tools they use necessitate these farmers
to cut down trees to prepare the soil for agriculture. He states that “[i]n the most
adequate and satisfactory tool, there is a hidden violence which is the reverse of its
docility. Its inertia always allows it to ‘serve some other purpose’, or rather, it already
serves some other purpose; and that is how it creates a new system” (Sartre 1978, 183,
emphasis in original). This means that on a relatively small scale over long periods
of time, these farmers’ activities may not pose a problem for the farmers themselves
nor for the landscape they deforest. This might be because the farmers deforest sustainably,
or the ecosystem can counteract deforestation by adapting over time. However,
through their mode of production that is manifested in these farmers’ tools and
practices, they fulfill one condition for counter-finalities to arise.
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 165
The bare fact that historically situated individuals must attain their ends by
modifying surrounding materiality that is disposed to give rise to counter-finalities
is not enough. According to Sartre, this specific form of activity “must be carried
on elsewhere” (Sartre 1978, 163, emphasis in original). This is the third and final
condition. It refers to the fact that many activities, whose effects and side effects
could be dealt with on a smaller scale, accumulate through “serial ubiquity” (Turner
2014, 41). In Sartre’s example, this last condition is given by the fact that not only
single farmers but a larger collective recognizes the strategy of cutting trees for soil
to be initially beneficial for satisfying their specific desires. They begin to repeat this
strategy and thus cultivate a certain hexis that both stabilizes the inner workings of
their practical ensemble and enables it to persist through these repeated actions.
In so doing, these farmers eventually rid their land of any natural boundaries that
might prevent the flooding of their fields.
When flooding occurs through the geological and hydrographic structure—the
material disposition—of the landscape, this flooding represents a counter-finality
for these farmers. The very strategies they intentionally employed to respond to their
needs and desires—in the sense of finalities—caused effects that eventually counteracted
these strategies. Consequently, the practical ensemble these farmers constitute,
together with their landscape based on a specific mode of production, is put
into a state of exigency that necessitates action to be transformed—or else the ensemble
itself might disintegrate.
This ensemble-wide state of exigency can be called a crisis. Koselleck et al. (1982)
reconstruct the Greek origins of this concept and highlight both its revelatory and
compulsive aspects. In its wider connotation, a crisis was a separating, distinguishing,
or deciding between things. Accordingly, a crisis represents a crucial moment in
the course of processes, such as the operations of systems, the course of surgeries
and diseases, and the totalization of practical ensembles. At this moment, certain
elements and structures are revealed to be substantial or critical for those processes.
Furthermore, crisis illustrates the potential necessity for intervention so as to avoid
disruption and/or collapse.
In Sartre’s example, the farmland represents the central structure of equipment
around which the practical ensemble of the farmers is organized. As such, it represents
these farmers’ interest (see section 4.3). In the critical moment of flooding,
the farmland itself is revealed as a vulnerability of the practical ensemble. In infrastructure
research, the concept of vulnerability is used to determine potential flaws or
weaknesses of systems (Eifert et al. 2018, 21). Egan (2007) links critical moments of
systems to their vulnerabilities or weak spots (J.I. Engels 2018b, 45–46). In Sartre’s
example, the farmland can be understood as the critical agricultural infrastructure
around which an ensemble’s overall form of organization is built. The structural integrity
of the farmland is thus associated with the structural integrity of the very
form of organization that enables these farmers to satisfy their needs and desires. A
166 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
threat to the farmland represents a threat to the ensemble and, concomitantly, to the
existence of the farmers situated in this ensemble. Through flooding as a counterfinality,
the very practices the farmer’s ensemble consists of are in danger. This gives
rise to concrete needs and exigencies for transforming how their practical ensemble
is structured. That, or the ensemble collapses. This is further discussed in section 5.4
with regard to the critical significance of urban mobility infrastructures for the flow
of traffic.
Objective Contradictions
How Sartre describes counter-finalities along with the three conditions he mentions
almost suggests a somewhat environmentalist warning about the larger effects
of humanity’s intervention in their physicochemical surroundings (Ally 2017, 419).
Similar processes to Sartre’s counter-finalities can indeed be found in the negative
consequences resulting from the rectification of rivers (Blackbourn 2006, 104–119;
Bernhard 2016, 506–507)19 or from anthropogenic climate change attributable to
high CO2 emissions, among other factors (see section 5.2). Sartre even mentions
that the air pollution produced during the Industrial Revolution might represent a
potential counter-finality for employers, as they are not able to avoid breathing such
polluted air and thus suffer from how their actions act back on them through a larger
material complex (Sartre 1978, 194). Sartre claims that the existence of counter-finalities
makes it possible to identify what he refers to as objective contradictions in the
interrelations between differently structured ensembles.
As mentioned in section 4.4, Sartre’s practical ensemble framework allows one
to both understand practical constellations in two ways. Such constellations can be
understood regarding the overall function as a result of the interrelations of their
elements or regarding these interrelations themselves. In the latter case, these elements,
as partial totalities, promote this overall processing through their practical
relations. These interrelations can be further scrutinized regarding their various
modes of structuring. According to Sartre, the interrelations of practical constellations,
such as political parties, the working class, or even individuals at a bus stop,
are characterized by the needs and desires of the human elements these ensembles
consist of. Such interrelations between constellations can thus be understood in two
ways. One way is to focus on the individual elements or partial totalities and their
interrelations. Doing so might reveal these interrelations to be clashes of interest
between human beings. These clashes represent contradictions that demand solutions.
The atomized people at a bus stop, for instance, all initially compete with each
other for a seat on the bus. Focusing on these human elements may reveal that their
needs and desires initially conflict with and contradict each other. The same can be
19 Much appreciation to Nadja Thiessen for these insights.
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 167
said for a political debate between two parties, considered as more structured constellations.
Another way to understand these conflicts and contradictions is to conceive
them as structural moments of a larger totalization. In the case of the bus stop (see
section 4.3), the needs and desires of all human elements can be satisfied when
everyone gets a seat on the bus. Because of the larger totalizing process at the bus
stop, the initial contradictions between individuals appear not to be contradictions
at all, as they are sublated through the service provision of the bus. In the case of
a political debate between parties, no resolution may be found. However, in the
long run, the debate might be revealed to initiate a transformation in the debating
culture of the larger political complex. As such, the debate represents a structural
moment in the overall totalization of the political complex as a practical ensemble.
This understanding of how the interrelations between elements mediate each
other at different levels, and how they can be understood either as interrelations
themselves or as structural moments in larger processes, is one of the biggest
advantages of Sartre’s practical ensemble framework. All of these contradictions
have a materially objective foundation in the corporeality of each individual as a
praxis-process (see section 2.4), and in the sociocultural and material conditions,
they are situated in. But the contradictions still result from a clash of two interests
that initially cannot be reconciled.
With the idea of counter-finalities, Sartre introduces the possibility of contradictions
between human elements or constellations and inert matter. Such contradictions
are not the result of two conflicting parties, because worked matter “produces
a necessity for change of itself ” (Sartre 1978, 183, emphasis in original). Sartre
states that
at the level of technical ensembles of the activity/inertia type, contradiction is the
counter-finality which develops within an ensemble, insofar as it opposes the process
which produces it and insofar as it is experienced as negated exigency and as
the negation of an exigency by the totalised ensemble of practico-inert Beings in
the field. (Sartre 1978, 193, emphasis in original)
Again, whether such contradictions are predominantly understood and analyzed
as contradictions between elements or as structural moments of a larger totalizing
process, different conclusions can be drawn about the historicity of these processes
and the exact intricacies of finalities and counter-finalities. A counter-finality can,
for instance, be understood as benefiting some while disadvantaging others. Sartre
mentions that the over-industrialization of a country, for instance, might represent
a counter-finality for rural classes, as these classes “become proletarianised to precisely
the extent that is is [sic] a finality for the richest landowners because it enables
them to increase their own productivity” (Sartre 1978, 193). However, in the larger
totalizing process of the nation-state, understood as a practical ensemble, over-in168
The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
dustrialization might itself become a counter-finality “as the country is now further
away from its new rural bases” (Sartre 1978, 193).
With this conception, Sartre somewhat weakens the strict focus on materiality in
relation to counter-finalities. In the rest of Critique, he uses the concept of counterfinality
rather liberally to refer to instances in which the finalities and effects of one
practical ensemble negatively affect another practical ensemble or material sector,
and then eventually itself. This is because of his processual understanding of practical
ensembles. Although any objective contradictions might result from inert material
processes, they are all fundamentally attributable to human actions.
Totalization-of-Envelopment
The specific way in which Sartre frames the interrelations between practical ensembles
is attributable to his larger conception of history. Section 1.3 mentioned Sartre’s
attempt to understand history according to his regressive-progressive method. His
method essentially represents a de-reconstruction of the formation of historical situations.
Section 1.4 outlined Sartre’s claim that these situations must be understood
as moments in transformative processes that only become dialectically intelligible
as such from the inside, based on human action and experience. Sartre’s theory of
practical ensembles mirrors this understanding.
Any constellation, whether an individual in relation to the world, a family, a city,
or a nation-state, represents both a totalization in and of itself and a partial totality
that interplays with other partial totalities and thus contributes to larger totalizations.
Through the practical ensemble framework, any of these totalizations can
become intelligible based on praxis-processes directed to sublate the lacks and contradictions
of human existence. However, in the course of any of these totalizations,
structural moments can be identified in which objective contradictions necessitate
human actions, without there being an individual subject or larger grouping that
can be held accountable for those contradictions. Of course, individual and supraindividual
responses to these contradictions can themselves be understood as contradictions
or structural moments in larger totalizations. Eventually, after many iterations,
history itself becomes intelligible as what Sartre calls a totalization-of-envelopment
that incarnates the individual and ultimately progresses through itself without
a totalizer (Sartre 1991). Many Sartre scholars, such as Flynn (1997) and Catalano
(2007), have analyzed and criticized this understanding of history; it is not the objective
of this work to provide a satisfying answer to this debate.
Anyway, Sartre’s conception of historical totalizations allows for a nuanced understanding
of the role of the individual in larger processes. Human existence is
indeed situated within historical constellations, which necessitate certain actions
while delimiting other options. Nevertheless, human beings are simultaneously free
from these constellations, as it is their action that ultimately drives their transfor4.
Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 169
mation. Although human beings might not necessarily control their mobiles or motifs,
their actions fundamentally represent an expression of their ontological freedom. In
this regard, every action is a fundamentally free endeavor, even despite the fact that
it represents a re-actualization of the situation within a practical constellation (see
section 2.3). Ultimately, this means that human existence is intrinsically meaningful—
not only in a general way but also on a concrete, individual level. It is precisely
the actions of individuals, despite being inherently situated, prefabricated, and constrained
through inert matter, that constitute meaning and historical momentum,
whether intentional or not. Sartre incorporates both the dynamics of human existence
and action as well as the forces of technology into a single endeavor to which
human beings are subject. This view brings him close to Heidegger’s ideas about the
Seins-Geschick (Heidegger 2000) and to the role of human elements in technospheres,
i.e. complex autonomous systems of human and non-human elements in the Anthropocene
(Haff 2014; Heßler 2019).
One of the advantages of Sartre’s theory of practical ensembles is that it allows
one to understand any constellation between human and non-human elements in
terms of their interrelations. The examples in this chapter exemplify this. In an abstract
way, the general relation between individuals and their concrete material conditions
can be understood as a practical ensemble. Such an understanding discloses
the inherent structures of need, desire, and scarcity of which the ensemble consists.
In a more concrete way, this understanding can reveal the various ways in which
human action is mediated through material things and structures.
4.7 Concluding Remarks
This chapter has shown how Sartre’s thoughts on totalizing action and the relationship
between human existence and technology interconnect in his larger theoretical
conception of practical ensembles. From relatively simple practical interrelations
between human beings and their surrounding materiality, both in the form
of other humans, non-human entities, and even structured patterns of sociocultural
meaning within a scarce milieu, complex processes of formation and reinforcement,
transformation, persistence, crisis, and even disruption may ensue.
With his thoughts on the formation of serially structured ensembles and the cultivation
of hexeis as action dispositions, Sartre captures processes in which forms of
societal organization ossify in matter and, at the same time, produce the necessary
scaffolding for the efficient and effective satisfaction of requirements, wants, and
wishes.
Sartre’s thoughts on the transformation of serially structured ensembles into
communally structured ensembles, and his conception of counter-finalities, outline
both human and material processes. Through them, human beings are liberated
170 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
from and even robbed of the socioculturally organized, structured, and undoubtedly
necessary foundations for satisfying their requirements, wants, and wishes.
All these processes must in turn be considered in a larger dialectical interplay
based on totalizing action, and thus through the perspective of human needs and
desires. On the one hand, humanity’s structured actions and strategies to tackle
their material and immaterial requirements, wants, and wishes drive the combination
of technology and hexeis that enacts the abovementioned system effects. On
the other, human action, both in its active and passive, practico-inert form, stabilizes
and secures the systematic provision of the required, wanted, and wished-for
goods and services in the long run. Human needfulness and the inability to tackle
it in a scarce milieu thus represent the abstract, fundamental basis for all concrete
forms of societal organization. The structured interrelations between human and
non-human elements in practical ensembles are therefore fundamentally shaped by
the needfulness of their human elements. Against Sartre’s conception of the practico-
inert, the structured interrelations in practical ensembles also express the inherent
needfulness of historical human beings. This abstract needfulness is spatiomaterially
concretized in certain processes and strategies. Through them, the requirements,
wants, and wishes of the human elements are satisfied—both in the
technological artifacts used in these processes and strategies, as well as in the hexeis
through which the human elements adapt. Their adaptation is to the technological
artifacts and the processes and strategies and occurs through repeated interaction
and education over time. By highlighting the fundamental human needfulness at
the heart of all sociocultural structures, Sartre’s approach allows one to deconstruct
the structures’ totality and reconstruct their constitutive processes as active totalizations.
These structures are thus disclosed as artifacts themselves, within the oscillation
of human liberation and necessitation, based on the ontological freedom of
human existence. Sartre summarizes this as followed:
[T]he history of man is an adventure of nature, not only because man is a material
organism with material needs, but also because worked matter, as an exteriorisation
of interiority, produces man, who produces or uses this worked matter in so
far as he is forced to re-interiorise the exteriority of his product, in the totalising
movement of the multiplicity which totalises it. The external unification of the inert,
whether by the seal or by law, and the introduction of inertia at the heart of
praxis both result, as we have seen, in producing necessity as a strict determination
at the heart of human relations. And the totalisation which controls me, in so
far as I discover it within my free lived totalisation, only takes the form of necessity
for two fundamental reasons: first, the totalisation which totalises me has to
make use of the mediation of inert products of labour; second, a practical multiplicity
must always confront its own external inertia, that is to say, its character as
a discrete quantity. (Sartre 1978, 71–72, emphasis in original)
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 171
La force des choses, the power of things and circumstances in practical ensembles,
arises from the fact that the abstract structures of human need are socialized and
given shape in concrete, socioculturally mediated structures of desire. This shaping
also occurs in the technological processes and artifacts that manifest the satisfaction
of these desires as potential means to thusly manifested ends. However, la force des
choses arises only because there exists the ontological freedom of human beings as
the abstract condition for the determination of oneself by and for oneself, through
concrete action, in dialectical interrelation with concrete materiality. Needfulness,
both in the abstract structure of human existence and in the concrete structures of
forms of societal organization, expresses the dialectical tension of liberation and the
necessitation of human history.
The perspective on this dialectical understanding of needfulness allows one to
disclose forms of societal organization as entangled simultaneities of mutually mediating
fields of possibility. This understanding considers practical constellations to
be enacted through goal-directed human actions. It also deconstructs every form
of organization and reveals structured interrelations at multiple levels, while emphasizing
that this form of organization can itself be reconstructed through these
interlocking levels of interrelation.
Sections 4.4 and 4.6 mentioned that practical ensembles can be understood either
by their overall totalizing processing or by the interrelations of their elements
at different levels. According to the praxeological, dialectical, and de-reconstructive
nature of Sartre’s approach, human constellations are revealed as graduated interrelations
that structure, inform, and mediate each other. All of these interrelations
have their basis in human action. Owing to its inherent historicity, the practical ensemble
framework presupposes a certain bottom-up modality in terms of how enabling
and constraining processes interlock and may become intelligible through
each other in human constellations. A top-down modality can be identified in terms
of how larger forms of organization represent enabling factors of the structures
those forms consist of. To better grasp this layered modality, a multilevel conception
is used to refer to interrelations at the micro-, meso-, and macro-levels.
The micro-level represents the goal-oriented, totalizing interrelations between
human and non-human elements. Depending on the nature of the constellations
in question, the exact status of these interrelations might differ, but all are understood
to be serially or communally structured so as to enable the satisfaction of human
requirements, wants, and wishes. Furthermore, these interrelations are understood
as mediated by practico-inert objects and structures. Eventually, this reveals
more complex modes of structuring that mediate human actions in different
ways. Depending on the granularity, the meso-level either represents the actual individual
agents or, when considering larger systemic connections, practical ensembles.
When individuals are perceived on the meso-level, the individual significance
of practical interrelations is scrutinized with regard to an individual’s existence as
172 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
a praxis-process. When the practical ensembles are perceived on the meso-level, the
modes of structuring of the practical interrelations that comprise the structures of
the practical ensemble as a totalizing process are scrutinized. On the meso-level,
individuals or ensembles represent partial totalities that totalize and are enveloped
in the totalization of a practical ensemble on the macro-level. Based on this understanding,
structured interrelations between several partial totalities can be identified,
and these further mediate the interrelations on the micro-level and contribute
to the macro-level processing of the constellations in question. Lastly, the macrolevel
represents overall forms of practical ensembles and even history as a practical
ensemble itself. In these ensembles, the interrelations between partial totalities
can be understood as structural moments of an overall totalizing process that again
affects interrelations on the meso- and micro-level.
Based on this deconstruction of practical constellations, the interlocking levels
of totalizing interrelations can be reconstructed in more abstract or concrete ways.
A more abstract form of reconstruction is to outline how these interrelations themselves
mediate each other. A more concrete form of reconstruction is to scrutinize
individual interrelations between human and non-human elements in terms of how
these interrelations mediate human action in various ways. This reconstruction can
take place by focusing on either how instrumental means enable people to realize
their intended ends, or how human-technology relations mediate other planes of
human reality.
In section 4.5, it was shown that Sartre’s practical ensemble framework also illustrates
the significance of practical inertia, both in the form of practico-inert objects
and structures and of human hexeis. The practical inertia of objects and structures
plays a central role in all the processes involved in the totalization of practical
ensembles. Emphasizing the role of material inertia in these processes allows for a
closer, more nuanced assessment of path dependencies, practical constraints, and
spaces of possibility. The same is true for bodily inertia. The analysis has shown that
hexis does not just play a significant role in the persisting of practical constellations.
It also accounts for the fact that human beings naturalize their form of organization
and thus conceive it to be the normative default mode for how their interrelations
are structured per se. Scrutinizing the role of hexis reveals the practical inertia
of human elements and also shows potential ways to transform the supposedly ineluctable
structures of human reality.
Furthermore, the practical ensemble framework allows one to conceive of potential
contradictions and conflicts of interest between the elements of ensembles
as conflicting finalities at different levels of analysis (see section 4.6). The forms of
conflict may or may not represent actual conflicts when seen against the background
of higher-level totalizations. This allows retracing the clashes between elements as
potential drivers or disturbances on the micro-level, which may grow into driving
forces or disruptions for the larger totalizing processing on the macro-level. In going
4. Theory of Practical Ensembles: Structures in Action 173
beyond the internal effects of the totalizing processing of practical constellations,
potential counter-finalities can be identified. These may act back on the constellations’
structure, thus putting them into crisis.
To give this needfulness and the multilevel modality of practical ensembles a
more concrete shape, and to ground the significance of Sartre’s thoughts on practical
ensembles in the contemporary challenges of the human condition, the next
chapter explores how the theory can be applied to urban mobility systems in praxis.

5. Praxis of Practical Ensembles: Bodies in Motion
5.1 Introduction
The principal goal of this chapter is to explore some of the ways that Sartre’s investigation
into the dialectics of action, technology, and society, which culminate in his
view on practical ensembles, can be applied to contemporary challenges of the human
condition. The chapter, therefore, applies Sartre’s thoughts on practical ensembles
to urban mobility to illustrate some of the underlying dynamics and effects of
people’s spatial, technologically mediated, and organized movement through their
built environment.
In this chapter, urban mobility systems are those that enable the movement of
people, goods, and information within, as well as in and out, of urban spaces (Sheller
& Urry 2006; Urry 2007). Urban mobility systems consist of people, artifacts, rules,
regulations, expectations, habits, institutions, structures, infrastructures, and networks
that interplay in various ways to contribute to an overall urban flow. Such systems
can be found in one form or another in all cities and settlements. This ubiquity
is apparent in the way the very fabrics of cities and larger settlements throughout
history reflect the dominant modes used by their inhabitants to move between
places (Newman & Kenworthy 2015).
5.2 Urban Mobility as Practical Ensemble
This section outlines an understanding of urban mobility as a practical ensemble.
In accordance with the findings from the previous chapter, needfulness represents
the entry point for this outline. Human needs and desires, as well as material demands
and requirements, permeate every level of societal constellations. According
to Sartre, it is always through a goal-oriented human agency that structured interrelations
form and prefabricated options for action eventually become realized. Understanding
the foundational role of needs, desires, and action allows one to accentuate
interrelations between human and non-human elements on the micro-level.
It also makes it possible to scrutinize them for the way the interrelations are struc176
The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
tured as well as for how their specific mode of structuring affects how and why not
only people but also goods and information, move through urban spaces the way
they do.
Eventually, this multilevel analysis discloses other structures that equally affect,
inform, and mediate such structured interrelations. In this way, structured interrelations
on the micro-level reveal more modes of structuring at the meso-level. The
interrelations between these modes of structuring can again be scrutinized regarding
the way they mediate interrelations on the macro-level. Another possibility is to
conceive of these meso-level modes of structuring as partial totalities themselves.
The interrelations of these partial totalities represent structural moments in a larger
totalization on the macro-level. The overall totalization represents the form of organization
of urban mobility as a complex process. This process is represented by
the overall flow of elements and thus affects the interrelations of structures and elements
on the meso- and micro-levels.
Structural Moments of Urban Mobility
Following Sartre’s thoughts about practical ensembles, the complex machinations of
urban mobility systems can be understood in a more abstract way, namely as an overall
totalization, reconstructed as an interplay of certain structures enabling the flow
of goods and people to move through urban spaces. Through this perspective, the dynamic
micro-level interrelations of road users at individual road segments must be
understood as being serially structured and not communally so. These structured interrelations
form through isolated practical relations between road users and other
people, things, structures, and rules, or a combination of all of them. Furthermore,
the interrelations mediate the various movements of all road users based on their
motion-relevant requirements. In an optimal case, the controlled and safe movement
of all road users is the outcome of this structuring. For instance, crosswalks
and pedestrian lights make it likely for pedestrians to safely cross streets. Trafficcalming
measures, such as road diets and speed bumps, slow down car traffic to
mitigate accident risk (Lee et al. 2013; Kim et al. 2019). Each of these traffic-governing
systems represents a mode of structuring between elements, and each of these
modes of structuring contributes to the whole form of organization at the road segment.
When two or more road segments meet, like at intersections or highways, other
modes of structuring mediate the interrelations between those coupled segments.
In this regard, the structured interrelations between road segments can be understood
as a practical ensemble that represents a partial totality on the meso-level.
The structuring of these interrelations causes some road users to stop their movements
and yield to others, all to enable an overall flow of traffic between the segments.
Eventually, this interplay affects individual road users at road segments and
5. Praxis of Practical Ensembles: Bodies in Motion 177
enables their movement. The interplay of structured interrelations between human
and non-human elements is thus both an outcome of balancing strategies to tackle
needs and desires, and also a complex yet abstract need itself, which must be taken
care of and concretized so as not to affect this delicate balancing.
The overall macro-level form of organization for urban mobility can thus be understood
as permeated by needs and desires at every level. From the perspective
of human elements, the organizational form reflects people’s requirements, wants,
and wishes to move from one place to another. These may be the abstract need for
movement in general, or concrete desires to move to do something else, such as
reach a destination.
From the perspective of non-human elements, the enabling function and the
services provided by these elements are related to the needs and desires of the human
elements. Traffic lights, speed bumps, and speed controls are in place simply
because the ends of individuals must be attained, and because the various strategies
of how this can be done must be balanced and reconciled so as not to inhibit each
other. Material demands and requirements then arise, because the proper function
and service provision of non-human elements is critical for managing the interrelations
of human elements. Consequently, there emerges a further desire to maintain
and protect these elements from damage.
From the perspective of the ensemble’s macro-level, the overall provision of flow
through interconnected structurings of human and non-human elements eventually
affects individual road segments at the meso-level, and also enables the individual
micro-level movements of road users at those segments.
Mediated Interrelations
Sartre’s practical ensemble framework can be applied by foregrounding specific
forms of human action and examining how these actions are mediated by technology
in the form of practico-inert instrumental means. Again, the goal-directed
actions of human beings, as well as their needs and desires, represent the entry
point of this analysis. Here, Sartre’s philosophy of technology comes into play (see
section 3.2).
The movement of pedestrians, for instance, can be understood as the result of
a serial structuring based on human needs and desires, which concretize abstract
structures of need and thus transforms them into desires by manifesting their potential
satisfaction through instrumental means. These means are the pedestrians’
shoes, the pavement, traffic lights, and other items. The connected employment of
these instrumental means represents an equipmental field that corresponds to the
practical field of possibilities for these pedestrians (see sections 2.3 and 3.2). This
equipmental field thus enables pedestrians to realize their movements by mediating
between their abstract and concrete ends. This movement is governed by institu178
The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
tionalized traffic laws and conventions, which pedestrians either follow consciously
or due to certain hexeis. The path pedestrians use is simultaneously chosen and prefabricated
in accordance with the established ways in which pedestrians can or must
satisfy their needs and desires through the larger material settings and formations
of their urban environment. Depending on the pedestrians’ needs and desires, and
their concomitant ends, their movement through urban environments represents a
self-realization (see section 2.3).
The movements of car drivers also represent outcomes of a serial structuring
enabled by cars and road infrastructures alike, one which is eventually realized by
the goal-directed actions of those drivers. In the case of cars, the role of technology in
the form of practico-inert objects becomes even more apparent for the specific mode
of structuring and the form of mediation. A car not only enables drivers to realize
their ends in specific ways by supporting and accelerating their spatial movements;
depending on whether it is a sports car or a vehicle specifically designed for urban
spaces, a car also mediates and thus shapes the spatial experience of its drivers as
well as their perceptive relation to the road in different ways (Ihde 1990, 74).
It is not just the concrete movements of people and their perceptions of how
they are on the move that are mediated by various things, structures, and modes of
transportation. Their relation to space and time is inherently mediated as well (Ebert
2020). From a perspective toward the dimension of space, the distribution of bus
stations at which people might serially gather is revealed to be mediated by the positions
of other bus stations throughout urban areas. The positions of these bus stations
again depend on the density of the population in certain areas, and on other
factors. The bus stations are connected by bus lanes, and enacted by the totalizing
actions of bus drivers and passengers alike. All these interrelations result from the
overall form of organization of urban mobility while simultaneously contributing
to it (see section 4.3). The concrete sociospatial relations within cities are thus both
constituted by and constitutive of the nature of urban mobility (Jessop et al. 2008).
This applies even more to large, interconnected networks of streetcars and tracks,
which link various points of interest. However, the dimension of space is also inextricably
linked to the dimension of time. Schivelbusch (2018) has demonstrated this
by showing how traveling by railroad mediates the perception of space and time.
Handel (2017) argues that a decrease in travel time between places can cause distant
areas to be perceived as closer, whereas areas that are spatially closer but less connected
may be perceived as further away (Müller 2021).
Focusing on other, more obscured interrelations between human and non-human
elements reveals even more profound modes of structuring. In his article Do Artifacts
Have Politics?, Winner (1980) claims that a focus on simple use contexts of technologies
might obscure the larger, potentially harmful effects those technologies can
generate. Winner states that the low-hanging bridges designed by architect Robert
Moses to allow cars to travel in and out of Long Island exceeded their supposed use
5. Praxis of Practical Ensembles: Bodies in Motion 179
context. Their height had a discouraging effect on buses that had to run on parkways
underneath them. The result was a form of racial segregation in people’s ability to
reach remoter areas. The fact that black people and other marginalized groups had
to rely on buses as an affordable means of transportation, on account of their socioeconomic
situation, meant that they could not reach the areas past the bridges. White
people who could afford cars had fewer problems going past the bridges. Winner’s
conclusions have seen some criticisms. He illustrates, however, the fact that material
properties of technological artifacts, in combination with other factors and an overall
mode of societal organization, can affect the ways people may practically realize
themselves.1
Edwards (2017) shows a similar situation in the racial coding of public transport
in pre- and post-Apartheid South Africa. Although public buses and a railway line
used to bring segregated black laborers into white areas, the unreliability of these
means of transport forced these laborers to walk. Consequently, the experience of
racial inequality is still present in the possible provision of public transportation and
its lack in some areas (Müller 2021). In these examples, the serial structuring of people’s
movements is a direct result of how their historical situation forces them to rely
on limited modes of transportation. In doing so, people enact and reinforce the current
structures. They totalize the structures that enable them to do so because they
posit these structures as their practical field of equipmentality and possibility (see
section 4.3).
Paths of Freedom and Necessity
The examples presented above give instances of predominantly serial modes of
structuring that enable the harmonized interplay of various modes of transportation
in the flow of urban traffic. However, there are examples in which serial,
materially prefabricated, and rigid options of travel disturb people’s preferred way
of movement. For these people, it may be necessary to break out of serial structures
and spontaneously form communal structures.
When pedestrians walk through a park, for instance, the deliberately designed
paths that link points of interest, such as landmarks and entry points, afford to be
used. Signs might even tell pedestrians not to enter certain lawn areas, which further
encourages pedestrians to use the path network.
In a Sartrean sense, this path network can be understood as a practical ensemble
in which a practical field of equipmentality and possibility is predominantly structured
in a serial mode. The ensemble enables pedestrians to stroll or to quickly move
through the park without obstacles. Depending on the needs and desires of these
1 For a more thorough analysis of Winner’s theses and their academic reception, see Joerges
(1999).
180 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
pedestrians, however, this field of equipmentality and possibility can be more or less
restrictive, such as when the path network itself does not directly link two points
of interest in a straight line, or when it prohibits access to certain areas. It is common,
for instance, in almost all areas in which people walk between two places, to
see the formation of desire paths or desire lines (Furman 2012), also sometimes called
sunken lanes or hollow ways. These paths form when people break free from the restrictive
field of equipmentality and possibility given to them through the larger organization
of their practical ensemble, choosing instead to form their field of possibility
in space through their actions across time. Every desire path initially begins
as the attempt to counteract a certain lack of options for action. The term desire path
even refers to the fact that these paths are perceived to satisfy certain requirements,
wants, and wishes that are not satisfied otherwise. The processes that Sartre claims
to be in effect in the formation history of practical ensembles can be used to illustrate
how such desire paths form as alternative options for human action, re-serialize into
roads, and thus generate the need for another transformation. If the processes and
mechanics Sartre develops in the context of his practical ensembles are taken as a basis,
human need and the totalizing actions to tackle it must provide the entry point
for this analysis (see section 4.7).
Everything begins with people’s need for movement. This need is somewhat universal,
given the constitution of the human body and the human condition in general.
People move from one place to another for various reasons. This can be because
their scarce environment does not provide them with what they require. By moving
from one place to another, these people change how their ensemble scaffolds their
options for action. This is the beginning of the formation of a communal ensemble.
Through their actions, these people inscribe themselves both positively and negatively
into the material world. They produce positive outcomes for themselves while
also producing potentially negative effects (Sartre 1978, 162). In the case of walking,
positive outcomes can be, for instance, basic and complex movements through material
friction, as well as the general closing of distances. These positive results are
necessarily accompanied by certain negating effects in that these positive results,
“in so far as they are inscribed in the object, are turned against and into it in the
form of objective, negative exigencies” (Sartre 1978, 159). The act of walking also entails
various material processes in which humans and instrumental means consume
each other. In the spirit of Marx, every production must thus also be understood as a
consumption, i.e. a prosumption (Marx 1983, 25; Schivelbusch 2016, 15). Inasmuch as
humans wear down their shoes in the act of walking, these shoes wear down human
feet, so that the skin becomes more callous to withstand pressure. Only after time,
when shoes and feet have adapted to each other, will these worn and torn shoes feel
like a second skin. This is a concrete, material instantiation of a hexis (see section
4.5).
5. Praxis of Practical Ensembles: Bodies in Motion 181
Walking not only wears down shoes and the human body; it also imprints
itself into the material conditions it takes place in. When people move from one
place to another as a result of certain needs and desires, they leave traces—such as
footprints—of the strategies they employed to tackle these needs and desires. These
traces deepen when people repeatedly walk from one place to another, like from
their home to a well and back. Eventually, these traces amount to the aforementioned
desire paths, sunken lanes, and hollow ways. They link two or more places of
interest and usually represent the shortest way to travel between those places; they
also reflect some of the concrete needs and desires of those who trampled the paths
before. As material cues, such visible connectors may represent practico-inert,
material signifiers in a Sartrean sense, as these lines refer to the goal-oriented
actions of others (see section 3.3). If one meets a desire path, its very existence
usually means that something is interesting in one or the other direction.
Through repeated use, such desire paths become more solid and even broader.
In Sartrean terms, this means that their practical inertia increases through repeated
action over time. This not only represents the beginning of a path creation in the sense
of a path dependence (see section 3.4); it also represents a re-serialization and thus the
transformation from a communal into a serial ensemble (see section 4.4). In some
instances, desire paths might have been early predecessors of modern road infrastructures.
Paving these lines gives them certain material properties, through which
these newly paved roads become useful for some use contexts but harmful for others.
Their accessibility and utility might be increased. But changing the course of a
paved road involves effort. By paving the road, people commit to a concrete course of
the road. This entails even more forms of path dependences. Most importantly, the
current material form and shape of these roads represent the passive remainder of
the concrete strategies of past generations. The specific width of central European
roads, for instance, goes back to Roman attempts to build roads wide enough so that
two carriages were able to move past each other (Frey 2018, 14).
Paved road segments can connect to other road segments, which are paved in
return to increase flow. When the interrelations between these road segments are
structured through things, people, or rules, modes of travel are institutionalized.
At this stage, road networks represent serial modes of structuring that afford people
the chance to satisfy their requirements, wants, and wishes through the materialized
action possibilities these roads provide. This is one way in which ontologically
free, yet inherently goal-directed actions of individuals accumulate inertia over
time, and eventually form practical ensembles that act back on those individuals in
return.
182 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
5.3 Disturbances, Disruptions, and Crises
This section focuses on the various grades of disturbances, disruptions, and crises
in urban mobility. The practical ensemble framework does not just provide principles
to scrutinize the concrete relations between people and the material conditions
they are situated in. It also provides tools to analyze how certain structured interrelations
may influence each other, and how this might affect the structuring of these
interrelations in return (see section 4.6).
Disturbances and Disruptions
Against the larger context in which the interrelations between road users and transport
users take place, it becomes apparent that they affect each other’s movements.
For instance, depending on how the respective actions of pedestrians and car drivers
are structured, how these modes of structuring interconnect, and how agents relate
to this overall structuring, the interrelations between pedestrians and car drivers
are more or less balanced and reconciled. Given, for instance, that pedestrians use
pedestrian lights or crossings, and given that road users tend to obey the rules of
traffic, their interrelations can be understood as balanced. However, such ideal cases
of balanced and functioning safety and prevention measures in traffic do not necessarily
represent reality.
In the case of jaywalking, the interrelations between road users are not reconciled
despite possibly being otherwise balanced by certain modes of structuring. Jaywalking
occurs when pedestrians cross busy streets while disobeying the established
rules that regulate this crossing. Pedestrians might do this either because they do
not know the traffic rules, they do not care, or they have a habit of doing it (Zhuang &
Wu 2011; Xu et al. 2013). They can also jaywalk because it is faster. In Sartrean terms,
they form a practical ensemble with the road that has a communal structure, to increase
their options for action (see section 4.4).
However, by jaywalking, pedestrians materially intrude into the structured interrelations
of other road users, such as car drivers and bicyclists. These road users
must again deviate from their otherwise structured interrelations to avoid an accident.
Eventually, this causes a disturbance in traffic flow, which can be transformed
through proper responses to avoid accidents and by resuming structured and balanced
interrelations. If accidents happen and pedestrians get injured for jaywalking,
their injury can be understood as a counter-finality. Their action returns to them
through the effects they caused in the structured interrelations between themselves,
the road, and other road users (see section 4.6).
Although such accidents might initially represent disturbances for local flows of
traffic at individual road segments, these disturbances can amount to a larger disruption
in the overall flow of urban traffic. This might be the case, for instance, when
5. Praxis of Practical Ensembles: Bodies in Motion 183
critical road segments are blocked or when traffic jams occur. Such disruptions can
even be caused by exogenous events, such as natural disasters or system-wide infrastructure
failures. Especially regarding networked urban infrastructures, these
disruptions may lead to cascading events—events with the potential to cause further
problems at all levels of constellations that rely on the service provision and the
proper functionality of the infrastructures (Little 2002). Cascading effects happen
because of the inherent interdependency of infrastructure systems and their critical
role as lifelines of society (Rinaldi et al. 2001; BMI 2009). These systems not only
enable flows of traffic and access to concomitant options for actions; the services
they provide are also associated with the continued existence of societal forms of
organization.
Counter-Finality and Crisis
Beyond the internal effects that a larger form of urban mobility might have on its elements
and structures, there may also be greater external effects that potentially act
back on the current state of urban mobility in the form of counter-finalities (see section
4.6). Undoubtedly, anthropogenic climate change represents a global counterfinality
that affects not only those who are predominantly responsible for it but also
all life on earth. The first condition for counter-finality—the disposition of matter—
is given by the dynamic changeability of weather. Low- and high-pressure areas
alternate constantly, and solar radiation is reflected by ice surfaces or warms up
large land masses during the day, which then release the heat overnight. Even the
confluence of cold and warm water masses in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans affects
distant weather events.
The second condition of counter-finality—the becoming-inert of human
praxis—is given by the fact that contemporary national economies have grown
to rely on international flows of goods and individualized traffic, both mainly accomplished
by cars, trucks, ships, planes, and other technologies with combustion
engines. The historical development of global market flows, traffic, and transport
is complex and itself situated in interlocking constellations of economic interests,
industrialization, narratives of modernization, and a technological push and pull
among many factors. The car, for instance, developed from a luxury object for tinkerers
to a fast and reliable means of transport for the middle class, until it became
a given that one is supposed to own a car in modern western societies (Heßler
2012, 103–107). In this context, Merki (2008) stresses the fact that it is almost impossible
to disentangle the forward and backward linkages between the economy,
industry, technology, and society (22–25). Nowadays, the core modes of production
and mobility in modern economies are inextricably linked to large technological
systems. These widely branched and networked systems of roads, highways, tracks,
fuel stops, cars, storage buildings, and other elements represent the inert and long184
The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
lasting infrastructures of modern economies. They are the material foundations
around which most contemporary societies are structured. According to Rogers
Gibson (2017), paved roads have an average lifetime of around 10 to 20 years, whereas
bridges last around 50 to 100 years (6). In the historical becoming of these systems,
multiple developmental paths crossed, blocked and reinforced each other up until
the present time (Hughes 1987; Mayntz & Hughes 1988). During this process,
some forms of individual and supraindividual needs and desires could be satisfied,
whereas others were created and even promoted. The contemporary constitution of
modern societies is thus the materially inert product of path-dependent processes.
These processes are themselves permeated by human needs and desires, material
demands and requirements, and the materialized strategies to harmonize them.
Following Sartre’s thoughts on the persistence of practical constellations, people’s
hexeis also play an essential role in these path-dependent processes. In section
4.5, it was mentioned that Sartre’s conception of hexis combines aspects of Aristotelian
hexis, habitual behavior, and habituation. As an action disposition, hexeis
may even represent attitudes in the sense of a habitus. Especially with regard to
private traffic, travel habits and familiarity with certain means of transportation
seem to play a major role in travel-mode choice (Møller & Thøgersen 2008; Middleton
2011). In the case of car driving habits, Brette et al. (2014) argue that behavioral
inertia not only reduces stress and anxiety; it even contributes to the perception
that driving is itself a pleasant activity. Following the findings of section 4.5, those
authors further emphasize the role of contextual cues that trigger certain patterns
of behavior. When the car is taken as the means of transportation for reaching the
workplace, the car will most likely remain the primary mode of transportation,
given the same context. Because transportation habits intermingle with various
other patterns of behavior—such as buying groceries after work in the same area,
visiting friends, or going to the gym—travel habits are hard to change (415–417).
Although habituated behavior might not necessarily yield negative consequences
on its own, the same behavior can yield such consequences when performed by
a group of people on a larger scale. The habit of using a car to get to work, for
instance, does not just potentially obscure other more sustainable travel options
for individuals. Usually, it is also more carbon-intensive than other modes of transportation
(Schwanen et al. 2012, 527). This circumstance already points toward the
third condition of counter-finalities.
The third condition of counter-finality—serial ubiquity—is given by the fact
that global market flows and motorized traffic have indeed promoted both national
economies and modern ways of life, especially in the northern hemisphere. This
makes them attractive strategies for promoting a nation’s wealth. Furthermore, this
entails that other aspects accompanying these strategies—such as the presence of
roads or owning a car—are associated with modernity and wealth. In the case of
Peru, Harvey and Knox (2012) argue that road infrastructure has become associated
5. Praxis of Practical Ensembles: Bodies in Motion 185
with speed, connection, and other promises of emancipatory modernity (523).
Edwards (2003) even claims that the building of infrastructures has been constitutive
of the modern condition (191). Larkin (2013) refers to the conceptual roots of
infrastructures in the Enlightenment and the fantastical evocations and fantasies
that seem to accompany infrastructure projects (332–334). Consequently, global
market flows and individualized traffic become attractive for nation-states and
individuals alike. Because the dominant technologies around which globalization
and individualized traffic are structured also emit large quantities of CO2 during
normal operation, global CO2 rises. In 2014, transport as a whole was responsible
for 23% of all CO2 emissions worldwide (Santos 2017).
If all three factors come together, the basic conditions for climate change as
a counter-finality are met. Owing to the material and bodily inertia of infrastructure
systems, and promises of economic progress and connection, the reliance on
combustion engines becomes serially ubiquitous. The global rising of CO2 emissions
contributes to the greenhouse effect, which, in combination with dynamic weather
conditions, results in global climate change and potentially catastrophic weather
events (Gesang 2011, 16–18). These events may put systems into crisis, cause potential
disruption, or even create global disasters. To avoid such catastrophes, the core
structures around which modern economies and individual transport are structured
must be transformed.
Although these examples represent simplified representations of urban mobility,
global economics, transportation infrastructures, and anthropogenic climate
change, they illustrate the potential of the practical ensemble framework to deconstruct
structured interrelations in complex constellations, such as cities, from
multiple levels, and even to analyze the contribution of individuals for system-wide
effects.
5.4 Infrastructures as Needful Structures
This section offers a more focused analysis of urban infrastructures in general, and
urban mobility infrastructures in particular, through Sartre’s practical ensemble
framework. Again, the perspective on human needs and desires is central.
Urban Infrastructures
Urban infrastructures are remarkable constellations of practico-inert things, structures,
and practices that organize societal interrelations in fundamental ways. In
modern cities, infrastructures and their concomitant structuring are omnipresent,
although often unnoticed. Drainpipes and power cables stretch under widespread
street networks and enable a constant flow of water, electricity, information, and
186 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
power, and send those things across the borders of human settlements, nationstates,
and even continents. Some of these structures, like streets, water supplies,
and sanitation, date back to ancient civilizations. Compared with these old constants
of human settlements, electric power, and digital information technologies
are relatively new. However, these modern systems have had profound impacts
on the constitution of the modern condition. In most countries, even rural areas
are connected to some sort of infrastructure systems, such as roads, electricity, or
information systems.
Owing to their ubiquity, historicity, and practical inertia, infrastructures do
more than their basic functional roles would suggest (see section 5.3). These structures
not only support and manifest forms of societal organization; they also
store power relations (Engels & Schenk 2014), and produce complex intermittent
fluctuations of temporalities (Engels 2020). However, in most cases, especially
given proper functionality, infrastructure systems are usually obscured by everyday
routine and intentional design decisions. In modern societies, infrastructures
represent instantiations of background technologies. Most people relate to them
without noticing it (Ihde 1990, 109–111). However, for experts and maintainers,
and when everyday users are affected by infrastructure disruption, infrastructures
shift to the foreground and can generate the immediate need for preparatory and
preventive measures.
This illustrates the challenging manner of appearing of infrastructures (Müller
2021). On the one hand, material infrastructures provide the ever-present “artificial
environment” (Edwards 2003, 189) of urban life. On the other, these technological
systems become somewhat opaque in cases of emergency, catastrophe, or disruption.
Five out of nine properties that Star (1999) identifies regarding infrastructures
relate directly to their manner of appearing. These are embeddedness, transparency,
learned as part of membership, embodiment of standards, and becomes visible upon breakdown.
According to Star, these properties are essential to infrastructures. From a
technical perspective, a certain infrastructure transparency is intentional. These
systems are supposed to be unobtrusive for everyday users while still allowing
technicians and engineers to maintain critical elements (Müller 2021). Edwards
(2017, 2019) approaches the challenging manner of appearing of infrastructures
differently, by focusing on habituation processes as well as on the habits and skills
of their users—which potentially render infrastructures transparent or invisible
throughout their use context. Edwards points out that people may become habituated
to the service provision of infrastructures, given that this service provision is
somewhat reliable:
Evolution designed human attention first and foremost to detect immediate danger,
so our brains always focus most urgently on things that change, rather than
those that remain constant. You cannot avoid noticing a fast-moving object that
5. Praxis of Practical Ensembles: Bodies in Motion 187
enters your field of vision, but you must work rather hard to see the end of your
own nose, even though it is always visible. You notice the refrigerator’s hum when
it starts up, but after a few seconds it fades entirely from your consciousness—until
it stops and you briefly notice it again. The same phenomenon makes infrastructures
you use every day unnoticeable: they are always there, and they always
do the same thing, so your mind has better things to do than focus on them. (Edwards
2019, 358)
Furthermore, users interiorize the social norms and routines of urban mobility
through repeated and even daily practical interrelation with things and structures.
In so doing, they cultivate a hexis that allows them to satisfy their material or immaterial
needs and desires efficiently and effectively (see section 4.5). Despite being
an acquired practical interrelation between a person’s hexis as an action disposition
and a practico-inert technological artifact or structure as material disposition,
the routinized realization of this interconnection in everyday activities becomes
normalized as an integral part of how the practical ensembles work. As “[h]uman
attention naturally focuses on what changes, rather than what remains constant”
(Edwards 2017, 329), infrastructures seem to shift in and out of everyday awareness,
depending on both whether experts or laypeople interrelate with them and what
extent these people routinize this interrelation and habituate it (Müller 2021).
The core characteristic that seems to constitute the very concept of infrastructure
is illustrated by the fact that these systems and institutions, which are usually
considered to be infrastructures, provide specific services, knowledge, or other
items that other sometimes more complex services, structures, institutions, individuals,
and the general public depend on (Müller 2021). This explains not only their
fundamental role in the structuring of modern societies but also their manner of
appearing. Furthermore, it underlines the fact that things, structures, and even institutions
derive their significance from the place they adopt in larger constellations.
Sartre’s practical ensemble framework comes into play here. In rather abstract ways,
what constitutes an infrastructure is its relative importance as a result of the barely
substitutable services it provides in a practical constellation. This conception can
apply to almost every element in such constellations.
However, the material focus of Sartre’s practical ensemble framework, as well
as the needfulness understood to pervade all levels of practical constellations, allow
one to ground the concept of infrastructure in the practically inert systems that serially
structure, support, and prefabricate societal forms of organization based on
human needs and desires. Larkin (2013) describes this conjunction as follows: “Infrastructures
are matter that enable the movement of other matter. Their peculiar
ontology lies in the facts that they are things and also the relation between things”
(329).
188 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
Infrastructural Inertia and Resilience
Section 5.3 already indicated the critical role of infrastructures. With regard to urban
mobility, that role can be further scrutinized regarding the way material infrastructures
support and structure the formation and consolidation of urban mobility
cultures through the interplay of their inert elements. Urban mobility cultures describe
dominant modes of transport in connection to predominant socioeconomic
conditions in cities. Klinger et al. (2013) identify these dominant modes according
to certain indicators, such as spatial arrangement, density, population size, available
transport infrastructure and supply, travel habits, attitudes of citizens and commuters,
and so on. They cluster German cities, for instance, into cycling cities, autooriented
cities, walking cities, and transit cities, among other types. Cycling cities,
like Bremen or Leverkusen, are characterized by having a below-average population
size and settlement density. Generally, cycling cities are smaller than auto-oriented
cities such as Aachen and Wiesbaden, which, in return, have greater than average
car-related businesses and fewer travel options besides cars. Transit cities, such as
Augsburg or Dresden, are characterized by lower-priced tickets for public transport
as well as a generally lower household income.
A similar concept to urban mobility cultures is that of urban fabrics. Newman
and Kenworthy (2015) develop this concept to consider ways in which patterns of land
use change and react to the transport infrastructures and to what they call the priorities
of cities. The authors use a clustering similar to that in Klinger et al. (2013) and distinguish
between walking cities, transit cities, and automobile cities to illustrate the
interplay between material arrangements of urban spaces and the population’s basic
and more complex requirements, wants, and wishes. The authors use Marchetti’s
constant as a basis for their research. According to Marchetti’s constant, humans
have a somewhat fixed travel-time budget of around one hour, on average, per day
that they are willing to commute. Based on this constant, the authors conclude that
cities grow in relation to the speed with which people can commute through them.
According to the authors, walking cities have represented the most common urban
form for 8,000 years, and most city cores still retain the characteristics of walking
cities.
Through the lens of the practical ensemble framework, this fact can be interpreted
according to the needs, desires, and capabilities of a city’s human elements
as well as the composition of their practical field of equipmentality. Walking cities
generally have narrow streets and shorter block sizes for optimal walkability and
reachability of places in less time. Given that walking, riding, or traveling by cart or
carriage were the dominant modes of transportation for the majority of human history
until the industrial era (Merki 2008, 16), the material arrangement of cities represents
the technological possibilities of those times. Automobile cities, on the other
hand, oblige their inhabitants to own cars or to switch to other modes of transporta5.
Praxis of Practical Ensembles: Bodies in Motion 189
tion, as streets are generally wider and blocks further apart (Newman & Kenworthy
2015).
The interplay of the inert elements of urban mobility can be further scrutinized
through the concept of resilience, a key idea in critical infrastructure research (J.I. Engels
2018a). Resilience is understood as the “capacity of a system to absorb and cope
with perturbations” (Elsner et al. 2018, 31). The concept can be understood in terms
of a bouncing back to its initial mode of operation, or in terms of a bouncing forward,
an adaptation, to another mode of operation. According to Sartre’s view on practical
ensembles, both aspects of resilience can and even must be understood through the
practical interrelations between their human and non-human elements.
The material side of infrastructures is usually built to last from 10 to 20 years,
in the case of paved roads, to up to 100 years in the case of water distribution and
sewage systems (Rogers Gibson 2017). Their relative durability renders these material
infrastructures fairly resistant to change. Moreover, given that their specific
properties provide a wide range of options for action, these material infrastructures
can even be used throughout changing societal and political transformations.
Roads, bridges, and sewage systems scaffold fundamental practical fields of equipmentality
and possibility. They represent modes of serial structuring that enable the
processing and consummation of various forms of societal organization. Simultaneously,
in being continuously used, these material infrastructures are totalized
as the necessary conditions of possibility for the practical ensembles that build on
them. In this regard, such material infrastructures also represent the necessary
conditions of possibility for a bouncing forward in the form of an adaptation of the
larger practical ensemble. The previous chapter mentioned that serial and communal
modes of structuring overlap and mutually enable the other modes to be
realized through human action. Throughout history, the same roads have been used
for needy and desiring people, tanks and soldiers, military parades, and freedom
marches. The material foundations remain and enable different forms of societal
constellation.
The human counterpart of material infrastructures is human hexis, in the sense
of the routinized action dispositions cultivated by the repeated use of these infrastructures.
Section 4.5 mentioned that practical ensembles persist through the hexeis
of their human elements because it is those elements that enact the conditions of
possibility of their actions by performing them. Because human elements rely on
the goods and services their infrastructures provide or enable them to produce and
perform, these elements stabilize the predominant modes of structuring for their
respective practical ensembles. Such hexeis exhibit a high inertia themselves.
190 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
Criticality and Vulnerability
The criticality of infrastructures lies in the fact that the services they provide are directly
linked to the satisfaction of individual and societal requirements, wants, and
wishes. Movement has already been noted as an essential part of the human condition
(see section 5.2). Owing to how serial modes structure flows of people, goods,
and information, urban mobility infrastructures represent the concrete interests of
urban dwellers. This is because of the positions both urban dwellers and infrastructures
adopt in the larger form of organization for urban mobility (see section 4.3).
The practical inertia of urban mobility infrastructures, as well as the serial structuring
that these infrastructures manifest, prefabricates a field of possibility that
urban dwellers have to make use of to satisfy their needs and desires. In this way,
urban mobility infrastructures are associated and even equated with continued human
existence. This, in turn, leads to a concatenation of human and non-human
elements, which together amount to a mutual functional criticality (Lukitsch et al.
2018, 16).
In critical infrastructure research, the concept of criticality is used to assess and
analyze the dynamics of how infrastructures derive their societal significance. Criticality
has its roots in the Greek crisis as discussed in section 4.6.
In the context of urban infrastructures, the concept of criticality has a long history.
Folkers (2017, 2018) dates the concept to the idea of Daseinsvorsorge, or existential
provision developed in Nazi Germany in the 1930s. This idea, like other structures and
institutions from that time, found its way into the Federal Republic of Germany’s
welfare state paradigm. Existential provision refers to the idea that modern conditions
and urban environments challenge pre-modern ideals of self-sustenance, which is
why the state must provide for the structures and services that individuals require
to live productive lives. During and after World War II, the criticality of infrastructures
was reassessed in accordance with their relative importance for warfare, given
the fact that some structures are vital points when attacked by the enemy. In the US,
for instance, this so-called vulnerability mapping and the concomitant attribution
of criticality to certain structures and systems was most prominent during the Cold
War. In this way, the concept of criticality and critical infrastructure found their way
into the civil sector (Collier & Lakoff 2008).
In all these contexts, criticality is used descriptively to identify and measure the
relevance of certain features of society. Nowadays, the existential provision from the
state, and the critical vulnerabilities of society in the case of war, have yielded to more
systemic thinking about the importance of infrastructures. Technological innovation,
rationalization, networking, and functional differentiation have led to a more
sociotechnical conception of infrastructures that complicates a clear assessment or
a clear hierarchy of which structures and systems are more critical than others and
why.
5. Praxis of Practical Ensembles: Bodies in Motion 191
The COVID-19 pandemic brought increasing difficulty in determining which
parts of the population to protect, on which structures and institutions to rely, and
how to fairly distribute social responsibility, workload, financial compensation,
and vaccination, both on national and international levels. For instance, most protective
measures taken during the pandemic were meant to avoid overstraining
health infrastructure while predominantly relying on transport and information
infrastructures for maintaining supply chains and social connectivity. Societies
wish to avoid the collapse of their health infrastructure not just because it would
mean loss of life but also because they require a large workforce to maintain other
infrastructure systems. Health infrastructure is thus disclosed as a critical infrastructure,
because it provides services that keep other infrastructures running in
one way or another for those infrastructures, like the electrical grid, to keep health
infrastructures running, and so on.
To reassess the potential of the concept of criticality, J.I. Engels (2018b) identifies
three dominant perspectives on infrastructural criticality in infrastructure research.
They differ regarding the strategic contexts in which criticality can be used
as an analytical concept. The first perspective is concerned with systemic criticality.
Systemic criticality is a bottom-up perspective that highlights single components
as critical for system functionality. From a systemic perspective toward criticality,
for instance, roads are understood as critical for traffic, water supply is critical
for living, and wastewater disposal is critical for public health. This perspective
is mostly concerned with the relation between infrastructures as individual parts of
a sociotechnical totality and the general functional interplay of parts and wholes.
The second perspective is concerned with consequence-based criticality. Consequence-
based criticality highlights societal consequences in the disruption of individual
infrastructure systems. While the systemic perspective toward criticality also
considers potential consequences via the functionality of the whole, consequencebased
criticality represents a top-down perspective toward individual components.
From a consequence-based perspective on criticality, infrastructures are essential
because their disruption potentially threatens the well-being of individuals or even
society as a whole.
The third perspective is not a strategic perspective per se, as it is mostly concerned
with how criticality emerges in political discourse. J.I. Engels remarks that infrastructural
criticality is in some sense always a product of an ascription or an attribution
within a specific discourse. As such, criticality is always, in a sense, ideological.
What is important for whom and why is not only a result of system features
or potential harms and consequences, but also a result of political decision-making
and, most importantly, ideological framing. Similar to processes of securitization
(Balzaq 2005; Balzaq et al. 2016), J.I. Engels refers to scientific approaches that analyze
processes of criticalization, through which societal relevance is ascribed to certain
infrastructure systems. In this way, criticality can become a powerful tool for
192 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
exercising power by framing specific discourses. By attributing criticality to certain
infrastructures, these structures transform from matters of fact into matters of concern
(Latour 2004).
Based on his reflections on the analytical perspectives for criticality, J.I. Engels
does not advocate for criticality as a measure or property of infrastructures that describes
their importance or relevance. Instead, he sees criticality as an expression of
the degree of relationality of individual components within networked systems. According
to J.I. Engels, the relevance of a component or an infrastructure is expressed
in the number and significance of its relations. Criticality is thus largely an expression
of the density and causal quality of networking (J.I. Engels 2018b).
In the context of Sartre’s view on practical ensembles, the condition of possibility
for an infrastructure’s density and causal quality of networking, which may be
called their sociotechnical relationality, is grounded in two things. One is the intricate
and practical interrelation between the goal-directed actions through which human
beings satisfy their requirements, wants, and wishes. The second is the things they
instrumentalize and thus associate as the stable means to meet their ends. The conditions
of possibility for infrastructural criticality are thus inherent in the systematic
provision of essential goods and services both in and through practical ensembles.
Against the background of Sartre on practical ensembles, the concept of criticality
is closely connected to vulnerability, another key concept of critical infrastructure
research (J.I. Engels 2018a). The concept itself evokes images of open wounds and inherent
vices. Because the criticality of specific infrastructure systems is expressed
through the high sociotechnical relationality of individual components and systems,
this criticality also reveals the spots that may cause harm or even cascading collapse
to the functionality of other systems in the case of disturbance or failure. In the continued
operation of sociotechnical systems, a certain dialectic can be identified—the
very conditions of possibility enabling these systems to function in accordance with
their intended requirements also render these systems prone to fail when those conditions
are harmed. Through this dialectic in the operation of urban mobility infrastructures
as practical ensembles, certain structured interrelations are revealed as
weak spots that are therefore in need of protection (Kröger & Zio 2011, 5).
There is an inherent interconnectedness in urban mobility, understood as a
strategic constellation to satisfy individual and supraindividual needs and desires.
The integrity and functionality of those structures support this form of organization
and enable this satisfaction, and is thus equated with people’s continued
existence. Consequently, people experience their own vulnerability through the
susceptibility of urban infrastructures to disturbances, disruptions, and crises. The
inherent needfulness of human beings is thus expressed in the needfulness of their
infrastructures, and vice versa.
5. Praxis of Practical Ensembles: Bodies in Motion 193
5.5 Concluding Remarks
This chapter explored how Sartre’s view on practical ensembles can be applied to
deconstruct and better understand some of the challenges of the human condition
in modern societies. In this view, urban mobility represents a multilayered system of
structured interrelations as well as a complex network of people, things, structures,
and regulations. The material rigidity of urban mobility infrastructures enables the
flow of goods and people through space. This flow is itself a complex product of how
the actions of individuals are mediated by and for each other. Despite this rigidity,
however, people, especially pedestrians, have the opportunity to blaze their paths
where the current practical field does not suit their needs and desires.
The most important aspect of urban mobility infrastructures is their criticality
and vulnerability. The inherent needfulness of the human condition works its way
into the structures that were produced to tackle this needfulness in the first place.
From the complex entanglement between humans and non-human things in the
consummation of practical ensembles, the needful structures act back on the human
elements again by exposing them to more complex requirements and material
demands. The oscillation of liberation and necessitation can thus be found on all
planes of human reality and history—in the complex sociotechnical relationality of
modern societies, and the fundamental structure of human existence.

Conclusion
The goal of this work was threefold: to explore and systematize the theoretical foundations
of practical ensembles in Sartre’s philosophy; to outline a theoretical framework
for practical ensembles; and to apply that framework for an understanding
of societal constellations. Part I laid down the theoretical context and development
of Sartre’s ideas (Chapter 1), the totalizing character of human action and the processual
character of human existence as a material endeavor (Chapter 2), and the
significance of technology and body techniques for human action (Chapter 3). Part
II then reconstructed how these dialectical foundations interplay in historical contexts
and between individuals, which interactions result in a dialectic of practical
ensembles. Within this dialectic, forms of societal constellation emerge and reinforce,
transform, persist, and potentially collapse (Chapter 4). These principles were
then applied to urban mobility systems to scrutinize some of the contemporary challenges
of the human condition (Chapter 5).
This work has foregrounded the inherent needfulness—in the full meaning of
the term—of both human existence and the structures produced in space through
time to tackle it. This needfulness can be engaged in two ways: through human requirements,
wants, wishes, and material demands, and through the socialization of
besoins into désir—including their long-lasting concretization by material manifestation
in the form of material inertia.
Practical ensembles are permeated by needs and desires, as well as by material
demands and requirements, at every level. Human beings exteriorize themselves
by relating to and engaging with their surroundings based on those needs and desires.
By looking for food, water, shelter, or other things they require, want, or wish
for themselves, human beings totalize themselves and their material surroundings
against the background of their needfulness as material beings in a scarce environment.
Their concrete form of subjectivity and the concrete objectivity of their world
arise within and throughout this totalizing interrelation. As these humans then construct
tools and structures, and as they adapt to using these tools and structures to
secure access to their needs, they socialize and concretize their needfulness in material
inertia. They form a practical ensemble and relate to it as the necessary foundation
for how their specific form of societal organization is structured.
196 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
In doing so, their need, in an understanding of besoin as an abstract and initially
undirected mode of relating to their requirements, wants, and wishes is manifested
in practico-inert things and incarnated in practico-inert hexeis. In this way, their
need becomes a concretized, directed, socioculturally shaped, and mediated desire,
understood as désir, for the continued operation of their practical ensemble. Basic
and more complex human requirements, wants, and wishes, together with the various
strategies these humans employ to tackle them, arise in the continued existence
of these ensembles.
Through the conceptual lens of practical ensembles, any larger constellation in
which human beings unite with other humans, things, and structures is revealed
to be permeated by actions and action schemes. These tackle needs and desires and
attempt to meet material demands and requirements. The processes of formation
and transformation in practical ensembles already reflect this in remarkable ways.
According to Sartre, the formation and transformation of any forms of organization
throughout human history can be traced back to the fact that certain practicoinert
things, structures, and hexeis enable individuals to satisfy their requirements,
wants, and wishes—or to the fact that they, for one reason or another, do not.
When individuals satisfy their needs and desires through modes of serial structuring,
and when they continue to rely on the instrumental means they are structured
with, these individuals reinforce the structures binding them. In this way, they
continuously enact certain strategies to tackle their needs and desires and thus associate
their possibility for self-reproduction with the means they use in this process.
The fundamental needfulness of these serial structures becomes apparent in
the various attempts to provide continuous access to certain resources or services
through which needs and desires can be satisfied in the long run. Furthermore, inasmuch
as individuals become reliant on instrumental means to transform their exigencies—
especially owing to the various positions these individuals may adopt in
practical ensembles—the structural integrity and continued functioning of these
means are disclosed, along with their susceptibility to damage and disruption. Furthermore,
this susceptibility may be equated with the impossibility of continued existence.
When individuals are not enabled to attain their ends with the means at hand,
or when they become aware that some but not all of their exigencies might be taken
care of by the larger form of organization they are embedded in, these individuals
have the chance to transform their structures. They may employ different means or
use established means differently. In doing so, their whole undertaking is defined
as a partial totality by their very needfulness and their lack of real-life satisfaction.
These communal structures become institutionalized and serialized, which not only
allows people to tackle some requirements, wants, and wishes more efficiently and
effectively—it also generates rigid structures that again entail other exigencies. Thus
the cycle continues.
Conclusion 197
In agreement with Hegel, Sartre is convinced that human existence is inherently
an unhappy consciousness without the chance to surpass this unhappy state. This
means that, according to Sartre, it is difficult to analyze history with categories like
progress or development. Needs and desires are fundamental, and will always render
physicochemical reality a scarce milieu in which only needful structures may
emerge. The whole of material culture bears witness to this constant struggle at the
heart of the human condition. However, although these structures are inherently
pervaded by needfulness, they are not determined by it. They merely provide possibilities
to transform and satisfy what humans need to live in specific ways.
The reasons for individuals to perpetuate these structures or to initiate structural
transformations are manifold, but all can be fundamentally traced back to the
ability or inability to attain their ends in the long run. This becomes apparent in the
role of hexis in the persistence of practical ensembles. In Sartre’s understanding of
human existence and history, hexeis represent organic counterparts to the material
cultures of societies. They store the dynamic forces of societies and perpetuate structured
interrelations. The reason for their cultivation is, again, past repeated success
in tackling the needfulness of human existence. Whether in the structural foundations
of human society or in the structure of human existence itself, needfulness, as
the motor of human reality and history, remains a constant of the human condition.

References
Ally, M. C. (2012). Ecologizing Sartre’s Ontology: Nature, Science, and Dialectics. Environmental
Philosophy, 9(2), 95–121.
Ally, M. C. (2017). Ecology and Existence. Bringing Sartre to the Water’s Edge. Lexington
Books.
Anderson, T. C. (2013). Sartre’s Second or Dialectical Ethics. In S. Churchill & J.
Reynolds (Eds.), Jean-Paul Sartre: Key Concepts (195–205). Taylor & Francis.
Aristotle. (2015). Nikomachische Ethik (U. Wolf, Trans.). Rowohlt.
Aronson, R. (2019). Revisiting Existential Marxism: A Reply to Alfred Betschart.
Sartre Studies International, 25(2), 92–98.
Ashby, W. R. (1957). An introduction to Cybernetics. Chapman & Hall LTD.
Balzacq, T. (2005). The Three Faces of Securitization: Political Agency, Audience and
Context. European Journal of International Relations, 11(2), 171–201.
Balzacq, T., Léonard, S., & Ruzicka, J. (2016). ‘Securitization’ Revisited: Theory and
Cases. International Relations, 30(4), 494–531.
Barad, K. (2007). Meeting the Universe Halfway. Quantum Physics and the Entanglement
of Matter and Meaning. Duke University Press.
Barata, A. (2018). Towards a theory of action in Sartre’s philosophy. From action to
ethics. Philonsorbonne, 12, 125–137.
Bernhard, C. (2016). Im Spiegel des Wassers. Eine transnationale Geschichte des Oberrheins
(1800–2000). Böhlau.
Bernstein, R. J. (1980). Praxis and Action. Contemporary Philosophies of Human Activity.
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Betschart, A. (2019). Sartre was not a Marxist. Sartre Studies International, 25(2), 77–91.
Birt, R. E. (1986). Alienation in the Later Philosophy of Jean-Paul Sartre. Man and
World, 19(3), 293–309.
Blackbourn, D. (2006). The Conquest of Nature. Water, Landscape, and the Making of Modern
Germany. W. W. Norton & Company.
Blättler, C. (2012). Serial Sixties auf Französisch. Zur Ambivalenz der Serie. Zeitschrift
für Medienwissenschaft, 7(2), 70–79.
200 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
Bonnemann, J. (2009). Sartre und die Macht der Dinge. Überlegungen zum Wechselverhältnis
zwischen Handlung und Welt. In K.-H. Lembeck, K. Mertens, & E.
W. Orth (Eds.), Phänomenologische Forschungen (5–36). Meiner.
Boria, D. (2015). Creating the Anthropocene: Existential Social Philosophy and Our Bleak
Future. 14.
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a Theory of Practice. University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1996). Distinction: A social critique of the judgement of taste (R. Nice, Trans.).
Harvard Univ. Press.
Bowman, B., & Stone, B. (2004). The End as Present in the Means in Sartre’s Morality
and History: Birth and Re-inventions of an Existential Moral Standard. Sartre
Studies International, 10(2), 1–27.
Bowman, E. A., & Stone, R. V. (1992). Socialist Morality in Sartre’s Unpublished 1964
Rome Lecture: A Summary and Commentary. Journal of French and Francophone
Philosophy, 4(2–3), 166–200.
Boyle, M. (2005). Sartre’s Circular Dialectic and the Empires of Abstract Space: A
History of Space and Place in Ballymun, Dublin. Annals of the Association of American
Geographers, 95(1), 181–201.
Brette, O., Buhler, T., Lazaric, N., & Marechal, K. (2014). Reconsidering the nature
and effects of habits in urban transportation behavior. Journal of Institutional Economics,
10(3), 399–426.
Bundesministerium des Inneren. (2009). Nationale Strategie zum Schutz Kritischer Infrastrukturen.
Bundesministerium des Innern.
Burman, A. (2018). Back to Hegel! Georg Lukács, Dialectics, and Hegelian Marxism.
In A. Bartonek & A. Burman (Hrsg.), Hegelian Marxism. The Uses of Hegel’s Philosophy
in Marxist Theory from Georg Lukács to Slavoj Žižek (17–34). Södertörns högskola.
Cannon, B. (1991). Sartre and psychoanalysis: An existentialist challenge to clinical metatheory.
University Press of Kansas.
Cannon, B. (1992). Praxis, need, and desire in Sartre’s later philosophy: An addendum
to existential psychoanalysis. Bulletin de La Société Américaine de Philosophie
de Langue Française, 4(2–3), 131–141.
Catalano, J. S. (2007). The Meaning and Truth of History: A Note on Sartre’s Critique
of Dialectical Reason. Sartre Studies International, 13(2), 47–64.
Collamati, C. (2016). Alienation Between the Critique of Dialectical Reason and the Critique
of Economic Reason. Sketch of a Materialist Ethics. Sartre Studies International,
22(1), 83–98.
Collier, S., & Lakoff, A. (2008). The Vulnerability of Vital Systems: How Critical Infrastructure
Became a Security Problem. In M. Dunn & K.S. Kristensen (Eds.)
Securing the Homeland. Critical Infrastructure, Risk and (In)Security (40–62).
Crespo, A., Dombois, M., & Henning, J. (2018). Preparedness & Prevention. In J. I.
Engels (Ed.), Key Concepts for Critical Infrastructure Research (39–44). Springer VS.
References 201
Crossley, N. (2010). Body, Technique and Reflexivity: Sartre in Sociological Perspective.
In K. J. Morris (Eds.), Sartre on the Body (215–230). Palgrave Macmillan.
Dahlmann, M. (2013). Freiheit und Souveränität. Kritik der Existenzphilosophie Jean- Paul
Sartres. ça ira.
DeLanda, M. (2006). A New Philosophy of Society. Assemblage Theory and Social Complexity.
Continuum.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (2005). A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia
(B. Massumi, Trans.). University of Minnesota Press.
Dings, R. (2018). Understanding phenomenological differences in how affordances
solicit action. An exploration. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 17(4),
681–699.
Ebert, A.-K. (2020). Mobilität. In M. Heßler & K. Liggieri (Eds.), Technikanthropologie:
Handbuch für Wissenschaft und Studium. Edition Sigma.
Edwards, P. N. (2003). Infrastructure and Modernity: Force, Time, and Social Organization
in the History of Sociotechnical Systems. In Modernity and technology.
Edwards, P. N. (2017). The Mechanics of Invisibility: On Habit and Routine as
Elements of Infrastructure. In I. Ruby & A. Ruby (Eds.), Infrastructure Space
(327–336). Ruby Press.
Edwards, P. N. (2019). Infrastructuration: On Habits, Norms and Routines as Elements
of Infrastructure. In M. Kornberger, G. C. Bowker, J. Elyachar, A. Mennicken,
P. Miller, J. Nucho, & N. Pollock (Eds.), Thinking infrastructures (355–366).
Emerald Publishing.
Egan, M. J. (2007). Anticipating Future Vulnerability: Defining Characteristics of Increasingly
Critical Infrastructure-like Systems. Journal of Contingencies and Crisis
Management, 15(1), 4–17.
Eifert, S., Knauf, A., & Thiessen, N. (2018). Vulnerability. In J. I. Engels (Eds.), Key
Concepts for Critical Infrastructure Research (21–30). Springer VS.
Elsner, I., Huck, A., & Marathe, M. (2018). Resilience. In J. I. Engels (Eds.), Key Concepts
for Critical Infrastructure Research (31–38). Springer VS.
Engels, F. (1975). Anti-Dühring; Dialektik der Natur (MEW 20). Dietz.
Engels, J. I. (2018a). Key Concepts for Critical Infrastructure Research (J. I. Engels, Eds.).
Springer VS.
Engels, J. I. (2018b). Relevante Beziehungen. Vom Nutzen des Kritikalitätskonzepts
für Geisteswissenschaftler. In J. I. Engels & A. Nordmann (Eds.), Was heißt Kritikalität?
Zu einem Schlüsselbegriff der Debatte um Kritische Infrastrukturen (17–45).
transcript.
Engels, J. I. (2020). Infrastrukturen als Produkte und Produzenten von Zeit. NTM
Zeitschrift für Geschichte der Wissenschaften, Technik und Medizin, 28, 69–90.
Engels, J. I., & Schenk, G. J. (2014). Infrastrukturen der Macht—Macht der Infrastrukturen.
Überlegungen zu einem Forschungsfeld. Historische Zeitschrift, 63,
22–58.
202 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
Engels, J. I., Frank, S., Gurevych, I., Heßler, M., Knodt, M., Monstadt, J., Nordmann,
A., Oetting, A., Rudolph-Cleff, A., Rüppel, U., Schenk, G. J., & Steinke, F. (2021).
Transformation, Zirkulation, System of Systems: Für ein dynamisches Verständnis netzgebundener
Infrastrukturen (1–20). KRITIS TU Darmstadt.
Engels, K. S. (2018). From In-Itself to Practico-Inert. Freedom, Subjectivity, and
Progress. Sartre Studies International, 24(1), 48–69.
Flynn, T. R. (1997). Sartre, Foucault, and Historical Reason. Volume One. Toward an Existentialist
Theory of History. The University of Chicago Press.
Flynn, T. R. (2005). Sartre, Foucault, and Historical Reason. Volume Two. A Poststructuralist
Mapping of History. The University of Chicago Press.
Flynn, T. R. (2014). Sartre: A Philosophical Biography. University Press.
Folkers, A. (2017). Existential provisions: The technopolitics of public infrastructure.
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 35(5), 855–874.
Folkers, A. (2018). Was ist kritisch an Kritischer Infrastruktur? Kriegswichtigkeit,
Lebenswichtigkeit, Systemwichtigkeit und die Infrastrukturen der Kritik. In
Was heißt Kritikalität? Zu einem Schlüsselbegriff der Debatte um Kritische Infrastrukturen
(123–154).
Føllesdal, D. (2010). The Lebenswelt in Husserl. In D. Hyder & H.-J. Rheinberger
(Eds.), Science and the Life-World. Essays on Husserl’s Crisis of European Sciences
(27–45). Stanford University Press.
Frey, M. (2018). Wege zu Macht und Wohlstand. Das Straßensystem der Römerzeit.
In K. Andermann & N. Gallion (Eds.), Weg und Steg. Aspekte des Verkehrswesens von
der Spätantike bis zum Ende des Alten Reiches (11–28). Jan Thorbecke Verlag.
Furman, A. (2012). Desire Lines: Determining pathways through the city. In M.
Pacetti & G. Passerini (Eds.), Sustainable City VII (Vol. 155, pp. 23–33). WIT Press.
Garud, R., Kumaraswamy, A., & Karnøe, P. (2010). Path Dependence or Path Creation?:
Path Dependence or Path Creation? Journal of Management Studies, 47(4),
760–774.
Gehlen, A. (2007). Die Seele im technischen Zeitalter. Sozialpsychologische Probleme in der
industriellen Gesellschaft. Vittorio Klostermann.
Gesang, B. (2011). Klimaethik. Suhrkamp.
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems. George Allen & Unwin
Limited.
Giddens, A. (1986). The Constitution of Society. Polity Press.
Graham, S. (2010). When Infrastructures Fail. In S. Graham (Eds.), Disrupted Cities:
When Infrastructure Fails (1–26). Routledge.
Grosz, E. (2013). Habit Today: Ravaisson, Bergson, Deleuze and Us. Body & Society,
19(2–3), 217–239.
Haff, P. (2014). Humans and technology in the Anthropocene: Six rules. The Anthropocene
Review, 1(2), 126–136.
References 203
Handel, A. (2017). Distance matters: mobilities and the politics of distance. Mobilities.
Hartmann, K. (1966). Sartres Sozialphilosophie. Eine Untersuchung zur Critique de la Raison
Dialectique I. De Gruyter.
Harvey, P., & Knox, H. (2012). The Enchantments of Infrastructure. Mobilities, 7(4),
521–536.
Hegel, G. W. F. (1986). Phänomenologie des Geistes. Suhrkamp.
Heidegger, M. (2000). Die Frage nach der Technik. In Vorträge und Aufsätze (7–36).
Vittorio Klostermann.
Heidegger, M. (2005). Die Grundprobleme der Phänomenologie. Vittorio Klostermann.
Heidegger, M. (2006). Sein und Zeit. Max Niemeyer.
Heßler, M. (2012). Kulturgeschichte der Technik. Campus.
Heßler, M. (2019). Technik und Autonomie Kulturhistorische Bemerkungen zu einem
komplexen Verhältnis. In H. Hirsch-Kreinsen & A. Karacic (Eds.), Autonome
Systeme und Arbeit: Perspektiven, Herausforderungen und Grenzen der Künstlichen Intelligenz
in der Arbeitswelt (247–274). transcript.
Hubig, C. (1978). Dialektik und Wissenschaftslogik: Eine sprachphilosophisch-handlungstheoretische
Analyse. De Gruyter.
Hubig, C. (2006). Die Kunst des Möglichen I, Grundlinien einer dialektischen Philosophie
der Technik Band 1: Technikphilosophie als Reflexion der Medialität. transcript.
Hubig, C. (2007). Die Kunst des Möglichen II, Grundlinien einer dialektischen Philosophie
der Technik Band 2: Ethik der Technik als provisorische Moral. transcript.
Hubig, C. (2010). Kulturbegriff – Abgrenzungen, Leitdifferenzen, Perspektiven. In
G. Banse & A. Grunwald (Eds.), Technik und Kultur. Bedingungs- und Beeinflussungsverhältnisse
(55–72). KIT Scientific Publishing.
Hubig, C. (2013a). Arnold Gehlen: Die Seele im technischen Zeitalter. Sozialpsychologische
Probleme der Industriellen Gesellschaft. In Nachdenken über Technik
(150–153). Edition Sigma.
Hubig, C. (2013b). Historische Wurzeln der Technikphilosophie. In Nachdenken über
Technik. Die Klassiker der Technikphilosophie und neuere Entwicklungen (19–40). Edition
Sigma.
Hubig, C. (2015). Die Kunst des Möglichen III, Grundlinien einer dialektischen Philosophie
der Technik Band 3: Macht der Technik (1. Aufl.). transcript.
Hubig, C. (2016). Dialektik. In P. Richter (Ed.), Professionell Ethik und Philosophie unterrichten.
Ein Arbeitsbuch (133–144). Kohlhammer.
Hughes, T. P. (1987). The Evolution of Large Technological Systems. In W. E. Bijker, T.
P. Hughes, & T. Pinch (Eds.), The Social Construction of Large Technological Systems.
New Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology (51–82). MIT Press.
Huning, A. (2013). Ernst Kapp: Grundlinien einer Philosophie der Technik. In C.
Hubig & G. Ropohl (Eds.), Nachdenken über Technik (214–217). Edition Sigma.
Ihde, D. (1990). Technology and the Lifeworld. From Garden to Earth. University Press.
204 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology Vol I. Henry Holt and Company.
Jay, M. (1984). Marxism and Totality. The Adventures of a Concept from Lukács to Habermas.
Polity Press.
Jessop, B., Brenner, N., & Jones, M. (2008). Theorizing Sociospatial Relations. Environment
and Planning D: Society and Space, 26, 389–401.
Joerges, B. (1999). Die Brücken des Robert Moses. Stille Post in der Stadt- und Techniksoziologie.
Leviathan, 27(1), 43–63.
Kant, I. (1974). Kritik der Urteilskraft. Suhrkamp.
Kapp, E. (2015). Grundlinien einer Philosophie der Technik. Meiner.
Karafyllis, N. C. (2019). Soziotechnisches System. In K. Liggieri & O. Müller (Eds.),
Mensch-Maschine-Interaktion: Handbuch zu Geschichte – Kultur – Ethik (300–303).
J.B. Metzler.
Kim, S., Park, J., Abdel-Aty, M., Lee, S., & Kim, S. (2019). Influence of road lane reductions
on motorised and non-motorised traffic safety. Proceedings of the Institution
of Civil Engineers – Municipal Engineer, 172(4), 233–238.
Kleinherenbrink, A., & Gusman, S. (2018). The Ontology of Social Objects: Harman’s
Immaterialism and Sartre’s Practico-Inert. Open Philosophy, 1(1), 79–93.
Klinger, T., Kenworthy, J. R., & Lanzendorf, M. (2013). Dimensions of urban mobility
cultures. A comparison of German cities. Journal of Transport Geography, 31, 18–29.
Koselleck, R., Brunner, O., & Conze, W. (Eds.). (1982). Krise und Kritik. In Geschichtliche
Grundbegriffe. Historisches Lexikon zur politisch-sozialen Sprache in Deutschland
(617–675). Klett-Cotta.
Kröger, W., & Zio, E. (2011). Vulnerable Systems. Springer London.
Larkin, B. (2013). The Politics and Poetics of Infrastructure. Annual Review of Anthropology,
42(1), 327–343.
Latour, B. (2004). Why has Critique Run Out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters
of Concern. Critical Inquiry, 30(2), 225–248.
Lee, G., Joo, S., Oh, C., & Choi, K. (2013). An evaluation framework for traffic calming
measures in residential areas. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment,
25, 68–76.
Leroi-Gourhan, A. (1988). Hand und Wort. Suhrkamp.
Little, R. G. (2002). Controlling Cascading Failure: Understanding the Vulnerabilities
of Interconnected Infrastructures. Journal of Urban Technology, 9(1), 109–123.
Lockwood, T. C. (2013). Habituation, Habit, and Character in Aristotle’s Nicomachean
Ethics. In T. Sparrow & A. Hutchinson (Eds.), A History of Habit. From
Aristotle to Bourdieu (19–36). Lexington Books.
LSJ-Ancient Greek dictionaries (no date a): ἔχω. Retrieved from https://lsj.gr/wiki/
%E1%BC%94%CF%87%CF%89
LSJ-Ancient Greek dictionaries (no date b): τέχνη. Retrieved from https://lsj.gr/wik
i/%CF%84%CE%AD%CF%87%CE%BD%CE%B7.
Luckner, A. (2005). Klugheit. De Gruyter.
References 205
Luckner, A. (2012). Gestellte Möglichkeiten. Heidegger über die technische Seinsweise.
In P. Fischer, A. Luckner, & U. Ramming (Eds.), Die Reflexion des Möglichen.
Zur Dialektik von Handeln, Erkennen und Werten (51–64). LIT.
Lukács, G. (1923). Geschichte und Klassenbewusstsein. Studien über marxistische Dialektik.
Luchterhand.
Lukitsch, K., Müller, M., & Stahlhut, C. (2018). Critiality. In J. I. Engels (Ed.), Key
Concepts for Critical Infrastructure Research (11–20). Springer VS.
Marx, K. (1983). Grundrisse der Kritik der Politischen Ökonomie (MEW 42). Dietz.
Marx, K., & Engels, F. (1962). Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Ökonomie. Erster Band
Buch I. Der Produktionsprozeß des Kapitals (MEW 23). Dietz.
Mauss, M. (1934). Les techniques du corps. Journal de Psychologie, 32(3–4).
Mauss, M. (1973). Techniques of the Body. Economy and Society, 2(1), 70–88.
Mayntz, R. (2002). Zur Theoriefähigkeit makro-sozialer Analysen. In R. Mayntz
(Ed.), Akteure, Mechanismen, Modelle: Zur Theoriefähigkeit makro-sozialer Analysen
(7–43). Campus.
Mayntz, R., & Hughes, T. P. (Eds.). (1988). The Development of Large Technical Systems.
Campus.
Merker, Barbara (2015): Die Sorge als Sein des Daseins (§§ 39–44). In Rentsch, T.
(Ed.), Martin Heidegger: Sein und Zeit (109–124). De Gruyter.
Merki, C. M. (2008). Verkehrsgeschichte und Mobilität. Verlag Eugen Ulmer.
Middleton, J. (2011). I’m on Autopilot, I Just Follow the Route: Exploring the Habits,
Routines, and Decision-Making Practices of Everyday Urban Mobilities. Environment
and Planning A: Economy and Space, 43(12), 2857–2877.
Møller, B., & Thøgersen, J. (2008). Car Use Habits: An Obstacle to the Use of Public
Transportation? In C. Jensen-Butler, B. Sloth, M. M. Larsen, B. Madsen, & O. A.
Nielsen (Eds.), Road Pricing, the Economy and the Environment (301–313). Springer.
Monahan, M. J. (2008). Sartre’s Critique of Dialectical Reason and the Inevitability of
Violence: Human Freedom in the Milieu of Scarcity. Sartre Studies International,
14(2), 48–70.
Müller, M. (2017). The Urban Disposition. A Sartrean Framework for the Analysis of
Urban Life. Filosofia. Revista Da Faculdade de Letras Segunda Série, 34, 187–203.
Müller, M. (2021). Structure and Background. The Influence of Infrastructures on
Human Action. In M. Nagenborg, T. W. Stone, M. González Woge, & P. E. Vermaas
(Eds.), Technology and the City. Towards a Philosophy of Urban Technologies
(121–136). Springer International Publishing.
Neal, D. T., Wood, W., Labrecque, J. S., & Lally, P. (2012). How do habits guide behavior?
Perceived and actual triggers of habits in daily life. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 48, 492–498.
Neal, D. T., Wood, W., Wu, M., & Kurlander, D. (2011). The Pull of the Past: When
Do Habits Persist Despite Conflict With Motives? Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 37(11), 1428–1437.
206 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
Newman, P., & Kenworthy, J. (2015). The End of Automobile Dependence. How Cities are
Moving Beyond Car-Based Planning. Island Press.
Norman, D. A. (2013). The Design of Everyday Things. Basic Books.
Orlikowski, W. J., & Scott, S. V. (2008). Sociomateriality: Challenging the Separation
of Technology, Work and Organization. The Academy of Management Annals, 2(1),
433–474.
Peaucelle, J. (2000). From Taylorism to Post-Taylorism. Simultaneously Pursuing
Several Management Objectives. Journal of Organizational Change Management,
13(5), 452–467.
Peirce, C. S. (1878). How to Make Our Ideas Clear. Popular Science Monthly, 12,
286–302.
Petit, V., & Guillaume, B. (2018). We Have Never Been Wild: Towards an Ecology of
the Technical Milieu. In S. Loeve, X. Guchet, & B. Bensaude Vincent (Eds.), French
Philosophy of Technology. Classical Readings and Contemporary Approaches (81–100).
Springer.
Pickering, A. (1995). The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency, and Science. Univ. of Chicago
Press.
Quinn, J. M., Pascoe, A., Wood, W., & Neal, D. T. (2010). Can’t Control Yourself? Monitor
Those Bad Habits. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36(4), 499–511.
Rae, G. (2011). Sartre, Group Formations, and Practical Freedom: The Other in
the Critique of Dialectical Reason. Comparative and Continental Philosophy, 3(2),
183–206.
Ravaisson, F. (2008). Of Habit. Continuum International Publishing Group.
Remley, W. L. (2012). Sartre and Engels. The Critique of Dialectical Reason and
the Confrontation on the Dialectics of Nature. Sartre Studies International, 18(2),
19–48.
Richter, M. (2011). Freiheit und Macht. Perspektiven kritischer Gesellschaftstheorie—Der
Humanismusstreit zwischen Sartre und Foucault. transcript.
Rietveld, E., & Kiverstein, J. (2014). A Rich Landscape of Affordances. Ecological Psychology,
26, 325–352.
Rinaldi, S. M., Peerenboom, J. P., & Kelly, T. K. (2001). Identifying, understanding,
and analyzing critical infrastructure independencies. IEEE Control Systems Magazine,
21(6), 11–25.
Rogers Gibson, J. (2017). Built to Last. Challenges and Opportunities for Climate-Smart
Infrastructure in California. Union of Concerned Scientists.
Ropohl, G. (2009). Allgemeine Technologie: Eine Systemtheorie der Technik (3., überarbeitete
Auflage). Universitätsverlag Karlsruhe.
Rosenberger, R. (2014). Multistability and the Agency of Mundane Artifacts: From
Speed Bumps to Subway Benches. Human Studies, 37, 369–392.
Rosenberger, R., & Verbeek, P.-P. (Eds.). (2015). Postphenomenological Investigations.
Essays on Human-Technology Relations. Lexington Books.
References 207
Santos, G. (2017). Road transport and CO2 emissions: What are the challenges?
Transport Policy, 59, 71–74.
Sartre, J.-P. (1943). L’être et le néant. Essai d’ontologie phénomenologique. Gallimard.
Sartre, J.-P. (1960). Critique de la raison dialectique I. Théorie des ensembles pratiques. Gallimard.
Sartre, J.-P. (1963). Search for a Method (H. E. Barnes, Trans.). Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
Sartre, J.-P. (1969). Itinerary of a Thought. New Left Review, 58, 43–66.
Sartre, J.-P. (1978). Critique of Dialectical Reason I. Theory of Practical Ensembles (A. Sheridan-
Smith, Trans.). NLB.
Sartre, J.-P. (1985). Critique de la raison dialectique II. L’Intelligibilité de l’histoire. Gallimard.
Sartre, J.-P. (1991). Critique of Dialectical Reason II. The Intelligibility of History (Q. Hoare,
Trans.). Verso.
Sartre, J.-P. (2001). To Be Hungry Already Means That You Want To Be Free. Sartre
Studies International, 7(2).
Sartre, J.-P. (2003). Being and Nothingness. An Essay on Phenomenological Ontology (H.
E. Barnes, Trans.). Routledge.
Sartre, J.-P. (2005). Der Existentialismus ist ein Humanismus. In Der Existentialismus
ist ein Humanismus und andere philosophische Essays 1943–1948 (145–192). Rowohlt.
Sartre, J.-P. (2021). Being and Nothingness. An Essay on Phenomenological Ontology (S.
Richmond, Trans.). Washington Square Press/Atria.
Schatzki, T. (2010). Materiality and Social Life. ResearchGate, 5(2), 123–149.
Schivelbusch, W. (2016). Das verzehrende Leben der Dinge. Versuch über die Konsumption.
Fischer.
Schivelbusch, W. (2018). Geschichte der Eisenbahnreise. Zur Industrialisierung von Raum
und Zeit im 19. Jahrhundert. Fischer.
Schlanger, N. (2020). André Leroi-Gourhan (1911–1986). In M. Heßler & K. Liggieri
(Eds.), Technikanthropologie: Handbuch für Wissenschaft und Studium (22–130).
Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft mbH & Co. KG.
Schuitmaker, T. J. (2012). Identifying and unravelling persistent problems. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, 79(6), 1021–1031.
Schwanen, T., Banister, D., & Anable, J. (2012). Rethinking habits and their role in behaviour
change: The case of low-carbon mobility. Journal of Transport Geography,
24, 522–532.
Sheller, M., & Urry, J. (2006). The New Mobilities Paradigm. Environment and Planning
A: Economy and Space, 38(2), 207–226.
Shove, E. (2016). Infrastructures and practices: Networks beyond the city. In J.
Rutherford & O. Coutard (Eds.), Beyond the Networked City: Infrastructure Reconfigurations
and Urban Change in the North and South (242–258). Routledge.
Shove, E., & Trentmann, F. (Eds.). (2019). Infrastructures in Practice. The Dynamics of
Demand in Networked Societies. Routledge.
208 The Dialectic of Practical Ensembles
Siegler, M. (2022a). Der Regelkreis der Geschichte. Sartres Überlegungen zur
Gewohnheit im Spannungsfeld von Aristoteles und William James. In A.
Betschart (Ed.), Pragmatismus und Existentialismus. William James und Jean-Paul
Sartre (121–148). Schwabe Verlag.
Siegler, M. (2022b). The Dialectics of Action and Technology in the Philosophy of
Jean-Paul Sartre. Philosophy & Technology, 35(2), 1–28.
Simont, J., & Trezise, T. (1985). The Critique of Dialectical Reason: From Need to
Need, Circularly. Yale French Studies, 68, 108–123.
Smith, Q. (1979). Sartre’s theory of the progressive and regressive methods of phenomenology.
Man and World, 12(4), 433–444.
Sparrow, T., & Hutchinson, A. (Eds.). (2013). A History of Habit. From Aristotle to Bourdieu.
Lexington Books.
Star, S. L. (1999). The Ethnography of Infrastructure. American Behavioral Scientist,
43(3), 377–391.
Stone, R. V., Bowman, E. A. (1986). Dialectical Ethics: A First Look at Sartre’s Unpublished
1964 Rome Lecture Notes. Social Text, 13/14, 195–215.
Sydow, J., Windeler, A., Müller-Seitz, G., & Lange, K. (2012). Path Constitution Analysis:
A Methodology for Understanding Path Dependence and Path Creation.
Business Research, 5(2), 155–176.
Thompson, R. F. (2009). Habituation: A History. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory,
92, 127–134.
Tomlinson, G. (2014). Totalization, Temporalization and History: Marx and Sartre.
In L. Jeschke & A. May (Eds.), Matters of Time. Material Temporalities in Twentieth-
Century French Culture (87–102). Peter Lang.
Turner, C. (2014). The Return of Stolen Praxis. Counter-Finality in Sartre’s Critique
of Dialectical Reason. Sartre Studies International, 20(1), 36–44.
Urry, J. (2007). Mobilities. Polity Press.
Verplanken, B., & Wood, W. (2006). Interventions to Break and Create Consumer
Habits. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 25(1), 90–103.
Weber, J. (2020). MenschMaschine. In M. Heßler & K. Liggieri (Eds.), Technikanthropologie:
Handbuch für Wissenschaft und Studium (318–322). Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft
mbH & Co. KG.
Weismüller, C. (1999). Jean-Paul Sartres Philosophie der Dinge. Zur Wende von Jean-Paul
Sartres Kritik der dialektischen Vernunft sowie zu einer Psychoanalyse der Dinge. Psychoanalyse
& Philosophie.
Winner, L. (1980). Do Artifacts Have Politics? Daedalus, 109(1), 121–136.
Wood, W., & Neal, D. T. (2007). A new look at habits and the habit-goal interface.
Psychological Review, 114(4).
Wood, W., & Neal, D. T. (2016). Healthy through habit: Interventions for Initiating
& maintaining health behavior change. Behavioral Science & Policy, 2(1), 71–83.
References 209
Wood,W., & Rünger, D. (2016). Psychology of Habit. Annual Review of Psychology, 67(1),
289–314.
Xu, Y., Li, Y., & Zhang, F. (2013). Pedestrians’ intention to jaywalk: Automatic or
planned? A study based on a dual-process model in China. Accident Analysis and
Prevention, 50, 811–819.
Young, I. M. (1994). Gender as Seriality: Thinking about Women as a Social Collective.
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 19(3), 713–738.
Zhuang, X., & Wu, C. (2011). Pedestrians’ crossing behaviors and safety at unmarked
roadway in China. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 43(6), 1927–1936.
All print, e-book and open access versions of the titles in our list
are available in our online shop www.transcript-publishing.com
Essay
João Costa
Health as a Social System
Luhmann's Theory Applied to Health Systems.
An Introduction
January 2023, 198 p., pb.
30,00 € (DE), 978-3-8376-6693-9
E-Book: available as free open access publication
PDF: ISBN 978-3-8394-6693-3
Markus Gabriel, Christoph Horn, Anna Katsman, Wilhelm Krull,
Anna Luisa Lippold, Corine Pelluchon, Ingo Venzke
Towards a New Enlightenment –
The Case for Future-Oriented Humanities
2022, 80 p., pb.
18,00 € (DE), 978-3-8376-6570-3
E-Book: available as free open access publication
PDF: ISBN 978-3-8394-6570-7
ISBN 978-3-7328-6570-3
Anke Strüver, Sybille Bauriedl (eds.)
Platformization of Urban Life
Towards a Technocapitalist Transformation
of European Cities
2022, 304 p., pb.
29,50 € (DE), 978-3-8376-5964-1
E-Book: available as free open access publication
PDF: ISBN 978-3-8394-5964-5
All print, e-book and open access versions of the titles in our list
are available in our online shop www.transcript-publishing.com
Essay
Frank Adloff, Alain Caillé (eds.)
Convivial Futures
Views from a Post-Growth Tomorrow
2022, 212 p., pb.
25,00 € (DE), 978-3-8376-5664-0
E-Book: available as free open access publication
PDF: ISBN 978-3-8394-5664-4
ISBN 978-3-7328-5664-0
Sven Quadflieg, Klaus Neuburg, Simon Nestler (eds.)
(Dis)Obedience in Digital Societies
Perspectives on the Power of Algorithms and Data
2022, 380 p., pb., ill.
29,00 € (DE), 978-3-8376-5763-0
E-Book: available as free open access publication
PDF: ISBN 978-3-8394-5763-4
ISBN 978-3-7328-5763-0
Sabine Pfeiffer
Digital Capitalism and Distributive Forces
2022, 282 p., pb., ill.
59,00 € (DE), 978-3-8376-5893-4
E-Book: available as free open access publication
PDF: ISBN 978-3-8394-5893-8
ISBN 978-3-7328-5893-4
