%> 

m< OU 160623 >m 

gm " * 



MAKERS OF MODERN EUROPE 

Edited by DONALD C. McKAY in association with DUMAS MALONE 



NIETZSCHE 



LONDON : GEOFFREY CUMBERLEGE 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 



NIETZSCHE 



BY 

CRANE BRINTON 

McLean Professor of Ancient and Modern History, 
Harvard University 




CAMBRIDGE MASSACHUSETTS 

HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

1948 



COPYRIGHT, 1941 
BY THE PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS OF HARVARD COLLEGE 



Second Printing 



ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. NO PART OF THIS 
BOOK MAY BE REPRODUCED IN ANY FORM 
WITHOUT PERMISSION FROM THE PUBLISHER. 



PRINTED AT THE HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRINTING OFFICE 
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS, U.S.A. 



To 
L. J. HENDERSON 



EDITOR'S PREFACE 

present biographical series, initiated by the volume on 
JL Nietzsche by Crane Brinton, has no intention of offering to 
the public once again the biographies of men which appear with 
almost monotonous regularity Napoleon, Cavour, Gladstone, 
Marx. It proposes instead to present the lives of men for whom 
there is no biography, or no adequate biography in English. At 
the same time these biographies will deal with men who left a 
significant impress on their age, men who may properly be con- 
sidered as "Makers of Modern Europe." 

Contributors will be invited to keep steadily before them the 
view that serious historical biography involves constantly the 
relation of its subject to his historical context. They will expose 
in adequate detail the problems with which the statesman dealt, 
the significant contributions which the thinker made. They 
will address themselves constantly to the question: "What was 
the significance of this man for his epoch?" 

The conception and development of the present series owes 
much to the counsel of others and especially of those here men- 
tioned. I have consulted repeatedly various ones of my col- 
leagues at Harvard, and have had the helpful advice of 
Professor Charles K. Webster of the University of London, 
Professors Carl L. Becker and Philip E. Mosely of Cornell, Pro- 
fessors Arthur M. Wilson of Dartmouth and Chester W. Clark 
of the University of Iowa, and Drs. Edgar P. Dean and Robert 
G. Woolbert of the Council on Foreign Relations. In this, as in 



viii EDITOR'S PREFACE 

my other projects, I have enjoyed the stimulating interest of my 
wife and have been saved from many errors by her detached 
and candid criticism. 

DONALD C. McKAY 

JOHN WINTHROP HOUSE 
HARVARD UNIVERSITY 
January /6, 7947 



AUTHOR'S PREFACE 

IWJSH to make quite clear that this study of Nietzsche does 
not attempt to analyze his work from the point of view of 
a professional philosopher, nor to estimate his place in the long 
line of such philosophers. That is a task for which I am not 
prepared. This study is rather an attempt to place Nietzsche's 
work in the more general currents of "opinion" in our time. It 
is a study of Nietzsche as politiquc ct moralistc. Begun before 
Munich, finished after the defeat of France, it must bear 
some marks of contemporary events. Nazi commentators on 
Nietzsche are not agreeable and conciliating writers. There is, 
at least to an American brought up before the Four Years' 
War, something very unpleasant about the Nazis, and especially 
about Nazi intellectuals. Abusive epithets like "barbarous," 
"uncivilized," "insane," "arrogant," "brutal," all carry many 
of the right overtones: you cannot fairly use nice words, nor 
even neutral words dear to semanticists, about the group that 
has made contemporary Germany. Yet I confess I have not 
been able to find what seems to me just the right word for the 
Nazis: the nearest I can come is the metaphor with which I 
close Chapter VIII. I have not, then, written sine ira ct studio. 
On the other hand, I hope that I have not indulged in the now 
once more popular sport of Hun-baiting. This book is not 
meant to indict the German nation. 

I owe much to odds and ends of conversations with many of 
my friends, whom I cannot in these pages do more than thank 
as a group. I should like, however, to acknowledge more 



X PREFACE 

specifically numerous debts. To the Macmillan Company I 
am grateful for their generous permission to quote liberally 
from the authorized English translation of Nietzsche's works, 
edited by Dr. Oscar Levy. Dr. Fritz Epstein, Professor Seelye 
Bixler, and Professor S. B. Fay have drawn my attention to 
specific phases of Nietzsche's life and influence which might 
otherwise have escaped me. My editors, Donald McKay and 
Dumas Malone, have been most helpful. Mrs. Ruth Harris has 
been kind enough to read the whole manuscript, and make sug- 
gestions from which I have profited greatly. Mrs. Harriet Dor- 
man has prepared the manuscript, read the proof, and made 
valuable suggestions. Professor A. O. Lovejoy has consented to 
my using in Chapter VIII large parts of my article on "The 
National Socialists' Use of Nietzsche," which appeared in the 
Journal of the History of Ideas in April, 1940; he has also helped 
me greatly in shaping the mass of material on Nietzsche to be 
found in Nazi writings. To all these I am especially grateful. 

CRANE BRINTON 

DUNSTER HOUSE 
HARVARD UNIVERSITY 
November 7, 7940 



CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION XV 

I. THE STUDENT 3 

'll. THE PROFESSOR 2J 

pi. THE PROPHET 50 

JV. WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 74 

,/V. WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED Il8 

JVI. NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 142 

Vll. THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 172 

VIII. NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 200 

ylX. NIETZSCHE IN WESTERN THOUGHT: PROPHECY ON A 

PROPHET 232 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 247 

INDEX 263 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

NIETZSCHE IN His LAST YEAR OF LIFE frontispiece 

Thanks to photography, we have as good a record of Nietzsche's ap- 
pearance as one might expect of a member of a German middle-class 
family in the late nineteenth century. He did not, however, become a 
subject for artists until the decade of his great fame, the 1890'*, by 
which time he was insane and bedridden. Elizabeth allowed several 
artists to have access to her brother at Jena and Weimar. In 1899 one 
of these, Dr. Hans Olde, made this now familiar drawing, showing the 
sick Nietzsche gazing sightlessly at the setting sun. There arc several 
better-known engravings from this drawing, in which only Nietzsche's 
head or head and shoulders are shown. 

NIETZSCHE AT SIXTEEN 22 

This is the familiar photograph which all good German families have 
taken of the son at his confirmation. 

RICHARD AND COSIMA WAGNER 46 

The famous couple posed at about the period when Nietzsche first 
made their acquaintance an acquaintance which very rapidly became 
friendship. 

ELIZABETH NIETZSCHE 112 

This is Elizabeth on the edge of middle age, just before she married 
Bernhard Forster. She did not assume the name by which she is known 
to students of Nietzsche, Frau Forster-Nietzsche, until the 1890'$, when 
her husband was dead and her brother famous. 

NIETZSCHE IN UNIFORM 170 

This photograph was taken in the fall of 1868, about the time of 
Nietzsche's appointment to the professorship at Basle. 

HITLER AT THE NIETZSCHE-ARCHIV IN WEIMAR 208 

Elizabeth did all she could to associate both Hitler and Mussolini with 
the memory of her brother. The photographer has here, perhaps sym- 
bolically, cut Nietzsche's bust in half. The Fuehrer is there in full. 



INTRODUCTION 

MIGHT, even in this world, must not be allowed to make 
right. Ever since Socrates so readily refuted the un- 
subtle arguments of Thrasymachus, the best people, and cer- 
tainly the best philosophers, have in general agreed that Truth 
is great even though it does not prevail. Yet successful might 
forces itself on the serious, and indeed indignant, attention of 
the firmest believers in the ultimate victory of Truth and Right. 
Successful might, perhaps unfortunately, is never comic. Hit- 
ler's mustache, which looked funny on the crank who failed 
in the Beer-hall Putsch, now looks menacing on the victorious 
Fuehrer. Similarly with Hitler's ideas. Mcin Kampf, that 
hash of racial superstitions, contorted history, odds and ends 
of a soap-box orator's culture, crude and cunning rhetorical 
violence, and several sorts of neuroses, seemed to most educated 
people only a few years ago hardly worthy of serious criticism. 
Today, if Mcin Kampf still seems to the unconverted no mas- 
terpiece of literature or of philosophy, even the unconverted 
must admit that Hitler's book is an important part of a National 
Socialist canon now established as the faith of millions. 

Not all of that canon is derived from culturally disreputable 
sources. Mcin Kampf itself, if it owes much to bad ethnologists 
like Gobineau and to fakers like the anti-Semites, could hardly 
have been written without the aid of two of the great names in 
the cultural heritage of the West Richard Wagner and 
Friedrich Nietzsche. About both men there has always been 
controversy: neither is a serene and Olympian figure like 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

Goethe, forever safe in any list of the Hundred Best. But both 
are respectable in a way that most of the other contributors to 
Nazi holy writings are not respectable. Both have followings 
outside Germany. The Nietzscheans, if not so numerous nor 
so noisy as the Wagnerites, have been quite as worshipful. 1 

That a subtle and most literate philosopher and an earth- 
shaking composer, both of them enshrined among the beautiful 
and therefore good, should help make the faith professed 
by Dr. Goebbels is not the only bit of irony to stare at the 
skeptical student of National Socialism. It is a fact, perhaps too 
obvious and too often remarked to be worth much as irony, 
that a striking proportion of the names of those who have built 
up the canon of the National Socialist faith in the German race 
are not German. The Comte de Gobineau, Paul de Lagarde, 
Houston Stewart Chamberlain, Treitschke, Nietzsche do not 
sound very German. Indeed, these French, English, and Slavic 
names must ring discordantly through Valhalla. The men who 
bore them make a strange band, as disparate as any that ever 
made a faith; and if they have come in death to that most 
Germanic heaven, they must add appreciably to the pleasurable 
confusion of its traditional melee. Nietzsche, whose memory 
on German earth and not only German is now among the 
most honored of them all, has certainly fought his share, if not 
rather more than his share; but one doubts whether he is happy 
among his fellow Supermen. Indeed, since in Valhalla words 
presumably kill no more finally than do swords, he must be 

*Mr. Peter Viereck first brought to the attention of Americans the Nazi 
canonization of Wagner as a thinker and prophet. His articles in Common 
Sense for November and December, 1939, are being expanded into a book to 
be published shortly. 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

most unhappy unless there is in Valhalla also a Sils-Maria. 
For Nietzsche, living, got on very badly with flesh-and-blood 
Germans. He loved to badger them, to attack their most as- 
sured superiorities. 

I shall never admit that a German can understand what music is. 
Those musicians who arc called German, the greatest and most famous 
foremost, are all foreigners, either Slavs, Croats, Italians, Dutchmen 
or Jews: or else, like Heinrich Schiitz, Bach and Handel, they arc Ger- 
mans of a strong race which is now extinct. 2 

He had no use whatever for theories of race superiority, which 
he regarded as mere swindles. He wrote of himself as a "good 
European," and he lived most of his adult life in Switzerland 
and Italy. 

And yet the writings of this man are in high honor in Na- 
tional Socialist Germany. They do not burn his books there: 
they print them by the thousands in popular editions. Their 
reasons on the whole are consistent with their doctrines, and 
worth investigating. Nietzsche's career, in life and in death, is 
one of the most curious in modern intellectual history. It is a 
career which may help us understand better what goes on in 
the minds of the intellectual leaders of National Socialism. 
For these revolutionary preachers of the deed, these lovers of 
blood and soil, these anti-intellectuals, are in a sense as much 
intellectuals as those other revolutionaries, the children of the 
Enlightenment, the philosophcs who made the articles of faith 
of 1776 and 1789. But the Nazi intellectuals are followers, not 
of Locke and Voltaire, but of Nietzsche; and Nietzsche, 
wherever he led, did not lead towards the Rights of Man. 

1 Nietzsche, Eccc Homo, "Why I am so clever," 7. 



NIETZSCHE 



CHAPTER I 
THE STUDENT 

IN OCTOBER 15, 1844, a son was born to the young wife 
of the Lutheran pastor of the little village of Rocken in a 
part of Saxony which had fallen to Prussia after the War of 
Liberation. It was the birthday of the reigning king of Prussia, 
Frederick William IV, towards whom pastor Nietzsche felt 
as a clergyman of the Church of Luther should feel towards 
his sovereign. Some of these feelings he managed to express 
at the christening of his son: 

O blissful moment! O exquisite festival! O unspeakable holy duty! 
In the name of the Lord I bless thce! From the bottom of my heart do 
I utter these words; Bring me, then, this my beloved child, that I may 
consecrate him unto the Lord! My son, Friedrich Wilhclm, thus shalt 
thou be named on earth, in honor of my royal benefactor on whose 
birthday thou wast born. 1 

The boy grew up as Fritz to his family and friends; and since, 
as a grown man and a philosopher, he came to feel an ordinary 
king of Prussia rather far beneath him, he did not customarily 
use the royal name, but signed himself simply Friedrich 
Nietzsche. 

About Nietzsche's heredity biographers have indulged them- 
selves in the fine free speculation customary in such matters, 
Nietzsche himself set them an example. The Slavic family 

1 E. Forstcr-Nictzschc, The Life of Nietzsche, English translation (1912), 
I, 12. 



4 NIETZSCHE 

name, and some talcs of his grandmother, gave his imagina- 
tion a few facts to work on, out of which, perhaps with the help 
of his always admiring young sister Elizabeth, he spun out a 
romantic tale of decent from a family of refugee Polish nobles 
named Nicki or Nietzky. 

My ancestors were Polish noblemen: it is owing to them that I have 
so much race instinct in my blood who knows? perhaps even the 
liberum veto. When I think of the number of times in my travels that 
I have been accosted as a Pole, even by Poles themselves, and how seldom 
I have been taken for a German, it seems to me as if I belonged to those 
only who have a sprinkling of German in them. 2 

The tremendous mustache, of the kind once known in the 
America of bicycle days as a "handle-bar mustache," which 
Nietzsche grew with such care and pride, may well have been 
worn to accentuate his Polish, and presumably also his noble, 
appearance. 

There is nothing in the story. There was no Polish blood in 
Nietzsche, and no very recent or certain noble blood. Five 
generations back of Friedrich in the paternal line, patient 
research has found a Christoph Nietzsche in Burkau in Upper 
Lusatia some time about the year 1600. There is further evi- 
dence to push the family back across the border into Slavic 

*Eccc HomOy "Why I am so wise," 3. Except for his first book, The Birth 
of Tragedy , Nietzsche's books are not systematically put together into long 
chapters, but are collections of aphorisms, verses, or parables (as in Zarathus- 
tra). References to Nietzsche's works are therefore usually given in the follow- 
ing form: title of the book, section name or number, and aphorism number. 
This is a very convenient form of reference, and will be used in this study of 
Nietzsche. Unlike reference to page numbers, it permits the reader to refer 
to any edition in the original or in translation. Wherever possible, I have 
quoted the English translation in the authorized edition of Nietzsche's works 
edited by Dr. Oscar Levy, published in the United States by the Macmillan 
Company, who have kindly granted me permission to quote from this edition. 



THE STUDENT 5 

Bohemia. The name Nietzsche is probably a variant German 
spelling of the diminutive form of a saint's name very popular 
among Slavs Nicholas. Some Czech blood, then flowed in 
Nietzsche's veins or, since modern genetics repudiates the 
metaphor of common blood, some Czech chromosomes went 
into the making of the man Nietzsche. But not many, at least 
no more than is usual among Germans in the middle Elbe 
basin. The other names in his ancestry, Oehler, Krause, and 
the like, sound German enough. 3 

Nietzsche's mental collapse has set many of his biographers 
the task of finding an hereditary taint of insanity in his family. 
They can find one case of mental illness readily enough. In 
August, 1848, his father fell on a flight of stone steps and suf- 
fered a severe concussion. After a year of illness, during which 
he never recovered mental or physical health, Pastor Nietzsche 
died. Apart from the fact that we have no satisfactory clinical 
reports of his illness, there remains the difficulty that in such 
cases it is impossible to assign any precise part to an hereditary 
disposition to insanity. There are no known similar cases in 
the family history, but beyond the maternal and paternal grand- 
parents we have no certain information whatever. Pastor 
Nietzsche came later to stand in the minds of his son and 
daughter, who could not really remember him in the flesh, as a 
sensitive, imaginative, scholarly man, held by fragile health to 
a country pastorate unworthy of his endowments of mind and 
character. His emotions, to judge from his words at the chris- 
tening of his son, were of the kind that frequently required 
exclamation points to do them justice; this, however, is no 

a M. Oehler, "Nietzsche's angeblichc polnischc Herkunft," Ostdeutschc 
Monatshcjte (February, 1938), XVIII, 679. 



6 NIETZSCHE 

more than good German taste in the romantic 1840*5, and is 
not in itself evidence even of a mild neurosis. 

Nietzsche's ancestors, so far as they can be traced, were ap- 
parently substantial middle-class folk, with solid roots in the 
soil of Germany where it meets the westernmost bastion of the 
Slavs Saxony, Lusatia, Bohemia. Many of them were Lu- 
theran clergymen. In Germany, as in England, pastorates in an 
established protestant church tend to be preserved in the fam- 
ily, and to give it a kind of distinction well short of that enjoyed 
by a landed nobility. Nietzsche's family background was one 
of which in his writings he seems now proud, now ashamed: 
sturdy, industrious, middle-class, respectable, undistinguished, 
a Germanic stock mixed with Slavic elements in brief, some- 
thing ccht dcutsch. 

After the death of her husband Frau Nietzsche retired with 
her mother-in-law, two sisters-in-law, and her two children to 
the quiet market-town of Naumburg on the river Saale. There 
is no evidence that the family were ever in pinched circum- 
stances. Frau Nietzsche had a small pension as a pastor's 
widow, and in Naumburg she was in the midst of her own 
family, the Oehlers, who were prosperous, well-established 
people. Fritz grew up in a household carefully and economi- 
cally run in the traditions common to European bourgeois. The 
Nietzsches were never allowed to be extravagant. But of the 
poverty and uncertainty in which fatherless boys so often grow 
up there was none at all. Indeed, the boy's childhood was com- 
fortable and sheltered beyond that of most boys, even in the 
safe, domestic Germany of the mid-nineteenth century. 

Too sheltered, perhaps, for his future stability, Fritz grew up 
wholly surrounded by the determined love of five women, 



THE STUDENT 7 

grandmother, mother, aunts, and sister. They were all good 
women, much too good to distinguish between love and owner- 
ship. Aunt Augusta, as she appeared to Elizabeth, will do as a 
sample: 

For years she suffered from exceedingly painful gastric troubles, which 
she bore, however, with great sweetness and patience; and in spite of 
her affliction, she did not cease from conducting the affairs of the house- 
hold in a truly admirable manner. "Leave me this one solace," she 
would say, when she was entreated to spare herself. 4 

Though Elizabeth reports that Aunt Rosalie regularly perused 
the papers, which was unusual among women in those days, 
none of the women seem to have been very intellectual, nor to 
have possessed the supreme feminine wisdom which tells them 
when to let a man alone. Fritz, as the one boy left in the family, 
they worshipped not only with the fervor women in such social 
groups commonly display towards the symbolically dominant 
male, but with the added fervor German women feel for the 
man of the family. The object of such worship is hard to dis- 
tinguish from any other object of tyranny. His sister herself 
reports her absolute subservience to her brother, her elder by 
three years. When she came to study Greek, for instance, she 
always translated in her mind avro? $a by "Fritz says so." 
Yet it is clear throughout her biography of her famous brother 
that she always bossed him about, and that never, save in his 
philosophical flights, could he twist himself loose from the 
bonds of her submissive affection. He lived to write one of the 
most innocently transparent bits of wishful thinking in all 
literature: u Thou goest to women ? Do not forget thy whip!" 5 

* Forstcr-Nictzschc, Nietzsche, I, 29, 
8 Thus Spake Zarathustra> I, chap, xviii. 



8 NIETZSCHE 

Fritz was a good little boy, studious, well-behaved, highly 
esteemed by his teachers. In Anglo-Saxon countries, he would 
have been a horrible little prig, and it is possible that even in 
Germany the following anecdote, as told by his sister, suggests 
virtues carried rather uncomfortably far: 

One day, just as school was over, there was a heavy downpour of 
rain, and we looked out along the Priestergasse for our Fritz. All the 
little boys were running like mad to their homes at last little Fritz 
also appeared, walking slowly along, with his cap covering his slate and 
his little handkerchief spread over the whole. . . . When our mother 
remonstrated with him for coming home soaked to the skin he replied 
seriously: "But, Mamma, in the rules of the school it is written: on leaving 
school, boys are forbidden to jump and run about in the street, but must 
walk quietly and decorously to their homes." Fritz had obeyed this rule 
under the most adverse circumstances. 6 

The boy was known in Naumburg as "the little minister," a 
title perhaps not given quite in the spirit in which Elizabeth 
reports it. 

We need not rely wholly on Elizabeth for our knowledge of 
this precocious and virtuous childhood. Excellent confirmation 
comes from Fritz himself. At the age of fourteen he began an 
autobiography. Fragments of this, together with other juve- 
nilia, essays, verses, and school exercises, have been published 
with the most thorough scholarly editing in the first volumes 
of the "Historical and critical edition of the collected works of 
Friedrich Nietzsche." 7 The lad whose odd scraps of writing 

e Forster-Nietzsche, Nietzsche, I, 25. 

7 Friedrich Nietzsche, WerJ^e und Briefe, Historisch-lyitische Gcsamtaus- 
gabe (1933-), Werfy. i Band. "J u g en dschriften, 1854-1861." Briefe. i Band. 
"Briefe der Schiller und Bonner Studentenzeit, 1850-1865." The autobiography, 
"Aus meinem Leben," is in Werfa I, 1-32. All these papers were preserved by 
the especial care of Elizabeth. No one who has followed her determined use 



THE STUDENT 9 

have thus against all odds survived and found their way to print 
is now and then boyish enough. "I ate lots of cherries yesterday, 
and my uncles played several of Beethoven's sonatas for me." 8 
He was clearly a bright, bookish boy, omnivorous in his reading, 
and already bitten with the desire to write. He can, indeed, al- 
ready write; for although the matter of these writings is wholly 
conventional, their form shows little of the schoolboy's awkward 
stumbling. There are few attempts at purple passages, and 
even the conventional romantic soul-searchings are conducted 
in amazingly crisp German prose. He reads history, mythology, 
travels, poetry, and though Elizabeth reports his fondness for 
play-acting, the printed juvenilia are overwhelmingly didactic 
or analytical, rather than narrative or dramatic. Nietzsche, 
indeed, never was able to get far enough outside himself to be 
an effective mime. No one would expect originality in such 
early writings; precocity means successful imitation, or it means 
nothing. But one might expect a trace of mischievousness, 
some faint foreshadowing of the ironic laughter that was to 
come. There is, in fact, so little of such foreshadowing that one 
wonders what so serious a boy made of Tristam Shandy, which 
he resolved to buy for himself as a birthday gift on his fifteenth 
birthday. 9 



of the Nietzsche- Archiv in Weimar to keep to memory of her brother as 
spotlessly and innocuously German, Christian, and middle-class as possible 
a very hard job would dare assert that this represents all the boy Nietzsche 
wrote. He may, like other little boys, have had naughty thoughts, and even 
put them on paper; but if he did, no trace of them remains, and it is always 
possible that he never had them. 

* Bricjc, I, 9. To his friend Gustav Krug. 
l, 119. 



io NIETZSCHE 

II 

At fourteen, the adolescent boy was at last separated from 
his adoring womenfolk, and entered on a scholarship at the 
boys' school in Pforta, five miles away from Naumburg on the 
river Saale. Schulpforta has always had an admirable intellec- 
tual tradition, and many writers and scholars have gone from 
there to the universities. Lutheran pastors and teachers had 
taken over the place from mediaeval monks, and maintained 
some of the strictness, sobriety, and devotion to a classical edu- 
cational discipline of the mediaeval school. The boys worked 
hard at Pforta. But the school did not put its pupils through 
the essentially unintellectual social conditioning such nurseries 
of a ruling class as Eton or the Prussian cadet schools im- 
pose. Nietzsche was probably already at fifteen as proof 
against this sort of conditioning as was, at the same age, 
the lad Shelley. But Shelley had to undergo Eton and Ox- 
ford. Nietzsche never came quite so close to this harsh 
world. 

Pforta was not of course entirely a cloister, a prison, or a 
library. It was filled with adolescent boys who played, strolled 
in the garden, swam in the river, joked, and on Sundays and 
holidays drank wine from the school's own vineyards. Yet this 
kind of play was pleasantly anarchic, with nothing to gall 
or restrain a lad already precociously intellectual. Fritz had 
at first some trouble adapting himself to the routine of early 
rising, communal meals, and ordered studying, but he was still 
young enough to bend slightly. A fragmentary diary, preserved 
as usual by Elizabeth's care, gives an interesting account of the 
daily life of this most German school, so different from any- 



THE STUDENT II 

thing young Americans and young Englishmen have ever been 
put through. 10 

As the boy grows up his letters, journals, and essays for he 
was always writing begin to lose their straightforward 
clarity. With adolescence, the appropriate emotional crisis 
seems to come over Fritz, and gets expressed in ways which 
are still appropriately conventional. "Vorbei, vorbei! Herz, 
willst du zerspringen?" Roses, and the world, must die. He 
writes poetry, pages and pages of it, lyric and dramatic. At his 
height, in u The Conspiracy of Philotas," he achieves thirty-six 
exclamation points in twenty-seven lines, which is rather bet- 
ter than his father had done. 11 A new and somewhat less 
solemn tone comes into the letters from Pforta. He writes long 
letters to his old friends Krug and Finder, and to a new one, 
Granier, letters full of self-conscious and literary jesting, wag- 
gish and lively as though they came from a perpetually young 
American college professor of English: 

The plan for my contrarious novel Lord! you've already forgotten 
it never mind! I threw overboard in annoyance as soon as I had 
finished the first chapter. I'm sending you the monstrous manuscript 
to use for ... well, what you will. . . . Yours till we meet again soon 

F W v Nietzky (alias Muck) 
homme ttudic en lettrcs 
(votrc ami sans lettrcs) 12 

The lad is clearly capable, at moments, of high spirits, just as, 
in his letters to his mother, his aunts, and his sister, he is capable 
of strong affection. Yet neither the spirits nor the affection ever 
sound very earthy, substantial, straightforward. Nietzsche is 



c, I, 119-125. 
11 Werfa I, 129; 170. 
u Bricfe, I, 193. To Raimund Granier, July 28, 1862. 



12 NIETZSCHE 

already anointing himself with words. He does not leave the 
impression of pose or insincerity nothing as simple as that. 
He is already, perhaps, impatient of the sluggish, wordless, 
thoughtless world we humans mostly live in, a world in which 
he was not only uncomfortable, but also inconspicuous. 

Nietzsche was confirmed at Easter in 1861 at the age of six- 
teen, and was, certainly in his womenfolk's mind and probably 
in his own for some time after, destined for the Lutheran min- 
istry. Yet when he was eighteen, and beginning his last year 
at school, the model pupil, the bright boy, began to go wrong. 
He lost interest in his classes; he even slipped off during the 
school walk on Sunday, and got very drunk in a Bierstube. 
Though existing evidence cannot be pieced together to make 
the matter certain, it is more than likely that one very impor- 
tant factor in his behavior was doubt over his call to the 
ministry. Though the author of The Antichrist is still far off, 
Nietzsche may already have been afflicted with doubts about the 
existence of the God with whom he had been brought up on 
such excellent terms. Certainly he had come to doubt very much 
his own aptitude for the pulpit of his fathers. This was not an 
easy matter to communicate to his mother. It seems very likely 
that the forthright moralist-to-be did some human, all too- 
human hedging; he clearly gave his mother to understand that 
he would take up the study of theology as well as that of 
philology in his approaching university career. 

Music, which had always meant much to the boy, occupied 
more and more of his attention in adolescence. He played the 

u His contrite letter to his mother shows him still in some ways the school- 
boy. Bricjcy I, 209. April 16, 1863. An English translation is in Forstcr- 
Nictzschc, Nietzsche, I, 105. 



THE STUDENT 13 

piano, apparently well short of excellently, and with much 
emotion. He wrote Liedcr, bits of sonatas, and other short bits 
of music, mostly for the piano. The piety which has hitherto 
worked such wonders in the Nietzsche- Archiv at Weimar has 
spared us the publication of most of these musical outpourings. 
Elizabeth did print in her first German biography the score of 
a piano composition written by her brother in 1858, entitled 
"In the Moonlight on the Pussta." It has not won its way to the 
concert-stage. 14 Nietzsche's many gifts were not those that 
make great musicians or great composers. Music was to 
Nietzsche in after life a refuge when words failed him; and 
when words failed him he really had very little left. 

The boy's academic troubles, whatever their origin, were not 
serious, and he rallied to make his school record, in the "certifi- 
cate of proficiency" with which he left Pforta for the Univer- 
sity, on the whole excellent. In religion, German, and Latin 
he was marked excellent ; in Greek good\ in French, History 
and Geography, and Natural Sciences, satisfactory. Only in 
mathematics was he notably deficient. Here his masters had to 
report, "As he has never shown any regular industry in mathe- 
matics, he has always gone backwards, so to speak, both in his 
written and in his oral work." 15 

III 

In October, 1864, at the age of twenty, Fricdrich Nietzsche 
matriculated in theology and philosophy at the University of 

14 E. Forstcr-Nictzschc, Das Lcbcn Fricdrich Niftzsches (1895), I, 80. There 
is also a song of his printed in the same volume, p. 224. The "Hymn to Life," 
words by Lou Salome, music by Friedrich Nietzsche, can be found at the end 
of the English translation of Ecce Homo and the poems. 

u Forstcr-Nietzschc, Nietzsche, I, 119-121. 



14 NIETZSCHE 

Bonn. The next few months are a crisis in his life, which will 
probably remain obscure, and therefore a constant temptation 
to his biographers. Nietzsche himself used afterwards to refer 
to his|"lost year" at Bonn|and to the whole experience as an 
almost inexplicable straying from the path of his destiny. His 
sympathetic biographers, such as Charles Andler, have regarded 
the year at Bonn as an essential part of their hero's Calvary, his 
ennobling exposure to the test of withstanding German student- 
life in its full comic-opera vulgarity. 

Here a simpler explanation may be hazarded. Nietzsche was 
making a final and determined effort to be one of the boys. 
After his coddled childhood, his cloistral adolescence, after the 
long domination of his womenfolk, of the Naumburg proprie- 
ties, of all sorts of high seriousness, the young man was ready 
for revolt. And his revolt was still, characteristically, very con- 
ventional. He was going to sow his wild oats, in our complex 
modern society one of the ritual forms through which the 
adolescent becomes a man. Nietzsche was still one of the tribe, 
still most eager for the applause of the tribe. He would go 
through a brave and boisterous initiation. 

Such ceremonies, varying in form from tribe to tribe, seem 
always a bit ludicrous to an outsider. The current American 
form, especially as caricatured in Hollywood moving pictures 
of "collegiate" life, may seem ludicrous even to an insider. 
Certainly German "student life" of the mid-nineteenth century 
takes on today an absurdity mellowed into something roman- 
tically enduring. Beer, metaphysics, song and buxom young 
love, the manly touch of the duel, the sweetness of a not un- 
conquerable nostalgia this is surely one of the world's great 
patterns for ritual, and one likely to survive a number of 



THE STUDENT 15 

totalitarian dictatorships. Sowing one's wild oats, never a pur- 
suit to give the subtle artistic sensibility much scope for inde- 
pendent variation, was in nineteenth-century Germany limited 
by the national genius for organization, which seems as apt 
if as unlovely at organizing youthful jollity as at organizing 
a military campaign. 

Nietzsche tried his best. He joined a student corps, the Fran- 
conia, which was composed mostly of Pforta men. He drank 
beer a drink for which he later expressed the greatest con- 
tempt at noisy student gatherings, took long walks, always 
with groups, and even made a pathetic attempt to fight a duel. 
For this latter purpose, he challenged a man of whom he was 
very fond; perhaps the ironist was already at work within him. 
The duel produced no scars. He must also have been appropri- 
ately in love, or at least given his fellows some evidence that in 
this most important human activity he was what a good Ger- 
man ought to be in his student days. He may merely have 
talked about women, which if done at all skillfully, will qualify 
the talker among men. He may have had a go with a prostitute, 
and thus unfortunately caught the syphilis which ended his 
career twenty-five years later, 16 Nietzsche's actual relations with 
women remain a puzzle for most of his life. In spite of the 
pathetic efforts of his sister Elizabeth to bring in concrete in- 
stances of his puppy loves and his adolescent flames, in spite of 
the insistence with which she repeats that her Fritz was in this 
as in all matters a sound, normal German lad, the impression 

"This subject must later be considered in relation to Nietzsche's collapse 
in 1889. Here it will be enough to say that the fact that Nietzsche did have 
syphilis may be regarded as proved (as certainly as anything of the kind can 
be proved) by the publication of E. F. Podach's book, Nietzsche s Zusatnmcn- 
bruch in 1930. 



16 NIETZSCHE 

persists, from a reading of Nietzsche's own youthful writings, 
that he hadn't much to do with the girls. 17 

Nietzsche's efforts to live up to what his comrades thought 
he should be lasted several months. In a long letter to Elizabeth 
he describes one of these excursions of jolly fellows: 

I write this the first thing in the morning after having just torn myself 
from bed, thus flatly disproving the notion that I may have a thick head. 
Maybe the expression "thick head" conveys nothing to your mind. Yes- 
terday we had a great drinking bout and sang the solemn Landcsvater, 
and there were endless torrents of punch; guests from Heidelberg and 
Gottingen, . . . We numbered over forty men; the public-house was 
beautifully decorated. . . . The festival was of a very splendid and 
elevating nature. On such evenings, believe me, there is a general spirit 
of enthusiasm which has little in common with the mere conviviality 
of the beer-table. This afternoon we are all going to march through the 
High Street in parade garb, and there will be a good deal of shouting 
and singing. Then we go by steamer to Rolandseck, where we have a big 
dinner in the Hotel Croyen. . . . The bout began on the evening of 
the day before yesterday; we drank until two o'clock in the morning, 
assembled yesterday at n a.m. for a morning pint, and then went on a 
spree in the market-place, and had lunch and coffee together at Kley's. 18 

Here already Nietzsche is beginning to find the round of drink- 
ing and back-slapping less than "elevating," though on the 
whole this letter sounds like the normal young man boasting 
sheepishly about his ability to drink. As time went on, how- 
ever, he dropped more and more out of the merry doings of the 
Franconia, drew more and more into himself where he al- 
ways found plenty of room. His letters home become even 

"Elizabeth goes so far as to publish, in the English edition of the Life, 
a full-page portrait of the actress Hedwig Raabe, on the grounds that Fritz 
worshipped her during his University days. But she admits Fritz had but 
the slightest personal acquaintance with the lady. Forster-Nietzschc, Nietzsche, 
I, 161. Sec also H. W. Brann, Nietzsche und die Fraucn (1931), chap. i. 

** Brief e, I, 281. Dec. n, 1864. English translation in Forstcr-Nictzsche, 
Nietzsche, I, 127-128. 



THE STUDENT 17 

more forcedly cheerful. Finally he gives up altogether, and 
admits that "the touch of poetry which seemed to hang over 
this life had vanished" for him, and that all he could now see 
was "the coarse, Philistine spirit, reared in this excess of drink- 
ing, of rowdyism, of running into debt." 19 

Nietzsche had made his last attempt to accept the world. 
Perhaps the world might have been presented to him in a fairer 
shape than that of the Franconia Corps of the University of 
Bonn in 1864. Yet the mere historian finds it very hard to 
conjure up the picture of a world which Nietzsche would have 
accepted. The great "Yea-sayer" spent most of his life saying 
"No." Such is, perhaps, the mark of the profound moralist. 
And yet, from any other than a profound moralist, Nietzsche's 
letter of resignation from his corps would sound somewhat 
priggish: 

I beg to inform the Association, the Franconia, that I herewith return 
it my sash, and in so doing send in my resignation. By this I do not 
mean that I cease to value the principle of the Association. All I would 
frankly declare is that its present features are not very pleasing to me. 
This may be in part my own fault; in any case it has proved a great 
effort for me to endure my membership over the year. Nevertheless I 
regarded it as a duty to become acquainted with the Society, and now 
that no narrow bonds unite me with it I bid it a hearty farewell. 

May the Franconia soon grow out of that stage of development at 
which it now stands, and may it ever claim high-minded moral men for 
its members. 

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 20 

Perhaps this letter still sounds a bit priggish, even from Fried- 
rich Nietzsche. 
Bonn had become unbearable. Well before he composed the 

*v . 

lf Forster-Nietzsche, Nietzsche , I, 146. 

80 Bricfc, II, 12. Oct. 20, 1865. English translation in Forster-Nictzsche, 
Nietzsche, I, 147. 



l8 NIETZSCHE 

above letter, Nietzsche had left it for the University of Leipzig. 
Here he made no attempt to be one of the boys. He found a 
study, classical philology, and a professor, Ritschl himself a 
recent refugee from Bonn worthy of his attention, and in 
what seems nowadays the almost incredible academic freedom 
of the German Universities in their great period, this was 
enough. He might have eaten, drunk, and slept classical 
philology. No one would have disturbed him. Actually he had 
some relief from work. ^"Three things make up my recreation 
rare recreation my Schopenhauer, Schumann's music, and 
finally, solitary walks." * l j 

With his academic work he made out admirably. For these 
few years he summoned the patient industry, the care, the 
simple Sitzflcisch indispensable for scholarly success. Since he 
also had what is vaguely and knowingly called intelligence, a 
gift useful if not altogether indispensable for such success, his 
work pleased Professor Ritschl very much indeed. The piety 
of the Nietzsche- Archiv has spread out in the third and fourth 
volumes of the definitive edition of his works whatever is left 
of the apparatus of his scholarship, from finished dissertations 
to mere embryos of notes. To the layman, this mass of Greek 
and Latin is impressive, and often incomprehensible. What for 
instance lies behind this entry? 

Hcsiod Homer 

1 6 Biichcr 13 

Nach Tzetzes 

Thcogonie Aspis Epithal 

Catalog Aigimius Ccyc. gam. 

Eoccn Theseus* Kara/? Trept 'iSaiwv 22 



c, II, 45. April 7, 1866. To Carl von Gcrsdorff. 
Wcrkc, IV, 126. 



THE STUDENT 19 

Yet it is clear from these notes seen as a whole that Nietzsche 
was a careful and a curious worker, that he kept asking himself 
questions about his Greeks that went far beyond mere cata- 
loguing. His most finished work in the field, DC Lacrtii Di- 
ogcnis jontibuSy was printed in the Rheinischcs Museum fur 
Philologic in 1868 and 1869, and gave the twenty-four year old 
scholar a European reputation among professional philologists. 
More important in the long run for Nietzsche's career was his 
discovery of Schopenhauer's philosophy. In one of his numer- 
ous autobiographical fragments he has described how, rum- 
maging in a Leipzig bookshop during the lonely days after he 
had broken with Bonn and the Franconia, he came across 
Schopenhauer's The World as Will and Idea, took the book 
home, and devoured it with increasing excitement. This was 
something less than what had happened to St. Paul on the road 
to Damascus or to Rousseau on the road to Vincennes, but it 
too was a great conversion. Schopenhauer's slightly Bieder- 
meier stoicism, though it could not for long satisfy the emo- 
tional needs of a man as God-ridden as Nietzsche, solved in this 
crisis and for a moment the problem of the universe. "Here 
each line," he wrote a few years later of his first reading of 
Schopenhauer, "cried out renunciation, denial, resignation; 
here I saw a mirror in which the world, life, my own mind 
were reflected in fearful grandeur. Here the wholly disinter- 
ested and heavenly eye of art looked at me, here I saw illness 
and salvation, banishment and refuge, hell and heaven." 23 
The world makes no sense intellectually; Kant and the eight- 
eenth-century philosophes were no more than whistlers in the 
dark. Will, the blind striving of millions of organisms, is what 

* Wcrfa, III, 298. "Riickblick auf meinc zwci Leipzigcr Jahre." 



20 NIETZSCHE 

really makes the world go. And it goes crazily, stupidly, 
cruelly. All that is left for a philosopher is renunciation, the 
extinction of the will to live which is the will to evil. Schopen- 
hauer came in the end to a kind of Nordic Nirvana most attrac- 
tive to the lonely young philologist. Nietzsche decided, not 
without pride, that he too was a philosopher. 

Yet the Leipzig years were by no means pathologically soli- 
tary years. Nietzsche made a few new friends, and especially 
Erwin Rohde, like himself young, intellectual, seeking his way. 
Rohde found it in the relatively serene paths of German aca- 
demic preferment, and though he later lost touch with the 
academically outlawed Nietzsche, he remains one of the best 
sources of information on Nietzsche's personal history. Old 
Pforta friends and especially the Prussian officer and gentleman 
Baron von Gersdorff and the quiet scholarly Paul Deussen, later 
a distinguished expert in Sanskrit, remained close to the young 
Nietzsche, who wrote them long letters of the kind no one 
seems any longer to write. Music still was a solace and a ful- 
fillment, though by now Nietzsche probably knew he was not 
to be a great composer. He did, however, meet casually a great 
composer, Richard Wagner, who with Schopenhauer was to 
provide the setting for Nietzsche's flight from scholarship to 
philosophy and preaching. 

For the present, he was still a very promising philologist, a 
favorite pupil of Professor Ritschl, a candidate for the degree 
of Doctor of Philosophy. He never had to write his thesis. In 
1868 a chair in philology at the University of Basle in Switzer- 
land fell vacant, and Ritschl managed to have his brilliant 
young student chosen, without benefit of the doctorate. 24 

84 He was at once given the degree by Leipzig University on the strength 
of his previous record. 



THE STUDENT 21 

Nietzsche had an almost incredible start in the profession: at 
twenty-four he was Hcrr Professor I His womenfolk were in 
raptures. Their little Fritz had justified their loving care; a 
university professor is perhaps even higher in the hierarchy of 
virtue and respectability than a Lutheran pastor. 

IV 

Hero-worship has produced flattering descriptions of the 
young Nietzsche. We have some help from photographs, and 
notably from one his sister gives us, taken at his confirmation 
at the age of sixteen. The portentous Polish cavalryman's 
mustache of his maturity is not yet there. The lad's rather large 
mouth is set firmly. His eyes look dark and for so young a boy, 
surprisingly deep-sunken. His face is round and full, yet sensi- 
tive. He is certainly no Nordic, but he might be almost any- 
thing else. 

He appears at Bonn "a picture of health and strength, broad- 
shouldered, brown, with rather thick fair hair, and of exactly 
the same height as Goethe." ~' f Goethe, of course, is for Ger- 
mans strength and beauty made flesh, and to associate him ever 
so tenuously with Nietzsche is to make Nietzsche share some- 
thing of Olympian health. Elizabeth reports that her brother 
swam, skated, and rode horseback, and that only his short- 
sightedness prevented his being still more athletic. Later ob- 
servers were not struck with any such evidence of physical 
prowess. They are, indeed, usually reporting after Nietzsche 
had become famous which was only after he had become 

"Quoted in W. K. Salter, Nietzsche the Thinker (1917), 7, from H. Ellis, 
Affirmations, u. Goethe is described as slightly above the average height, but 
looking taller than he really was. 



22 NIETZSCHE 

insane and inaccessible. More than usually, perhaps, their 
reports are less of what they saw than of what they thought 
they ought to have seen. At any rate, they describe Slavic 
restlessness, high cheek-bones, piercing and unquiet eyes, the 
timidity of the scholar and the soul of a prophet. 26 

The problem of Nietzsche's bodily and mental health has 
exercised all his biographers. That he was ill a great deal during 
his adult life, and that he died insane, not even Elizabeth and 
the faithful workers of the Nietzsche-Archiv have been able to 
deny. They insist, however, that he was born and grew up a 
splendid example of German youth, normal, healthy, cheerful, 
fond of sports. For his later ill-health they must find an honor- 
able explanation in circumstances no decent German lad of this 
sort could have avoided. It all started, according to Elizabeth, 
from Nietzsche's poor eyesight. This, if an organic weakness, 
is at any rate one that suggests nobility and spirituality of 
character. Poor light at Pforta, over-study, carelessness about 
glasses (Fritz would not listen to his mother and his sister!), 
led to splitting headaches. Headaches led to sleeplessness. 
Later this sleeplessness drove the young professor to drugs, and 
to the serious undermining of his health. Moreover, with his 
mind on higher things, Nietzsche neglected himself, ate the 
wrong things, ate irregularly as bachelors do. Then, with his 
natural good health undermined, he took to doctoring him- 
self, and gradually developed into a mild hypochondriac. Yet 
underneath this ill-health, very real and very tragic in its con- 
sequences, but in a sense superficial, there remained a basis of 

** One of the most plausible of these descriptions is that made by a French- 
man, Edouard Schure, who saw Nietzsche in Bayreuth in the 1870*5, and re- 
ported in the 1890*5. It is given in Salter, Nietzsche, 476. 



THE STUDENT 23 

hearty, sane Germanic health. Such is the account Frau 
Forster-Nietzsche gives us. 27 

The medical problems of Nietzsche's life are puzzling enough 
to the physician. They are quite insoluble to the layman. One 
can only note that Elizabeth herself was no physician, and that 
she could not bear to think of her brother as in any way abnor- 
mal. He was, she is quite willing to admit, a genius. But 
"genius" is a very nice word, and "abnormal" is not. Later in 
Nietzsche's career his behavior was clearly that of an extreme 
neurotic; and though "neurotic" is also a word of pejorative 
overtones, and though it has somewhat different meanings for 
physician and for layman, most of us know neurotic behavior 
when we see it and sometimes, even when we indulge in it. 

Whatever name we give this behavior of Nietzsche's, it is 
evident enough, in milder forms, in what we know of the 
school and university student. The young Nietzsche, swim 
and skate though he did, seems always to have been awkward 
in the use of his body. Sensitive and self-conscious, he did not 
like to appear awkward. If you prefer, you may say that he was 
a perfectionist, and that he would do nothing he could not 
from the first do pretty well. Or you may say that he was proud, 
or vain, and that he hated to seem ridiculous. Whatever the 
reason, save for a tempestuous facility with the piano, he had 
no bodily skills. Bodily energy he had, or at least a kind of 
nervous restlessness for which he found an outlet in long walks. 

17 This explanation is scattered through both volumes of Forstcr-Nictzsche, 
Nietzsche. Most of Elizabeth's points are recorded for purposes of debate 
by E. F. Podach in the chapter "Das Pathologische bei Nietzsche" in his 
Nietzsches Zusammenbruch, 21-35. (There is an English translation of this 
book, The Madness of Nietzsche, 1931, and a French translation, L'Effondre- 
ment de Nietzsche t published in Les documents bleus in 1931.) 



24 NIETZSCHE 

Much of his writing was composed during these walks and 
noted down hurriedly on his return home. 

Again, save for his studies, he had undergone no very im- 
portant discipline. A short and uncomfortable period of mili- 
tary service in the Prussian cavalry had been brought to an end 
by an accident incurred in mounting his horse. The pommel of 
his saddle struck his chest, tore muscles and fractured ribs. 
Elizabeth informs us that he recovered from this wound only 
thanks "to the excellence and the purity of his blood." 28 
Neither home, school nor university life gave him the kind of 
discipline that tames, if it does not subdue, the self-centered 
person. His family had done little but admire him and take 
care of him. His womenfolk had been too devoted to leave 
him any but intellectual work to do. He seems not to have had 
any hand in the family finances, nor to have had any other 
kind of responsibility, except that of spending an allowance. 
Already, at the beginning of his professorship at Basle, he shows 
signs of an inability to attend to the bothersome details of the 
external world, an inability not necessarily philosophical in 
origin. 

Nietzsche, in short, was what it is nowadays fashionable to 
call an intellectual. He was, to an extent rare even among 
intellectuals, insulated from people whose main concern lies 
with things, with rituals and traditions, with handling other 
people, with affairs, with dull, undignified, unyielding "real- 
ity." He was about to join a group of intellectuals, many of 
whom were indeed sober, dull and conforming enough, but 
who in general could hardly give the young Nietzsche a taste 
for social discipline, for cooperation with his fellows, or even an 

88 Forstcr-Nietzsche, Nietzsche, I, 173. 



THE STUDENT 25 

abiding sense of self-satisfaction. German university professors 
in the later nineteenth century were not infrequently brilliant 
men, indeed great men, but as a body they seem notably lack- 
ing in cohesion, good manners in controversy, worldly sense, 
and most of what else is necessary to make an intellectual 
aristocracy an effective aristocracy. 

One gift, one skill, Herr Professor Nietzsche had already 
shown himself to possess in a very high degree. He could 
write. From earliest childhood, he had been developing this 
technical skill in handling words, a skill for which we shall 
no doubt have to say he had a special, inborn aptitude, and 
which increased with exercise and training. Nietzsche had 
this gift for words as others have gifts for music, for painting, 
for mathematics, for cookery, or for gymnastics. It was, char- 
acteristically, a gift for the written word rather than the spoken 
word. Nietzsche was far too shy a man for oratory. 

This facility with words, not uncommon among bright chil- 
dren, is probably only indirectly and obscurely related to the 
process of thinking. Like great technical facility in playing a 
musical instrument, or like facility in arithmetical calculation, 
it may be very highly developed in individuals incapable of 
making anything important out of their skills. So far, Nie- 
tzsche had done little with the words he poured out so freely. 
His youthful writings show an eager, sensitive, dutiful young 
German intellectual, who has gone through the appropriate 
emotional and religious crises of adolescence. They show, not 
very far beneath the surface, an ambitious, self-centered young 
man who wants to shine, and who is one day to write about 
"the Will to Power." They do not, save to the eye of faith, show 
any evidence of originality. 



26 NIETZSCHE 

Yet the very possession of this command over words was, to 
a young man about to become a professor of classical philology, 
a danger. Professors, of course, should be able to write, but they 
ought not to write well, or at any rate, not freely and easily. 
The professor should dig deep for his truths and he ought not 
to bring them to the surface without good, honest and obvi- 
ous sweating. Nietzsche was shortly to find himself badly 
adjusted in a dozen ways to the demands of the learned profes- 
sion* They were unreasonable, unlovely, unjust demands if 
you like, but they were definite and inescapable. As he left 
Leipzig for Basle, however, only a very wise man indeed, and 
one who knew Nietzsche well, could have foreseen his early 
and complete failure as a professor of classical philology. And 
even the wise man might have been wrong. Great fluency with 
the written word has not always proved a barrier to success in 
the learned world, and the will to shine has illuminated many 
an academic chair. 



CHAPTER II 
THE PROFESSOR 

THE Basle in which young Professor Nietzsche delivered 
on May 28, 1869 his inaugural lecture on "Homer and 
Classical Philology" was an old and prosperous town, proud of 
its independent past as a South German city-state, content with 
its present part in the Swiss Confederation, perhaps a little 
conscious, over against the great new Germany to the north, of 
being provincial. Its university, though it lacked the wealth, 
equipment, and enrollment of the greater German universities, 
was by no means an intellectual backwater. The merchant 
aristocracy of Basle had long been devoted to the support of 
culture. Several generations of the mathematical and scientific 
dynasty of the Bernoulli had brought a European distinction 
to their native town. Jakob Burckhardt, the great historian of 
the Renaissance, was the most famous member of the Univer- 
sity Faculty. In 1869, he was at the height of his powers and 
reputation, in no sense below the best Leipzig, Heidelberg, or 
Berlin could offer. Bachofen, whose productive studies of the 
matriarchate were opening new fields to anthropologists and 
legal historians, had occupied a chair of Roman Law in the 
university, and was now a scholarly judge in the city. Riiti- 
meyer, professor of zoology, was anticipating Mr. G. B. Shaw 
in the consoling, if not very fruitful, journey back to La- 
marck. A good many others, not earth shakers, but well deserv- 
ing of the humble immortality of the biographical dictionary, 



28 NIETZSCHE 

helped bring distinction to town and gown in Nietzsche's 
Basle. 1 

Into the life of Basle Nietzsche never really entered. He 
made a few intimate friends, with whom he led for a while an 
almost normal social life. In the first few years, at least, he 
carried out faithfully the formal teaching obligations of his 
post, which meant, in addition to university lecturing, six hours 
a week of classroom work in Greek with picked students in 
the Padagogiurn, a sort of Gymnasium or high-school attached 
to the university. He made the necessary minimum of formal 
social calls and attended the necessary minimum of university 
meetings. He was not yet the recluse of Sils-Maria and the 
Riviera, not yet the Zarathustra en pension of his last years. 
But his life at Basle was from the beginning lonely and harassed, 
lightened only by his work or at least his writing his 
ambitions, and his chosen friendships. 

Only a few months after his arrival, he wrote to Rohde, "I 
feel so alien and indifferent among the mass of my honored 
colleagues that I turn down with pleasure the invitations and 
requests that flow in daily. Even the enjoyment of mountains, 
forest, and lake is somewhat spoiled for me by the herd of my 
fellow-teachers." 2 Elizabeth also. has frequently to record this 
aspect of her brother's behavior, though she tries hard to pre- 
tend he was a social success at Basle. On one of their numerous 

1 The cultural background of Basle in Nietzsche's day is sketched with 
for Andler surprising brevity in C. Andler, Nietzsche, II, 113-125. 

3 Nietzsche, Gcsammeltc Brief e (1902-1909), II, 148. To Rohde, June 16, 
1869. I have translated Nietzsche's plebecula by "herd," which is perhaps 
unduly mild. The great Gesamtausgabe is not yet save for a few letters 
of 1869 available for letters or works after the Leipzig period. This is not 
a serious gap as far as the major writings go, but it is a real loss in the 
correspondence. The above edition, presided over by Frau Forster-Nietzsche 



THE PROFESSOR 29 

little vacation trips together, she writes, for instance, that they 
ran up a huge bill at Constance because Fritz would not eat in 
the table d'hote. He called such meals "the browsing of herds/' 
and on this occasion had all their meals served privately. As he 
paid the bill, he remarked sadly, "Lizzie, one always has to pay 
dearly for grazing away from the herd." 3 One more instance, 
close to neurosis. Piccard, a colleague, tells how he advised 
Nietzsche to see the cathedral at Lausanne, and how carefully 
he described the best way to see the sights of the whole city. 
Nietzsche got lost, walked around aimlessly for hours, and 
came back to the railway station without having seen anything 
of the city itself, let alone the cathedral. "But why didn't you 
ask some one the way?" said Piccard. And Nietzsche replied, 
"You know, Piccard, they might have laughed at me!" 4 

Nietzsche, then, had a kind of neurotic dislike for mingling 
with his fellows, a dislike which the professional psychologist 
could no doubt break down into its complex parts. Fear of 
ridicule was certainly one of the most important of these. 
Nietzsche himself was sure that this feeling of discomfort in 
crowds was a most aristocratic trait. His admiring biographers 
have repeated the word "aristocratic" in constant admiration of 
their hero's behavior. Though this comforting adjective has 
not infrequently been given such an application, especially 
since the rise of the middle classes, in the general course of 
European history aristocratic folk have not behaved like Nie- 



is the best single collection of Nietzsche's letters. It has six volumes (volume V 
in two parts). 

1 Forster-Nictzschc, L/'/r, I, 314. 

4 C. A. Bernoulli, Ovcrbcc\ und Nietzsche, II, 169. In Lausanne, Nietzsche 
would probably have had to use French, a language which he read easily, 
but did not speak well. 



30 NIETZSCHE 

tzsche. There is something insecure, timid, and defeated about 
the over-sensitive young professor that in no way seems aristo- 
cratic. Aristocrats have to be fairly insensitive in some ways or 
they cease to stay up where aristocrats belong. They must not 
be afraid of crowds, nor even of vulgarity least of all in 
themselves, Nietzsche was, in simple fact, a middle-class in- 
tellectual in revolt against most of the ways of his class. "F. W. 
von Nietzky," the would-be descendant of Polish noblemen, 
was hardly more of an aristocrat than was Keats. Both, no 
doubt, belong with the eternal aristocracy of the spirit; but 
Nietzsche, one suspects, would have been willing to compro- 
mise on some more earthly and more immediate distinction, 
which he was never quite to obtain. 

Whatever its roots, whatever its explanation, Nietzsche's 
inability to lead a conventional social life has important conse- 
quences in any estimate of his work. In spite of the many 
insights he achieved, in spite of the intensity of his search for 
a good way of life for men on this earth, at bottom Nietzsche's 
study of man as a social and political animal and this is most 
of his work suffers from the fact that he knew so little, at 
first hand, of other human beings. To a sufficiently transcen- 
dental critic, this is of course hardly a serious deficiency. But 
Nietzsche himself tried hard not to set up as a transcendentalist, 
directed indeed some of his sharpest barbs at innocent old Kant 
and other dwellers in the untrodden ways of pure spirit. On 
Nietzsche's own grounds, his withdrawal from this world was 
a limitation and a weakness. 

It was a weakness reflected rather in his attempts at practical 
judgments, in his sense of what is possible, than in the actual 
materials, in the facts and observations he worked with. Nie- 



THE PROFESSOR 31 

tzsche was not, like so many of the philosophically inclined 
Coleridge, for instance wrapped up, insulated in, the thoughts 
that buzzed around inside his skull. He read a good deal, for 
a man with chronic eye-trouble, and on the whole he read the 
kind of books histories, memoirs, travels from which it is 
possible to obtain a useful, if vicarious, experience of men and 
things, 5 He did not altogether avoid the market-place; indeed 
he prowled about it quietly, looking and listening, and possibly 
even learning. And, though he quarreled with them frequently, 
and otherwise plagued them greatly, he had in these years 
friends who listened to him, and, indeed, talked back at him. 
Distantly and faintly, perhaps, he seems to have heard them, 
and for a while to have tried to adjust himself to their worlds as 
well as to his own. 

Burckhardt was too old to be an intimate, but he was too 
distinguished to be neglected. Nietzsche excepted him from 
the herd, and cultivated his acquaintance. They walked and 
talked together not infrequently. No doubt Nietzsche's devo- 
tion to the heroic was strengthened by the historian of the 
athletic age we call the Renaissance. For Burckhardt, too, a 
glory had gone from a world in which machines, banks, insur- 
ance companies (for which latter Basle was becoming a Euro- 
pean center) were more important than virtu. The two must 
have spent many pleasant moments together mourning the 
world's decay. 

In long letters the young professor kept up his ties with 
Rohde, still solidly Schopenhauerian, and on his way to a pro- 
fessorship of philosophy in Kiel, and with von Gersdorflf, the 

* Nietzsche's Belesenheit is exhaustively treated in the course of Andler's 
Nietzsche, and more especially in vols. II and IV. 



32 NIETZSCHE 

Prussian squire he had known so well at school, and who was 
beginning to display a Prussian willingness to rescue the world 
from Latin skepticism and decay. Romundt, another of his 
Leipzig circle, and a lover of Schopenhauer, he helped to an 
appointment as Privat-dozcnt at the University in Basle, and for 
a while lived with him on intimate terms. But for Romundt, a 
delicate soul, pessimism led on to Christianity and finally to 
holy orders. Nietzsche never forgave him this treason. 

Of all Nietzsche's friendships, however, the firmest, longest, 
and most unclouded was that with Franz Overbeck, who joined 
the faculty at Basle as professor of church history one year 
after Nietzsche entered on his professorate. Overbeck, seven 
years Nietzsche's senior, was an intelligent, rather conventional, 
scholar, a careful research worker, with the professional skep- 
ticism his training as a historian had brought, and no great 
desire to attain the unattainable in himself or the Universe. 
Nietzsche he found full of ideas, willing and able to talk on 
almost anything, and, once the barriers were down, extraordi- 
narily unreserved. The two had bachelor quarters together in 
a little house in the Schiitzgraben, Nietzsche on the first floor, 
Overbeck on the ground floor. Overbeck's marriage a few years 
later lessened somewhat the intimacy, though Frau Overbeck 
made valiant efforts to get on with the temperamental Nie- 
tzsche. Elizabeth Nietzsche never liked the Overbecks, and 
when in 1908 Carl Albrecht Bernoulli published in his Franz 
Overbeck. und Friedrich Nietzsche: Eine Freundschajt Over- 
beck's own honest observations on his friend's character and 
behavior, she lost herself in indignation. According to Eliza- 
beth, all Overbeck says of her brother is false, and inspired by 
jealousy. Overbeck, however, seems to a neutral observer to 



THE PROFESSOR 33 

have had to the end the greatest admiration and love for 
Nietzsche, whom he held to be a genius, an unquestioned mem- 
ber though certainly not the greatest of the small group 
of supremely great German men of letters. But Overbeck 
thought he was justified from intimate experience of Nietzsche's 
daily life in noting that his friend was also selfish, absurdly 
sensitive, a neurotic invalid given to self-doctoring, an awkward 
figure in society, a thinker impatient of criticism, assured and 
intolerant. For all that, and indeed because of it, Overbeck to 
the end cherished towards Nietzsche an affection he himself 
called "unclouded." 6 It was, in part, no doubt, the affection 
the competent in this narrow world often have for the incom- 
petent, an affection that grows on irritation. Nietzsche may 
well have been a great man; he was certainly not a competent 
one. 

Nietzsche's great sensibility was perhaps unduly concentrated 
on his few friends. He had no great abstract loyalties to take 
up his energies and his vanity, no routine administrative duties, 
no hobby, no gift at all for idleness, for doing nothing. Even 
the Franco-Prussian War proved for him a confused and un- 
profitable interlude. He had had to become a naturalized 
Swiss citizen, and so could not join the German armies. At the 
first news, he was proudly cosmopolitan and superior. But soon 
the itch to take part in this marvellous redemption of the 
Teutonic race from Latin vices and Latin rationalism grew too 
strong. He enlisted in the German ambulance service, and 
after a short period of training was sent out to the battlefields, 
where he promptly took very ill with dysentery and diphtheria, 
and had to be invalided out of the service. Elizabeth regards 

* Bernoulli, Overbcc^ und Nietzsche, I, 63. 



34 NIETZSCHE 

this as an important part of the martyrdom which broke down 
his health. Nietzsche himself took a patriotic pride in the 
German victory, though hardly had he come back to his teach- 
ing at Basle than he began to have his doubts. This new Em- 
pire of Bismarck's seemed a little vulgar and materialistic. He 
could think of better things. For a time, he dreamed of a kind 
of modern cloister, wherein he and a few choice spirits would 
purge themselves, and somehow through themselves the world, 
of this vile materialism. 7 

Friendships, indeed all personal relations, were always ex- 
hausting to Nietzsche. They did not free him from his feeling 
of his own ineptness, did not make up for the deficiencies of 
peoples and empires. How intense and demanding friendship 
was for him can be gathered from a description of his farewell 
to Romundt, about to take holy orders: 

It was horribly sad, wrote Nietzsche to Gersdorff. Romundt knew, 
repeated endlessly that henceforward he had lived the better and the 
happier part of his life. He wept and asked our forgiveness. ... At the 
last moment I was seized with a veritable terror; the porters were shut- 
ting the doors, and Romundt, wishing to continue to speak to us, wanted 
to let down the window, but it stuck; he redoubled his efforts, and while 
he tormented himself, trying in vain to make himself heard, the train 
went slowly off, and we were reduced to making signs to each other. 
The awful symbolism of the whole scene upset me terribly, and Over- 
beck as much as it did me: it was hardly endurable. I stayed in bed the 
next day with a bad headache that lasted thirty hours, and much vomiting 
of bile. 8 

7 See his letter to Rohde, Dec. 15, 1870. Gesammelte Briefc, II, 214. 

8 Gesammelte Briefe, I, 312. To Gersdorff, April 17, 1875. Romundt's name 
is represented by asterisks in the original. 



THE PROFESSOR 35 

II 

Of all the men and women who touched Nietzsche's life, 
Richard Wagner is perhaps the most important, as he is cer- 
tainly tfie most striking. The brief and intense friendship 
between the two men takes up most of the early years of 
Nietzsche's professorate; its long disintegration filled the rest 
of his conscious life. Just before his final madness Nietzsche 
printed a series of violent attacks on the now-dead Wagner. 
The problems of the relationship, complicated by the fact that 
Nietzsche was in some senses in love with Wagner's mistress 
and wife, Cosima, have tempted all sorts of writers, and there 
is already a large Wagner-Nietzsche literature. 9 Both Masters 
have their disciples and their defenders, though Wagner, whose 
charms are perhaps a little more obvious, has here the numeri- 
cal advantage. 

Nietzsche had met Wagner briefly at Leipzig, but in the rush 
of a mere social occasion had had no chance to impress himself 
upon the composer. Now he learned that Wagner, having been 
forced into the open in his relations with Cosima, the wife of 
Wagner's friend von Biilow, had left the scandal behind him, 
and had retreated with Cosima and his Art to the peace of the 
near-by Swiss village of Triebschen. Admiration and ambition 
aiding, Nietzsche so far overcame his natural diffidence as to 
call on the great man. He was politely, and then cordially, 
received. He was young, eager, admiring, a professor and 
hence perhaps not without some influence on public opinion. 
Wagner, who had not yet entirely conquered public opinion, 
even in Germany, welcomed a new disciple. Soon Nietzsche 

* For a brief discussion of it, sec the bibliography, p. 255. 



36 NIETZSCHE 

was spending as much of his spare time as possible in Trieb- 
schen, listening to Wagner's music, discussing the supreme 
synthesis of human culture Wagner was preparing had in- 
deed practically achieved talking, eating, strolling by the 
lake, running errands for the household. 

Triebschen is removed from us by an awkward interval of 
time and its idyll necessarily seems to us to fall short of classic 
finish. The setting is wrong: a Swiss villa of the 1870'$ will do 
at best for comic opera. The characters lack serenity and no- 
bility. They seem to come from a slightly depressing novel, or 
from real too real life. Wagner, high-priest even to him- 
self, living each moment and each act in a supreme, intense, 
and wearing dedication; Frau Cosima, nursing, protecting, 
flattering and cajoling this man who had brought her fame, 
if he had not quite made her Isolde; the four children of Cosima 
and von Billow, with the fifth, little Siegfried, child of Cosima 
and Wagner, all of them lively, and, in such a household, rela- 
tively uninhibited; the awkward young professor and philolo- 
gist, protective cavalryman's mustache just grown, listening, 
admiring, and when opportunity presented and when Wag- 
ner allowed someone else to talk breaking into long periods 
of eloquence in which the Master saved the clean soul of animal 
man from the corruptness of Socrates and Christ. 

Time has made almost everything about Triebschen slightly 
ludicrous. The villa itself, furnished "in accordance with the 
style of a Paris furniture company, who had been somewhat 
lavish in their use of pink satin and little Cupids," seems no fit 
birthplace for a pure Teutonic Siegfried. Then there is Frau 
Cosima strolling by the lake, "dressed in a pink cashmere 
gown with broad revers of real lace, on her arm a large Tuscan 



THE PROFESSOR 37 

hat trimmed with a crown of pink roses . . . behind her pacing 
a dignified, heavy and gigantic, coal-black Newfoundland 
dog." And Wagner himself, "in a Flemish painter's costume, 
consisting of a black velvet coat, black satin knee-breeches, 
black silk stockings, a light blue satin cravat tied in a rich 
bow, with a piece of his fine linen and lace shirt showing below, 
and a painter's beret on his head." Finally, by no mere meta- 
phor the culmination and purpose of Triebschen, there are the 
high thoughts, as Cosima recorded them: 

When I contemplate our peaceful existence which, in view of the 
Master's genius, may well be called sublime, and feel at the same time 
that the sufferings we have previously endured are indelibly stamped on 
our souls, I say to myself that the greatest joy on earth is vision, and 
that this vision has fallen to the lot of us poor creatures. 10 

The vision has inevitably dimmed for us, or perhaps merely 
altered. We see the papier-mache in the Master's stage-dragon. 
We hear above the Liebestod, the unpleasant voice of Wagner 
the Jew-baiter, Wagner the German fanatic, Wagner the un- 
buttoned egotist. We hear above the commotion other voices, 
more recent and even more unpleasant. Triebschen, like Berch- 
tesgaden, is not for us an idyllic spot. 

What Nietzsche sought from Wagner he undoubtedly got. 
The brilliant young philologist was really, like many another 
academic light, a professor in spite of himself. He had no deep 
love for the patient ways of scholarly research. He wanted to 
shine, and as a bookish young fellow he had already shone 
academically as long as he could. Now he wanted to illuminate 
the world, and Diogenes Laertius obviously did not provide 
nearly enough light. He wanted to move and be moved, to 

16 Forster-Nietzsche, Nietzsche, I, 223-224. 



38 NIETZSCHE 

scale the heights and sound the depths, to solve the problems 
of Eternity and the Universe. He wanted to be a philosopher. 
He wanted, as he had wanted at Bonn, tribal initiation and 
tribal admiration. The little clan of philologists had not been 
enough. This scorner of the crowd could never do without the 
homage of the crowd. 

Luck or instinct served him well in sending him to Wagner. 
The composer was already a national, indeed a world figure. 
His music, acclaimed by the fervent groups of Wagnerites as 
the supreme experience of human life, was gradually, in the 
1870*5, coming to be accepted by calmer people for what it is, 
great music pieced out with long stretches of dull music. To 
Wagner and the Wagnerites, however, the master was no mere 
musician. The Ring, notably, was at once a history of Germany 
and a prophecy, a program for Germany. Wagner had achieved 
a synthesis of all the arts, and the arts were obviously all of life 
worth having. Wagner was therefore the supreme teacher, 
philosopher, law-giver, prophet. He was, in the aesthetic frame 
in which his whole life, like his tam-o'-shantered costume, was 
cast, the Master; but he might just as well have been the 
Fuehrer. 

Nietzsche's first book grew directly out of this association 
with Wagner. It was an association at first unquestionably 
based on mutual liking and respect, though also from the first 
mixed naturally and profitably with a mutual desire to exploit 
the partner in the relationship. Nietzsche's great contribution 
was his book, The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music, 
published with Wagner's blessing in 1872. And well might the 
composer bless a work in which he appeared as the re-discoverer 
of the best in Greek art, as the modern heir of Aeschylus, in- 
deed, of Dionysos himself. 



THE PROFESSOR 39 

Nietzsche's book took a spectacular farewell to philology 
and scholarship. It was no careful account of Greek tragedy, 
but a brief, lively, and literary defense of an old thesis in 
philosophy, an old folk-belief among German intellectuals. 
According to Nietzsche, art and therefore, of course, every- 
thing in human life has two poles, the Dionysian and the 
Apollinian. The Dionysian is A Good Thing: it is God's and 
Nature's primal strength, the unending turbulent lust and 
longing in men which drives them to conquest, to drunken- 
ness, to mystic ecstasy, to love-deaths. The Apollinian is A 
Bad Thing though not unattractive in its proper place : it is 
man's attempt to stop this unending struggle, to find peace, 
harmony, balance, to restrain the brute in himself. But the 
brute is life, and cannot be long restrained. Greek life and art, 
as we can find if we go back to the sources, was originally 
Dionysian. With Socrates and Euripides, however, the Apol- 
linian element won a too-conclusive victory. The living springs 
of Dionysian strength were cut off. Greek culture became re- 
strained, harmonious, gentlemanly, reasonable, beautiful and 
dead. 

This is an unduly simple outline of an idea which Nietzsche 
developed with all the subtlety of his literary skill. But such an 
outline does bare the commonplace, indeed traditional, charac- 
ter of Nietzsche's basic assumption. Dionysian against Apol- 
linian, romantic against classic, realism against idealism, natural 
against artificial, Germanic (or Nordic) against Latin the 
antithesis has provided great fun for critics and philosophers for 
generations. Herder, Schiller, Hegel had played with it; Speng- 
ler was to take it up, transpose its terms a bit and predict the 
downfall of a European civilization at the hands of which his 
Germany had suffered temporary defeat in the Four Years' 



40 NIETZSCHE 

War. For Germans, at least, this favorite antithesis has usually 
had a common feature: the Germans possess the quality X 
which makes for profundity, strength, union with the World- 
Spirit and survival. Nietzsche is no exception: 

... in some inaccessible abyss the German spirit still rests and dreams, 
undestroyed, in glorious health, profundity, and Dionysian strength, like 
a knight sunk in slumber; from which abyss the Dionysian song rises to 
our ears to let us know that this German knight even now is dreaming 
his primitive Dionysian myth in blissfully earnest visions. . . . Someday 
the German spirit will find itself awake in all the morning freshness 
following a deep sleep; then it will slay the dragons, destroy the malig- 
nant dwarfs, waken Brunhilde and Wotan's spear itself will be unable 
to obstruct its course! n 

It is true that Nietzsche gives a twist of his own to this old 
theme. The Dionysian is good, but apparently rather exhaust- 
ing. What the Dionysos-ridden man wants infinitely he gets 
if he gets anything at all finitely. Unaware of the predica- 
ment in its fresh youth, a Dionysian civilization as it grows 
older comes face to face with this most dialectical difficulty. 
Awareness of the predicament is tragedy, the brief moment 
when the Dionysian wild-man, self-conscious at last, tastes the 
delights of the Apollinian gentleman. This is the costly mo- 
ment of Verfylarung Ver%larung> that nobly German experi- 
ence for which we poor Anglo-Saxons have only the inadequate 
and borrowed Latin "transfiguration." What tragic myth was 
for the Greeks, Wagner's music is for the Germans. Wagner's 
artful dissonance expresses our "desire to hear and at the same 
time have a longing beyond hearing." Wagner's is "the eternal 
and original artistic force." 12 

11 The Birth of Tragedy, chap. xxiv. 

13 The Birth of Tragedy, chaps, xxiv and xxv. 



THE PROFESSOR 41 

There is, however, a joker in this pack of fine words. Wagner 
seems cast for Dionysos. But Dionysos is clearly not enough: 

If we could conceive of an incarnation of dissonance and what else 
is man then, that it might live, this dissonance would need a glorious 
illusion to cover its features with a veil of beauty. This is the true artistic 
function of Apollo, in whose name we include all the countless manifesta- 
tions of the fair realm of illusion, which at each moment render life 
in general worth living and impel one to the experience of the next 
moment. 

And therefore: 

When the Dionysian powers rise with such strength as we are experi- 
encing at present, there can be no doubt that, wrapped in a cloud, Apollo 
has already descended to us. . . . 13 

Wrapped in a cloud ? Fanciful language, of course, and a bit 
vague. But it would have been most inartistic to write "dis- 
guised as a professor of philology at the University of Basle." 

Ill 

Nietzsche almost from the first seems to have regarded his 
duties at the University as an unpleasant interruption of the 
serious work of his life. He took maximum advantages of 
vacations and holidays; he was ill with increasing frequency, 
and in one way or another managed to pare down his actual 
teaching to a minimum. The publication of The Birth of 
Tragedy and its effect on his reputation further diminished his 
teaching load. Serious students began to avoid him. The little 
book was hailed favorably by the Wagnerites, neglected by the 
general public, and damned almost unanimously by Nietzsche's 
professional colleagues in the study of philology. Had Nie- 

u The Birth of Tragedy , chap. xxv. 



42 NIETZSCHE 

tzsche been a professor of philosophy, his colleagues would 
not have been surprised at his unverifiable assertions about the 
Dionysian and the Apollinian; but philologists were used to 
the methods if you prefer, the limitations of exact scholar- 
ship. Young Ulrich von Wilamowitz, destined to a great 
career as a classical scholar, unburdened himself in a pamphlet, 
Philology of the Future, which was a merciless riddling of 
Nietzsche's careless and confident prose. 14 Rohde, and Wagner 
himself, came to Nietzsche's defense, but the result was never 
in doubt. The learned gentlemen rose to the defense of their 
threatened standards, and shut Nietzsche out. They are still 
unrepentant nearly sixty years afterwards. Wilamowitz wrote 
in his recollections: 

Boyish as much of my work in question is, with the conclusion I hit 
the bull's-eye. Nietzsche did what I called on him to do, gave up his 
teaching office and science, and became the prophet of a non-religious 
religion and an unphilosophical philosophy. His daemon justified him 
in that: he had the genius and strength for it. Whether self- worship and 
blasphemy against the teaching of Socrates and Christ will give him the 
victory, let the future show. 15 

Nietzsche was, as a matter of fact, to continue on the faculty 
at Basle for another seven years. In the university proper there 
were not infrequent periods when he had no students at all: 
the philologists were very effective as boycotters. Public lectures 
were not a severe strain. In the lower school he continued to 
take schoolboys through Greek texts. But his health grew worse 
and worse, his absences more frequent, and his unfitness for his 

14 U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Zut(itnjtsphilologie. Eine Erwiderung 
auf F. Nietzsche's Geburt dcr Tragodie (1872). 

15 U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, My Recollections (English transla- 
tion, 1930), p. 152. 



THE PROFESSOR 43 

job more apparent. At last, in the summer of 1879, he was very 
generously retired by the university with a pension of 3,000 
Swiss francs a year, though he was only thirty-four years old 
and had taught at Basle but ten years, and that rather fitfully. 
From now on, the genius of Nietzsche was freed from what 
everyone then knew to be the worst shackle a poet or a thinker 
can wear a university post. 

He had not been a bad teacher, certainly not in his earlier 
years at Basle. Shyness, fear of numbers of men, afflicted him 
much less once he felt beneath him the security of the lecture- 
platform. His delivery was clear and authoritative, if not ora- 
torically very skilled. He always had what in this connection 
is usually called "ideas," and could hold the attention even of 
the pedantic or cautious among his classes. Even in the 
lower school he seems to have had no serious troubles. Here he 
rather shot over the heads of all save the ablest of his pupils. 
But though he was absent-minded, near-sighted, and highly 
intellectual, these schoolboys at least kept discipline under him. 
After all, even in Swiss Basle, they were German schoolboys, 
and knew their place. 16 

Apart from the visits to Triebschen and a few vacation trips, 
the Basle years were to Nietzsche mostly unhappy, and increas- 
ingly so. Elizabeth attributes everything to her brother's bad 
health and to his irregular life as an unworldly bachelor. There 
are all sorts of stories about his eccentricities. He experimented 
with various diets, vegetarian and otherwise, cooked for him- 

16 My temperate account of Nietzsche as professor is not, of course, in the 
tradition of the Nietzsche- Archiv. To Elizabeth, Fritz was at least as good 
at the job as Burckhardt. See her lyrical summing-up in the Life, II, 61. Over- 
beck is here, as usual, sympathetic but critical. See Bernoulli, Overbec^ und 
Nietzsche, I, 66-71. 



44 NIETZSCHE 

self, ate raw food, and doctored himself with a fine array of 
medicines. His letters are full of complaints about nausea, head- 
ache, sleeplessness. He estimates he is incapacitated for normal 
work nearly two-thirds of the time. Traveling seems to bring 
him some relief, and returning to Basle to work almost always 
starts him on a particularly bad spell. Wilamowitz's attack 
made him ill. Wagner's growing preoccupation with the Bay- 
reuth scheme affected his health unpleasantly. In general, when 
he didn't get what he wanted, he fell ill or rather, fell more 
conspicuously ill. This is by no means an uncommon form of 
behavior among human beings, and not in itself an indication 
of genius. 

The Nietzsche of these years, clear even in the pages of his 
adoring sister, still clearer in his correspondence and in Over- 
beck's recollections, is a figure rather more unpleasant than 
pathetic, a vain, touchy, prematurely old young man, an eccen- 
tric, querulous hypochondriac, a preacher unheard, a writer 
unread and soured. Yet shift the emphasis ever so slightly, and 
a quite different figure emerges, the poet tortured by God and 
man, Prometheus exposed not only to the vultures, but to the 
myriads of biting insects, a noble soul ripened by martyrdom. 
So Nietzsche later regarded himself, and so his followers still 
regard him. At any rate, it was a martyrdom, and as such quite 
essential to his mission. As martyrdoms go, it now seems a 
little inglorious, even shabby. Psychiatry, above all in the sim- 
plified forms with which it has penetrated to popular conscious- 
ness, has been hard on martyrs. Nietzsche obviously had forty 
different kinds of inferiority complex. 



THE PROFESSOR 45 

IV 

One series of gestures Nietzsche did make, in the middle 
seventies, towards reconciling his sense of mission mission 
to do something great, mission to reform the universe with 
his position as a university professor. He projected first as lec- 
tures, then as essays, a series of discussions on all the great 
issues which, as editorial writers like to put it, confront man- 
kind. Of these, four longish essays were actually written, and 
published between 1873 and 1876 under a title officially trans- 
lated in the English edition of Nietzsche's works as Thoughts 
out of Season: the untranslatable German original, Unzcit- 
gemdsse Bctrachtungen, may be roughly given as Considera- 
tions contrary to the Spirit of the Age. In these essays praising 
Schopenhauer as an educator, damning the philistine and com- 
placent rationalism of the famous Strduss of The Life of Jesus, 
worrying about the deadening effect of our modern interest in 
history on our energies and originality, praising Wagner in 
Bayreuth, Nietzsche conscientiously carries out the promise of 
his title. Everything is wrong in the nineteenth century. The 
age is materialistic, vulgar, corrupt, leveling all distinction of 
mind or spirit in a democratic tyranny, doomed to extinction 
and so on in a vein familiar nowadays to everyone. Nie- 
tzsche's tone is very much assured, very superior, very earnest 
and omniscient. It is a tone recognizable enough for twentieth- 
century Americans, among whom it is rather oddly known as 
"liberal." 

These thoughts were apparently a little too far out of season. 
They were not appreciated save by the now narrowing circle 
of Nietzsche's own friends. The philologists no longer even 



46 NIETZSCHE 

bothered to attack the young professor. The Germans, after 
1870, felt pretty much in tune with the times. They didn't even 
listen to Nietzsche as he urged them to gather behind him and 
go somewhere Bismarck couldn't possibly lead. But not only 
was Thoughts out of Season a failure. The one great corporate 
effort into which the young man had put the devouring en- 
thusiasm of his ambition was turning out badly. Wagner was 
going wrong; he was succeeding. 

The composer had long wanted to build a center wherein his 
music-dramas could receive the complete and reverent per- 
formance impossible in theatres built for the limited operas of 
Gluck and Mozart. It was not fitting, indeed it was hardly 
possible, to present Gotterddmmerung in a setting meant for 
Cost fan tutte. In the 1870*5, he set seriously to work on what 
finally became the shrine of Bayreuth. The money essential to 
the undertaking ultimately supplied by the mad King of 
Bavaria Wagner at first tried to raise by an appeal to his 
devotees, an appeal conducted with a very modern apparatus 
of publicity, meetings, committees, a "campaign," in short. 

Nietzsche, high in the esteem of the Master, was given an 
important place in the campaign. His essay on "Richard Wag- 
ner in Bayreuth," included in Thoughts out of Season, was 
originally campaign literature, though in the three years or so 
it was being put together, it lost a bit of its early freshness. 
Nietzsche was chosen to write a particularly important piece 
of publicity, a direct appeal for funds. His draft was severely 
criticized by his co-workers, who found it better philosophy 
than advertising. It was cast aside as much too high-falutin', 
and Nietzsche received another of the innumerable wounds he 
collected all his life with profit, if not with pleasure. 




RICHARD AND COSIMA WAGNER 
From a photograph, 1870 



THE PROFESSOR 47 

More and more people kept discovering Wagner, They were 
rich, noble, snobbish, vulgar, worldly. They did not seem to 
find Wagner at all superior to the Spirit of the Age. They did 
not, unless they had happened to glance at The Birth of Trag- 
edy, think of him as Dionysos. They did not, in fact, often 
notice Herr Nietzsche. They took up most of Wagner's time. 
The Master not only did not mind them: he seemed to like 
them. They were helping him build Bayreuth. 

Bayreuth was built, and in 1876 the first of the festivals 
opened with performances of the whole Ring of the Nibclungen. 
Nietzsche could hardly refuse the invitation to be an honored 
guest. He came, and was lost in the press of visitors. Bayreuth 
was no Heavenly City: it was already no more than a summer 
resort, a watering-place. 17 Nietzsche took ill, and went off to 
the quiet woods of near-by Klingenbrunn to get strength to 
face the dress rehearsals and formal performances of the four 
operas. He returned to Bayreuth but could not go through 
with it. The dress rehearsals were enough. He had been look- 
ing for some supreme, unearthly experience, some touch of 
eternity. He found himself looking at Grand Opera. 

My blunder was this. I travelled to Bayreuth with an ideal in my 
breast, and was thus doomed to experience the bitterest disappointment. 
The preponderance of ugliness, grotesqueness and strong pepper thor- 
oughly repelled me. 18 

After Nietzsche's sudden departure from the triumph of the 
first season of Bayreuth, his friendship with Wagner died a 
lingering death, beyond the power of Elizabeth, who retained 
an innocent German love of Wagner's music, to keep alive. 

1T The Case of Wagner, Postscript. 

* The Case of Wagner, Selected aphorisms, i. 



48 NIETZSCHE 

They never really met again on the old terms. Nietzsche said 
unkind things about the Master: but he did not as yet print 
them. It had always been an unstable friendship, for both men 
were egotists, intellectuals, and ternperamentvoll Germans 
that is, both lacked most even of the purely outward restraints 
that keep men from behaving like game-cocks. On Nietzsche's 
part, certainly, the relation had by no means lacked the impul- 
sion of high ideals. It is a mistake, common to idealist and 
materialist alike, to suppose that men are driven by interests 
to the exclusion of ideals, or by ideals to the exclusion of inter- 
ests. Friendship, notably, is a relation much too solid to be 
based on such abstract distinctions as that between ideals and 
interests. 

Nietzsche, then, really felt that Wagner at Bayreuth had 
betrayed some great ideal he had at Triebschen promised to 
serve. What is more important, Nietzsche really felt that the 
music-dramas were unsatisfactory, that for him at least they 
unlocked no pent-up Dionysian ecstasy. That he also felt 
neglected, that he was jealous, that his old fear of the press of 
people came back on him in crowded Bayreuth, that he was 
not shining in this Germany of Richard Wagner surely such 
considerations can but add to the depth and honesty, as well 
as to the completeness, of his revulsion from Wagner-Diony- 
sos. Even in 1872, in the Birth of Tragedy, he had hinted 
that Nietzsche-Apollo was needed to make a new Hellas of 
Germany. 

The revulsion led him, as such revulsions have often led 
German intellectuals, to France. Those who construct periods 
in Nietzsche's life and works discern after his first or 
Wagner period a second or critical and rational period, for 
which he was in part prepared by careful reading of Montaigne, 



THE PROFESSOR 49 

Pascal, La Rochefoucauld, Vauvenargues, Stendhal and other 
masters of French prose. In his travels he had met a bright 
young Jewish intellectual, Dr. Paul Ree, who prided himself 
on a cynical realism in the study of men, a realism never 
fashionable, he thought, among such sentimental idealists as 
the Germans. Ree was undoubtedly a tenth-rate figure, but he 
proved a good foil for Nietzsche emerging from his disillusion 
over Wagner. Other new faces came into Nietzsche's circle as 
he withdrew from Basle and entered the cosmopolitan group 
that shuttled among Swiss and Italian pensions and villas. One 
of them was Peter Kosselitz, better known by his assumed 
name of Peter Cast, an undistinguished musician devoutly 
immersed in his art, a German plunged, as only Germans can 
be plunged, in what he thought was Italy, an arty, sensitive 
soul, a born disciple. Another was Mathilda von Meysenbug, 
an incredibly innocent old lady, a close friend of the Wagners, 
a collector of experiences and geniuses, a sort of spiritual, or 
possibly only German, Madame de Warens. 

In these new surroundings, Nietzsche put together the series 
of aphorisms which he published in 1878 under the title of 
Human, All Too Human. It was dedicated to Voltaire. For 
the German Wagner, who had just published in Parsifal his 
reconciliation with priestly Christianity, and who had hated 
the French since his failure at Paris, this was indeed an insult. 
It was, in a sense, Nietzsche's declaration of independence. 
And not only independence of Wagner. It was also a declara- 
tion of independence from the professorate. One year later, 
Nietzsche was officially retired from a post he was barely occu- 
pying. The professor was free to undertake a career which, 
even in twentieth-century America, is commonly regarded as a 
bit unacademic: that of the prophet. 



CHAPTER III 
THE PROPHET 

NIETZSCHE in 1880 had twenty years of life ahead of 
him: a decade of extraordinarily active writing in which 
all his greatest works were composed, and another decade of 
complete invalidism, the hopeless isolation of the incurably 
insane. The marvellous decade of the i88o's in Nietzsche's life 
is for his disciples and admirers filled with great moments, 
inspired with the high, tragic contrast between the petty details 
of his apparent life and the god-like grandeur of his real life. 
To the unconverted, blind to this real life, his only too apparent 
life is not without elements of comedy. 

Financially, at least, Nietzsche never sank into picturesque 
want, and the impression current in the 1890*8 that he had, like 
all the really great geniuses of art and letters, been "penniless" 
as well as scorned, is not true. His Basle pension of 3,000 
Swiss francs went perhaps as far as $1,500 would go in America 
today; and to this he could add about as much again from his 
mother. For a single man, $3,000 a year is far indeed from 
poverty. It permitted Nietzsche, not luxury and display, but 
some of the subtle little indulgences in food, clothes, and books 
that gave him such aristocratic satisfaction. No doubt it was 
an income unworthy of a Polish nobleman. Poor Nietzsche, 
even here, was at a level well below his estimate of himself. He 
was, in fact, that characteristic nineteenth-century, middle-class 
figure, the rentier the petit rentier, at that. 



THE PROPHET 51 

Freed from any settled obligations, he could live where he 
wanted to. His great decade was spent mostly in Italy and in 
Switzerland, with a few brief visits to Germany. In Italy, 
where he spent the long winters, he never quite found the per- 
fect spot. One season he had earlier spent at Sorrento, along 
with others as a member of Mathilda von Meysenbug's manage, 
and here he had his last constrained interview with Wagner in 
1877. After that he stayed alone, with occasional visits from 
friends like Peter Cast or from his sister. He tried Stresa on 
Lake Maggiore, and various places along the Riviera, Rapallo, 
Genoa, Nice the latter at that time but recently annexed to 
France, and still in many ways Italian. His last winter before 
his breakdown he spent at Turin, where he seemed very con- 
tented. Wherever he went in Italy, he tried to settle down for 
part of the season at least, taking a room in some quiet boarding 
house, eating about in inexpensive restaurants, walking, com- 
posing, lying in the sun. 

In Switzerland he returned time and again to the Engadine, 
a region which he used to say "gave me back my life." l He 
went there first with his sister in the summer of 1879, to con- 
valesce from a more than usually severe bout of illness which 
had signalized his last days as a professor. Later he settled in 
the little village of Sils-Maria, from which he took long walks 
through the high valley of the Inn. The piety of the Nietzsche- 
ans has associated Nietzsche with the Engadine as Words- 
worth is associated with the Lake District, or Thoreau with 
Concord. A monument now marks the spot on the lake of 
Silvaplana, not far from Surlei, where, "six-thousand feet 
beyond Man and Time," Nietzsche was struck with the idea 

1 Forster-Nictzschc, Nietzsche, II, 67. 



52 NIETZSCHE 

of eternal recurrence, "the highest formula of affirmation that 
can ever be achieved." 2 No doubt that Nietzsche loved the 
Engadine of his day, before St. Moritz had become too fashion- 
able a center; no doubt that its cool, clear air and quiet helped 
him to the sustained effort needed for his work. But Thus 
Spafe Zarathustra is only incidentally a book to be associated 
with a place. Nietzsche's thoughts were spun out in an at- 
mosphere far more rarefied than that at six thousand feet. He 
was too good or too orthodox a philosopher to notice the 
petty facts of his environment, save as they got into his moods. 
He hated cold, dampness, dark, and loved the sunshine and clear 
air. He was lucky in the Engadine and in the Riviera ; but you 
would not learn much about those regions if you relied solely 
on Nietzsche's works. 3 

In some ways, Nietzsche's health did improve in these years. 
His correspondence is always spotted with complaints about 
his health: "It has been my gloomiest and unhealthiest winter, 
except for ten days, which were just enough to allow of my 
doing something [writing on Thus Spake Zarathustra} that 
makes up for all my days of sadness and ill health." 4 His 
headaches and sleeplessness continued; and about this time, 
according to his sister, he began to take a mysterious mixture 
she calls the "Javanese sedative." Podach, the most sensible of 
those who have written about Nietzsche's diseases, has doubts 
about the very existence of this sedative, which he thinks 
Elizabeth brought forth as a rebuttal to the unpleasant rumors 

*Ecce Homo, "Thus Spake Zarathustra," i. 

"He could do an occasional descriptive piece, as in Human, All Too 
Human, "The Wanderer and his Shadow," 295. But even here, though he 
starts with a lake and pines, he ends with Epicurus. 

4 Gesammelte Brief e, V, part II, 507. To his sister, April 27, 1883. 



THE PROPHET 53 

about her brother's syphilis. Even Nietzsche's doses of chloral, 
Podach argues, are, to take him at his own word, by no means 
heroic, and can hardly have seriously undermined his health. 5 
That Nietzsche suffered real pain there can be no doubt; but 
that he was also a hypochondriac, that he was proud of his 
sufferings, that he loved to complain of them, is also undeniable. 
He complained almost as much about the way he was de- 
serted by his fellows, about his lack of friends, about the absence 
in his life of the love so necessary to the genius. Naturally, 
Elizabeth got the brunt of these complaints. 

So far as friendship is concerned, I have, in fact, altogether managed 
to forego a good deal. ... In the deeper sense I have no comrades 
(Genossen) no one knows when I need comfort, encouragement, or a 
grip of the hand. . . . And if I complain, the whole world thinks it has 
a right to wreak its petty sense of power upon me as a sufferer: they call 
it consolation, pity, good advice, and so forth. But this has always been 
the fate of such men as I. 6 

Yet with all his complaining, he somehow contrived health 
enough to write books. And as time goes on, he complains a 
bit less, even admits that he feels somewhat better. Here, too, 
there is the touch of exaggeration, the tension of the extreme, 
the queer instability rarely absent in Nietzsche's life. He never 
seems to write quietly, dutifully, and dully: he is always in 
ecstasy, always panting. As madness approaches, the feeling of 
euphoria is plain. As far back as Zarathustra, he had felt the 
divine touch. He had written under revelation. 

A joy, strained to a tremendous pitch which sometimes seeks relief in 
a flood of tears a perfect ecstasy, with the most distinct consciousness 
of an endless number of delicate shocks and thrills to one's very toes; 

"Podach, Nictzsches Zusammenbruch y 25-28. 

*Gesammelte Brieje, V, part II, 541. To his sister, August, 1883. 



54 NIETZSCHE 

a feeling of happiness, in which the most gloomy and painful feelings 
act, not as a contrast, but as something expected and inevitable, as an 
essential coloring within such an overflow of light; an instinct for rhythm 
that bridges wide gulfs of form. . . . This is my experience of inspira- 
tion. I have no doubt that we should have to go back many thousands 
of years before we could find anyone who would dare say to me: "It is 
mine as well." 7 

It was a strange life, and Nietzsche must have seemed to the 
little people among whom he moved the hotel-keepers, the 
waiters, the porters, the chambermaids a most extraordinary 
fellow. Unfortunately, such people rarely write their memoirs. 
A few observations from a concierge or a waiter might throw 
light on Nietzsche in ways that have not occurred to the high- 
minded and highly educated people who have written about 
him. With his eyeglasses, his mustaches, his height and his 
brownness, he must have been to his Italian hosts the clumsy 
German, stupid and exploitable. He was absent-minded, shy, 
not given to scraping casual acquaintances, fond of mooning 
about alone. Under inspiration, he could talk to himself, com- 
pose aloud, even in Genoa. He looked like a German professor, 
which, in a sense, he never ceased to be. But, even at the end 
in Turin he kept himself neat, well-dressed, almost, in a con- 
sciously careless way, dandyish. Eccentric, he never quite lost 
a somewhat bewildered dignity: he never wholly looked the 
crank. 

II 

There is not much use trying to follow Nietzsche in the 
detail of his wanderings during this decade, nor in trying to 

T Written in 1888, and quoted in Forster-Nietzsche, "Nietzsche, II, 155-156. 



THE PROPHET 55 

trace the ups and downs of his health and his friendships. 8 But 
there is one phase of his relations to his fellows so characteristic 
of the man, and so illuminating, that it is worth dwelling upon. 
As at Triebschen, it is a triangular relation, and as at Triebschen, 
it is a tragi-comic idyll. The figures were Nietzsche, Paul Ree, 
and a young and very intellectual Jewish girl, Russian or 
rather, Finnish by nationality, Mile. Lou Salome. The three 
met first in the circle of Mathilda von Meysenbug. Lou was a 
precocious girl, with literary and philosophical aspirations T and 
most probably also with a tew more ordinary, if not more 
specifically feminine, aspirations. She was chaperoned the 
word is a bit strong by a not too clearly designing mother. 
The interplay of emotion among the three is most complicated 
and confused, and has not been cleared up very satisfactorily 
by the letters, confessions, and memoirs of the participants, 
and the debates of Nietzsche's biographers and hagiographers. 9 
Nietzsche certainly saw in Lou a prospective disciple, a 
tender, respectful disciple, cwig weibliche. When, writes And- 
ler "she confided to him her intention of sacrificing her life to 
Truth, he recognized in her a predestined companion." 10 At 
any rate, he made her a formal proposal of marriage, to be 
delivered through Ree. Whether Ree delivered it or not is 
uncertain. That Lou was also interested in Ree, whom she must 
have found rather easier to get along with than Nietzsche, is 

'This is done, moreover, in very great detail in Andler, Nietzsche, IV, 
and rather more rapidly in Forstcr-Nietzsche, Nietzsche, II. 

*C. A. Bernoulli, "Nietzsches Lou Erlebnis." Raschers Jahrbuch (1910), 
I, is perhaps the most sensible account. Andler's chapter, entitled "Idylle 
tragiquc," Nietzsche^ III, 280-306, is astonishingly sentimental, at once French, 
academic, and maudlin. 

10 Andler, Nietzsche, IV, 284. 



56 NIETZSCHE 

certain. She seems to have found a very natural pleasure in 
keeping both men dangling for a while. No reply ever came 
to the proposal. Lou went off to visit Ree's family, and then to 
visit Nietzsche's sister. In the summer of 1882, Nietzsche, Ree, 
and Lou lived together for six weeks at Leipzig in a common 
pursuit of truth. Nietzsche, already warned by his sister, whose 
first good impressions of Lou had been altered when she found 
the girl actually thought the philosopher rather funny at times, 
began to have unpleasant suspicions. He caught Lou and Ree 
whispering together; he found their language unpleasantly 
familiar. 

The manage h trots broke up, and back home in Naumburg 
with mother and sister, Nietzsche began writing reproachful 
letters to Lou. She hadn't lived up to her promise to sacrifice 
herself to Truth. She was irreverent, light-headed, even in the 
presence of Zarathustra. In his last letter to her he wrote: 11 

I have never yet made a mistake about any human being, and in you 
I recognize that impulse towards a sublime selfishness which is an in- 
stinctive obedience to the highest law. Some curse or other, it seems, has 
made you confound it with its opposite, the selfishness and rapacity of 
the cat, that_wants nothing but life. Now this feline egotism . . . 

Not a lover's letter: not, at any rate, an accepted or an accept- 
able lover's letter. 

Nietzsche at first held Ree guiltless of treachery or betrayal. 
But reflection, grim, painful chewing over his grievances, with 
the help of Elizabeth who did not like Ree, and of Mathilda 
von Meysenbug, whose carelessness let Nietzsche see a letter 
from Lou's mother complaining that the now altogether too 
emancipated young lady had been living with Ree in Berlin, all 

u Quoted in Forster-Nietzsche, Nietzsche, II, 140. 



THE PROPHET 57 

pointed to Ree. Nietzsche decided he had been duped and in- 
sulted. He drafted a letter to Ree, a very strong letter though 
the one he actually sent may have been milder: 

I should very much like to give you a lesson in practical morality with 
the help of a few bullets. Perhaps, if I am lucky, I shall manage to make 
you give up occupying yourself with morality once for all for this 
occupation needs clean hands, Herr Dr. Ree, not muck-raking fingers 
like yours! 12 

This, even though it came from the pen of a German professor, 
would seem to call for a duel. Perhaps Nietzsche never sent the 
letter. Perhaps Ree was not easily insulted. At any rate, the 
duel was never fought. 

There are some things fairly clear in this unlovely but not 
unamusing episode. Lou possibly, even probably, became the 
mistress of Ree; she was almost certainly never the mistress of 
Nietzsche. Elizabeth, jealous of her brother, and inclined al- 
ready to anti-semitism, interfered deliberately and sharpened 
antagonisms that might have tapered off into forgetfulness. 
But Nietzsche himself appears almost incredibly inept and 
emotionally immature. Perhaps the philosopher-prophet was 
too good for the earthly commerce of love and friendship. It is 
unfortunate, however, that he felt obliged to attempt a course 
of action so much more difficult than putting words together 
nicely. Nietzsche simply could not, by this time, leave the 
private world he was building for himself, and move about 
with people who occasionally, and even habitually, take the 
world as they find it. Nietzsche could never relax; he could 
liardly expect to love. I 

The episode confirmed him in his self-righteousness, in his 

M Forster-Nietzschc, 'Nietzsche, II, 176. 



58 NIETZSCHE 

fear and hatred of everybody else even Elizabeth and in 
his determination to build his own private world into some- 
thing colossal, overpowering. It may have helped to shake his 
already badly shaken nervous system. It must have increased 
the feeling of personal inferiority for which his writings are 
^sometimes an almost absurdly simple form of compensation: 

Every defamation, every misunderstanding has made me more free: I 
want less and less from humanity, and can give it more and more. The 
severance of every individual tie is hard to bear, but in each case a wing 
grows in its place. 13 

Adler and Jung and Freud are hardly necessary here: almost 
any kind of life is clinical experience enough to give an under- 
standing of such a case. Even Nietzsche himself could have 
understood it in another. 

Ill 

This is the decade when Nietzsche's best known books were 
written though "written" is a modest, routine word for what 
Nietzsche himself regarded as a cosmic process. He composed 
them in all sorts of places and in all sorts of conditions 
sitting on the sea-shore near Genoa, strolling the back-ways of 
Nice, striding in ecstasy by Lake Silvaplana, hunched near- 
sightedly over a table in a dozen rooming-houses. His habit 
was to think out the matter occupying his mind while he was 
walking; in times of great excitement he could walk for hours 
at a rate apparently quite inconsistent with his invalidism. 
Back in his room, he would put his thoughts together in a series 
of aphoristic passages, or in a short chapter. A few days, at most 
a few weeks, of these erratic efforts would exhaust his strength. 
" u Forster-Nietzsche, Nictzschf, II, 181. 



THE PROPHET 59 

Headaches, sleeplessness, and chloral would follow, until calm 
returned, and inspiration began again its wearing course. 

The books he wrote under these conditions were naturally 
not systematic, orderly treatises. They were collections of great 
and lesser thoughts, beaded together on the string of Nietzsche's 
temperament. Critics have inevitably found a higher unity, 
indeed, several higher unities, in his work. But on the surface 
and surfaces are important a book of Nietzsche's lacks 
form and continuity. He is always a bit out of breath. And, 
except in small doses, he is likely to weary readers short on 
devotion. 14 He repeats himself perhaps more often perhaps 
only more obviously than is usual among more formal 
philosophers. 

We shall have to return to this problem of how far Nietzsche's 
work holds together. Here we are concerned with the cata- 
logue of his books. They were not, by a publisher's no doubt 
confined standards, successful books. His Birth of Tragedy and 
Thoughts out of Season had been published by E. W. Fritsch 
of Leipzig, Wagner's own publisher, to whom he had been 
recommended as one of the inner circle of Wagnerites. Human, 
All Too Human was not the kind of book Fritsch dealt in. 
Nietzsche transferred his patronage to Schmeitzner of Chem- 
nitz, who continued to publish for him down to 1884. When 
Fritsch, after Wagner's death, consolidated his list and took 
back Nietzsche's books, there were still "62 hundredweight" 
of these earlier writings unsold. 15 Nietzsche was hard on pub- 
lishers, nagging them over details of printing, always unsatis- 

"Ovcrbeck himself notes the limitations of the "books of aphorisms" his 
friend wrote. Bernoulli, Qvcrbec\ und Nietzsche, I, 228. 
" Forster-Nietzschc, Nietzsche, II, 267. 



60 NIETZSCHE 

fied with sales and promotion, convinced that publishers were 
natural slaves and herd-men who owed their unnatural power 
over authors to the perverse structure of nineteenth-century 
society. In 1884, after years of wrangling with his publishers 
and after finding it very hard if not impossible to get a new 
one he decided to have Part IV of Zarathustra printed and 
published at his own expense. Beyond Good and Evil was so 
published in 1886, and all the rest of his works to the end of his 
sane life. The great man was reduced to the expedient of buy- 
ing his way into print. The swinish public wouldn't even root 
among his pearls. 

Human, All Too Human, published in 1878, inaugurates a 
series of books which clearly belong together. All are frankly 
aphoristic, modeled as to form on the great French aphorists 
like La Rochefoucauld. They are collections of thoughts on 
men and morals, at once chaotic and encyclopaedic. They vary 
somewhat in tone, but they are all expressions of what Nietzsche 
called "the free spirit" anti-intellectual, but also anti-roman- 
tic, contemptuous of the plush civilization of Bismarck's Ger- 
many, sure that most men are fools, but still unsure as to just 
who are wise. They are part of the field of belles lcttrcs\ had 
Nietzsche never written anything more, he would certainly not 
be known as a philosopher, but at most as a German imitator 
of the French aphorists. 

Human, All Too Human was followed in 1881 by The Dawn 
of Day and in 1882 by The Joyful Wisdom. These are the books 
that celebrate Nietzsche's emancipation from teaching and his 
discovery of Italy sunny, classic, smiling Italy, free of damp, 
beer, corsetry, Protestantism, and Wagner's music. The Joyful 
Wisdom is or aspires to be the Provencal gai saber y the 



THE PROPHET 6l 

flashing southern wit, never morose, never befuddled with 
metaphysics, but capable of tragic depth and penetration. Both 
books are more cheerful than Human, All Too Human, less 
bitterly critical of life as ordinary people live it, less closely 
modeled on French patterns. They are Nietzsche's best-tem- 
pered books. 

While they were being written, Nietzsche was meditating 
much grander things. He was not going to content himself 
with being a German Montaigne, resigned to writing wisely 
and skeptically about a world he could not change. He was 
still the Nietzsche who, in Thoughts out of Season, had really 
hoped to change the German season. After all, there were a lot 
of clever writers in the world, even in the i88o's, and the world 
wasn't very clearly the better for their being in it. What was 
wanted was someone of the stamp of the great religious leaders, 
Buddha, Zoroaster, Jesus, Mohammed, but someone who could 
do the job much better than they had done. 

Nietzsche set himself up as prophet in Thus Spa\e Zara- 
thustra: A Boo\ for All and None, published in four short parts 
between 1883 and 1885. The book is in form no more unified 
than all his other books after The Birth of Tragedy. It is a 
collection of parables, sermons, and reflections, written in what 
is, no doubt justly, called poetic prose, and giving an account of 
the mission of Zarathustra to pave the way for the coming of 
the Superman. Zarathustra has no more than the name in 
common with his historical original, Zoroaster, and is as much 
nineteenth-century Nietzsche as the Persians, Hottentots, or 
Hurons of eighteenth-century letters were Montesquieu, Vol- 
taire, or Diderot. The style throughout is exceedingly elevated; 
Zarathustra would be lost without his "saith," and "thou" and 



62 NIETZSCHE 

"ye," helpless without his exclamation points. In English 
translation he sounds very pseudo-biblical, like the King James 
version gone wrong, and almost inevitably suggests the literary 
style of the angel Moroni, as transcribed by another and less 
highly educated prophet, Joseph Smith. Indeed, Thus Spakf 
Zarathustra has become, for a certain type of half-educated in- 
tellectual throughout the world, a kind of Enchiridion. 

This is, of course, the report of an unbeliever. For the 
Nietzscheans, Thus Spa\e Zarathustra is an undoubted master- 
piece, a sacred writing inferior in depth and dignity to none. 
Nietzsche himself was of this opinion. "Whenever I dip into 
my Zarathustra," he said, "I walk up and down my room for 
half-an-hour, unable to repress my sobs." And his sister con- 
tinues, "The figure of Zarathustra is the poet's highest creation, 
it is a type of feternal beauty, of a divine transfiguration of the 
world it is the Superman himself." 16 

Whatever its depth and beauties probably, since the world 
of the flesh is so limited, because of its depth and beauties 
Thus Spake Zarathustra is an enigmatic work. Nietzsche seems 
pretty clearly to have set himself next the deliberate task of 
bringing it down to earth, of expounding analytically and in 
plain prose the elevated obscurities that give the book its first 
hold on the seeker. After the Word, comes exegesis. The 
result was two books which, to many limited intellects outside 
the circles of convinced Nietzscheans, are his masterpieces: 
Beyond Good and Evil, published in 1886, and The Genealogy 
of Morals, published in 1887, an< ^ written, Elizabeth claims, in 
twenty days. 17 

16 Forstcr-Nietzsche, Nietzsche, II, 234. 



THE PROPHET 63 

Nietzsche himself wrote in the extraordinary biographical 
fragment he called Eccc Homo that after the yea-saying of Zara- 
thustra he had to turn to the negative, destructive part of his 
task, though he looked in vain for help in this work of 
destruction: 

Thenceforward all my writings are so much bait: perhaps I understand 
as much about fishing as most people? If nothing was caught, it was 
not I who was at fault. There were no fish to come and bite. 1 * 

Again, and quite naturally, a limited critic whose values have 
not been properly transvalued finds that Nietzsche has got 
things reversed. Zarathustra is destructive nonsense. Beyond 
Good and Evil and The Genealogy of Morals are relatively 
sober and successful efforts to penetrate objectively into some 
very important aspects of the behavior of human beings. They 
are, in spots, among the best scientific studies of this behavior 
ever made. Certainly Nietzsche was wrong in one respect. 
How the fish have bitten! 

Like his earlier works, these are built up from short aphoristic 
passages, but they are built around definite central themes. 
Beyond Good and Evil tries to show how men have come to 
value certain ways of life, and to name certain forms of be- 
havior aristocratic; and in its final book, it urges for a "master- 
class" a reversal of these forms of behavior. The Genealogy of 
Morals pays especial attention to the role of religion, and in 
particular Christianity, in forming our standards of behavior, 
of "good." 

All of Nietzsche's "philosophy" was now in print. There 
remained to him somewhat more than a year of life, during 
which he produced a series of brief books, The Case of Wagner, 

**Eccc Homo, "Beyond Good and Evil," i. 



64 NIETZSCHE 

The Twilight of the Idols, The Antichrist, and Ecce Homo. 
These extraordinary books, dashed off at high speed in periods 
of tense excitement, add nothing to his stock of ideas; they 
represent a stepping up of the already high voltage of his other 
work. All his gifts, all his faults, as a writer are here exposed 
in quivering nakedness his abruptness, exaggeration, petu- 
lance, clarity of line, love of epigram and surprise, his straining 
for an unbreaking breaking-point. They are, as all but a very 
few of the most extreme Nietzscheans admit, the work of a 
madman. Even to the amateur diagnostician, they carry on 
almost every page the mark of the paranoiac. 

The Case of Wagner was printed by the late summer of 1888, 
and Nietzsche, his mind still lucid enough for reading, saw the 
little book, and some of the very indignant notices it received 
in the German press. Well, they were paying attention to him, 
after all! The book it is hardly more than a pamphlet 
puts in most intemperate language the objections to Wagner 
Nietzsche had been sharing with his correspondents for years: 
Wagner's music is just German bad manners and indecency, 
German romantic longing, German wallowing around in vi- 
carious sin and real repentance, German sloppiness and un- 
endingness. By contrast "Bizet's music seems to me perfect. It 
comes forward lightly, gracefully, stylishly. It is lovable, it does 
not sweat." 19 

The Twilight of the Idols Nietzsche sent to press, but it was 
not printed until January 1889, by which time its author was 
beyond reading even his own works. It was put together, as 
was much of these four books of 1888, out of materials gathered 

19 The Case of Wagner, i. This is one aspect of Nietzsche's wit at its 
best; Wagner's music mostly does sweat. 



THE PROPHET 65 

for his projected systematic work, The Will to Power. Its 
sub-title, How to Philosophize with a Hammer, is a good sample 
of its temper. This book, and the famous Antichrist, also 
broken of? from The Will to Power, are really twins both 
attacks on Christianity and other European habits, both mere 
intensifications, mere maddenings, of Beyond Good and Evil. 

Elizabeth, to whom these manuscripts fell on her return 
from Paraguay, guarded them with due reverence. But they 
were shocking books, especially shocking to poor old Frau 
Nietzsche, who outlived her son's sanity by several years. Only 
when Nietzsche's fame grew to portentous heights did Eliza- 
beth consent to the printing of the Antichrist in 1902. The 
Ecce Homo, Nietzsche's last work, she withheld until 1908. 
It is a kind of autobiography, wholly unsystematic, reviewing 
one after another Nietzsche's books. It is not apologetic, not 
an attempt to justify himself. Nietzsche in the fall of 1888 was 
well beyond that stage, well beyond a mere sense of martyrdom 
and persecution. Some of its chapter headings have become 
famous: "Why I am so clever," "Why I write such good books." 
And sentences: "I am not a man: I am dynamite." 

Later, his sister and her faithful co-workers brought together 
many of Nietzsche's fragments into a book they called The 
Will to Power. So fragmentary are most of the works he wrote 
in his own lifetime that this book hardly seems out of line with 
his other books. The mass of his literary remains was enormous. 
Much of it has been collected here and there, and a notably 
complete arrangement made in 1931 under the title Die 
Unschuld des Werdens by Professor Alfred Baeumler. 20 

20 Nietzsche, Die Unschuld des Werdens [The Innocence of Becoming]. 
Der Nachlass. Ausgewiihlt und geordnet von A. Baeumler. (2 vols., 1931.) 



66 NIETZSCHE 

Scattered through the works are a number of short poems, 
which, put together, make part of a volume of the authorized 
English edition of the works of Nietzsche. 21 They are very 
German poems, not at all the product of Nietzsche's enthusiasm 
for the Provencal and sunny clarity, and they are wholly un- 
translatable. A few have found their way into most anthologies 
of German poetry, where they must fulfill some need. The 
most famous is the very Dionysian and well-named "Drunken 
Song" from Zarathustra. 

Oh Mensch! Gieb Acht! 
Was spricht die tiefe Mitternacht? 
"Ichschlic,ichschlic , 
Aus tiefem Traum bin ich erwacht: 
Die Welt ist tief, 
Und tiefer als der Tag gedacht. 
Ticf istihrWeh , 
Lust tiefer noch als Herzeleid: 
Weh spricht: Vergeh! 
Doch alle Lust will Ewigkeit , 
will tiefe, tiefe Ewigkeit!" 22 

This goes at least one better the famous concluding lines of 
Faust , the chorus mysticus. 

Alles Vergangliche 
Ist nur ein Gleichnis; 
Das Unzulangliche, 
Hier wird's Ereignis; 
Das Unbeschreibliche 
Hier ist's getan: 
Das Ewig-Weibliche 
Zieht uns hinan. 

81 In the volume Ecce Homo, 149-207. 

"Thus Spa^c Zarathustra, "The Drunken Song," 12. 



THE PROPHET 67 

But Goethe also wrote poems like Ucbcr alien Gipfeln and 
Nietzsche did not. 

IV 

Nietzsche's last few years were spent in loneliness: hotel- 
keepers, servants, fellow-guests, a very few casual acquaintances 
made the sum of his relations with his fellow-men. It was, if 
you are a Nietzschean, the loneliness of a brooding Titan left 
alone by ungrateful little men; if you are not a Nietzschean, it 
was the loneliness of a man who had quarreled with all his 
friends and relatives. Peter Cast remained, and from time to 
time stayed with Nietzsche, and helped him with his manu- 
scripts. The rest were all gone Wagner and Cosima long 
ago. Ree and Lou Salome, Fraulein von Meysenbug, all the 
arty and talkative little folk of her circle had broken with 
Nietzsche, or left him to himself. Frau Overbeck had mixed 
in the affair of Lou, Elizabeth had replied indignantly, and 
though there was no formal break between Nietzsche and Over- 
beck, there was a coolness, and a lessening of letter-writing. 
Rohde was one of the last to go. But in the spring of 1886 
Nietzsche had stayed for a while in Leipzig, and misunder- 
standings between the two had come to the surface. To his 
sister he wrote from Leipzig : 

Neither Rohde nor Overbeck have the slightest idea of what I am 
about, let alone a feeling of obligation towards me. In this university 
atmosphere the best men decay; I feel it continually in the background 
and as an ultimate determinant, even with such men as Rohde and 
Overbeck, this damned general indifference and total lack of belief. 28 

This letter was sent to his sister in Paraguay. Elizabeth, his 
beloved "Lama," his mainstay in trouble and illness, had left 

* Gcsammeltc Briefe, V, Part II, 675. To his sister, June 14, 1886. 



68 NIETZSCHE 

him too, and her leaving had in some ways been a worse blow 
than the defection of Lou. Nietzsche had come to regard 
Elizabeth as his; she was proof that he, too, owned a woman. 
And now, at almost forty, she married Bernhard Forster, an 
anti-semitic agitator who had founded a Germanic racial colony 
in Paraguay, and was taking her off there to the ends of the 
earth. Nietzsche had opposed the engagement, but, as usual 
when he attempted to get something done, he behaved very 
unskillfully. Elizabeth took literally his sour and self-pitying 
assertions that he could get along by himself and married 
Forster in 1885. Nietzsche wrote an extraordinary letter to the 
bridegroom. 

Love is leading the Lama apologies, but I have called her that up 
to now into many dangers, it seems, far from home, into a life full 
of temptations. Some things will go well, others badly: on the whole, 
she has a heroic future before her. So have I: it seems that this is char- 
acteristic of our stock. And if love leads her in a less abstract form 
than it leads me, perhaps she has a better taste, and has chosen the better 
part: namely Herr Bernhard Forster. In such matters, women are 
shrewder than men. We men run after truth, and similar pallid beauties. 
. . . This, to conclude from letters and other psychological documents 
has not been my sister's fate. 

""" T nW| 

And to his Lama he sent, in lieu of attendance at her wedding, 
a long letter entirely about himself, and the failure of his 
friendships ! 24 

In comparative loneliness and in intense literary activity, 
Nietzsche spent the years 1887 and 1888. For the autumn of 
1888-1889 he chose to go to Turin, intending to spend the 
winter itself in Nice. Indeed, he had worked out for himself a 
pathetically regular schedule of wandering, suited to the great 

24 Forster-Nietzsche, Nietzsche, II, 237-239. 



THE PROPHET 69 

systematic work The Will to Power he was engaged 
upon: Sils-Maria, Turin, Nice, Turin, and then Sils-Maria again 
for the beginning of another Nietzschean year. 25 He did not 
get beyond Turin. Sometime in December 1888 or January 
1889 he went incurably mad. His terrified landlord was 
about to turn him over to the Italian authorities when the 
faithful Overbeck, warned by a series of strange letters from 
Nietzsche, arrived and took charge of his removal to Switz- 
erland. 

Signs of what was coming are clear to us now in The Twi- 
light of the Idols, The Antichrist, and Ecce Homo, Nietzsche's 
last works. They might have been clear then to other cor- 
respondents than Overbeck. To August Strindberg, with whom 
he had linked correspondence through Georg Brandes, he 
wrote: "I have called together at Rome an assembly of princes, 
I will have the young emperor [Kaiser Wilhelm II] shot. Au 
revoir! For we shall meet again. One condition. Let us 
divorce! Nietzsche-Caesar." In the last access of madness, 
he wrote letters and telegrams to an astonishing variety of 
people: some, no doubt, have never been traced. To the King 
of Italy he wrote, addressing him as "my dearly beloved son 
Umberto"; to the papal secretary of state he wrote requesting 
that His Holiness be told of Nietzsche's veneration for him, 
and signing himself "the Crucified One." To Brandes he wrote: 
"To friend George: When once you had discovered me, it was 
easy enough to find me; the difficulty now is to get rid of me 
The Crucified One." To Overbeck and his wife : "Although 
hitherto you have shown small faith in my solvency, I never- 
theless hope to prove to you again that I am one who pays his 

23 Gcsammclte Brief e, V, Part II, 793. To his sister, September 14, 1888. 



70 NIETZSCHE 

debts to you, for instance. Right now I'm having all the 
anti-Semites shot Dionysos." It was this letter, and a longer 
one to Burckhardt which the historian had brought at once to 
Overbeck, that sent Overbeck to Turin. 

The whole sheaf is no doubt revealing to the professional 
psychiatrist, and tempting to the amateur psychiatrist that 
lurks, not sufficiently unsuspecting, in almost everyone who 
writes today. The illusions of grandeur, the assumption of the 
role of Napoleon-Caesar, are obvious enough. Dionysos and 
the Crucified One are echoes of Nietzsche's own intellectual 
history. But the strangest, most revealing, in some ways most 
obvious of the letters was a scrawled line to the widowed 
Cosima: "Ariadne, I love thee Dionysos." 

Nietzsche in these later years had worked his relations with 
Wagner and with Cosima into an elaborate symbolic tale, hints 
of which are frequent in his writings, as for instance: "Who, 
besides myself, knows who is Ariadne ? To all enigmas of this 
sort, no one has yet learned a clue; I doubt whether anyone has 
even seen enigmas there." 26 Cosima was Ariadne, held prisoner 
by no mere Minotaur, but by the stale old hero Theseus, 
known to the world as Richard Wagner. Nietzsche was the 
god Dionysos, the real lover of Ariadne, and loved by her. 
This was certainly a projection of the old Triebschen days. It 
proves only that Cosima played an important part in Nietzsche's 
life of revery. Twenty years before, at Triebschen, it seems 
doubtful whether Nietzsche would ever have dared to admit, 
even to himself, that he was in love with so impressive and 
so possessed a woman as Cosima. In his madness, the symbol 
kept its life. Examined in the insane asylum at Jena on March 

28 Eccc Homo, "Thus Spake Zarathustra," 8. 



THE PROPHET 71 

27, 1889, he told the physician, "It is my wife, Cosima Wagner, 
who brought me here." 27 

Overbeck arrived just in time to rescue his friend. Nietzsche, 
who was fortunately in a period of docility, allowed himself 
to be taken to the train, and was brought safely to Basle, where 
he was put into a hospital for the mentally diseased. From 
there, courageous old Frau Nietzsche took him to Jena, where 
she consulted the best specialists available. Their verdict was 
incurable insanity. Elizabeth's husband had died in Paraguay, 
and in 1890 she came home to take charge of brother and 
mother. For the first few years of his illness, Nietzsche had 
occasional lucid intervals. He was usually quiet, and his rare 
outbreaks were no worse than petulance or bad temper. After 
Frau Nietzsche's death in 1897, Elizabeth moved her brother 
to a house in Weimar which she had already destined to be the 
shrine of his fame. Perhaps for the Germans are incurable 
in these matters she moved to Weimar because Goethe and 
Schiller had already given the place the right atmosphere. It 
was an inept action, a little like trying to move Mr. Mencken 
who is, happily, no invalid to die in Concord. 

Here, in a big, airy room looking out on the sunset, Nietzsche 
spent the last years of a steady decline. Paralysis, which had 

"Podach, Nietzsches Zusarnmenbruch, 94. I have used Podach for my 
account of the final madness, because he seems the most temperate and sensible 
of those who have written on the subject. For the other side, the Nietzsche- 
worshipping tradition of the Nietzschc-Archiv, the most modern treatment is 
Paul Cohn, Um Nictzsches Untergang (1931), 13-59. This book also prints 
four letters from Elizabeth to Dr. Cohn, letters dealing with the subject of 
her brother's health, and the last important word she has to say on the subject 
She continues to deny that the Ariadne story relates to Cosima, and to refuse 
to believe that Nietzsche was in love with Cosima. Needless to say, she still 
denies that her brother had syphilis. 



72 NIETZSCHE 

struck him in Turin, held his whole right side, and prevented, 
one can only say fortunately, his writing. He would lie for 
hours, looking fixedly out of the window. Music stirred him 
to the end, and to the end he could listen to Peter Cast, who 
had followed the Master to Weimar. On August 25, 1900 he 
died quietly. 

Nietzsche's illnesses were many and varied. It is unlikely 
that, even with the full information we have about his daily 
life, a trained physician could from such documentary informa- 
tion alone make a satisfactory diagnosis of his trouble. Cer- 
tainly, it would be rash for a mere historian to attempt such a 
diagnosis. But one thing seems fairly clear. He did have 
syphilis, and the paresis with which his life ended followed on 
a syphilitic infection. 28 Some natural and presumably very 
useful sentiments, strong even among intellectuals, tend to 
focus a disproportionate attention on the fact that a great man 
had a venereal disease. With Nietzsche, especially, that atten- 
tion is perhaps rather cruelly sharpened by the workings of the 
comic spirit. For syphilis is not a philosopher's disease. Even 
after we cease in our minds to associate it with sin, it cannot 
be dissociated from indignities. 

You cannot, however, explain Nietzsche by the spirochetes. 
His trouble and his genius are not so simple as that. And 
even after psychiatrist, psychologist, physician, and biographer 
have got through with the man, his printed words remain. 

28 The explanation of syphilis was first ably and completely put forward 
in P. G. Mobius, Ueber das Pathologische bei Nietzsche (1902), and put be- 
yond reasonable doubt by Podach's Nietzsches Zusammenbruch, based on an 
examination of the papers recording the clinical examination of Nietzsche at 
Jena. It has been bitterly denied, even in the face of this evidence, by most 
Nietzscheans, or slurred over in silence. 



THE PROPHET 73 

They now are Nietzsche. They now are part of what we call 
Western culture. And more: they have been incorporated into 
the body of beliefs to which the German National Socialists 
subscribe. They have, then, become a part of something many 
men fear as the mortal enemy of Western culture. Nietzsche's 
personal history fades into unimportance compared with the 
history of his ideas. We may here leave the nicer disputes over 
Nietzsche's life and personality to others, and attempt the 
difficult task of analyzing and classifying his ideas. 2 



,29 



29 Of the books which attempt at some length the process of linking 
Nietzsche's life and character with his work, I find best among the older 
ones C. A. Bernoulli, Ovcrbccl^ und Nietzsche, and among the newer ones 
K. Jaspers, Nietzsche: Einfuhrung in das Verstandnis seines Philosophieren 
(1936). Professor Jaspers is certainly not guilty of over-simplification. Neither 
of these books is available in English. 



CHAPTER IV 
WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 

THE mapping of Nietzsche's ideas is a difficult task. We 
are not, to be sure, dealing with a terra incognita. Dozens 
of explorers have penetrated this strange land with its contrast- 
ing lights and shades, its straining heights and hollow depths. 
Many of them, indeed, report that they have acclimated them- 
selves to its unearthly atmosphere, that they have found good 
living there. Yet their maps vary. The truth is that the car- 
tography of ideas is still, and may perhaps remain, no exact 
science. Much goes on in the human mind that is beyond 
triangulation, and the human spirit will be measured by no 
surveyor's spirit-level. 

With Nietzsche the major difficulty may be, as he was pleased 
to think, that his ideas are greater than the understanding of 
other men. "My destiny ordains that I should be the first decent 
human being. ... I was the first to discover truth." l Natu- 
rally, so remarkable an achievement must still, for a time, 
remain a solitary one. In any attempt to measure Nietzsche's 
work with the instruments available to ordinary critical think- 
ing, there is one very obvious difficulty. The Master poured his 
ideas out with no regard for the petty conventions by which 
most thinkers arrange their thoughts. He was above contradic- 
tion. One of his aphorisms may seem to deny what another has 
asserted. He would create a race of Supermen; but whenever, 

l Eccc Homo, "Why I am a fatality," i. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 75 

as with the "Aryans" in India or the "golden men" of Plato, he 
encounters an attempt to create if only by thinking about it 
a superior ruling class, he is scornful in condemnation. He 
loathes all mention of so decadent and English-liberal a word 
as "happiness" (Gliick) ; yet he likes "instinct," and writes that 
"happiness is identical with instinct." In an attack on the 
vocabulary of philosophers which must delight our more inno- 
cent converts to semantics, he writes of the error "of supposing 
the will to be something that actuates a faculty. Now we 
know that it is only a word." 2 Yet he entitled what he hoped 
would be his masterpiece "The Will to Power." Even the 
"philosopher with a hammer" had also to be a philosopher with 
words. 

Nietzsche's contradictions can, of course, be resolved in a 
"higher unity," of which his followers have found several varie- 
ties. But with Nietzsche contradiction usually attains the mad 
intensity that marks almost all his work. It is tempting to ex- 
plain the piled-up complexities of his writing very simply. His 
endless vanity made him reject everything anyone else had 
proposed. But to contradict everybody is to contradict yourself. 
Nietzsche, who made so many paradoxes, was himself the 
victim of this one. He had to take refuge in one of the oldest 
and firmest shelters of bewildered men and Supermen. 
"Why ? Thou askest why ? I am not of those who may be asked 
after their Why!" 3 

The ideas of Nietzsche most certainly have origins in his 
experience; and since his experience was above all that of a 

1 Twilight of the Idols, "The 'Improvers' of Mankind," 3; "'Reason* in 
Philosophy," 5. 

* Thus Spake Zarathi4stra> Part II, chap, xxxix, "Poets." 



76 NIETZSCHE 

German intellectual of the late nineteenth century, his ideas 
have in part an origin in the books other men wrote. He did, 
indeed, transmute those ideas in the process of working them 
over in his mind or his consciousness, or his temperament, 
or his will, or whatever else you like to call what was peculiarly 
Nietzsche. What came out of the process was indeed original, 
though not quite as original as Nietzsche liked to think. 

Many scholars have devoted themselves to the pleasant task 
of tracing the affiliation of Nietzsche's ideas in the vast network 
of ideas which make up the intellectual heritage of Western 
civilization. 4 There is, indeed, a fundamental difficulty in such 
research. We know perhaps less about the inheritance of ideas 
than we do about biological inheritance. Thus, for instance, 
Nietzsche's grand and much-prized conception of the "Eternal 
Recurrence" which he considered absolutely unique, snatched 
from the pure air of the Engadine has much in common 
with notions prevalent in Eastern philosophy and theology, in 
Stoicism, and even in modern mathematical speculation. Yet 
we cannot say absolutely that he took it from any of these 
sources. He read much, if rather desultorily, in translations of 
and commentaries on Indian and Persian philosophy. The 
name, at least, of Zarathustra he proudly borrowed from the 
East. Greek philosophy he knew very well indeed. Of modern 
mathematics he knew very little. It seems likely, then, that he 
built the Eternal Recurrence out of confused memories of his 
reading, fused together in the ecstasy of poetic composition, 

4 As a matter of fact, Charles Andler did the job so thoroughly that it 
hardly needs additional work. The first of his six volumes is entirely devoted 
to Nietzsche's "precursors" including Emerson, who wrote of the "Over- 
soul." Scattered through the other five volumes are notes on what Nietzsche 
read, whom he talked to, what he talked about. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 77 

during which he could almost forget himself, to say nothing 
of others. 

Nietzsche was trained as a classical philologist, and though 
his learning was not sufficient to satisfy the exacting standards 
of a Wilamowitz, it remained as a solid background for his 
later work. Greek and Latin he had mastered as a schoolboy, 
and with the classical philosophers and historians, as well as 
with the Greek dramatists, he had the kind of familiarity that 
cannot be easily acquired unless one begins as a schoolboy. 
Nietzsche, like most lovers of classical antiquity, found what 
he wanted there a club with which to belabor his contempo- 
raries. He found, especially among the Greeks before they were 
corrupted by Socrates-Plato, the Will to Power in all its fierce 
violence. The Greeks, he insisted, were not the sober lovers of 
the Golden Mean stuffy German academics found them to be, 
not the rapt dawn-folk German romantics found them to be, 
but energetic fighters, at once disciplined and furious. Burck- 
hardt had helped him to this conception. 

Fancy judging the Greeks in the German style, from their philoso- 
phers; fancy using the suburban respectability of the Socratic schools as 
a key to what is fundamentally Hellenic! The philosophers are of course 
the decadents of Hellas, the counter-movement directed against the old 
and noble tribe (against the agonal instinct, against the polls, against 
the value of the race, against the authority of tradition). 5 

These old Greeks might almost have read Nietzsche, and 
joined the Nazi party. 

Much more important than the Greeks and Romans in 
Nietzsche's intellectual inheritance were the Germans among 
whom he was brought up. He had a good staple German 

1 The Twilight of the Idols, "Things I owe to the Ancients," 3 and 4. 



78 NIETZSCHE 

education in the Bible and Lutheran piety, in Goethe and 
Schiller, in the nineteenth-century romantics. Although he 
turned against them in later life, finding imperfections even 
in Goethe (the poet was all wrong about the Greeks, and his 
prose style was often heavy), their stamp was on him. Nietzsche 
had to the full that eternal German sense of cultural inferiority 
which appears as a perpetual striving, discontent, sense of im- 
perfection and incompleteness. He turned in passage after 
passage to the dissection of this "German soul" and his own. 
For instance, of Die Meistersinger, 

something German in the best and worst sense of the word, something 
in the German style, manifold, formless, and inexhaustible; a certain 
German potency and superplenitude of soul, which is not afraid to hide 
itself under the raffincments of decadence which, perhaps, feels itself 
most at ease there; a real, genuine token of the German soul, which is 
at the same time young and aged, too ripe and yet still too rich in futurity. 
This kind of music expresses best what I think of the Germans: they 
belong to the day before yesterday and the day after tomorrow they 
have as yet no today? 

Among these Germans, Schopenhauer and Wagner were 
the two great masters of the young Nietzsche, by his own admis- 
sion, men who helped turn him from the safe paths of philology 
to the dangers and delights of high thinking and strong feeling. 
With truly noble detachment or ingratitude he damned 
them specifically afterwards: 

A large number of the higher and better-endowed men will, I hope, 
have in the end so much self-restraint as to be able to get rid of their bad 
taste for affectation and sentimental darkness, and to turn against Richard 
Wagner as much as against Schopenhauer. These two Germans are lead- 
ing us to ruin: they flatter our dangerous qualities. A stronger future 

* Beyond Good and Evil y "Peoples and Countries," 240. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 79 

is prepared for us in Goethe, Beethoven, and Bismarck than in these 
racial aberrations. 7 

But in his younger days these two were his Masters. They 
taught him to distrust the comforts of logic and common-sense, 
to seek refuge in something endless, indefinable, and indescrib- 
able, which he was to spend his life trying to limit, define, and 
describe. They did not make him a romantic, but they con- 
firmed his romanticism. He tried to shake off Schopenhauer's 
pessimism, but succeeded only in calling it optimism. His 
concrete debt to Schopenhauer his ideas on women, for in- 
stance remained very great. He tried to shake off Wagner's 
confused bumbling by going to those masters of clarity, the 
French morcdistcs. 

Nietzsche learned much from the French. He did not need to 
learn to write, for even as a schoolboy he could write a clear, im- 
patient German. But he learned to write better, to mould a 
sharper phrase, to twist suddenly into irony, to condense and 
to shade. His was still, however, a German style, full of striv- 
ing and parentheses, and hitched to all the heavens. He went 
to La Rochefoucauld and Beyle for an antidote to German 
Gcmutlich}(cit and idealism, of which he never had much any- 
way, just as he went to Bizet for an antidote to Wagner's music. 
But an antidote is not in itself a form of nourishment, and in 
spite of his "middle period" of aphoristic books like Human, 
All Too Human, and The Dawn of Day, he never attained the 
sure good judgment of the more serene of his models, like 
Montaigne, nor the delicate sensitivity of the more troubled, 
like Pascal. Proof of what he failed to get from the French is 

T The Genealogy of Morals, "Peoples and Countries," 12. 



8o NIETZSCHE 

his inability to understand and appreciate the achievement of 
so final a Frenchman as Sainte Beuve, of whom he wrote, 

There is naught of man in him, he is full of petty spite towards all 
virile spirits. He wanders erratically: he is subtle, inquisitive, a little 
bored, forever with his ear to key-holes, at bottom a woman, with 
all a woman's revengefulness and sensuality. ... In his fundamental 
instincts he is plebeian, and next of kin to Rousseau's resentful spirit: 
consequently he is a Romanticist. 8 

A man who could write such perverse nonsense was hardly 
capable of learning what is best of France. That phrase about 
"virile spirits" is the stock German defense against France, in 
some ways a good defense, but not a form of understanding. 
And even as a defense, it has had its weaknesses in the past, and 
will have them again. What Nietzsche mistook for a lack of 
masculine fire in Frenchmen like Sainte Beuve is really a kind 
of tranquillity rarely attained by Germans, and certainly not 
by Nietzsche. Here, as so often, the labored originality and 
fierce individualism of Nietzsche turns out to be the old feeling 
of the tribe. 

From Anglo-Saxon thought Nietzsche got very little. He 
could not read English well, as he could French, in the original. 
He seems to have read little in translation, though as a good 
nineteenth-century intellectual he had picked up, if only from 
conversation and reviews, all the necessary names and tags. He 
had what was in the i88o's among Germans a most foresighted 
dislike for the English, whom he regarded as a shallow race 
incapable of philosophy and devoted to the decadent illusions 
of Trade and Science. He took out his dislike in epigrams 
which are not among his best: "Carlyle, or pessimism after 

8 The Twilight of the Idols, "Skirmishes in a War with the Age," 3. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 8l 

undigested meals. John Stuart Mill, or offensive lucidity." 9 
Of America he thought very little: we were too innocent to 
count. As a young man he had read Emerson in translation, 
and he always thought more highly of him than of Carlyle. 
His sister read him some of Mark Twain, whom he found 
amusing and harmless. But on the whole, he liked to think of 
the Anglo-Saxon peoples as not really counting. They were 
numerous, and apparently successful, but they lacked Depth. 
And only the deep survive or ought to survive. The judg- 
ment of the tribe again. 

Like most "imaginative" writers who crusade against what 
they call science, Nietzsche had no first-hand acquaintance 
with any scientific discipline. He was, however, too much a 
child of the nineteenth century he loathed so vocally not to 
dabble in writings about biology. He may have read Darwin 
in translation; at any rate he read enough about Darwin to 
know that Darwin's theories of evolution were wrong. Zara- 
thustra, he insisted, was uninfluenced by current doctrines of 
evolution; the race of Supermen was not to come by any such 
suspiciously British process as natural selection, but by a Dio- 
nysian exercise of the Will to Power. 

In general, Nietzsche's reading and education, save for his 
brief apprenticeship in classical philology, was that of a serious 
dabbler or, if you prefer, a philosopher. In working up to 
the Antichrist he read widely in the history of religions, and 
especially in that of Christianity and its Eastern antecedents; 
but even here he neglected what is perhaps the most important 

* The Twilight of the Idols, "Skirmishes in a War with the Age,** i. 
For a long and typical passage blaming England for "the European ignobleness, 
the plebcianism of modern ideas/' see Beyond Good and Evil, 253. 



82 NIETZSCHE 

part of the history of religions, institutional history. He was as 
contemptuous of the Middle Ages as any philosopher in the 
Age of Enlightenment, and knew little of the actual workings 
of the Mediaeval Church. Such study he felt was unnecessary, 
and indeed harmful. History, as he explained in one of his first 
essays, "On the Use and Abuse of History" in Thoughts out 
of Season, can really tell us nothing important about the pres- 
ent, and can woefully distract us from the flashing sureness of 
the play of instinct and will. Nietzsche, especially in his master- 
piece, Beyond Good and Evil, was most critical of the philoso- 
pher's habit of taking the word for the deed. Yet in his study 
of Christianity he himself concentrated on what the more 
articulate and intellectual Christian apologists wrote, and 
avoided the difficult study of how ordinary Christians really 
behave. Professional habit is strong, even among philosophers 
with a hammer. 

II 

From all this miscellaneous, but on the whole overwhelm- 
ingly literary, abstract, and second-hand experience, Nietzsche 
produced what is in many ways a unique and original inter- 
pretation of what must be grandly called the meaning of life. 
It was not, as we shall see, by any means an interpretation as 
unzcitgemass, as contrary to the spirit of the age, as he believed 
it to be. Indeed, Nietzsche's importance for us is that he is a 
part of a movement among his contemporaries and near-con- 
temporaries which is rather unfortunately called anti-intellectu- 
alism, a movement which is in some sense at least as old as 
Greek thought, but which in our time has taken on a com- 
plexity and a thoroughness perhaps new. Nietzsche belongs in 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 83 

the history of thought with Marx, Georges Sorel, Freud, Pareto, 
and hundreds of lesser men, down to the latest popularizers of 
semantics. His work in part differs greatly from theirs. He is 
either the enfant terrible or the mad prophet of the movement 
or both. But he is part of a movement, and no solitary. This 
scorner of history is a product of history. 

Nietzsche himself, at least, could hardly complain too bit- 
terly if we accept him on his own grounds, and attempt to 
arrange his ideas according to a thoroughly anti-intellectualist 
scheme. We shall attempt to see what he hated and what he 
wanted; or to use more abstract terms, and perhaps misleading 
ones, to distinguish between the negative and the positive 
aspects of his work, between Nietzsche the destroyer and 
Nietzsche the builder. Again, he has made himself so great a 
reputation as the "philosopher with a hammer" that he could 
hardly object if we concentrate at first upon what he proudly 
regarded as his destructive labors. We shall begin appropriately 
with what Nietzsche hated. 

He hated extensively and energetically, so that it is hard to 
distinguish among his hatreds. One of the most constant of 
them, however, one which appears clearly in his very first 
book, is a hatred for the tradition of European rationalism. 
Socrates, one of the great heroes of that tradition, is for 
Nietzsche a villain. Before Socrates, the Greeks had been, 
according to Nietzsche, happy creatures of instinct and habit, 
fighters, revelers, builders, singers, "the men who fought at 
Marathon." With Socrates they began to think not to think 
as healthy animals probably think, and as the old Greeks 
thought, simply to find ways of getting what they wanted, 
getting what their wills and instincts made them strive for. 



84 NIETZSCHE 

Socrates actually told them to thinly about what they wanted! 
He carried the process a step farther, as far indeed as it can 
ever be carried, into the final abyss of the unconscious: he 
invented in his daemon an intellectualized perversion of 
instinct: 

This voice, wherever it comes, always dissuades. In this utterly abnor- 
mal nature instinctive wisdom only appears in order to hinder here and 
there the progress of conscious perception. Whereas in all productive 
men it is instinct that is the creatively affirmative force, and consciousness 
that acts critically and dissuasively; with Socrates it is instinct that be- 
comes critic, and consciousness that becomes creator a perfect mon- 
strosity per dcjectum. 

After Socrates and his pupil Plato, Nietzsche thinks, the way 
was open for the ravages of Christianity. Still other perversions 
were indeed necessary to make Christianity finally victorious, 
but the basic perversion was achieved when the Greeks aban- 
doned Dionysos for Apollo, Homer and Aeschylus for Socrates 
and Plato. In its more or less easily isolated form of rationalism, 
the Socratic virus has persisted down to our own day. England, 
notably, is hardly more than a mass of infection, with her Dar- 
wins, Mills, and Herbert Spencers. But Nietzsche could find 
this deadly rationalism almost everywhere he looked which 
is one of the comforts of hating. It was clear to him in the 
fashionable critics of Christianity, in men like Tom Paine and 
David Strauss, who were merely stuffier Christians, ethical- 
society bores without the capacity for mystic feeling which gave 
Christianity a touch of life. It was even clearer to him in natural 
science, the devouring heresy of the age. It was clear too in the 
absurd disguise of conventional philosophic idealism. Poor 

10 The Birth of Tragedy, chap. xiii. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 85 

Hegel missed the Life Force by at least as much as did John 
Stuart Mill. Jumbled together in the minds of little men, the 
European herd-men who believed in science, progress, democ- 
racy, bigger and better things ahead, all these ideas were a sign 
of the decadence of the age. Nietzsche innocently called it 
decadence: his followers today repudiate the corrupt French 
word and insist on the good German word Entartung. 

Nietzsche's hatred of rationalism, vigorous and clear in his 
earlier writings, seems to weaken in his "French" period, when 
he wrote Human, All Too Human, The Dawn of Day, and 
The Joyful Wisdom. Now and then in these books he sounds 
almost like a shallow Englishman. "The most important result 
of the past effort of humanity is that we need no longer go 
about in continual fear of wild beasts, barbarians, gods, and our 
own dreams." n His prophetic gifts were in abeyance when he 
wrote this aphorism; not only Hitler, but Freud escaped his 
foresight. Yet even in these books Nietzsche never really 
abandons his anti-intellectualism. He comments on Spinoza's 
non rider e, non lugere, neque dete start, sed intelligere (not to 
laugh, not to lament, nor to abhor, but to understand) : "We 
think that intelligere is something conciliating, just and good, 
something essentially antithetical to the impulses; whereas it is 
only a certain relation of the impulses to one another." And he 
adds, "Conscious thinking, and especially that of the philoso- 
pher, is the weakest, and on that account also relatively the 
mildest and quietest mode of thinking; and thus it is precisely 
the philosopher who is most easily misled concerning the nature 
of knowledge." 12 

11 The Dawn of Day, 5. 
" The Joyful Wisdom, 334. 



86 NIETZSCHE 

In his last years, this hatred for traditional rationalism 
reaches the pitch of obsession, and he repeats over and over 
again, sometimes in an involved style worthy of any German 
philosopher, what Thomas Hardy said so simply: thought is a 
disease of the flesh. 

It docs not suffice for you to sec in what ignorance man and beast 
now live; you must also have and learn the desire for ignorance. It is 
necessary that you should know that without this form of ignorance life 
itself would be impossible, that it is merely a vital condition under which, 
alone, a living organism can preserve itself and prosper; a great solid 
belt of ignorance must stand about you. 13 

Zarathustra was more eloquent and abusive, as is fitting in a 
poet: 

For fear that is man's original and fundamental feeling. . . . Such 
prolonged ancient fear, at last become subtle, spiritual, and intellectual 
at present, methinketh, it is called Science. 1 * 

Science, then, that fine flower of the Western mind, is for 
Nietzsche really but a refinement of feeling but of a per- 
verse form of feeling, the fear which makes for cunning and 
arms the weak against the strong. Darwin rightly saw that 
thought in this sense is an instrument making for survival; but 
he was wrong in claiming that it is an instrument making for 
the survival of the fit. On the contrary, "species do not evolve 
towards perfection: the weak always prevail over the strong 
simply because they are the majority, and because they are also 
the more crafty." 15 



Will to Power, 609. For an example of Nietzsche at play like 
any other philosopher among Being and Becoming, see 617 of this same 
work. He is on the side of Becoming. 

14 Thus Spafc Zarathustra, chap. Ixxv, "Science." 

15 The Twilight of the Idols, "Skirmishes in a War with the Age," 14. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 87 

HI 

Nietzsche, then, rejected with contempt that current of Euro- 
pean rationalism represented in his time by natural science and, 
in ethics, political theory, philosophy in general, by positivism, 
materialism, empiricism, by the French philosophes and the 
English utilitarians. But he disliked quite as vigorously that 
strain in European rationalism which is usually labeled "ideal- 
ism," a strain clear in the formal philosophy of Plato, the pupil 
of the original rationalist, Socrates, and fixed by Leibnitz and 
Kant as the dominant form of German philosophy. In his 
attacks on philosophic idealism, Nietzsche's hatred ripens into 
some of his most remarkable pages of criticism, pages which 
ironically foreshadow the attacks on philosophic idealism made 
by such modern scientists as Pareto. We can study best this 
phase of Nietzsche's work in his famous comments on Kant in 
Beyond Good and Evil. 

Kant, says Nietzsche, was proud of having made what he 
thought was a discovery, the existence in men of the faculty 
of synthetic judgment a priori. In other words, Kant, like 
Plato, was hunting for an absolute, a formula in words to which 
all men would subscribe as the Truth. He had no trouble in 
showing that sense-experience could not provide any such 
eternal, changeless, absolute Truth, and that scientific laws 
were not truths in this sense. But he dug up an absolute in 
words, where it can always be found. 

"How are synthetic judgments a priori possible?" Kant asks himself 
and what is really his answer? "By means of a means (faculty)" 
but unfortunately not in five words, but so circumstantially, imposingly, 
and with such display of German profundity and verbal flourishes, that 
one altogether loses sight of the comical niaiseric allemandc involved in 



88 NIETZSCHE 

such an answer. . . . But is that an answer ? An explanation ? Or is 
it not rather merely a repetition of the question? How docs opium in- 
duce sleep? "By means of a means (faculty)" namely, the virtus dor- 
mativa> replies the doctor in Moliere, 

Quia est in eo virtus dormativa 
Cujus est natura sensus assoupire. 1 * 

Indeed, Nietzsche wrote as bitterly about idealists as he did 
about everybody else. He is not always as good-tempered as in 
the above passage on Kant. In the midst of The Antichrist, 
for instance, he breaks out: 

I find the arrogant habit of the theologian among all who regard 
themselves as "idealists" among all who, by virtue of a higher point of 
departure, claim a right to rise above reality and to look upon it with 
suspicion. . . . The idealist, like the ecclesiastic, carries all sorts of lofty 
concepts in his hand ( and not only in his hand!), he launches them 
with benevolent contempt against "understanding," "the senses," "honor," 
"good living," "science"; he sees such things as beneath him, as pernicious 
and seductive forces over which "the soul" soars as a pure thing in 
itself. 17 

The idealists, then, have, according to Nietzsche, fished in 
their own minds really, in their own desires and brought 
up a lot of nice words like "idea" and "the thing-in-itself." 
Nietzsche occasionally admits that this process is even more 
delusive, even more remote from normal human experience, 
than the processes of common-sense rationalism. Such philoso- 
phers let "conceptions, opinions, events, books" come between 
themselves and "things." 18 Nietzsche could even, in a moment 
of apparent nihilism, admit that "will" is only a word. 19 But 

ia Beyond Good and Evil, chap, i, 11. 

" The Antichrist, 8. 

M Thoughts out of Season, "Schopenhauer as Educator," chap. vii. 

10 See above, p. 75. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 89 

this was no doubt "will" as Schopenhauer and others used the 
word not Nietzsche's own precious Will to Power. 

Here Nietzsche rescues himself by a device central to modern 
anti-intellectualism. We must not, he says, worry ourselves over 
the problems raised by such men as Kant. The classic problems 
of philosophy are simply insoluble. The "new" philosophers 
so necessary to the world will not ask whether an opinion is 
true or false, but whether it is useful or harmful. 

The falseness of an opinion is not for us any objection to it: it is here, 
perhaps, that our new language sounds most strangely. The question is, 
how far an opinion is life-furthering, life-preserving, species-preserving; 
perhaps species-rearing; and we are fundamentally inclined to maintain 
that the falsest opinions (to which synthetic judgments a priori belong) 
are the most indispensable to us; that without a recognition of logical 
fictions, without a comparison of reality with the purely imagined world 
of the absolute and immutable . . . man could not live that the re- 
nunciation of false opinion would be a renunciation of life, a negation of 
life. To recognize untruth as a condition of life: that is certainly to im- 
pugn the traditional ideas of value in a dangerous manner, and a philoso- 
phy which ventures to do so, has thereby alone placed itself beyond good 
and evil. 20 

Nietzsche does not, however, consistently accept his conclu- 
sion that idealism, though "false," is "indispensable to us." 
He admits that such opinions as Kant's have a long history and 
a "natural" origin, that they are a product of the philosopher's 
instincts, of physiological demands for a mode of life. He even 
traces them to a common origin in the language of Indo- 
European peoples, a function of the prehistoric formation of 
our vocabulary and grammar. 21 But Nietzsche was a hater, 
perhaps a lover, and certainly no skeptic. He is soon back in 

* Beyond Good and Evil, chap, i, 4. 
* Beyond Good and Evil, chap, i, 20. 



90 NIETZSCHE 

his old strain. " 'Reason' in language ! oh what a deceptive old 
witch it has been! I fear we shall never be rid of God, so long 
as we still believe in grammar." The idealists have really in- 
vented harmful fictions, and the age and long prevalence of 
these fictions is far from proof of their usefulness to us now- 
adays. On the contrary, that we should so respect them is a sign 
of our degeneracy, of our blind attachment to history, that muse 
of unprofitable illusions. 

The characteristics with which man has endowed the "true Being" 
of things are characteristics of non-Being, of nonentity. The "true 
world" has been erected on a contradiction of the real world; and it is 
indeed an apparent world, seeing that it is merely a moralo-optical delu- 
sion. ... To divide the world into a "true" and an "apparent" world, 
whether after the manner of Christianity or of Kant (after all a Christian 
in disguise), is only a sign of decadence, a symptom of degenerating life. 22 

It is significant that Nietzsche does not put the skeptic's 
quotation-marks around "real world" in the above passage. 
The fact is that, attack the idealists as he might, he could not 
get over a certain fascination for them, notably for Plato and 
Spinoza. He wavered much, and it is possible here, as on almost 
every point, to find him at some time or other contradicting 
himself. But he rarely shows any sympathy with materialistic 
or empirical philosophers. He is convinced there is a "real 
world" beyond the lying evidence of the senses, beyond the 
misleading organization scientific thought gives to the evidence 
of the senses. But he cannot accept for long the gentle, orderly 
world of love and pity idealistic philosophers always end by 
finding. He wanted something better something more. He 
was a German. 

M The Twilight of the Idols, " 'Reason* in Philosophy," 6. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 91 

IV 

Nietzsche, then, condemned both the materialistic and the 
idealistic philosophical solutions: both were to him essentially 
intellectualist at bottom, both were merely more or less in- 
genious metaphysical dodging of a problem essentially moral: 
right conduct here and now. But he was at least as violent in 
condemnation of a solution he, like the late Irving Babbitt and 
many other modern thinkers, always associated chiefly with 
Rousseau. In spite of his frequent damning of "intellect," his 
frequent praise of "instinct," "impulse," "nature," he insisted 
over and over again that he did not mean by any of these nice 
words what Rousseau and his followers seemed to mean by 
them. "Rousseau, or the return to nature, in impuris naturali- 
bus? Significantly, the list of Nietzsche's "impossible people" 
from which this malicious characterization is drawn, ends with 
a very earnest and unsubtle condemnation: "Zola, or the love 
of stinking." 28 

The Rousseauists, Nietzsche felt, preached that the lowest 
and cheapest human feelings were the best guide to conduct. 
They appealed from reason to sentiment, and beyond sentiment 
to the deepest well-springs of desire in the animal man, the 
plcbs, the herd-man. They were justified in attacking the silly 
"right reason" of the philosophes and the commonsense school; 
but they themselves fell into even sorrier depths when they 
appealed from reason and commonsense to common feeling. 
Rousseau was really the father of all the worst modern heresies, 
democracy, socialism, humanitarianism, pacifism (they had, of 
course, many mothers!). He and his followers gave Christian- 

* The Twilight of the Idols, "Skirmishes in a War with the Age," r. 



92 NIETZSCHE 

ity, which had become a mere tradition, and hence an almost 
harmless, if not actually beneficial, opiate for the people, a new 
and baleful energy. This new political Christianity, this appeal 
to "natural man" and his General Will, aspired to a world at 
best mere organized mediocrity, at worst a chaos of stupid 
conflicts among dog-men. 

To Nietzsche, Rousseau's influence was not at all limited to 
the "romanticists" so labeled in our manuals of literary history, 
but extended to "realists" as well. Zola was, in fact, the foster- 
son of Rousseau. Take away, as Rousseau preached and as our 
modern democracies have done, the restraints of convention 
and tradition, of a society organized hierarchically, feudally, 
and at least as much according to high aristocratic unreason as 
according to priestly reason, and you unchain, not the bright 
violence of the saving few, but the meagre ambitions or the 
dirty lusts of the many. The old feudal society and its Renais- 
sance successor did protect a few great souls and bodies, did 
allow scope for a Frederick of Hohenstaufen, a Michelangelo, 
a Cesare Borgia. The new democratic society swamps all such 
great spirits. Nietzsche, like many another moralist, was not 
sure whether democracy tended to produce a society flatly con- 
forming to the dull mediocrity of the greengrocer's actual 
habits, or a society madly pursuing the unpleasant extremes of 
sensual indulgence which he was sure were the greengrocer's 
not very secret desires. He seems to have felt that democracy 
could quite inconsistently be both things at once both an 
organized mediocrity and a disorganized and very vulgar rout. 
We are in Nietzsche's mind on the brink of a volcano, and 
ready for several other cliches. Perhaps his general formula pro- 
vided for a period of conformity and mediocrity, to be ended by 

the ratastrnnhir HiQinfeoratinn nf a snriefv in whirh mnral Hicri- 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 93 

pline had so long lacked the sanction of true aristocratic leader- 
ship. Nietzsche's attacks on democracy are somewhat confused, 
but so are most of those of our prophets of doom. Needless to 
say, he had no first-hand knowledge of the working of a demo- 
cratic society. His acquaintance with common men was limited 
to waiters, hotelkeepers and professors. All he knew he learned 
from newspapers, and introspection. 

Nietzsche's hatreds are hard to weigh. But his hatred for the 
Rousseauists was certainly one of his strongest. This romantic 
opponent of the great tradition of European rationalism could 
not bear his fellow-romantics. His Will to Power, as befits a 
philosopher, was really a Will to Belief. Like most strong be- 
lievers, he hated heretics even more than unbelievers. He was 
his own pope, and infallible. It is strange that so insistent a 
psychologist as Nietzsche did not recognize this trait in himself. 
Perhaps he did. He was fond enough of self-analysis, and 
could write that he too was a decadent, could confess that 
"My danger is the loathing of mankind." 24 At any rate, rail 
against "reason" and "idealism" though he did, he could not 
bring himself to accept the simple alternative to these con- 
cepts, the emancipation of "natural" man, the "natural good- 
ness of man," the "life of instinct." He wanted to say "Yea": 
"Voluptuousness, passion for power, and selfishness: these three 
things have hitherto been best cursed, and have been in worst 
and falsest repute these three things will I weigh humanly 
well." But he found himself saying "Nay": "I am distrustful 
of your doggish lust." 25 Good voluptuousness and doggish 
lust. Do we hear echoes of the virtus dormativa? 

Nothing in Nietzsche is harder to expound than his position 

* Eccc Homo, "Why I am a fatality," 6; The Case of Wagner, preface. 



94 NIETZSCHE 

on this old question of "reason" versus "instinct." His range 
varies with his immediate polemical purpose. He can be quoted, 
as Lutheran divines have discovered, in an edifying vein: 

To cling to life, blindly and madly, with no other aim, to be ignorant 
of the reason or even of the fact, of one's punishment, nay, to thirst after 
it as if it were a pleasure, with all the perverted desire of a fool this is 
what it means to be an animal. If universal nature leads up to man, it is 
to show us that he is necessary to redeem her from the curse of the 
beast's life. . . . We should consider where the beast ends and man 
begins. 28 

He could, indeed, be more than edifying: he could be priggish. 
He wrote of Lou Salome: "She told me herself she had no 
morals (I thought that, like me, she had stricter morals than 
anyone else)." 27 Moreover, and in spite of the ecstatic and 
far-fetched comments of followers like Klages, who hold that 
Nietzsche actually felt the intellect to be a weakness in men, 
Nietzsche himself rarely went the whole way in condemning 
the intellect. It was the abuse of thinking * by savants, Chris- 
tians, and "practical" men he objected to, the making an end 
rather than a means of the intellect and of intellectual effort. 
Only rarely does he write in the vein of "Gcjtihl ist allcs"\ 
usually he employs words like "intellect," "intelligence," and 
"reason" in a clearly eulogistic sense. 28 

Here, as so often, Nietzsche will not be pruned down. He is 
complex, refined, subtle, modern, most zeitgcmass\ his thought 
is part of what he called the "morbid multiformity of modern 

* Thoughts out of Season, "Schopenhauer as Educator," chap. v. 
** Quoted in Forstcr-Nietzsche, Nietzsche, II, 142. 

*Sce for instance the last paragraph of The Antichrist, 21, quoted in 
part below, p. 101. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 95 

life." 29 Yet, in a final attempt to pin him down, we may take 
two texts which reveal, perhaps, a common ground in his hatred 
for science and for Rousseauistic romanticism. Both are from 
his earlier writings. In one of the essays in Thoughts out of 
Season he writes: 

Science . . . considers only that view of things to be true and right 
and therefore scientific, which regards something as finished and his- 
torical, not as continuing and eternal. Thus it lives in a deep antagonism 
towards the powers that make for eternity art and religion. 30 

This is a complete misunderstanding of what the practising 
scientist docs, and it runs counter to such modern theorists of 
scientific method as von Mach and Poincare. But it is not a 
serious misunderstanding of what such contemporaries of 
Nietzsche as Herbert Spencer thought science to be. Nietzsche's 
outburst is a revulsion against the notion of science as a closed 
system of absolute laws which still prevails today among lesser 
scientists, and among major non-scientists. In the history of 
thought, it places him more or less clearly in the company of 
such thinkers as Croce, Bergson, and even Whitehead, who 
insist that the "scientific positivism" of the nineteenth-century 
tradition provides no place for novelty and adventure. 

A second text has an even earlier origin, in the reflections of 
the Leipzig student : 

Self-observation it betrays. Know thyself. Through acting, not 
through observing. Observation confines and limits energy: it breaks 
up, disintegrates. Instinct is the best. Our deeds must be brought about 
unconsciously. 31 

* Thoughts out of Season, "Richard Wagner in Bayreuth," chap. ii. 
80 Thoughts out of Season, "On the Use and Abuse of History," chap. x. 
11 Wtr\e (Historisch-ty-itische Ausgabe), IV, 126. 



96 NIETZSCHE 

Both Spencer and Rousseau, both scientist and romanticist, sin 
against this precept. Knowing is doing, not formulating nor 
enjoying. Laws and lyrics are both evasions, forms of self- 
indulgence. Men must act; and for a guide to action they must 
seek neither in the lessons of the past in the too-neat patterns 
of science or history, or of that deadening combination, sci- 
entific history, nor in tortured searchings of the heart; but 
in a difficult and most human skill, a skill impossible to define, 
hard to learn, but which can be recognized in its results. 
Nietzsche here takes refuge in the word "unconscious," but 
he clearly does not mean the romantic "impulse from a vernal 
wood." He means rather the acquired unconscious, the un- 
conscious skill of the trained craftsman, an effective adjust- 
ment to the complexities of experience which can be gained 
only by thinking while acting, never, or never solely, by thinkc 
ing about acting. Here again Nietzsche's position, where he 
does not exaggerate it for the purposes of philosophizing with 
a hammer, is essentially that of contemporary anti-intellectu- 
alism. 

V 

Before Nietzsche, then, to simplify, but not to falsify the 
Master's own analysis of his predecessors Western thinkers 
immersed in the high problems of philosophy had gone astray 
in three ways. Materialistic or empirical rationalists, taking 
their cue from Socrates, had falsified and suppressed full 
human experience by erecting the dream-world we now call 
science. Idealistic rationalists, taking their cue also from 
Socrates, had achieved a similar falsification and suppression by 
erecting the even more fantastic dream-world of idealism, a 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 97 

world especially familiar to Germans, who had produced Kant 
and Hegel. Finally, gross men miscalled artists, hardly obliged 
to appeal to Greek masters, though Epicurus and others were 
there if needed, had tried to do without these intellectual 
dream-worlds, and had fallen back on their "doggish lusts" 
and sentimental memories as guides to conduct and exhaustive 
descriptions of reality. For Nietzsche, all these errors were 
combined in Christianity, the historic form in which philo- 
sophical speculation had been brought within the capacities of 
ordinary men brought deliberately by designing thinkers, 
weaklings perversely turned men of action: that is, by priests. 
All Nietzsche's more general and abstract hatreds were focussed 
in his hatred for what he called Christianity. He found there 
the idealist, hardly at all disguised; the sensualist, his simpler 
lusts suppressed only to crop up in subtler and more tortured 
forms; even the empirical rationalist did not the English 
call themselves Christian? 

Nietzsche's most famous attack on Christianity is The Anti- 
christ, written at top speed in the last few months before he was 
shut up as a madman, and charged with the full energy of his 
hatred, his literary gifts, and his tautened nerves about to 
break. If only because of its intensity and skill in invective, it 
makes conventional anti-Christian literature seem pale and 
lifeless. It has become a kind of handbook for lustier anti- 
Christians like Mr. H. L. Mencken and for Nazis, though it is 
meat much too strong for the mild, vegetarian radicals who 
want to keep Christian ethics while discarding Christian "su- 
perstitions." Hardly any of Nietzsche's writings is without 
passages directed against the Christian religion; but in The 
Antichrist his hatreds, magnificently, madly, indecently gath- 



98 NIETZSCHE 

ered together, burst in a final explosion. The book ends with a 
passage which reveals the overwhelming ambition of the 
prophet. The Nietzsche who signed himself in his madness 
The Crucified One would supplant Jesus with Nietzsche: 

And time is reckoned from the dies nejastus upon which this fatality 
came into being from the first day of Christianity! why not rather 
from its last day? From today? Transvaluation of all Values! 32 

The base from which Nietzsche works, he had already clearly 
laid down in earlier writings. What we call morality among 
men, if studied as the natural historian studies the behavior of 
other organisms (Nietzsche, by the way, was willing to adopt 
"scientific" methods when he found them convenient), this 
morality is seen to be no divine command, no thing-in-itself, 
but an instrument by which a few men control for their own 
benefit the activities of their fellows. The distinction between 
"good" and "bad" is wholly man-made; Nature, the universe 
revealed to us by our sense-experience and by our desires, knows 
nothing of such a distinction. "There are no moral phenomena, 
only a moral interpretation of phenomena; the origin of this 
interpretation lies beyond the pale of morality." 33 

All men want. And since we must give names, we shall, 
writes Nietzsche, call this wanting, this fundamental attitude 
of human consciousness, which uses the intellect as a tool, but is 
hardly ever guided by the intellect though it may be corrupted 
and weakened by the intellect we shall call this wanting The 
Will to Power. Now some men are stronger in body, more alert 
in mind, more driven by this Will, than others. Very early, 
among peoples we call primitive or savage, this fact became 

83 The Antichrist, 62. 

tt The Will to Power, 258. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 99 

clear. Nietzsche is uncertain whether this differentiation took 
place within all those groups of men we call races, or whether 
whole races, in respect to other races, possessed these superior 
powers. He inclines to accept both descriptions as true. Within 
any group, a few men possess such powers, and become masters; 
but au fond the northern peoples of Europe do possess them in 
greater strength than the southern peoples. Whatever their ori- 
gins and Nietzsche is emphatic that they are not at all as sim- 
ple as innocent theorists of German racial "purity" make out 
Nordics, Teutons, "blond beasts," do in fact possess this superi- 
ority. 34 There are purified races, if no pure ones. And these 
races, these groups of superior men, if you prefer, have set up 
those potent abstractions we call "good" and "bad." "The 
pathos of nobility and distance, the chronic and despotic esprit 
dc corps and fundamental instinct of a higher dominant race 
coming into association with a meaner race, an 'under-race,' 
this is the origin of the antithesis of good and bad." 35 

There are, then, a minority of "masters" and a majority of 
"herd." This means that there are two moralities, master- 
morality and herd-morality. They are different, indeed anti- 
thetical. "Good" for the masters is the pure exertion of the 

84 1 know that there is much in Nietzsche that can be quoted against such 
a view. He attacked theories of "race" as products of nineteenth-century herd 
morality, of unaristocratic looseness of thought and feeling. He wrote bitter 
things against the Germans, who had so stupidly neglected him. But in one 
of his bitterest attacks on the Germans, he wrote that they display "a number 
of virtues more manly than any that other European countries can show." 
The Twilight of the Idols, "Things the Germans lack," i. To anyone who 
knows the supreme value Nietzsche set on what he called "manly," the above 
passage is final. The Nazis have had no trouble in adopting him as their 
prophet. Sec also Chapter VIII below. 

u The Genealogy of Morals, First Essay, 2. 



100 NIETZSCHE 

Will to Power, which in our decadent times we cannot even 
name without using words of ill-repute, like fighting, cruelty, 
greed, lying, voluptuousness. "Good" for the herd we herd- 
men and Christians can describe in nice words, like peace, 
compassion, obedience, self-restraint. And similarly, of course, 
with "bad." 

Already it should be clear, from the terms used above, that 
Nietzsche is facing the ineluctable and insoluble problem of 
the origin of evil. He has decided that somehow, sometime, 
somewhere perhaps in Greece before Socrates men behaved 
as he liked to think of them as behaving. This is his Garden of 
Eden, a place extraordinarily like Valhalla, where heroes fought 
and cheated all day, and, their wounds miraculously no wounds, 
feasted all night. Once the distinction between master-morality 
and slave-morality had been as clear on earth and in reality as 
it was in Nietzsche's mind. But no longer. There had been a 
Fall of Man, and the slaves had come to rule the masters. Good 
had somehow become evil, evil good. Inexplicably ? Not quite, 
unfortunately. History, aided by Nietzsche, was equal to the 
explanation. 

Christianity is for him the key. Christ, and even more the 
apostle Paul, inspired by Jewish malevolence and Greek phi- 
losophy, undid the work of Nature, and set slaves over masters. 
What they did was indeed no more than priests everywhere 
have tried with varying success to do. But they did it more 
completely and more disastrously than it has ever been done 
more so even than in India. There Buddha, a natural if some- 
what gentle aristocrat, came to the rescue of the victims of 
"super-spiritualization." Buddha was primarily a "hygienist," 
"He understands goodness as being good as promoting 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 101 

health. Prayer is out of the question, as is also asceticism" 36 
But Christianity, as finally established, was the -work of herd- 
men who loved their own weaknesses, who strove to further 
disease. "Christian is the hatred of the intellect, of pride, of 
courage, freedom, intellectual libcrtinage\ Christian is the hatred 
of the senses, of the joys of the senses, of joy in general." 37 

How can anything so unnatural as the victory of the slaves 
over the masters take place ? As easily, surely, as the regrettable 
elevation of the Lower Law above the Higher Law noted by 
moralists more orthodox than Nietzsche. The slaves are always 
vastly more numerous than the masters. Normally they remain 
quiet, content with their slave-morality. Indeed, Christianity, 
if it were limited to the masses, and used, as it was used during 
the best days of the Renaissance, to keep them quiet, might be 
a natural and a useful thing. But perversely some of the slaves 
are born intelligent, or at least crafty, and they become priests. 
Even more perversely, some of the masters are born weaklings, 
but intelligent; or at any rate catch the mysterious disease called 
moral idealism. They too become priests Christian, Jacobin, 
or socialist. Now the priest in this broad sense is a man with a 
very strong Will to Power, but without the great gifts of bodily 
strength, without the capacity for masculine joy in its disci- 
plined exercise, without the reverent attachment for this earth 
so essential to the true aristocrat the old Prussian Junker, for 
instance. The priest's Will to Power drives him to seek a way 
to rule, and his craft finds this way; he invents a religion of 
pity, of softness, of equality, and rallies the slaves to the over- 
throw of the masters. 

* The Antichrist, 20. 
w The Antichrist, 21. 



102 NIETZSCHE 

Especially when he is dealing with the origins of primitive 
religions and of Christianity, Nietzsche leans rather heavily on 
this somewhat outmoded "priest-hypocrite-villain" theory. But 
he is far too subtle a psychologist, too good a child of the late 
nineteenth century, to repeat here the simplicities of French 
anti-clericals of the eighteenth century. Nietzsche's priest is no 
plain hypocrite. This priest believes, perhaps from the very 
first, the pious fictions he invents. He really believes the meek 
are blessed; he even believes that he himself is meek, and that 
he ought to inherit the earth. His hatred he thinks is love. He 
takes joy in his disease, in his weakness. And since joy is one 
of the primal sources of strength in men, the priest achieves the 
extraordinary and very Christian feat of turning his weakness 
into a kind of personal strength, not consciously, not hypo- 
critically, but unconsciously. That is the full and paradoxical 
horror of religion, and especially of Christianity; it seems re- 
grettably natural. When he comes to modern exponents of the 
religion of humanity, Nietzsche is sure that no hypocrisy is 
involved. Men like Condorcet and Tolstoy have not the intelli- 
gence to be hypocrites. 

Among all religions of gentleness that is, among social 
diseases Christianity is for Nietzsche by all odds the worst, 
partly because it has succeeded in corrupting the most manly 
and capable of the human race, the peoples of Northern 
Europe, partly because it is so perfectly tailored to meet the 
desires of the groveling herd. "Faith, hope and charity" make 
a complete charter for the domination of the masters by the 
slaves. Christian morals are consistently, coherently, the ex- 
pression of the basic instincts of low men, instincts that make 
them try to avoid real living that is, to try to perpetuate 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 103 

existence at the lowest possible level. Christianity fouls life at 
its very source, in the relations of the sexes. "How can one pos- 
sibly place in the hands of children and women, a book that 
contains those vile words: 'it is better to marry than to burn.' 
And is it decent to be a Christian so long as the very origin of 
man is Christianized, that is to say, befouled by the idea of 
the immaculata conception >38 Christianity is thus the perfect 
form of decadence, the denial of life, the use of instinct against 
itself. Jesus and Paul finished the deadly work of Socrates's 
daemon. "Let us not underestimate the Christians: the Chris- 
tian, false to the point of innocence in jalsity, is far above the 
apes, with regard to the Christians a certain well-known 
theory of Descent becomes a mere good-natured compliment." 89 

Nietzsche recognizes many historical reasons for the peculiar 
virulence of Christianity: the importance of Paul, whom he 
makes the arch-villain of the piece, an insane, vengeful Jew, a 
destroyer, a hater; the skill with which Greek idealism was 
woven into Christian theology, giving it a specious intellectual 
respectability; the perverted discipline of Church organization; 
the existence of a great proletariat of slaves, thirsting for salva- 
tion and revenge. But he puts particular emphasis on two broad 
considerations, the Christian doctrine of personal immortality 
and the Jewish origin of Christianity. 

The doctrine of immortality as it appears in Christianity is 
for Nietzsche one of the most diabolical of priestly inventions. 
Believers are not promised that pity, self-abnegation, chastity, 
asceticism will bring them success in this world. They do not 
turn the other cheek to get caresses, but blows. By the ingenious 

98 The Antichrist, 56. 
w The Antichrist, 39. 



104 NIETZSCHE 

device of the Kingdom of Heaven, however, they are promised 
complete fulfillment of their crudest desires in an after-life. 
Without this promise, even herd-men might come to realize 
that the Christian virtues failed to pay dividends on this earth. 
The Christian doctrine of personal immortality provides an 
almost unbelievably effective way of getting men to accept the 
degenerate life in which the priest is supreme. The more 
unnatural, the more diseased, the more hopeless the lot of the 
believer here below, the more certain his eternal bliss above. 
And this is not the worst. Hell is even more effective than 
Heaven in preventing men from becoming what they might 
become. The more natural, healthy, and hopeful the lot of a 
believer here below, the more certain his eternal punishment in 
a still lower region. The hope of Heaven and the fear of Hell 
combine to botch existence for all men, save for the tiny 
minority is it a minority of one? of free spirits (freie 
Gcistcr) beyond Heaven and Hell, beyond good and evil. The 
real horror of Christianity for Nietzsche is not so much that it 
coddles the weak as that it suppresses and cows the strong. In- 
deed, he is willing at times to welcome Christianity as a means 
by which, in better times, a minority of masters, free spirits, 
might keep in useful contentment a majority of slaves, herd- 
men. At other times, however, he will have nothing less than 
a new race of Supermen, an earth untainted even by the memory 
of Christianity, with no men as we now know them left. He 
was no Utopian, however, neither a Morris nor a Bellamy. He 
does not bother to ask what these Supermen will do about the 
mean little routine tasks. Perhaps there will be no such tasks ? 
Nietzsche-Zarathustra was a very exalted fellow, who rose 
above Nirvana as well as above Heaven. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 105 

A second element in the triumph of Christianity, according 
to Nietzsche, was its Jewish origin. In The Antichrist, at least, 
Nietzsche can write as crudely as any Nazi Jew-baiter. 40 The 
Jews first invented the lie of monotheism. Their Jehovah was 
originally, in the days of. Israel's prevailing, a God of dignity 
and justice; with the Captivity he became a monstrous god of 
jealousy and philosophy, a figure on whom the disappointed 
Jewish intellectuals spilled out their wounded pride, their 
unrealized ambitions. Jehovah became their revenge on the 
world, their flight from the world. But he was still a mere 
tribal God, at whose threats the Gentiles could and did 
laugh. There remained the final step, which Jewish intellec- 
tuals like Paul took. This tribal God could, by a gigantic 
conspiracy, be foisted on ignorant Gentiles. As the Christian 
God, he would sap the strength and confidence of the enemies 
of Israel. Jerusalem would be revenged, and the Jews would 
rule over a world corrupted by Jewish poison. It would be a 
dark, womanish rule over a world sunk in weakness and 
despair, but a world of which Jerusalem would once more be 
the center. 

This was the most fatal kind of megalomania that had ever yet existed 
on earth: insignificant little abortions of bigots and liars began to lay 
sole claim to the concepts "God," "Truth," "Light," "Spirit," "Love," 
"Wisdom," "Life," as if these things were, so to speak, synonyms of 
themselves, in order to fence themselves off from "the world"; little 
ultra-Jews, ripe for every kind of madhouse, twisted values round in 
order to suit themselves just as if the Christian, alone, were the meaning, 
the salt, the standard and even the "ultimate tribunal" of all the rest 
of mankind. 41 

M The key passages arc in The Antichrist, 24 and 25. 
41 The Antichrist, 44. 



106 NIETZSCHE 

But another God is coining may we not say invented? 
and Nietzsche is his prophet. Another megalomania? Has 
another people, scorned and humiliated, produced a new and 
successful gospel of revenge ? We can only hope that Nietzsche 
is as bad a prophet as he is a historian. 

For his account of the origins of Christianity is certainly not 
good history. The notion that Christianity began as a Jewish 
conspiracy is melodramatic nonsense.. Conspirators, even in 
very recent times, are rarely philosophers of history. Saint John, 
and .certainly Saint Paul, were not quite innocent enough for 
conspiracy. Even the major thesis of Nietzsche's attack on 
Christianity contains a paradox that strains the limits of logic. 
Christianity, according to him, is the victory of the weak over 
the strong. But if the weak are victorious, are they not then 
really the strong? Have not they carried out successfully the 
supreme demands of the Will to Power ? There is certainly an 
obvious reply here. The Will to Power of the Christians is not 
the right kind of Will to Power, not a good one. But if there 
are good and bad kinds of power, or success, then there are 
standards of judgment with which we can criticize the results 
of the struggle for power. There is a "higher" power than the 
Will to Power. We are back in the company of Kant and 
Socrates. Perhaps Nietzsche too had his daemon ? 

An analysis of Nietzsche's attitude towards Christianity 
would be incomplete without some mention of his attitude 
towards what he regarded as the final, and most decadent, form 
of Christianity the contemporary movement towards democ- 
racy and socialism. Nietzsche hated all forms of Western 
parliamentary governments, lumping together in his hatred 
English liberalism and continental socialism. In his opinion, 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 107 

the great popular movements of modern times, the English, 
American, and French revolutions, represent the herd-men's 
attempt to bring the unlovely and impossible Christian heaven 
down to earth. No longer content with the vicarious other- 
worldly realization of his low desires for comfort and self- 
indulgence which the success of the Jewish conspiracy brought 
him, the democrat or the socialist is trying to be comfortable 
and self-indulgent here and now, trying to remake this earth 
in his own image. And the result? A mad scramble for the 
cheap wares of the factory, for the pleasures of a vulgarized 
art, for the satisfactions of that base form of envy called 
patriotism. 

An absolute uprooting of culture in the increasing rush and hurry of 
life, and the decay of all reflection and simplicity. The waters of religion 
are ebbing, and leaving swamps and stagnant pools; the nations are draw- 
ing away in enmity again, and long to tear each other to pieces. The 
sciences, blindly driving on according to a system of laissez-faire, are 
splitting up. ... The educated classes are swept along in the con- 
temptible struggle for wealth. Never was the world more worldly, never 
poorer in goodness and love. Everything bows before the coming bar- 
barism, art and science included. 42 

We are ripe for the final disintegration, for universal nihil- 
ism. The one saving factor in the older Christianity, the post- 
ponement of its deadly egalitarianism to an after-world, which 
still permitted a fruitful inequality in this world, is lost. The 
equality of souls before God was a doctrine that might have 
been made harmless, but the equality of men before Society is 
a fatal lure, a final decadence; it is nihilism. 

The protraction of Christianity through the French Revolution. The 
seducer is Rousseau, he once again liberates woman, who thenceforward 

u Thoughts out of Season, "Schopenhauer as Educator," chap. iv. 



108 NIETZSCHE 

is always represented as ever more interesting suffering. Then come 
the slaves and Mrs. Beecher Stowe. Then the poor and the workmen. 
Then the vicious and the sick. . . . Then comes the cursing of all 
voluptuousness (Baudelaire and Schopenhauer): the most decided con- 
viction that the lust for power is the greatest vice; absolute certainty 
that morality and disinterestedness are identical things: that the "happi- 
ness of all" is a goal worth striving after (i.e. Christ's Kingdom of 
Heaven). We are on the best road to it: the Kingdom of Heaven of 
the poor in spirit has begun. 43 

VI 

On such blanket-terms as rationalism, Christianity, and 
democracy Nietzsche centered hatreds which, to take him in 
his own terms, are rather more than philosophical. There is a 
certain consistency in their variety. Nietzsche hates all that 
seems to him hostile to Life, to struggling, to the free expres- 
sion of a restless energy in men he called the Will to Power. 
He hates anything finished, complete, contented, "dead." Per- 
haps this worshipper of succeeding hates anything successful ? 
At any rate, we shall not stop now to pursue Nietzsche's per- 
sonality into its final and not very well concealed hiding- 
places. Our list of his hatreds has perhaps been a bit too 
abstract, has concentrated on their broadest and most general- 
ized expression. We shall do well to consider some of his more 
specialized hatreds. They are many, and we can but choose a 
few among them. They are also, and not unnaturally, greatly 
mixed with love. Nietzsche might have written, odi, ergo amo. 

He wrote some bitter things, which, values having been 
properly transvalued, he regarded as just and kindly things, 
about women. Nietzsche's opinions on women are at least as 
well-known as the very similar ones expressed by his master 

"The Will to Power, 94. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 109 

Schopenhauer. Historically, both represent a reaction against 
some of the views about women held in the nineteenth century, 
especially in England, America, and Germany, and commonly 
known as "Victorian." Such views really were held: read John 
Stuart Mill's Autobiography if you doubt it. Women, ran the 
common version, are really morally superior to men. They are 
gentle, kindly, idealistic, yet sensible. Their minds and desires 
are on higher things. They put up, because they have to, with 
the wicked lusts of men. They are ignorant now of many im- 
portant worldly matters because men conspire to keep them 
uneducated, and this ignorance gives them a certain charm. 
But since they are really so much better than men, they should 
be given at least an equal chance with men, for our common 
good. They should be given equal educational opportunities, 
should be welcomed into the world of business and politics. 
This, indeed, is the more radical version dear to men like Mill. 
The ordinary Victorian accepted the premises of Mill's version, 
the view of women as ministering angels; but he preferred to 
keep them in their present satisfactory place, and to continue 
to receive their ministrations. 

Against such notions Nietzsche wrote aphorisms scattered 
through all his works, and the famous eighteenth chapter of 
the first part of Thus Spa\e Zarathustra, "Old and Young 
Women." It is roughly possible to distinguish two veins in his 
writing about women. In the first vein, he attacks Victorian 
notions in his usual manner by affirming loudly their op- 
posites. Women are unscrupulous, self-centered, sensual; they 
make good schemers, liars, and haters. They are admirable 
practitioners of the art of slave-morality, using with intelligent 
hypocrisy the "Christian" virtues to establish their regrettable 



no NIETZSCHE 

domination over men. And they are intelligent, in a low 
way. Established European ideas in the nineteenth century 
have got the truth just reversed. Men have "character," women 
"intelligence." 

The intellect of women manifests itself as perfect mastery, presence of 
mind, and utilization of all advantages. They transmit it as a funda- 
mental quality to their children, and the father adds thereto the darker 
background of the will. . . . For those who know how to put a thing 
properly: women have intelligence, men have character and passion. 44 

In his second vein, Nietzsche is directly concerned with put- 
ting women in their proper place. Here, as so often when he 
has a concrete program, he sounds very like a Nazi. He might 
almost have used their formula, Church, Children, Cooking. 
Women must not be given an equal voice with men in affairs 
of any kind, state, business, or family. The movement for equal 
rights for women is one of the sorriest signs of our decadence. 
Women are really not good for much of anything. They are 
not even good cooks. 45 But in the economy of the world they 
must be used for something, and, properly mastered, they make 
tolerable slaves. The real danger is not the direct rule the 
suffragettes and their sympathizers, eunuchs like Mill, want; 
it is that women will rule indirectly, in the manner of a 
Pompadour or a Maintenon by using their talents for 
love-making and Christian piety to obtain an unnatural mas- 

" Human, All Too Human, "Wife and Child," 411. The whole of this 
division of Human, All Too Human, 377-437, together with The Joyful 
Wisdom, Book II, 57-75, makes up perhaps the best sample of Nietzsche's 
ideas on women, much fuller and more typical than anything in Thus Spa1(c 
Zarathustra. 

48 "Stupidity in the kitchen: woman as cook. Woman does not under- 
stand what food means." Beyond Good and Evil, 234. And Nietzsche had 
never faced an American female "salad"! 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED III 

tery over their masters. In the new order of society, women 
must be kept in their ordained position of inferiors, must be 
limited to the functions of child-bearing and housekeeping, 
that men may at last become Supermen. 46 

Nietzsche loved and hated women from a safe distance. 
The determined Elizabeth was the only woman whom he could 
have known at all well. Cosima he loved in secret, as the 
Ariadne of a most transparent sublimation. The ludicrous 
passage with Lou was too brief and wordy to have taught him 
much. Fraulein von Meysenbug was not even a good mother- 
substitute. In real life, there was always something fumbling 
and unsatisfactory in his relations with women. Perhaps this 
is why he wrote so assuredly about them. And he never really 
owned one, which is perhaps why he was so confident they 
should be owned. 

Nietzsche also hated professors, and here at least he had 
ample opportunity to know intimately the objects of his hatred. 
The academic mind, according to this professor of classical 
philology, is devoted to the process of embalming; it does not 
kill it has not energy enough for that. What priests and 
women kill, the savant embalms, preserves to clutter the world 
so that there is no room for anything alive. Professors are 
hopeless herd-men, conservatives in the negative sense of mere 

"This summary is not wholly fair to Nietzsche, since, especially in The 
Joyful Wisdom his least embittered book he can occasionally write about 
women discerningly, fair-mindedly, almost sympathetically. See for instance 
the aphorism (71) "On Female Chastity" in Book II of The Joyful Wisdom, 
where he discusses the "psychic entanglement" of the ordinary upper and 
middle-class European woman who faces marriage after being educated "with 
as much ignorance as possible in croticis" Not that Nietzsche is untrue to 
his major premises: even in this book, he insists that "Man's attribute is will, 
woman's attribute is willingness." (68). 



112 NIETZSCHE 

conforming; they are hostile to novelty, enterprise, adventure; 
they form a guild responsible for the spread of Socratic rational- 
ism in its modern and deadly forms of science and scholarship; 
they conspire against and suppress the rare spirits like 
Nietzsche who can use the stuff of history to illuminate, nay, 
to set fire to, the world. 47 

All this was not as new and as daring in the 1870'$ and i88o's 
as were Nietzsche's opinions about women. It had all been said 
before, and has been said since. It is the eternal complaint of 
the adventurous and imaginative free-lance writer, himself 
battling for a living among the realities of competitive exist- 
ence, while the cloistered professor rests secure in his make- 
believe world of academic tenure. It is the cry of the free artist 
against the enslaved scholar, of the creator against Dryasdust, 
of the thinker against the mere cataloguer. The kind of thing 
Nietzsche said about professors has been said so often that it 
must be worth saying. It has become almost a piece of ritualistic 
consolation for the imaginative and the profound in this dull 
world. And this must indeed be a dull world, in which so 
brilliant and fascinating a fellow as Nietzsche has to spend so 
much energy in warning his fellow men against the contagion, 
if not the charm, of academic dullness and stupidity. 

Wagner is almost a test case of Nietzsche's capacity for love- 
in-hate. In the Triebschen period, Nietzsche felt, as much as 
he could ever feel, the worship of the disciple for the master. 
Wagner's music was then the unattainable perfection of Dio- 
nysian striving. His emotions never recovered from the crash 
of Wagner's music, and to the last he never denied its unholy 

47 Here the locus classicus is Thoughts out of Season, "Schopenhauer as 
Educator," chap. vi. 




ELIZABETH NIETZSCHE 
From a photograph, about 1880 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 113 

greatness. But he came to hate the Theseus who still held 
Ariadne's body, though her soul must obviously belong to 
Dionysos; he came to envy the successful Master who had the 
admiration of the tribe, always denied to Nietzsche. His taste 
in music, too, changed. Well ahead of his time, and a little 
against the grain, one suspects, of so unbridled a yearncr, he 
reverted to the "classical" in music. 48 He came to prefer music 
before Beethoven to music after Beethoven, though he also 
liked the unpretentious clarity and lightness of Bizet's "Car- 
men." In this mood, he wrote about Wagner as only a disillu- 
sioned romantic could: 

Wagner's heroines one and all, once they have been divested of their 
heroic husks, are almost all indistinguishable from Madame Bovary. . . . 
If it were not for Wagner, who would teach us that innocence has a 
preference for saving interesting sinners? (the case in "Tannhauser"). 
Or that corrupted old females prefer to be saved by chaste young men? 
(the case of Kundry). Or that young hysterics like to be saved by their 
doctor? (the case in "Lohengrin"). Or that beautiful girls must love 
to be saved by a knight who also happens to be a Wagnerite? (the case 
in the "Mastersingers"). Or that even married women also like to be 
saved by a knight? (the case of Isolde). . . . Let us wander in the 
clouds, let us harangue eternity, let us be careful to group great symbols 
all around us. Sursuml Bumbuml there is no better advice. The 
"heaving breast" shall be our argument, "beautiful feelings" our advo- 
cates. Virtue still carries its point against counterpoint. 49 

According to Nietzsche, then, Wagner was no musician; he 
was an actor, a panderer to the low tastes of the public who 

**A remark of Hans von Billow makes very clear Nietzsche's native taste 
in music. Of a "Bacchanal" of Nietzsche's own composing submitted to him 
he wrote, "habc ich mchr an den lendemain eines Bacchanals als an dieses 
selbst denken miissen" "it makes me think rather of the day after a Bacchanal 
than of a Bacchanal itself." Nietzsche, Gcsammeltc Brieje, III, 350. 

M The Case of Wagner, 9; 3; 6. 



114 NIETZSCHE 

assemble at that "Hydro," Bayreuth "the cultured crttins ', the 
blast pigmies, the eternally feminine, the gastrically happy, in 
short, the people." 50 Wagner's works are an encyclopaedia of 
decadence. They end, appropriately, with the worst kind of 
decadence the Christian religiosity of "Parsifal." 

Finally, there are the Germans. Nietzsche was fond of call- 
ing himself a "good European," but he never forgot that he 
was a German. He thought the racial movement a swindle, 
but he contributed much to its spread. He was certainly in 
the ordinary sense not a good German, and, especially in 
his later years, wrote very violently against the Germans 
which is why we have considered this subject among his 
hatreds. 

It is part of my ambition to be considered as a despiser of Germans 
par excellence. . . . The Germans are impossible for me. When I try 
to think of a man who runs counter to all my instincts, the result is 
always a German. . . . The Germans are canaille. ... A man debases 
himself by consorting with Germans. ... I cannot endure this race 
with which a man is always in bad company, which has no feeling for 
nuances (and alas! I am a nuance). . . . The Germans have no idea of 
how vulgar they are which is itself the very acme of vulgarity they 
are not ashamed of being merely Germans. 51 

Yet here Nietzsche's hatred is most transparently disappointed 
love. He had wooed his fellow-countrymen, and they had 
turned him down. They had not followed Zarathustra. They 
had not even stoned him; they had simply paid him no atten- 
tion at all. 

And he had tried very hard. The Germans, in spite of their 
weaknesses, had still seemed to Zarathustra the most hopeful 



80 The Case of Wagner, 6. 

ll Ecce Homo, "The Case of Wagner," 4. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 115 

stuff out of which to make Supermen. Save for a few professors, 
a few dull bourgeois like David Strauss, they had not followed 
the false light of Socratic rationalism. Some deep instinct, 
something in the German soul, is forever hostile to the shallow 
glibness of French philosophe and English utilitarian. The 
Germans had, it is true, their philosophical weakness: Kantian 
idealism. But according to Nietzsche, even this absurd and 
loving dalliance with the thing-in-itself is really for Germans 
nothing more than a form of amusement, and perhaps a not 
altogether useless and innocent form of amusement, since it 
bewilders foreigners into thinking that the Germans really are 
good-natured metaphysical maunderers, and conceals from 
them the basic German hardness. "German depth among 
ourselves alone we perhaps take the liberty to laugh at it ... 
we should do honor to our name we are not called the 
'tiusche Volk' (deceptive people) for nothing." 52 At the core 
of this German race is to be found a fine blond strength, a 
capacity for disciplined obedience, for efficient cooperation, an 
energy that can be stimulated into Dionysian activity and 
enjoyment, a noble discontent clear even in men like Luther 
with the world as it is. Even the German search for "depth" 
is a sign of the German Will to Power. "Wir Deutschen wollcn 
etwas von uns, was man von uns noch nicht wollte wir 
wollen etwas mehr" 6S 

Over against this strength, Nietzsche finds serious German 
weaknesses which have hitherto prevented its highest develop- 

M Beyond Good and Evil, 244. I doubt whether Nietzsche's derivation of 
"Teutonic" is good etymology, but it makes fine irony. 

M "We Germans will get something from ourselves, which no one has yet 
wanted of us we want something more." The Will to Power, 108. This is 
understandably a favorite text in Nazi Germany. 



Ii6 NIETZSCHE 

ment. The right instincts are there, but they do not have full 
play; they are suppressed, overlaid by bad habits and institu- 
tions. They emerge awkwardly, if at all, into action. Nietzsche 
is never quite sure how this regrettable failure came about, but 
he knows how it shows itself at present in Wagner- worship, 
in the new Empire with its striving after worldly goods and 
empty political prestige, in national arrogance and obtuseness, 
in whoring after the strange gods of parliamentary government 
and socialism, in decadence, in neglect of Nietzsche. The Ger- 
mans are an enigma even more complex and contradictory 
than women. 

As a people made up of the most extraordinary mixing and mingling 
of races, perhaps even with a preponderance of the pre-Aryan element, 
as the "people of the center" in every sense of the term, the Germans 
are more intangible, more ample, more contradictory, more unknown, 
more incalculable, more surprising, and even more terrifying than other 
peoples are to themselves: they escape definition, and are thereby alone 
the despair of the French. 54 

We have, however, spent enough time on Nietzsche's hatreds. 
The list could be extended to great length, from Dante, "the 
hyena that writes poetry in tombs," to fanatical reformers, 
"that 'noble* little community of unbridled, fantastic, half-mad 
people of geniuses, too who cannot control themselves, or 
experience any inward joy, until they have lost themselves 
completely." 55 But it will be more profitable to try to under- 

54 Beyond Good and Evil, 244. This whole passage is an admirable sum- 
mary of Nietzsche's mature position on the Germans. See also the section 
"Peoples and Countries," appended to the English translation of The Genealogy 
of Morals. 

"The Twilight of the Idols, "Skirmishes in a War with the Age," i; 
The Dawn of Day, Book I, 50. There is no sign in the passage from which 
the latter quotation is taken that Nietzsche was indulging in self-analysis. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE HATED 117 

tand, not what Nietzsche loved which is, as we have seen, 
isually indistinguishable from what he hated but what 
Nietzsche wanted. We shall in the next chapter attempt the 
ifficult task of finding a program, a platform for concrete 
ction, in his work. 



CHAPTER V 
WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 

* I ^HE variety or the confusion of Nietzsche's thought is 
JL at least as apparent on what we may call, conventionally, 
its positive side as on its negative side. There is one constant: 
all his life Nietzsche was concerned, as a politiquc and mo- 
ralistc, with the problems of men in society. There are many 
variables. He is now critic, essayist on aesthetic problems, now 
moralist in the French tradition, now preacher, now prophet 
always, perhaps, philosopher. In his first work, he is primarily 
interested in ethics as aesthetics. In his last book, the skeleton 
Will to Power y he is interested in ethics as high politics, religion. 
Throughout his work, he seems torn between the contrary 
ideals of anarchy and authority; rarely, if ever, does he solve 
the conflict with the common play on words, the assertion that 
true liberty is true obedience. He is certainly not fairly labeled 
either as anarchist or as authoritarian, though enemies and 
friends alike have not hesitated to interpret him as one or the 
other. Perhaps he believed in the anarchical solution for an 
elite, the Supermen, in the authoritarian solution for the many, 
the herd-men? Certainly he is always vividly aware of a con- 
trast between the able few and the incompetent many, and the 
distinction between "masters" and "slaves" runs throughout his 
thinking. But, if it is in general true that for him "slave- 
morality" is obedience, it is not true that for him "master- 
morality" is what we know as anarchy. We must put the 



WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 119 

question of his ethics in its simplest form, and ask how he 
wanted men to behave. 

This seems, at least to an Anglo-Saxon mind trained to ask 
just such empirical questions, a perfectly fair question. But it 
is surprising, and in a sense no doubt illuminating, to learn 
how difficult it is to answer from Nietzsche's writings. He 
does not admit sharing Carlyle's noble scorn for any concrete 
proposal of reform as a mere "Morrison's pill." He does not in 
so many words say that if the soul of man sees the new light, 
all will be well, that we need a spiritual revolution in which the 
petty details of institutional change will take care of them- 
selves. Any such barefaced preaching would seem to be at odds 
with his tough-minded attacks on theological and philosophical 
idealism. But listen to him: 

And it is the great noontide, when man is in the middle of his course 
between animal and Superman, and celebrating his advance to the 
evening as his highest hope: for it is the advance to a new morning. 

At such time will the down-goer bless himself, that he should be an 
over-goer; and the sun of his knowledge will be at noontide. 

"Dead arc all the Gods: now do we desire the Superman to live? 
Let this be our final will at the great noontide! 

Thus spake Zarathustra. 1 

No doubt it is, in one of Nietzsche's favorite words, hope- 
lessly vulgar to ask for some indications of what Supermen will 
be like in the flesh for we understand that they are to have 
flesh. The mere asking such a question marks the questioner as 
one not chosen to advance to the new morning. Nietzsche is 
not going to imitate his Christian opponents, and come down 
to details such as the white robes and the harps of the Christian 

1 Thus Spa^e Zarathustra, Part I, chap. xxii. 



120 NIETZSCHE 

heaven. The conception of the Superman is of course pure 
eschatology, incomprehensible to the outsider, save as he can 
observe the behavior of men who say they "believe in" it. 

Nevertheless, in his less exalted moments Nietzsche did write 
much about how he wanted men to behave in this transitional 
period of the "great noontide." Even when he is dealing with 
such problems of conduct, he is more often than not the 
preacher, urging the masters to be bold, active, brave, cruel, 
hard, voluptuous, manly, and to keep the slaves in their places. 
Occasionally he will recommend some vague institutional 
frame for such behavior, but not often. And when he does, it 
is not at all clear whether he is thinking of masters or slaves, 
or of both. 

Take, for instance, the family. He believes in monogamy as 
the best general rule both for masters and slaves. For both, he 
holds that the man must be master within the family, that the 
place of woman is in the home. Marriage is an institution for 
breeding. It should have nothing to do with love. Modern 
bourgeois marriage has been corrupted by romantic notions 
about love. In the good society, it may well be necessary to 
supervise marriages in order to prevent the birth of the weak, 
the misfit. 

Society, as the trustee of life, is responsible to life for every botched 
life that comes into existence ... it should in many cases actually pre- 
vent the act of procreation and may, without any regard for rank, descent, 
or intellect, hold in readiness the most rigorous forms of compulsion and 
restriction, and, under certain circumstances, have recourse to castration. 
The Mosaic law, "Thou shalt do no murder/' is a piece of ingenuous 
puerility compared with the earnestness of this forbidding of life to 
decadents, "Thou shalt not beget"!!! 2 

8 The Will to Power, 734. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 121 

Note here the vagueness of "under certain circumstances" and 
the failure to define "decadents." Both the doctrine and the 
vagueness are proving useful to the Nazis, and this passage from 
The Will to Power is very popular with their theorists of 
Rassen hygiene. 3 

On education Nietzsche is again vague and often contradic- 
tory. Hewrotethe famous aphorism, "The future of German 
culture rests with the sons of Prussian officers." 4 What he 
admired in the Prussian officer-caste was precisely its rigorous 
training and discipline, its acceptance of tradition, its freedom 
from "decadent" questionings. And yet he also wrote, "What 
is now needed in Germany is independent educational estab- 
lishments which actively oppose the State system of slave- 
drilling." 5 The Prussians were clearly not quite Supermen. 
Nietzsche wants something more: "The education which rears 
those ruling virtues that allow a man to become master of his 
benevolence and his pity: the great disciplinary virtues . . . 
and the passions of the creator, must be elevated to the heights 
we must cease from carving marble!" 8 

But although Nietzsche never gives us a curriciilum, he 
knows what he doesn't want. The kind of formal education 
he himself had, for instance. In one of his longer passages 
it is almost an essay on "The So-called Classical Education" 
he writes: 

Only think of this wasted youth, when we were inoculated clumsily 
and painfully with an imperfect knowledge of the Greeks and the 
Romans as well as of their languages, contrary to the highest principle 

1 See below, p. 215. 

4 Genealogy of Morals, "Peoples and Countries," 14. 
1 Quoted in Forster-Nictzsche, Nietzsche, II, 250. 
6 The Will to Power, 983. 



122 NIETZSCHE 

of all culture, which holds that we should not give food except to those 
who hunger for it. Think of that period in our lives when we had 
mathematics and physics forced down our throats, instead of first of 
all being made acquainted with the despair of ignorance, instead of 
having our little daily life, our activities, and everything occurring in 
our houses, our workshops, in the sky and in nature, split up into 
thousands of problems, painful, humiliating and irritating problems 
and thus having our curiosity made acquainted with the fact that we 
first of all require a mathematical and mechanical knowledge before 
we can be allowed to rejoice in the absolute logic of this knowledge! 
If we had only been imbued with reverence for those branches of 
science, if we had only been made to tremble with emotion at the 
struggles, the defeats and the renewed combats of those great men, of 
the martyrdom which is the history of pure science! But, on the contrary 
we were allowed to develop a certain contempt for those sciences in 
favor of historical training, formal education, and "classicism." 7 

As for what is called "popular education" (Volfabildung), 
the very notion is unspeakable. You cannot "educate" the 
masses by submitting them to smatterings and distillations of 
what our time calls knowledge. Their true education they do 
not get from schoolmasters in their new schools. This educa- 
tion they find "there, where the Volf( cherishes its religious 
instincts, where it builds its mythical figures, where it guards 
its customs, its sense of right, its home-soil (Heimatsboden) , 
its speech." The only result of trying to give the people a 
formal academic education is to destroy in part this organic 
growth which keeps them volfysch and contented. And of 
course all "popular educators" are at heart envious radicals and 
socialists, bungling little intellectuals who want to destroy the 
natural Order of Rank. 8 

T The Dawn of Day, 195. Even the natural sciences are good, when 
Nietzsche wants to use them to club something else! 

'From Nietzsche's unpublished literary remains. See Werfy (Grossoctav- 



WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 123 

One would not expect Nietzsche to pay much attention to 
economics, to the ordinary details of making a living. The 
Supermen will be supported by the herd-men, as aristocratic 
classes in the past, foreshadowing the Supermen, have been 
supported by the masses. Apparently the deep habits and 
instincts of the masses, if undisturbed, will be sufficient to pro- , 
duce all that is needed in economic goods. Certainly the Super- 
men will not even guide the masses in economic life. The true 
aristocrat can have nothing to do with trade. "Not to under- 
stand trade is noble To sell one's virtue only at the highest 
price, or even to carry on usury with it as a teacher, a civil 
servant, or an artist, for instance, brings genius and talent down 
to the level of the common tradesman. We must be careful not 
to be clever with our wisdom!" 9 Nevertheless, Nietzsche 
brings himself to consider such matters now and then. The 
importance of the industrialist and the entrepreneur in modern 
society is for him a sign of disease. Sudden wealth makes 
unnatural leaders, men without taste, without honor, without 
the steadying force of tradition without what Pareto called 
"persistent aggregates." 

In order that property may henceforth inspire more confidence and 
become more moral, we should keep open all paths of work for small 
fortunes, but should prevent the effortless [!] and sudden acquisition of 
wealth. Accordingly, we should take all the branches of transport and 
trade which favor the accumulation of large fortunes especially, there- 
fore, the money-market out of the hands of private persons and private 
companies, and look upon those who own too much, just as upon those 
who own nothing, as types fraught with danger to the community. 10 

ausgabe), IX, 357. The whole long passage is a most interesting anticipation 
of what the Nazis call their voltysche Weltanschauung. 

9 The Dawn of Day, 308, 

10 Human, All Too Human, "The Wanderer and his Shadow," 285. 



124 NIETZSCHE 

Here again, Nietzsche stops short very conveniently for him- 
self. "Out of the hands of private persons," and into whose 
hands? Nietzsche does not say. His Nazi commentators have 
answered for him. Into the hands of the National Socialist 
state as now organized, writes one of them, who finds that 
Nietzsche foresaw the corporative state. 11 Not too much, not 
too little. Robespierre once said that in the republic to come, 
no one should have much over, or much under, 3,000 francs a 
year but Robespierre is strange company for Nietzsche. 

Capitalist society, Nietzsche continues, has exploited the 
laborer. The socialists for once are right. But their egalitarian 
remedies are a poison worse than the disease. The worker 
must be restored to his proper place in the Order of Rank. We 
have got to get rid of the cash-nexus. 

Workmen should learn to regard their duties as soldiers do. They 
should receive emoluments, support, but they should not get wages! 

There is no relation between wor\ done and money received-, the 
individual should, according to his fynd, be so placed as to perform the 
highest that is compatible with his powers. 12 

We need, in order to dissolve this cash-nexus, a revolution, a 
great renewal of society. Before economic life can be put in the 
modest place where it belongs, it must be properly subordinated 
to the moral and political life of the community. Justice, not 
wealth, must be the measure of utility. 13 

And justice ? It is at any rate the opposite of the prevailing 
capitalistic spirit. Socialism is merely the workman's aping 
envy of his masters. To cure the workman of his socialism, the 
upper classes must cure themselves of their capitalism. 

ll Haertle, Nietzsche und der Nazionalsozialismus (1937), 31. 

u The Will to Power, 763. 

"Human, All Too Human, "The Wanderer and his Shadow," 286. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 125 

The only remedy against Socialism that still lies in your power is to 
avoid provoking Socialism in other words, to live in moderation and 
contentment, to prevent as far as possible all lavish display, and to aid 
the State as far as possible in its taxing of all superfluities and luxuries. 
You do not like this remedy? Then, you rich bourgeois who call your- 
selves "Liberals," confess that it is your own inclination that you find so 
terrible and menacing in Socialists, but allow to prevail in yourselves as 
unavoidable, as if with you it were something different. As you are 
constituted, if you had not your fortune and the cares of maintaining it, 
this bent of yours would make Socialists of you. Possession alone differ- 
entiates you from them. If you wish to conquer the assailants of your 
prosperity, you must first conquer yourselves. And if that prosperity 
only meant well-being, it would not be so external and provocative of 
envy; it would be more generous, more benevolent, more compensatory, 
more helpful. But the spurious, histrionic element in your pleasures, 
which lie more in the feeling of contrast (because others have them not, 
and feel envious) than in feelings of realised and heightened power 
your houses, dresses, carriages, shops, the demands of your palates and 
your tables, your noisy operatic and musical enthusiasm; lastly your 
women, formed and fashioned but of base metal, gilded but without the 
ring of gold, chosen by you for show and considering themselves meant 
for show these are the things that spread the poison of that national 
disease, which seizes the masses ever more and more as a Socialistic 
heart-itch, but has its origin and breeding-place in you. Who shall now 
arrest this epidemic? 14 

II 

No more as to politics than as to family life, education, and 
economic life, can one expect from Nietzsche concrete pro- 
posals for reform. He is certainly no conventional political 
philosopher. He uses the classic terms of political theory 
monarchy, aristocracy, democracy in no fresh senses. In the 
abstract, "democracy" sounds bad to him, "aristocracy" and 
"monarchy" good. But with the actual governments of his 

14 Human, All Too Human, "Miscellaneous Maxims and Opinions," 304. 



126 NIETZSCHE 

time, no matter what they are called, he is disgusted. France 
and England have frankly committed themselves to democracy 
and therefore to decadence. Germany, in which the strong old 
instincts for a society founded on the Order of Rank were still 
alive under Frederick the Great, has since 1813 given way 
increasingly to her almost equally old weakness, the desire to 
imitate, and excel at their own game, the Western powers. 
Even so intelligent and realistic an "old" German as Bismarck 
has felt himself obliged to introduce parliamentary government 
and in many other ways to compromise with the West. The 
result is an unstable mixture of elements natural and unnatural 
in Germans, a society enjoying its own peculiar decadence; 
"the era of Bismarck the era of a stupefied Germany" (Aera 
dcr dcutschcn Verdummung) In this sad situation, only 
Russia seems to hold a promise, "Russia, the only great nation 
today that has some lasting power and grit in her, that can bide 
her time, that can still promise something Russia, the op- 
posite of all wretched European petty-statism and neurasthenia, 
which the foundation of the German Empire has brought to a 
crisis." 16 As for America, all Nietzsche thought we deserved 
was an aside, "no American future." It is true he put a ques- 
tion-mark after the phrase. 17 

The politics of all European and American states in the nine- 
teenth century, then, with the possible exception of Russia 
were to Nietzsche impossibly corrupt. And they were deeply 
corrupt, not with the petty graft old-maidish reformers worry 
about that was at most a symptom but with the funda- 

16 Wer\e (Grossoctavausgabe) , XIII, 350. 

1<J The Twilight of the Idols, "Skirmishes in a War with the Age," 39. 

17 The Genealogy of Morals, "Peoples and Countries," 17. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 127 

mental corruption of democratized Christianity. They were 
organized to achieve the ignoble ends of herd-men, peace, 
animal comfort, the survival of the mean, the stupid, the 
botched. But they were not even successful in achieving these 
ends. The nineteenth century had seen the rise of democratic 
nationalism, a new era of wars on a grand scale, wars between 
huge armies raised by universal conscription, not between the 
small armies of professional fighters of the Middle Ages and 
the Renaissance. In these wars, the comfortable decadence of 
the bourgeois was made impossible. International politics were 
in a worse mess if that was possible than domestic politics. 

Nietzsche approved wars in principle, and wrote flowingly 
in praise of war and warriors. 18 But he did not altogether like 
the specific wars of his own time. Perhaps here, as so often, 
Nietzsche simply displays the unsubtle neurosis that made him 
disapprove anything he hadn't invented and he clearly hadn't 
invented Bismarck's wars. He does, however, try hard to 
rationalize his feeling that the wars of his time are inglorious 
wars. 

They are inglorious partly because, of course, they are most 
unnaturally fought among the herd-men, who ought to be 
limited to their proper function of hewers of wood and drawers 
of water for the real warriors, the master-men. European 
nationalism is an emotion of the herd, the pooled egotisms of 
common men. But not even these emotions are really natural, 
really rooted in the strong soil from which grows the Volf(. 
Like everything else in this stupid contemporary world of ours, 
the emotions we call nationalistic are mere perverse and cor- 
rupted sentiments, artificially cultivated by men mostly "in- 

18 The classic passage is in Thus SpaJ(e Zarathustra, Part I, chap. x. 



128 NIETZSCHE 

tellectuals" infected with the Socratic virus. The nationalism 
that at present holds the Germans together, for instance, is not 
a pure love of blood and soil, but a ferment of Rousseau, Wag- 
ner, "progress," egalitarianism, hedonism, beer and fine ideals 
generally. 

This nation has deliberately abused itself for almost a thousand years: 
nowhere else have the two great European narcotics, alcohol and Chris- 
tianity, been so viciously abused as in Germany. Recently a third opiate 
was added to the list, . . . our music, our costive and constipating 
German music. How much peevish ponderousness, paralysis, damp- 
ness, dressing-gown languor, and beer, is there not in German intelli- 
gence! 19 

For a Europe so fundamentally ill, Nietzsche will supply no 
remedy in the narrow sense of mere clinical experience. That 
is not his way: he is nothing so limited as a clinician. But he 
will prophesy, he will play with the magic of words. Against 
the petty nationalists of his time he is always against someone 
or something he declares himself to be a "good European." 

I see over and above all these national wars, new "empires" and 
whatever else lies in the foreground. What I am concerned with for 
I see it preparing itself slowly and hesitatingly is the United Europe. 
It was the only real work, the one impulse in the souls of all broad- 
minded and deep-thinking men of this century this preparation of 
the new synthesis, and the tentative effort to anticipate the future of 
"the European." I am thinking of men like Napoleon, Heinrich Heine, 
Goethe, Beethoven, Stendhal, Schopenhauer. . . . 

But to the help of such minds as feel the need of a new unity there 
comes a great explanatory economic fact: the small states of Europe 
I refer to all our present kingdoms and "empires" will in a short time 
become economically untenable, owing to the mad, uncontrolled struggle 

"The Twilight of the Idols, "Things the Germans Lack," 2. For a 
more moderate discussion of "artificial nationalism," see Human, All Too 
Human, Part I, 475. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 129 

for the possession of local and international trade. ... In order, how- 
ever, that Europe may enter into the battle for the mastery of the world 
with good prospects of victory . . . she must probably "come to an 
understanding" with England. The English colonies are needed for this 
struggle, just as much as modern Germany to play her new role of broker 
and middleman, requires the colonial possessions of Holland. For no 
one any longer believes that England alone is strong enough to continue 
to act her old part for fifty years more [that is, to 1940] . . . here, as in 
other matters, the coming century will be following in the footsteps of 
Napoleon, the first man, and the man of greatest initiative and advanced 
views, of modern times. 20 

This is certainly prophecy in the grand manner. Nietzsche 
at times seems to be almost grateful to democratic nationalism : 
it is something to overcome. It is, indeed, the necessary prelude 
to a better state of affairs. The last few hundred years have 
been a time of marvellous and necessary destruction: they have 
at last leveled the ground on which the coming Supermen, the 
Cyclopeans, can build a noble work of masonry. They have 
destroyed, or are destroying, the last remnants of European 
barbarism, all the crude and tyrannical instincts of mere ani- 
mal man. 

Whether we call it "civilization," or "humanity," or "progress," which 
now distinguishes the European: whether we call it simply, without 
praise or blame, by the political formula: the democratic movement in 
Europe behind all the moral and political foregrounds pointed to by 
such formulas, an immense physiological process goes on, which is ever 
extending: the process of the assimilation of Europeans; their increasing 
detachment from the conditions under which, climatically and heredi- 
tarily, united races originate; their increasing independence of every 
definite milieu, that for centuries would fain inscribe itself with equal 
demands on soul and body; that is to say, the slow emergence of an 
essentially super-national and nomadic species of man, who possesses, 

**The Genealogy of Morals, "Peoples and Countries/' 18. See also The 
Joyful Wisdom, Part V, 362. 



130 NIETZSCHE 

physiologically speaking, a maximum of the art and power of adaptation 
as his typical distinction. This process of the evolving European . . . 
will probably arrive at results on which its naive propagators and pane- 
gyrists, the apostles of "modern ideas," would least care to reckon. The 
same new conditions under which on an average a levelling and cheap- 
ening of man will take place a useful, industrious, variously service- 
able and clever gregarious man are in the highest degree suitable to 
give use to exceptional men of the most dangerous and attractive quali- 
ties. For, while the collective impression of such future Europeans will 
probably be that of numerous, talkative, weak-willed, and very handy 
workmen who require a master, a commander, as they require their 
daily bread; while, therefore, the democratising of Europe will tend to 
the production of a type prepared for slavery in the most subtle sense 
of the term: the strong man will necessarily in individual and exceptional 
cases, become stronger and richer than he has perhaps ever been before 
owing to the unprejudicedness of his schooling, owing to the immense 
variety of practice, art, and disguise. I meant to say that the democratising 
of Europe is at the same time an involuntary arrangement for the rearing 
of tyrants taking the word in all its meanings, even in its most spiritual 
sense. 21 

Therefore: "The leveling of the mankind of Europe is the 
great process which should not be arrested; it should even be 
accelerated." 22 

Nietzsche has achieved the philosopher's favorite task, the 
reconciliation of the irreconcilable. Hegel could have found 
no better example of the benign workings of the dialectic; out 
of democracy, dictatorship; out of the rule of the herd-men, the 
rule of the Supermen. The cosmic process is at work smoothly 
and surely. It would almost seem as if there were nothing to 
get excited about. But the cosmic process needs the aid of 
cosmic thinkers. Nietzsche is at least as excited as another, and 
more open, Hegelian, Karl Marx. He, too, has blue-prints for 
the future, blue-prints a bit vague for mere practising architects 

21 Beyond Good and Evil, 242. 
88 The Will to Power, 898. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 131 

and builders, but all that a philosopher and a prophet ever need. 
Nietzsche foresaw a future which without him might not really 
turn out to be a future. The heart of his work is what he sets 
forth as a new eschatology, a new morality. Our study of what 
Nietzsche wanted in family life, education, economic life, and 
politics has led us naturally and inevitably to the traditionally 
abstract and generalized form of what this anti-philosopher 
wanted to his philosophy. We must try now to come to grips 
with those famous phrases of Nietzsche's which his followers 
have turned into slogans "the Will to Power," "immoral- 
ism," "the transvaluation of all values," "the Superman" 
(Uebermensch}, "the Eternal Recurrence" (cwigc Wicder- 
kunfi). 

Ill 

Nietzsche learned from Schopenhauer that Will is the first 
principle of the Universe, or at least of human life in the Uni- 
verse and that the intellect is the servant of the Will. But 
Schopenhauer's pessimism held human life, and hence Will, 
as an evil, to be palliated if not transcended by "living" as little 
as possible. This near-death in life he would attain by a kind 
of pseudo-oriental quietism, a Nirvana-like state of philosophic 
calm and contempt. Nietzsche early decided he would say 
"Yea" where his Master had said "Nay," that he would accept 
with delight the endless struggles to which his Will invited 
him. What Schopenhauer had called the Will to Life, and 
A Bad Thing, he would call the Will to Power, and A Good 
Thing. 

What is good? All that enhances the feeling of power, the Will to 
Power, and power itself in man. What is bad? all that proceeds from 
weakness. What is happiness? the feeling that power is increasing 
that resistance has been overcome. 



132 NIETZSCHE 

Not contentment, but more power; not peace at any price, but war; 
not virtue, but efficiency (virtue in the Renaissance sense, virtu, free from 
all moralic acid). The weak and the botched shall perish: first principle 
of our humanity. And they ought even to be helped to perish. 23 

The Will to Power, as Nietzsche used the term, is no doubt 
a philosophic rather than a scientific term. It will not satisfy 
contemporary logical positivists and students of semantics. 
Mr. Stuart Chase might ask in vain for a "referent" for this 
Will to Power and Mr. P. W. Bridgman might find that no 
operational test could be performed on it. Yet Nietzsche 
certainly does not use even this grand phrase, the "Will to 
Power," as Kant used the "Thing-in-itself" or Plato "idea." 
He struggles very hard not to hypostatize the term, not to make 
it an absolute; he avoids as meaningless the simple old problem 
of free-will versus determinism; and he makes a genuine effort 
to attain what he calls an "unphilosophical" definition of the 
term. 24 At any rate, though Nietzsche finds himself falling 
back on such fine, vague terms as "good," "bad," "happiness," 
"contentment" and "overcoming" as soon as he tries to define 
the Will to Power, he is perhaps in a position not much worse 
than the physicist struggling with the concept of Energy, of 
the economist struggling with the concept of Wealth. The Will 
to Power is for Nietzsche a convenient blanket-term, a generali- 
zation, a consciously invented abstraction which saved him 
time and enabled him to avoid repetition well, a certain 
amount of repetition. 

The Will to Power manifests itself, according to Nietzsche 

28 The Antichrist, 2. 

24 The key passage, in Beyond Good and Evil, 19, is much too long for 
quotation. The reader is advised to go to the passage himself, and to judge 
how far Nietzsche avoids the usual philosophical traps and trappings. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 133 

(and it is only to be known by its manifestations}^ very diversely 
in the lives of human beings; since it is practically synonymous 
with what we call "life," it is to be found in them all. States- 
man, artist, priest, peasant and banker are all trying to prevail, 
to impose themselves, to arrange their surroundings includ- 
ing surrounding human beings to suit themselves. In some, 
indeed in most men, this effort is a limited one, easily satisfied 
by rough-and-ready adjustment which is hardly more than 
mere staying alive. But there are a few stronger spirits whom 
the Will to Power impels to a wider range of action. These are 
the men who mould society, who determine for their own times, 
and even for posterity, the conditions of life on this earth. 
They must work with recalcitrant material, both human and 
non-human, and they do not commonly perform miracles. 
They are usually groups of men, "they" rather than "he." 
Nietzsche believed firmly, however, in the "great man" theory, 
and he held that sometimes individuals like Napoleon, gifted 
with an extraordinary Will to Power, intelligent and well- 
trained and favored by luck have brought about major 
changes in the conditions of life on this earth. Saint Paul, too, 
was one of these men which brings us to a very important 
point. 

It is possible to distinguish from a study of the past, and 
especially the past of European men, two broadly antithetical 
forms which the Will to Power has taken in the lives of these 
makers of history. The dualism is of course a rough one, as 
Nietzsche will admit, and there are all sorts of shadings in actual 
fact between the two poles we set up for our convenience in 
ordering the facts; but the dualism is convenient, since it cor- 
responds, however roughly, to facts. At one pole is the Will to 



134 NIETZSCHE 

Power as represented by the Warrior; at the other is the Will 
to Power as represented by the Priest. 

The Warrior is essentially noble. He represents for Nietzsche 
the "good" and also, for Nietzsche was as fond of the word 
as any eighteenth-century philosophc the "natural." The 
Warrior is frank and open in his exercise of the Will to Power. 
He has a strong body, good health, handsome features, noble 
bearing; he delights in the use of his strength in bodily combat, 
in the indulgence of all the fine gifts of enjoyment his lusty 
senses afford him. He is capable, at his best, of that flashing 
physical ecstasy so different from the spiritual masturbation 
of the religious mystic which Nietzsche liked to call "Dio- 
nysian." He is guided by honor, not by interest. He loves form, 
punctiliousness, ceremony. He has a keen sense of the Order 
of Rank, and will defend his own high place in that order. 
He hates as strongly and as much as he loves perhaps he 
hates rather more than he loves ? He has a "loathing of dema- 
gogism, of enlightenment, of amiability, and plebeian famil- 
iarity." 25 He is not, except when he hates, very much like 
Friedrich Nietzsche. 

The Priest is essentially ignoble. He represents for Nietzsche 
the "bad" and also the "unnatural." He is physically weak, 
diseased in mind if not in body. He is incapable of clean, 
straightforward voluptuousness. He cannot be truly proud or 
honorable, since he lacks the gifts of body and soul which 
enable him to establish his pride and honor in open combat 
with the Warrior. But his Will to Power is strong, perversely 
strong, and his intelligence is sharpened, as compensation for 
his bodily weakness, into a craftiness, an ignoble ability to 

28 The Will to Power, 943. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 135 

manipulate words and concepts. This craftiness, the servant of 
his Will to Power, he uses to confound and overthrow the 
Warrior. He bears in many ways an extraordinary resemblance 
to a philosopher named Friedrich Nietzsche. 

Contemporary Europe, or rather, the whole civilized world, 
was produced by the collective victory of Priests over Warriors. 
Indeed, and in a sense rather oddly, the Warrior has never yet 
had his rightful place in society. 

This more valuable type has appeared often enough already: but as a 
happy accident, as an exception, never as willed. He has rather been 
precisely the most feared; hitherto he has been almost the terrible in 
itself; and from the very fear he provoked there arose the will to 
rear the type which has now been reared, attained: the domestic animal, 
the gregarious animal, the sick animal man, the Christian. 26 

The clever and degenerate Priests, realizing that they could not 
compete with the Warriors at the Warriors' own level, have 
enlisted the aid of the masses against their "natural" masters, 
and have established themselves as their "unnatural" masters. 
This the priests have achieved by inventing morality and re- 
ligion, and especially their masterpiece, Christian morality and 
religion. The wak are, in the most literal sense, weak and as 
individuals would always go down before the strong the 
good, bodily strong, the nobles, the Warriors. But the weak 
are very numerous, and organized into a collectivity > they can 
overcome the strong. This organization has been achieved in 
the Christian Church and in its contemporary adaptation, the 
religion of democracy and progress. 

We have already seen how Nietzsche works out his explana- 
tion of the nature and triumph of Christianity. 27 The upshot 

*The Antichrist, 3. K See above, pp. 97-108. 



136 NIETZSCHE 

of it all is for Nietzsche that at present the weak, the botched, 
the ignoble seem to represent the actual working-out of the 
Will to Power in human beings. If we loved paradox as much 
as Nietzsche did, we might say that the Will to Power has 
denied, has annihilated, the Will to Power. Clearly this is a 
shocking state of affairs, for which the word "decadence" is 
hardly adequate. What is to be done? 

Well, we might try a little juggling with words. It is true 
that this is a rather priestly way of doing, but it seems to have 
worked for the priests, and we must not be too nice, or the 
Will to Power will perish from the earth. Why not fight fire 
with fire ? a vulgar activity, and certainly expressed in a 
vulgar way unworthy of the subtlest aphorist, but these are 
times of crisis. And it is a simple way, refreshingly, and per- 
haps deceptively, simple. Since the priests have given a good 
name to bad actions, and called them "moral," we will become 
immoralists. Their good shall become our evil, their evil our 
good. But we are really better moralists than they; we are really 
in the right, and we cannot forego the help the established uses 
of language can give us. So we shall call the standards we want 
to have prevail among men a transvaluation of all values 
(Umwertung aller Werte}. 

Such a manipulation of words charged with sentiment is by 
no means easy to carry out consistently, and Nietzsche is fre- 
quently in trouble. Sometimes he is logically and defiantly 
consistent: "evil, be thou my good!" He uses as terms of praise 
words that common usage makes terms of blame. He wants 
men to be cruel, hard, ruthless, pitiless, unscrupulous, deceitful, 
boastful, truculent, sensual, frivolous. Sometimes, however, he 
uses as terms of praise words that common usage makes terms 



WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 137 

of praise. He wants men to be brave, honorable, strong, serious, 
lofty, noble. Sometimes he uses words the Christians them- 
selves regard as good words; and then he has to be very careful 
to explain that these are indeed transvalued values, that he does 
not mean by them what the Christians mean. He can praise 
asceticism, even chastity; but he will have men ascetic only 
towards the coarser indulgences, ascetic only as the athlete who 
trains himself for struggle by disciplining his body; and as for 
chastity "it means that a man's taste has remained noble, that 
in eroticis he likes neither the brutal, the morbid, nor the 
clever." 28 Again, that constant definition by negation. 
Nietzsche can rarely keep on in the affirmative for more than a 
sentence or so. Listen to him attempt to answer a question 
which should bring out to the full his capacity for Dionysian 
Yea-saying: "What is noble ?" 

The fact that one is constantly forced to be playing a part. That one 
is constantly searching for situations in which one is forced to put on 
airs. That one leaves happiness to the greatest number, the happiness 
which consists of inner peacefulness, of virtue, of comfort, and of Anglo- 
angelic-back-parlor-smugness, a la Spencer. That one instinctively seeks 
for heavy responsibilities. That one knows how to create enemies every- 
where, at a pinch even in one's self. That one contradicts the greatest 
number, not in words at all, but by continually behaving differently from 
them. 

Or, from a longer series of answers to the same question : 

We [the noble ones] are not quick to admire. . . . We are ironical 
towards the "gifted"; we hold the belief that no morality is possible with- 
out good birth. . . . We always feel as if we were those who had to 
dispense honors; while he is not found too often who would be worthy of 
honoring us. ... We are capable of otium y of the unconventional con- 

* The Will to Power, 947. 



138 NIETZSCHE 

viction, that although a handicraft does not shame one in any sense, it 
certainly reduces one's rank. . . . We collect precious things, the needs 
of higher and fastidious souls; we wish to possess nothing in common. 
We want to have our own books, our own landscapes. 29 

\ 
Thus is "noble" transvalued from, shall we say, that which 

characterizes the behavior of a conventional, satisfied member 
of an aristocratic European family into that which characterizes 
the behavior of an unconventional, neurotic, dissatisfied and 
intellectual member of a middle-class family, who would like 
very much indeed to be considered an aristocrat? There are 
words much simpler than "transvaluation of all values" which 
one might apply to such a process: "snobbery," for instance. 

Assuming, however, that we know what we mean by the 
"transvaluation of all values," how can it be brought about? 
It seems there are no end of paradoxes in Nietzsche's thought 
that the present condition of human affairs is in itself a kind 
of transvaluation of values. Somehow the weak have come to 
rule the strong; the slaves have overcome the masters. Nature 
failed in her first experiment with nobility. We shall have to 
aid her possibly to supplant her and devise a new nobility, 
a new kind of master-class. These we shall call the "Super- 
men." They will accomplish the final transvaluation of values. 
They will live the bright, clean life their Dionysian prophet 
longed for, of which he caught in moments of inspiration such 
tantalizing glimpses, and which he struggled so hard to cap- 
ture in the feeble words which are all that the greatest of mere 
men can command. 

Do not ask Nietzsche how to make Supermen. They will 
not be made in our time, nor in our children's. They will not 

* The Will to Power, 944, 943. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 139 

come through the kind of biological evolution our Darwinian 
superstitions evoke. Evolution in Darwin's sense can perhaps 
make Englishmen, but certainly not Supermen. They will not 
even be achieved by what later biologists were to call a muta- 
tion. And they will certainly not be achieved by "planning," 
by the exercise of our petty little human tricks for making our- 
selves comfortable. They will come, these pure creatures of the 
Deed, by the miraculous exercise of the Word the poetic 
Word, the prophetic Word. Nietzsche-Zarathustra has not quite 
words enough: 

^ I teach you the Superman. Man is something that is to be surpassed. 
What have ye done to surpass man? 

All beings hitherto have created something beyond themselves; and 
ye want to be the ebb of that great tide, and would rather go back to the 
beast than surpass man? 

What is the ape to man? A laughing-stock, a thing of shame. And 
just the same shall man be to the Superman: a laughing-stock, a thing 
of shame. 

Ye have made your way from the worm to man, and much within 
you is still worm. Once ye were apes, and even yet man is more of an 
ape than any of the apes. 

Even the wisest of you is only a disharmony and hybrid of plant and 
phantom. But do I bid you become phantoms or plants? 

Lo, I teach you the Superman! 

The Superman is the meaning of the earth. Let your will say: The 
Superman shall be the meaning of the earth! 30 

The Superman is not quite Nietzsche's highest flight. There 
is yet the Eternal Recurrence, a concept which Nietzsche seems 
to feel will, if held firmly by the strongest of mere men, enable 
them to live as a kind of bridge to the Supermen. And the 
Supermen themselves, so far as Zarathustra can achieve the 

" Thus Spat(e Zarathustra, Part I, Prologue, 3. 



140 NIETZSCHE 

impossible feat of seeing into their minds-to-come, will nourish 
and fortify themselves in their superhuman world by their 
fearless contemplation of the eternal verity of the Eternal 
Recurrence, "somewhere between golden ice and a pure 
heaven." 31 

Nietzsche's concept of the Eternal Recurrence is an unrefined 
mixture of oriental speculation on metempsychosis, old Euro- 
pean striving for a metaphysical absolute, and misunderstood 
theoretical physics of the late nineteenth century, the latter of 
which held for Nietzsche much the same horrifying fascination 
it held for Henry Adams. Energy, says Nietzsche, was once 
thought to be unlimited. Now we know that it is limited. It is 
eternally active, but it cannot eternally create new forms. 
Therefore it must repeat itself. "Everything has returned: 
Sirius, and the spider, and thy thoughts at this moment, and 
this last thought of thine that all things will return." 32 There 
is no order in the universe, other than this circular process in 
which all things repeat themselves. Notions of growth, of 
change in any direction, of purpose in the universe, are all illu- 
sions, the notions we call "scientific" as well as the notions we 
call "moral." Abandon, as we must, any system of theism, of 
belief in a creator, and we have only this endless and almost 
unbearable Becoming. A thousand Nietzsches have written a 
thousand appeals to create the Superman, and a thousand more 

n "Notes on the Eternal Recurrence," 42, appended, in the English edition, 
to the volume containing The Twilight of the Idols and The Antichrist. 
These may be found in German in A. Baeumler's edition of Nietzsche's re- 
mains, Die Unschuld des Werdens, II, 1296-1351. The quotation above is 
from 1351. 

83 "Notes on the Eternal Recurrence," 22. In Die Unschuld des Werdens, 
II, 1330. 



WHAT NIETZSCHE WANTED 141 

will write again the same appeal, world without end and words 
without end. But no Nietzsche will ever have the slightest 
memory of another Nietzsche. 

It would seem that belief in the Eternal Recurrence might 
tempt its adept to cease trying to change the universe. But this 
grand and complete determinism no more makes Nietzsche 
a determinist in the fleeting life of his consciousness than an 
almost equally grand determinism made Marx a practising 
determinist. On the contrary it spurs him to intense moral 
effort. We must live so that we may be worthy of living again. 
We must fight theism, fight beliefs that deny this life and this 
world. We must struggle to attain the pure heights on which 
alone so stark a doctrine as that of the Eternal Recurrence can 
be endured. We must put off softness and take on hardness. 
We must give up the little hopes, and cherish the great hope of 
hopelessness. We must be what has never been before never, 
at least, during our little rondo in the Eternal Recurrence. We 
must become Supermen once more. 



CHAPTER VI 
NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 

THE critic of Nietzsche's work must not infrequently wish 
that he could imitate his subject's fine careless freedom, 
and cast his reflections in the form of loosely connected apho- 
ristic passages "Nietzsche on being noble," "The best 'Yea' 
is an explosive 'Nay,' " "How to exercise the Will to Power 
without sweating," "Will the Supermen use exclamation- 
marks?" It is dangerous, however, for the critic to desert the 
conventions of his craft to follow even so successful a rebel 
against these and other conventions as was Nietzsche. He had 
better try to bring the Master down to earth, though the Master 
himself was always in flight high above Lake Silvaplana, and 
seemed never to descend, not even to re-fuel. He did at least 
take off from this earth somewhere, sometime. 

He took off from the soil of late nineteenth-century Germany. 
Nietzsche was so far from being out of tune with the spirit of 
his age, unzeitgem'dss, that one is tempted to employ mechani- 
cally Nietzsche's own favorite intellectual device and declare 
that his work is most zeitgemass, most representative of his age. 
He was irritated, indeed infuriated, by the way most of his 
fellow men behaved. But so were most intellectuals of his time. 
Nietzsche wrote well after the brief era of Victorian peace and 
contentment with the world had reached its peak; and besides, 
that feeling of contentment with the world had never captured 
the intellectuals. The bulk of surviving nineteenth-century 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 143 

literature in any language is a literature of protest, and of pro- 
test against most of the things Nietzsche hated middle-class 
morality, industrial civilization, materialism, ostentation and 
vulgarity in art, the leveling process in manners, morals, and 
politics. Nietzsche's originality was largely a matter of intem- 
perate vocabulary. He swore at the herd instead of merely dis- 
trusting the common man. He not only wore his heart on his 
sleeve he wore much less sentimental organs there. He is 
the nineteenth-century intellectual in a frenzy. If you like the 
frenzy, you may of course call it a transcendence. 

Nietzsche's work fits neatly into the late nineteenth century 
in two very broad ways: in its emphasis on growth, develop- 
ment, change, and in its anti-intellectualism. In spite of his 
contempt for history and historians, he was himself a historian, 
or at least a philosopher of history. In spite of his hatred for 
Rousseau and the Rousseauists, he was in his distrust for the 
instrument of thought a direct descendant of the Genevan 
and, no doubt, of old Adam himself. Nietzsche may indeed 
have achieved the transvaluation of all values; but some facts 
are more recalcitrant than others to the easy magic of the prefix 
"trans," and it seems to be a fact that on this earth a man has 
to have contemporaries; which means that a man is contempo- 
rary, that his thoughts are contemporary. Nietzsche was, if 
you like, unfashionable and unpopular in his day; but he was 
very greatly influenced by what was fashionable and popular 
in his day. And those influences worked far more subtly than 
is implied in Nietzsche's proud boast that he was everything 
his contemporaries were not. 

We have already outlined briefly Nietzsche's philosophy of 
history, the curious and sketchy account of man's long rise from 



144 NIETZSCHE 

mere animal to decadent European, about to transform him- 
self into Superman. 1 This sketchy and very intellectual phi- 
losophy of history he himself has summed up in a most 
characteristic passage, elliptical, sardonic, cryptic, yet under 
analysis clear and almost Comtean in its simplicity. It is worth 
quoting at length: 

THE HISTORY OF AN ERROR 

1. The true world, attainable to the sage, the pious man and the man 
of virtue, he lives in it, he is it. 

(The most ancient form of the idea was relatively clever, simple, 
convincing. It was a paraphrase of the proposition "I, Plato, am the 
truth.") 

2. The true world which is unattainable for the moment, is promised 
to the sage, to the pious man and to the man of virtue ("to the sinner 
who repents"). 

(Progress of the idea: it becomes more subtle, more insidious, more 
evasive, // becomes a woman, it becomes Christian.) 

3. The true world is unattainable, it cannot be proved, it cannot 
promise anything; but even as a thought, alone, it is a comfort, an obliga- 
tion, a command. 

(At bottom this is still the old sun; but seen through mist and 
skepticism: the idea has become sublime, pale, northern, Konigsber- 
gian.) 

4. The true world is it unattainable? At all events it is unattained. 
And as unattained it is also unknown. Consequently it no longer com- 
forts, nor saves, nor constrains: what could something unknown con- 
strain us to? 

(The grey of dawn. Reason stretches itself and yawns for the first 
time. The cock-crow of positivism.) 

5. The "true world" an idea that no longer serves any purpose, 
that no longer constrains one to anything, a useless idea that has 
become quite superfluous, consequently an exploded idea: let us abolish it! 

(Bright daylight; breakfast; the return of common sense and of 

*Sce above, pp. 131-141. 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 145 

cheerfulness; Plato blushes for shame and all free-spirits kick up a 

shindy.) 

6. We have suppressed the true world: what world survives? the 
apparent world perhaps? . . . Certainly not! In abolishing the true 
world we have also abolished the world of appearance! 

(Noon; the moment of the shortest shadows; the end of the longest 

error; mankind's zenith; Incipit Zarathustra? 

There is, apparently, a first stage omitted from this summary, 
a period when men lived without worrying about the "true 
world," lived in simple acceptance of the world of the senses, 
the world of willing but of willing innocently undisturbed 
by the necessity of choice between good and evil. Once men 
got to worrying about good and evil, however, the priests could 
begin their sorry work. What is most noticeable in this account 
of men's overcoming the illusions of abstract thought 
Comte's theological, metaphysical, and positivistic stages all 
successively overcome is its highly intellectualist form. His- 
tory seems to be for Nietzsche the working out of an idea, 
men's actions for him to be determined by their response to 
the "first principles" of abstract thinkers. This of course will 
never do, and Nietzsche himself in most of his work goes to 
great pains to escape from a position so annoyingly like a cari- 
cature of Hegel's. 

He falls at other times into what looks like a caricature of 
Darwin's position. Life is a struggle among men exercising to 
the best of their abilities their Will to Power. In this struggle 
the weak and the botched are or should be beaten by the 

1 The Twilight of the Idols, "How the True World* ultimately became a 
Fable.'* Nietzsche, who loved to mock himself a pleasant and easy exercise 
of the Will to Power wrote that in spite of his attacks on history and 
historians, "In my own way, I am attempting a justification of history." 
The Will to Power, 63. 



146 NIETZSCHE 

strong and the competent. What we call morality and religion 
are but the instruments with which the strong subdue the weak, 
and make them minister to the process of evolution, a process 
in which higher and higher types of strength emerge from a 
conflict ever more tense. Or should emerge, for as we have 
already seen, there is a catch in the process. Something has 
gone wrong. Under Christianity, the weak have found a way 
to dodge the Will to Power, or to pervert it. They have ham- 
strung the strong with a religion of gentleness, love, pity, and 
general glorification of weakness. 

Christianity is the reverse of the principle of selection. If the degenerate 
and the sick man ("the Christian") is to be of the same value as the 
healthy man ("the pagan"), or if he is even to be valued higher than 
the latter, as Pascal's view of health and sickness would have us value 
him, the natural course of evolution is thwarted and the unnatural be- 
comes law. ... In practice this general love of mankind is nothing more 
than deliberately favoring all the suffering, the botched and the de- 
generate; it is this love that has weakened the power, responsibility, and 
lofty duty of sacrificing men. 8 

There is an old, old philosophical difficulty unsolved here, the 
difficulty of explaining how the unnatural became natural. 
But Nietzsche is really a consistent anti-philosopher deep down 
underneath, however much he may play with the traditional 
methods and vocabulary of philosophers, and he is willing to 
let the insoluble stay unsolved. Sufficient for him that the 
notion of a struggle for life, so much in the air in his generation, 
is one that he finds satisfying and useful. 

But he will be no conventional Darwinian. In Nietzsche's 
view the English scientist belonged, like all Englishmen, to the 
herd. His doctrine of evolution, as Herbert Spencer has un- 

1 The Will to Power, 246. 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 147 

consciously shown, is no call to battle to prepare the earth for 
the Supermen, but a sedative belief that the process of evolution 
will take care of itself, that our environment is automatically 
turning out better men, that natural selection is still going on. 
(It is doubtful whether Nietzsche ever really read Darwin.) 
What Darwin, according to Nietzsche, failed to understand is 
that the Will to Power is no mere process to be analyzed by 
so-called "scientific method," but something that only poets and 
prophets can get at and stir up. Such a poet-prophet could, 
for instance, find the Will to Power even in the amoebae 
not, of course, by objective observation and the other silly 
superstitions of science, but by intuition. "Among the amoebae 
propagation appears as a process of jetsam, as an advantage to 
them. It is an excretion of useless matter." 4 Wherever the 
seer looks, he sees the Will to Power. He also sees himself, 
perhaps nothing but himself. But that is the prerogative of the 
god-like, even if jealous little scholars call it naive anthropo- 
morphism. 

Nietzsche thought he saw through Darwin as well as through 
the amoebae. Darwin depicted organisms as trying to survive, 
to adapt themselves to an environment, rather than as trying 
to extend their power, to mould their environment, because, 
like most inquirers into nature, Darwin was not an aristocrat. 
Such men "belong to the people, their forefathers have been 
poor and humble persons, who knew too well by immediate 
experience the difficulty of making a living." Small wonder 
that "over the whole of English Darwinism there hovers some- 
thing of the suffocating air of over-crowded England, some- 
thing of the odor of humble people in need and in straits: 

4 The Will to Power, 653. ' The Joyful Wisdom, V, 349. 



5 



148 NIETZSCHE 

This, by the way, is typical of the kind of bright idea which 
makes interesting reading, the kind of thing one finds in 
essayists and critics of the livelier sort. It may even have some 
relation to facts. But there is no way of proving such a relation. 
On the other hand, its origin in Nietzsche's mind is clear 
enough. He was very anxious to show that he was an aristocrat, 
that he had always been able to vivre noblement. He could not, 
however, altogether resist the plebeian temptation to write. 

Nietzsche, then, is a good child of his age. He has a philoso- 
phy of history which is also a doctrine of evolution. It is true 
that in this field his work is somewhat involved and contra- 
dictory, that his evolving organisms and his evolving societies 
really have no business evolving as they do. His positive doc- 
trine, which is eminently philosophical rather than historical 
or biological, comes in the end to a kind of Lamarckianism, 
duly "transvalued" to accord with Nietzsche's sentiments. No 
species ever evolves, but only fit individuals within a given 
species (biologists, being herd-men, have naturally concentrated 
on the species). 6 The fit individuals are not "selected" because 
of any accidental biological variation by which they are pas- 
sively adapted to an environment, but because they possess 
something of their own, something inside them, something 
ultimate and real; not the "consciousness" or the "ego" of com- 
mon philosophical talk, but something we might call "soul" 
if the Christians hadn't spoiled the word, something we shall 
call the "Will to Power." Inspired by the Will to Power, these 
happy individuals dominate, increase their domination by 
struggle, and since they are, almost by definition, lusty folk, 
they exercise the Will to Power in sexual relations, and beget 

The Will to Power, 679-683. 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 149 

strong children who in turn dominate and expound their 
domination. This looks like a procession onward and upward 
in the best nineteenth-century style. But at just this point the 
Devil enters in the shape of Socrates-Paul-Pascal-Spinoza-Kant- 
Darwin, wickedly weakens the strong, and reverses the whole 
process makes it, indeed, hardly more than a legend. The 
Jews, who are an intelligent as well as vicious race, seem to have 
understood matters very well; did they not invent the story of 
Samson and Delilah ? 

II 

Nietzsche's anti-intellectualism makes him as much a child 
of his age as does his evolutionism, an eccentric and spoiled 
child, perhaps, but certainly no changeling of Time. Indeed, 
in Nietzsche as in his tamer contemporaries, both anti-intellec- 
tualism and evolutionism are manifestations of a "climate of 
opinion" hard to pin down with a single descriptive label. To 
use very old philosophical terms, we may say that the nine- 
teenth century was very strongly inspired with a Heraclitan 
feeling that all things flow. At all times, no doubt, men are 
aware of experiencing sameness (or repetition or permanence) 
and also of experiencing difference (or change). Ordinary, 
unreflecting men are aware of both, and do not much bother 
themselves with the question as to which is real, or more real. 
Philosophers, of course, have readily discerned that one sort of 
experience is real, or more real, and the other unreal, or less 
real; but they have not agreed as to which is which. A historian 
may content himself with the statement that the manifesta- 
tions of human feelings about permanence and change in 
observed phenomena vary in different times and places. Note 



150 NIETZSCHE 

well that the manifestations of men's sentiments and opinions 
about change may also be observed phenomena, Plato's opinion 
on the matter, as recorded in the famous metaphor of the 
prisoners in the cave, for instance, is a phenomenon that can 
be observed. Plato, it need hardly be remarked, was all for the 
reality of permanence. 

Now, although no mathematical formulation is possible, the 
historian can be pretty sure of a number of generalizations 
about this matter of permanence and change. The physical 
aspects of Paris, for instance, changed less rapidly in the thir- 
teenth than in the nineteenth century. That is simple and 
certain. Parisians in the thirteenth century felt, or were of the 
opinion, that changes of this sort, and changes in laws, clothes, 
habits, were not very rapid; Parisians in the nineteenth century 
felt, or were of the opinion, that such changes were very rapid. 
This is almost as simple and certain as the fact of changes in 
buildings and streets, and you can verify it from the materials 
of recorded intellectual history. We need not bother ourselves 
about the question (which is insoluble) as to whether "physi- 
cal" change caused "mental" change, or vice versa. We can, 
however, safely take another step, and state that in general 
thirteenth-century Parisians were less favorable towards, less 
desirous of, changes of a great many sorts than were Parisians 
of the nineteenth century. We may extend the scope of the 
generalization, and state that the climate of opinion in all 
Western Europe was less favorable to change in the thirteenth 
than in the nineteenth century. This is not of course to deal 
with absolutes and to say that nothing changed in the thirteenth 
century and that everything changed in the nineteenth century. 
It is a cautious and rather platitudinous generalization about a 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 151 

scries of relations among observed phenomena, which would 
need at least a volume to be given a semblance of what we may 
unphilosophically call reality. 

The anti-intellectualism of the later nineteenth century is a 
part of its attitude towards change, an attitude extraordinarily 
receptive and eager towards all sorts of change. Perhaps in the 
sum total life for Western men changed more rapidly in the 
nineteenth century than it has ever before changed for men on 
this earth. Certainly in the series of phenomena we group 
together as the Industrial Revolution, change was more con- 
tinuously obvious than it has ever been before, so obvious that 
the intellectuals took over from Renaissance Latin the neutral 
term "progress," and made it into an almost-popular religious 
belief in the desirability of change. But traditionally the Euro- 
pean mind, working at the level of theological, philosophical, 
and even, in a sense, "scientific," thought, had tended to reach 
conclusions that seemed inconsistent with the facts of change, 
that seemed to make change undesirable, impossible, unreal. It 
is not by any means clear how far such thought, such "intel- 
lectualism," influenced the course of events. But as a process in 
the minds of certain men and that is after all what Nietzsche 
all his life was analyzing its implications are clear. 

They are perhaps clearest of all in that manifestation of 
intellectualism Nietzsche attacked as "idealism." 7 The ideal- 
ist, in the opinion of such critics as Nietzsche, cannot accept 
the evidence of his senses as to the reality of change. He does 
not want change. He wants to escape the flow of all things, 
and take refuge in the absolute, the eternal, the unchanging. 
He can do this by a trick of his mind, by using what we call 

7 See above, pp. 87-90. 



152 NIETZSCHE 

the intellect to construct after all, out of his experience, which 
must be an experience of change a system of absolutes which 
he calls the "true world." This "true world" is of course a 
false one; but since we critics are good relativists, we must 
recognize that it is only relatively false. That is, as a mental 
construct it affects the lives of those who made it and of those 
who live in it; it is a part of reality. Its "falseness," its "bad- 
ness," means in simplest terms that we don't like the way 
people who hold it, who live in it, behave. We don't, for 
instance, like the way people behave under the influence of 
too much alcohol; we don't like drunks. Similarly, we don't 
like the way people behave under the influence of too much 
philosophical idealism; we don't like Kantians. 

We don't like them because, having persuaded themselves 
that change is unreal, they try to prevent the kind of changes 
we want to bring about. They do not, of course, succeed in 
preventing change; indeed they commonly let themselves and 
us in for the most unforeseen and catastrophic changes. For 
the intellect, as these searchers after the absolute use it, is readily 
satisfied with over-simple formulae, which it erects into "laws" 
of all sorts, moral, political, scientific; it then seeks to make all 
human experience conform to these laws. But human experi- 
ence cannot be so confined this is a fact of experience 
and when a prolonged and serious attempt is made to so con- 
fine it, it accumulates under pressure and finally blows off 
a kind of experience we do not like. 

When we relativists feel like exercising our noblest vocabu- 
lary we have one we accuse the absolutists of trying to 
dry up the well-springs of human life, of intolerance towards 
all who refuse to repeat their meaningless litanies, of a haughty 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 153 

disregard for the fruitful difficulties in attempting the conquest 
of which the true scientist and the true artist are one; we accuse 
them of sterility, of verbalism, of seeking death-in-life, of 
hating adventurousness, novelty, growth; we accuse them of 
being intellectuals, even though we ourselves are by no means 
blacksmiths. 

Nietzsche in his middle period was fond of this "we" 
"we fearless ones," "we free spirits," "we good Europeans," 
though in his later years the "I" sounds out louder and louder, 
until the final crescendo of "Why I am a fatality." But through- 
out his career he is crying out against intellectual absolutism, 
wherever he finds it and he finds it not only in the philo- 
sophical idealists, but in the historians and in the positivists. 
The nineteenth century had, he grants, recognized, though 
often reluctantly, the fact of growth. Even Hegel's was a phi- 
losophy which aspired to explain growth. That, in fact, was 
just the trouble. In his wilder moments, Nietzsche comes close 
to saying what some of his Nazi followers put in his mouth, 
that one must not try to explain anything, at least not with 
words exclamation-marks are enough. But Nietzsche was 
often fairly sober, and as critic rather than as prophet, he 
tried to put into words feelings about the inadequacy of 
much of the thought of the eighteenth and earlier nineteenth 
centuries, feelings which were shared by many of his con- 
temporaries. 

Nietzsche's major point is that all thinking is an arrange- 
ment, an interpretation, of facts (receptor-experiences) which 
must be tentative, changing, relative. Thinking is not a form 
of magic by which the thinker somehow gets out of himself 
and thereby "discovers" static, objective truth. The thing-in- 



154 NIETZSCHE 

itself of Kant, the past "as it really happened" (wic cs cigcntlich 
gewesen) of von Ranke, the eternal and immutable laws of the 
physical universe of the conventional Newtonian physicist, are 
all products of the thinking of Kant, von Ranke, and in the 
last case, of Newton filtered down into an ordinary mind. 
This is not to say that these products of thought are wholly 
"subjective." Indeed, the very antithesis of subject and object 
is merely one of the simple tools of thought, apparently neces- 
sary in the past and perhaps still not useless in the present, but 
an imperfect tool we must try very hard to improve, and cer- 
tainly no more than a tool not a final truth, not a certainty. 
All knowledge, all theories, are but the attempts of human 
organisms to live; and living is inevitably also dying. We may 
perhaps live more fully if we give up the quest for the absolute, 
for certainty. "The question of values is more fundamental 
than the question of certainty." 8 

We can, indeed, go further, and as relativists, give a relativist 
explanation of the search for the absolute. The categories of 
thought, even the transparent dodges of traditional philosoph- 
ical thought, have been useful they have helped men get 
what they wanted. Nietzsche put this neatly in one of the bare 
notes that were collected after his death and published in The 
Will to Power. 

"End and means" As interpretations (not as estab- 

"Cause and effect" lished facts) and in what respect 

"Subject and object" were they perhaps necessary inter- 

"Action and suffering" pretations? (as "preservative meas- 

"Thing-in-itself and appearance" ures") all in the sense of a Will 

to Power. 9 

8 The Will to Power, 588. * The Will to Power, 589. 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 155 

We may say then, according to Nietzsche, that the attaining 
in words of the absolute has had a value, since men who 
say they have attained it seem to act in some respects differently 
from men who do not say they have attained it. We may justi- 
fiably criticize that value, the kind of life it tends to promote. 
Here we must be concerned rather with moral absolutes than 
with the kind of absolute the nineteenth-century physicist 
thought he had attained. Nietzsche sometimes comes near sug- 
gesting that conception of scientific laws as absolutes a con- 
ception certainly held by men like Herbert Spencer, though 
equally certainly not used as a guide by effective practising 
experimental scientists of his time is not a useful one for the 
purposes of scientific investigation. But he himself had no sci- 
entific training, and shared the contempt for science common 
among the aesthetic and the philosophic. He is much more 
concerned to note that as private citizens most scientists ac- 
cepted the moral values of their time, and it is these values that 
he finds most important to attack. 

If then we test with Nietzsche these moral "truths," not by 
their coherence according to the logic with which they are 
spun out, but by the standard of life they set, we shall find that 
they represent "the struggle of sickly, desperate life, cleaving 
to a beyond, against healthier, more foolish, more false, richer 
and fresher life. Thus it is not 'truth' struggling with life, but 
one kind of life with another kind. But the former would 
fain be the higher kind! Here we must prove that some 
order of rank is necessary, that the first problem is the order 
of ran\ among \inds of life" 10 

Here, however, Nietzsche himself becomes an absolutist, 

10 The Will to Power, 592. 



156 NIETZSCHE 

becomes Zarathustra. Having demolished as mere disguises 
for the Will to Power the best and happiest phrases of his 
predecessors the thing-in-itself, scientific laws, objective 
reality, free will, utility, force, justice, God he insists that 
the Will to Power is no such disguise. He has found the 
philosopher's stone, the neat ultimate to which all human 
experience can be reduced. He has been fooling us all along 
by pretending to evade the quest for certainty. As if a philoso- 
pher a German philosopher could be such a renegade! 
He has merely been feigning indifference, in order to catch 
certainty off its guard, and pounce upon it once and for all. 
Kant, it seems to the skeptic, attempted a similar tour dc force. 
Having pursued with interminable skill certainty as pure rea- 
son (rcinc Vernunji) and proving that it could not be caught, 
he turned up with its pelt neatly stuffed in a beautiful job of 
taxidermy called practical reason (pratyischc Vernunji}. And 
now Nietzsche with his Will to Power. Not only the Eternal 
Recurrence repeats itself! 

If you are looking for the key to the universe, the Will to 
Power may be as good a one as has yet been made. If you must 
go to the roots of the matter, the Will to Power may be the 
deepest root. But perhaps there is no key? Perhaps there are 
no roots ? 

Ill 

Nietzsche, then, is not only true to his age in his preoccupa- 
tion with questions of growth, development, flow; he is true to 
his profession of philosopher in his attempt to find for them a 
final answer, to sum up in words experiences that are much 
more than words. The historian and skeptic the two can 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 157 

perhaps be combined in one person may, however, refuse to 
follow Nietzsche in his final flight to the Will to Power and the 
Eternal Recurrence, and content himself with noting and com- 
menting upon what Nietzsche fished up out of the flow of all 
things. 

For Nietzsche's conviction that all things can be reduced to 
manifestations of the Will to Power by no means prevented his 
recognizing the variety and changefulness of human experi- 
ence. In fact, the doctrines of the Will to Power and its curious 
companion and derivative, the Eternal Recurrence, merely 
served him as buttresses for his private hates and loves, as 
colossal extensions of his personality. In his more rapt moods, 
they helped him to live in a prophetic and to his followers 
as well as himself consoling world; in his more polemic 
moods, they helped him feel sure of the pettiness and undesir- 
ability of what he could make out of other people's worlds; and 
at all times they acted as a limitation on his ability to widen and 
deepen his experience that is, they made him intolerant 
but perhaps no more than is essential to make sense out of 
experience. At least a small amount of metaphysics is, like the 
presence of certain minerals in the human diet, perhaps neces- 
sary to human life. And Nietzsche's dose of metaphysics was 
not a very big one. The common opinion, which refuses to rank 
him with men like Kant and Hegel as all philosopher, but puts 
him partly in the field of literature, is well justified. 

He belongs in the field of literature because, for one thing, 
he could write. This is a gift not always lacking in philosophers. 
Plato, James, Santayana, to take a few at random, possess it; 
Aristotle to judge from what we have of him Bentham, 
and Hegel do not. There are great obstacles in the way of a 



158 NIETZSCHE 

German philosopher's writing well. In a sense, no language, 
living or dead, is an adequate instrument for the philosopher. 
Unlike the mathematician and the chemist, the philosopher 
cannot use a special language. Unless he limits himself to sym- 
bolic logic, he has to adapt to his purposes an instrument made 
for the coarser work of ordinary men. This adaptation usually 
takes the form of a technical jargon superimposed on the con- 
ventional vocabulary of the workaday language. The special 
difficulty of German as a philosopher's language or so it 
seems to one who is neither a philosopher nor a German is 
that in German the union of the technical jargon and the com- 
mon tongue is deceptively easy to make. The resultant hybrid 
looks quite healthy and normal, and only with the lapse of 
time does it become clear that the hybrid is sterile. 

Now Nietzsche often wrote like any other philosophical 
German. Much of the two volumes of The Will to Power are 
often written in a technical jargon worthy of Kant, and are 
full of passages that call for labored concentration on the part 
of the reader. But Nietzsche never meant these notes to be 
published as they stood, and they are not representative of him 
at his best. In his earlier work, written under Wagnerian influ- 
ence, he writes like the earnest young German storming the 
heavens and sounding the deeps with the aid of a pair of nice 
words, "Dionysian" and "Apollinian." But with Human, All 
Too Human he learned to shorten his sentences, point them 
with irony, color them with unexpected images, season them 
with common words too undignified for the conventional 
philosopher. With his later works, like The Twilight of the 
Idols, he acquired the knack of making his sentences explode. 

Sometimes, indeed, they explode rather hollowly, and even 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 159 

at his very best Nietzsche's prose always strives a little too hard, 
protests a little too much. He never achieved ease, simplicity, 
inoffensive clarity. But of course he did not want to he 
wanted to offend. Let others strive for the subtle phrasing that 
makes every whisper clear the womanish Sainte Beuve, for 
instance. Nietzsche will shout like a man. We have already 
quoted him so much, and in such varied moods, that the reader 
will hardly need more examples of his writing. As far as the 
limitations of translation will allow, he can come to his own 
conclusions on Nietzsche as a writer. But one more specific 
illustration may be given, one that shows very well his strength 
and his weakness. He is writing of George Sand: 

I have been reading the first "Lettrcs d'un Voyagcur": like everything 
that springs from Rousseau's influence it is false, made-up, blown out, 
and exaggerated! I cannot endure this bright wallpaper style, any more 
than I can bear the vulgar striving after generous feelings. The worst 
feature about it is certainly the coquettish adoption of male attributes by 
this female, after the manner of ill-bred schoolboys. And how cold she 
must have been inwardly all the while, this insufferable artist! She 
wound herself up like a clock and wrote. As cold as Hugo and Balzac, 
as cold as all Romanticists are as soon as they begin to write! And how 
self-complacently she must have lain there, this prolific ink-yielding cow. 
For she had something German in her (German in the bad sense), just 
as Rousseau, her master, had; something which could only have been 
possible when French taste was declining! and Renan adores her! . . . n 

Always the exclamation-mark, of course; perhaps this too is 
German in the bad sense Pelion piled upon Ossa and a few 
Matterhorns but, like Wagner's brasses, it wakes you up. 
The things Nietzsche wrote about, and the way in which he 
wrote about them, make him a writer as well as a philosopher. 
He might, in this respect, be variously catalogued, but we shall 

11 The Twilight of the Idols, "Skirmishes in a War with the Age," 6. 



160 NIETZSCHE 

consider him briefly as a poet, a critic and a title he himself 
very proudly assumed a psychologist. 

Nietzsche wrote a scattering of poems in verse form, which 
collected make a slender volume. They would not in them- 
selves have made him a great figure in German literature. The 
most famous of them, "The Drunken Song," "Venice," and a 
few others, sound well to a foreign ear, and are held by most 
German critics to be technically admirable. Nietzsche could 
often make good moody music with words, if not with the 
medium of formal musical composition. In content his most 
successful poems are mournfully mysterious contemplations of 
night, eternity, the weary riddle of existence, poems thoroughly 
German and romantic. In a lighter vein, poems like the "Songs 
of Prince Free-as-a-bird" are a little too self-consciously Medi- 
terranean, whistle a little too shrilly. 

Also sprach Zarathustra, though written formally in prose, is 
Nietzsche's highest poetic flight. In this work he is attempting 
not so much to persuade, nor even to annoy, his audience, as to 
move it by the incantation of words well beyond logic and the 
dictionary. Zarathustra is a poet-prophet, a divine teacher, a 
most cultivated medicine-man, and his medium is a didactic, 
rhapsodic prose that chants along interminably. To many 
people, he is a great poet, a peer of the Hebrew prophets whose 
style he has, in the opinion of other people, imitated a little 
too deliberately. There is, at any rate, hardly any middle 
ground from which to judge the poetry of Also sprach Zara- 
thustra. Either the book seems to you a masterpiece of insight 
into the highest human aspirations, a brilliant flight into 
regions forever shut to the pedestrian calculations and limited 
emotions of the unresponsive, or it seems to you the elevated 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 161 

maunderings of a man struggling to express the inexpres- 
sible. 

Nietzsche's gifts as a critic, both of literature and of music, 
require for their appreciation a less intimate initiation and 
discipleship than do his gifts as a poet. They are evident 
throughout all his work, scattered everywhere among the un- 
systematic reflections that are assembled to make the great 
majority of his books. He liked in others almost the opposite 
of what he himself produced in his "creative" flights into music, 
poetry, and world-shaking in general; that is, he liked clarity, 
simplicity, naturalness, restraint, incisive wit, mastery of form. 
To use once more a much-used pair of words, he was a "classic" 
critic and a "romantic" practitioner of the arts. 

No doubt because he was himself so self-conscious and arro- 
gant a romanticist a romanticist to the point of squeezing 
the ultimate paradox out of his self-torture he wrote pene- 
tratingly and harshly about European romanticism. In a single 
passage from The Will to Power again, a mere note jotted 
down for future development and polishing he packs into 
a few words a book of the late Irving Babbitt's. 

False "accentuation": (i) In romanticism; this unremitting "expres- 
sivo" is not a sign of strength, but of a feeling of deficiency; 

(2) Picturesque music, the so-called dramatic kind, is above all easier 
(as is also the brutal scandal-mongering and the juxtaposition of facts 
and traits in realistic novels); 

(3) "Passion" as a matter of nerves and exhausted souls; likewise the 
delight in high mountains, deserts, storms, orgies, and disgusting details, 
in bulkiness and massiveness (historians, for instance); as a matter 
of fact, there is actually a cult of exaggerated feelings (how is it that in 
stronger ages are desired just the opposite a restraint of passion?); 

(4) The preference for exciting materials (Erotica or Socialistica or 
Pathologica)'. all these things are the signs of the style of public that is 



162 NIETZSCHE 

being catered for to-day that is to say, for overworked, absentminded, 
or enfeebled people. 
Such people must be tyrannised over in order to be affected. 12 

Or in a single sentence, "Romantic art is only an emergency 
exit from defective 'reality.'" The substance of this remark 
can be found in many critical writings before Nietzsche; his 
own art and skill, his ability to add spice to a commonplace, 
lie revealed in the little word "emergency." 13 Or finally, an 
aphorism deceptively simple, "Both classically and romantically 
minded spirits two species that always exist cherish a 
vision of the future; but the former derive their vision from the 
strength of their time, the latter from its weaknesses." 14 

Nietzsche is at his best in these brief and pungent remarks 
about his fellow-artists. He has, it is true, a grand, philosophical 
generalization he often uses as a measuring-rod in criticism, 
the famous distinction between "Dionysian" and "Apollinian." 
He can sometimes pursue the distinction into wordy disquisi- 
tions rather remote from concrete works of art, as in the last 
part of The Birth of Tragedy, and in The Will to Power, where 
he returns to worry this, his first philosophic love. But as such 
distinctions go, his is by no means the most sterile effort that 
men have made to put into words a contrast as real as any in 
experience the contrast between the cathedral of Chartres 
and the Parthenon, between Shakespeare and Sophocles, be- 
tween Mozart and Wagner. If there is a possible "philosophy 
of art," Nietzsche's deserves a high rank. Here he can forget 
to preach, or perhaps better, preach in terms of an emotional 

131 The Will to Power, 826. 
18 The Will to Power, 829. 
14 Human, All Too Human, "The Wanderer and his Shadow," 217. 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 163 

response to things immediately observed, known. Here he can 
use to the full his craftsman's skill with words, words that 
evoke for most of us earthly even earthy experience in a 
way that the Will to Power, down-going and over-going to 
the Superman, and the Eternal Recurrence, do not. When 
Nietzsche says that the music of Wagner sweats, we think, 
even if we are offended by having the thought suggested to us 
in this way, of Wagner's music; when Zarathustra says "All 
'It was' is a fragment, a riddle, a fearful chance until the 
creating Will saith thereto: 'But thus I would have it!'," we 
just "think"; unless, indeed, we are already drugged into a 
happy stupor well beyond, and possibly above, thought. 15 

These same craftsman's gifts they are hard to describe, 
but they include ability to note accurately how men actually 
behave, what they do as well as what they say, and to make a 
synthesis, a coherent description of that behavior, which in turn 
can be verified in experience these same gifts appear in Nie- 
tzsche's work as a psychologist, or as a politique et moraliste. 
Here again he is by no means content to do the job of the 
observer, the describer. He is perhaps more interested in get- 
ting men to behave as he feels they should behave than in 
learning how, and if possible why, they behave as they do. The 
latter job he sometimes described as the petty task of science. 
But he himself was in some ways too much of a scientist or a 
"realist" to go ahead planning for men and Supermen 
without paying any attention to the kind of men surrounding 
him. He had not much skill at mixing with these men, and 
for the purist in empirical research, he skimped sadly the first 
steps in an inquiry, first-hand, intimate, habitual contact with 

u See above, p. 64 and Thus Spafe Zarathustra, Part II, chap. xlii. 



164 NIETZSCHE 

what is studied. But his shyness and aloofness were rather bars 
to his using men than to his understanding them. He was not, 
save in his last few years, an actual recluse. He had excellent 
opportunities to observe quite a variety of men, especially edu- 
cated Germans, and his inability to mingle freely and pleasantly 
with them gave him some of the advantages of detachment 
if, indeed, it was not in fact itself a kind of detachment. Wit- 
ness, for instance, the basic accuracy with which he sized up 
the people who came to Bayreuth. 16 He describes these Wag- 
nerites in the acid terms of caricature, but it is caricature, and 
not fantasy. He can always see enough of himself in others to 
recognize their weaknesses. 

Nietzsche's great work as a moralist is the study of the "in- 
tellectual" as a type; and here his own experience and his own 
temperament give him ample clinical materials. The great 
generalization which he characteristically produced out of his 
study we have insisted that as a philosopher he was always 
aiming at the most comprehensive generalization is his con- 
clusion that the intellectual par excellence, priest in older times, 
reformer, politician, writer, professor, socialist, democrat, hu- 
manitarian in our own, uses the instrument of thought to build 
up out of his desires a neat picture of what he calls the "true 
world" (or the beautiful and the good, or right, or the classless 
society) and then attempts to persuade, or force, everybody to 
live as in his picture; that he is usually quite unconscious of 
going through this process; that in the process he commonly 
neglects facts that simply are, and that therefore when he and 
others try to live as in his picture, they stumble into all sorts of 
things they hadn't thought were there at all; and finally, that 

"Sec above, p. 114. 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 165 

although in some senses this process seems a necessary part of 
human life, in the modern world it has been carried to a point 
where it threatens the existence of what we call civilization. 

For men do try to live according to the picture the intellectual 
makes of the "true world"; or rather, they try to live according 
to the pictures the intellectuals make, for there are many of 
them, and they are not all the same. It is fortunately true that 
the overwhelming majority of the things people do, even in 
modern Europe, are not at all influenced by the work of the 
intellectuals. The routine of getting a living, of marrying and 
begetting, of loving and hating and doing^ is still something 
older and deeper than our very nicest theories, is something for 
which we must use unsatisfactorily vague terms like instinctive, 
habitual, traditional ; or in post-Nietzschean terms, these things 
are a matter of conditioned reflexes, persistent aggregates. But 
there remains a marginal area in human affairs, and a very 
important one, since it enters into the activities of men organ- 
ized in social and political groups, in which the pictures made 
by the intellectuals seem to have an effect on men's actual 
conduct. 

Here Nietzsche's thought bifurcates. At times he assumes a 
position which seems the logical result of his previous analysis, 
as it does that of most contemporary anti-intellectualist attacks 
on political reform, "planning," constitution-making and other 
conscious efforts to make blue-prints for conscious political 
"builders." This is the position of what must be called con- 
servatism. Make no changes, especially no deliberate, logically 
worked-out changes. Distrust the theorist; trust the practical 
man, the man of affairs, above all the man who has roots, the 
peasant and the aristocrat, and the man who has a manual skill, 



166 NIETZSCHE 

the artisan and the surgeon. Let nature take its course, even if 
it is a hard course. There is some power in the world, of which 
we only know that we cannot yet know it as we know when 
we think according to logic, but which makes for rightness 
if we only let it alone. There is a vis medicatrix naturae, which, 
especially in matters moral, economic, political, is a better 
physician for ailing humanity than Jefferson, or Mill, or 
Spencer, or in Nietzsche's eyes the most harmful quack of 
them all Saint Paul. 17 

Nietzsche does not long occupy a position so sensible and 
unheroic as this. Having decided that all other physicians to 
humanity were quacks, he cannot leave humanity without a 
physician. Having shown the inadequacies of all other pic- 
tures of the "true world," he makes one of his own. It is not a 
very clear picture, but as we shall see, it is well enough drawn 
for the Nazis to put it to uses the Master would most probably 
have found very objectionable. It is a picture of a world surely 
as unreal as ever a German philosopher spun out of his inner 
consciousness, a world in which, by a final exercise of the will 
to neglect facts, men become Supermen. It is a grand world 
of the paradox made flesh, in which the immoral is moral, the 
weak strong and the strong weak, and the Fact lies down with 
the Ideal, each having devoured the other. 

17 Nietzsche takes something like this position time and time again through- 
out his work, especially in praise of "tradition" and in condemnation of 
"theory." It appears very early: "All states are badly managed when other 
men than politicians busy themselves with politics, and they deserve to be 
ruined by these political amateurs." Thoughts Out of Season, "Schopenhauer 
as Educator," chap. vii. An admirable passage on the authority of tradition 
"which is obeyed, not because it commands what is useful to us, but merely 
because it commands" is in The Dawn of Day, 9. See also the collected 
fragments, vol. XI of the Wer\c (Grossoctavausgabe) , 36. 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 167 

It is not, however, fair to Nietzsche to conclude on such a 
note as this. His work is packed with admirable observations 
on how men behave here and now, before they give way to the 
Supermen. They are one-sided, unsympathetic observations, 
not by any means to be recommended as a complete course in 
the study of human nature. But they bring to light perhaps 
more clearly than anywhere else in our literature, some of the 
basic illusions men live by. Had Nietzsche never produced 
anything but The Genealogy of Morals, and especially the 
admirable chapter on "Ascetic Ideals," he would still have 
to be ranked high among writers who have helped us know 
ourselves. 

IV 

Nietzsche's work is a great armory, by no means filled en- 
tirely with weapons of precision; there are some fowling-pieces 
of great age, and even a few sling-shots, as well as some very 
accurate modern pieces. On the whole, his light guns are more 
effective than his heavy artillery, though the latter makes a very 
loud noise. To drop the metaphor: Nietzsche's work contains 
a great variety of ideas, sometimes mutually contradictory, 
difficult if not impossible to reduce to a "system," made still 
more bewilderingly varied by the aphoristic form in which 
they are cast. This variety is the reflection of a many-sided 
temperament. Nietzsche had an excellent mind, well if rather 
bookishly trained, great aesthetic sensibility, a natural gift for 
writing, strong emotions which he could focus in the sacva 
indignatio we often call moral purpose, an untrained body, an 
unstable nervous system, a total personality never successfully 
conditioned to living together with anyone not in the fam- 



168 NIETZSCHE 

ily, not in the occupational or social group, not in church or 
state. He had, finally, a devouring ambition to be admired, a 
thirst for disciples, a will to shine which, as the Will to Power, 
he built up into a characteristic philosophical ultimate, and 
which, syphilis aiding, ended in paranoia. 

Among the stresses and strains which compose the unending 
conflicts that made Nietzsche, and perhaps made him great, 
there is one which will serve well to sum up the man and his 
work. This is the conflict between the observer and the re- 
former, between the artist and the prophet, between Nietzsche 
and Zarathustra. It is a conflict discernible, no doubt, in less 
heroic proportions, in the lives of all men. It is a conflict most 
of us hardly feel, and which we resolve comfortably in the 
routine of living. It is not, by the way, an ultimate. We are 
using the dualistic terms in which we describe the conflict as 
mere conveniences in putting Nietzsche and his work within 
common experience. 

The observer has his eye and all his other organs of sense 

first of all on the immense body of receptor-experiences we 
call facts. He does not merely passively record or report these 
facts, but tries to arrange them as uniformities put in relation 
to a conceptual scheme in such a way that they can be "verified" 

that is, experienced again as receptor-experiences by himself 
and others, but this time in an order. The observer's test for 
whether his order is "true" is a relational and instrumental one. 
Its relation with facts must be continuous; if it ties a falling 
barometer and rain together in the formula, a falling barometer 
is followed by rain, rain must always follow a falling barometer 
or the order ("theory") is not altogether true, and must be 
modified, at least to some extent. Its instrumental character is 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 169 

a more complicated matter, but is always, for the type of person 
we call the observer, subordinated to its relation with facts. 

The reformer, on the other hand, subordinates the relational 
character of the order he constructs out of experience to its 
instrumental character. The extreme type of reformer may 
even refuse to bother himself about the relational character of 
his "order," his "theories." If he has decided that a falling 
barometer ought to be followed by rain, he will do something 
about it almost anything, in fact, but observe the conditions 
under which rain actually falls. He will construct complicated 
and lovely barometers, and try to make everybody use them; 
he will pass a law requiring falling barometers to be followed 
by rain; he will define rain to include fair weather; he will 
refuse to admit that it is raining, unless the barometer has 
fallen, or that the barometer has fallen, unless it is raining. 

We have, of course, caricatured the reformer. But any full 
treatment of the distinction we have attempted to make be- 
tween the observer and the reformer would run into a volume. 
The important thing here is to note that though all conscious 
thinking is an ordering of experience, some kinds of thinking 
are directed by the thinker rather towards sorting experience 
into recognizable uniformities which are repetitive, verifiable, 
predictable, and which seem to the thinker to possess these 
qualities whether he wants them to or not; and that some 
kinds of thinking are directed by the thinker towards sorting 
experience into an order which is a modification of experience 
into something "better," something which he feels can be made 
true for himself and others, something which he rather proudly 
holds comes from himself (through God, perhaps) or from 
"things" independent of himself. We have, perhaps, done no 



170 NIETZSCHE 

more than put rather confusingly the well-worn distinction 
between "objective" and "subjective" which has exhausted 
generations of philosophers, but seems itself inexhaustible. 

It is a useful distinction, even though no one ever put his 
finger or his mind on either a subject or an object. Con- 
cretely, we can recognize that a biologist attempting to find 
order in human heredity is likely to think "objectively" and 
that a preacher of eugenics attempting to get human beings to 
breed as he wants them to breed is likely to think "subjectively." 
The two kinds of thinkers are constantly borrowing one from 
the other, are indeed frequently the same person. But as types 
they certainly exist, and not only in the stark contrast between 
the scientist and the preacher. Literature is as much a matter of 
good observing as is science, and some very great writers, like 
Shakespeare, have been much more interested in what is than 
in what it ought to be. Even philosophers have their grada- 
tions; Aristotle was a better observer than was Plato. Nietzsche 
was a better observer than Zarathustra. 

The contrast we have set up between Nietzsche the observer 
and Nietzsche the reformer is by no means an imaginary one. 
It was real enough so that it must have contributed to his 
mental suffering, to have given him a kind of split personality. 
There are people so immersed in understanding and coping 
with their experience of what is, that they do not bother them- 
selves much with what ought to be; and there are people so 
immersed in satisfying themselves about what ought to be that 
they are not much disturbed by what is. There are people who 
can live happily in this world, and others who can live happily 
in any number of other worlds. Nietzsche could do neither. 
He was too acute an observer, too sensitive an artist, to spin 



NIETZSCHE-IN-HIMSELF 171 

out theories without regard for facts; and he was too bitten 
with reforming zeal, too impatient, too exalted, perhaps at 
bottom too insanely or divinely convinced that he alone was the 
measure of all things, to accept the humbling limitations im- 
posed by regard for facts. And so he made his unhappy down- 
going and over-going to that strangest of "true worlds," the 
world of the Supermen, beyond good and evil, beyond you 
and me, beyond himself. 

But not beyond an Italian socialist hack, not beyond an 
Austrian corporal. One of the strange, and to some of us, dis- 
couraging things about the activities of reformers is the unpre- 
dictable effects their labors so often have in practice. The 
noblest dreams of the prophet turn into nightmares when they 
come true. Nietzsche called for the Supermen. Mussolini and 
Hitler answered the call. It does not much matter that in all 
probability Nietzsche would have scorned them as perverters 
of his doctrine, would have opposed them bitterly. It does not 
even matter that had Nietzsche never written these men would 
in all probability have come to power much as they did. They 
have found a use for Nietzsche, a use he probably never intended 
his words to provide. That is a risk all men run who build with 
words, but it is a risk peculiarly great for those who out of 
their discontents build with grand words a refuge from this 
poor world, a noble castle in the philosophic air. Such castles 
are often roomy and comfortable, but very hard to keep clean. 



CHAPTER VII 
THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 

BIOGRAPHERS of Nietzsche, including even Charles 
Andler, who took six volumes to tell his story, stop 
most inconveniently with the death of their hero in 1900, or 
indeed with his entrance into an asylum for the insane in 1889. 
Yet and this is hardly a metaphor, and certainly not a para- 
dox Nietzsche's life only began with his insanity and death. 
The depressing notion that the really great thinkers are ignored 
or reviled by their own generation, and appreciated only by the 
next generation, seems not true generally in the history of 
thought. But for Nietzsche it is true in all its simplicity. The 
contrast between the obscurity of his name during his lifetime 
and the continuing greatness of his reputation since his death 
is at least as striking as with a very different, and even more 
obscure, contemporary, Gregor Mendel. Nietzsche is still 
talked about and written about. Diminishing returns have 
not yet set in at least, not to the point of lessening the pro- 
duction of books about him. Heinrich Mann could write in 

1939: 

One thinker and writer has lived on for fifty years since the con- 
clusion of his work, and nearly forty since his death. As if constantly 
present, he has occupied the attention of a world less and less interested 
in the past. One cannot be considered present merely because one's works 
are still read and historically assimilated. The number of a man's adher- 
ents and imitators proves nothing for his work or its fruitfulness. What 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 173 

is the test? The work of a man who has passed on grows and changes; 
he is still finishing it from beyond. It has long since moved from the 
point where we once found it, when we were young and Nietzsche was 
alive. 1 

This passage would no doubt have pleased Nietzsche im- 
mensely, so much indeed that he would probably have for- 
borne to point out that much of it is nonsense. For Nietzsche, 
as we have seen, burned to be read, to have disciples, to make 
a stir in the world. Before he went mad only a mere handful 
had read him, only the inept Peter Cast still looked like a 
disciple, and he had clearly made no stir at all in the world. 
Two of his boyhood friends, Rohde and Deussen, nice, straight- 
forward German Herren Professoren without any of his gifts 
of thought or style, were actually much better known in Ger- 
man intellectual circles than the author of Zarathustra. Once, 
long ago, he had been qne of the bright young men around the 
Master of Masters, and such little fame as he had went back to 
the book in which he had announced Wagner Dionysos as the 
savior of German culture. Certainly none of Nietzsche's sub- 
sequent books were successes. Wagner himself is said to have 
remarked of the failure of Human, All Too Human, "Now 
you see Nietzsche is read only when he defends our cause; 
otherwise, no." 2 Wagner, recently dead, was in apotheosis in 
the late eighties, and the Wagnerites were conquering the earth. 
But Friedrich Nietzsche was still as obscure as if there had 
never been a Triebschen. His books, which were to do better 
things than Jesus, Buddha, or Mohammed had done, had to be 

1 H. Mann, "Presenting Nietzsche," The Living Thoughts of Nietzsche 

(i939), I- 

1 Daniel Halevy, The Life of Friedrich Nietzsche, 209. 



174 NIETZSCHE 

brought out at the expense of the author. Publication at the 
author's own expense usually marks the author as a dilettante 
or an unread scholar, as an unimportant man, perhaps even 
as a crank, a crackpot, a failure; and Nietzsche knew, with in- 
sane certainty, that he was not an unimportant man, not a 
crank, not a failure. 

There were, in the last few years of Nietzsche's active life, 
some signs of coming fame. Georg Brandes, the Danish critic 
whose European reputation was already established, probably 
deserves the distinction of having discovered Nietzsche. 3 It is 
true that Nietzsche himself helped the discovery by having his 
publisher send copies of Beyond Good and Evil to various dis- 
tinguished literary persons. This by no means uncommon 
practice is rarely, one suspects, very fruitful. But Nietzsche 
had the satisfaction of receiving intelligent letters of apprecia- 
tion from Taine and Brandes, and through Brandes, from 
Strindberg. Brandes actually lectured on Nietzsche's ideas at 
Copenhagen, and the two kept up a lively correspondence until 
Nietzsche went mad. Nietzsche had, then, the pleasure of hear- 
ing the first faint rumblings of the great noise his name was to 
make in the world. But by the time Brandes got around to 
printing, in 1889, a long article on "Nietzsche: An Essay on 
Aristocratic Radicalism," his subject was no longer able to 
understand what fame meant. 

There is indeed no danger that the Nietzscheans will let us 
forget the way the world neglected the Master. We must not 
exaggerate. Even during his lifetime Nietzsche was not abso- 
lutely unheard. The conspicuous critics left him alone, but 

* At any rate, Brandes later claimed the distinction for himself. G. Brandes, 
Friedrich Nietzsche. Translated from the Danish by A. C. Chater (n.d.), 59. 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 175 

every now and then a magazine brought up his name, and in 
1880 a writer in the popular weekly Die Gegenwart gave five 
whole columns to this "modern 'free spirit' . . . , whose name 
is not unknown to our literature." 4 His little circle of friends, 
and the larger number he no longer considered his friends, 
served to spread his reputation. Brandes's article on Nietzsche 
the aristocratic radical was translated into German and pub- 
lished in April 1890 in the Deutsche Rundschau^ equivalent 
in America to the accolade of the Atlantic or Harper's. By the 
beginning of the 1890*5 little trickles from various sources had 
begun to unite into a stream, Nietzsche's reputation grew with 
amazing speed after 1890, but it by no means sprang up over 
night. 

The periodicals took him up first, and made his name quite 
suddenly the fashion among the kind of people who need to 
talk fashionably so much so that when ten years later the 
distinguished philosopher Hans Vaihinger wrote a book about 
Nietzsche, he had to defend himself against the charge of 
writing about "a merely fashionable writer" (ein blosser Mo- 
deschrijtsteller}? Die Gegenwart published articles on Nie- 
tzsche in 1889 and in 1891, the second by a well-known writer 
of Swedish origin, Ola Hansson. Lou Salome could scarcely 
let a chance like this slip by. It began to look as though 
Nietzsche had been a great man after all. She published in 
the Sunday Supplement of the Vossische Zeitung during Janu- 
ary 1891 some articles on Nietzsche which were shortly after- 

* H. Herrig, "Ein moderner Freigeist," Die Gegenwart (August 7, 1880), 
XVIII, 85. For other examples see M. Wirth, "Die Zukunft der Rcminisccnz: 
Variationen uber Themen von Friedrich Nietzsche," Die Kunstwart (1888), 
II, 52; Das musi\alischc Wochenblatt (1887), XVIII, 441. 

5 H. Vaihinger, Nietzsche als Philosoph (1902), 13. 



176 NIETZSCHE 

wards expanded into a book. It was by no means a bad book, 
rather pretentious philosophically, but sensible about Nietzsche 
as a person. Nietzsche's Wagner heresies were attracting more 
and more attention in the musical press. They were still 
heresies his remarks about Bizet's superiority over Wagner 
were of course beneath disdain but they made good copy. 
The Allgemeine Zcitung des Judentums published in 1892 
what is probably the first essay on Nietzsche and the Jewish 
question. The quality magazines were now working the new 
vein very hard. The Deutsche Rundschau^ Nord und Sud, the 
Preussische Jahrbucher, Westermanns Monatshe]te assigned to 
him long articles by well-known writers. One of these was 
Eduard von Hartmann, a now almost forgotten professor of 
philosophy, who had synthetized one of the most extraordinary 
brews ever made, in which Hegel, Schopenhauer, and the in- 
ductive method so successful in the natural sciences were mixed 
Hartmann's word was "reconciled." Hartmann was already 
going out of fashion, and Nietzsche was coming into fashion, 
but as Hartmann was not altogether aware of this, he treats 
Nietzsche soberly and without bitterness Nietzsche's "sys- 
tem" he found, of course, inadequate, and not even new. 6 
In 1892 and 1893, the original German volumes of Max 

a j. Mahly, "Friedrich Nietzsche," Die Gegenwart (Sept. 7, 1889), XXXVI, 
148; O. Hansson, "Friedrich Nietzsche und der Naturalismus," Die Gegcn- 
wart (May 2, 1891), XXXIX, 275; G. Adler, "Friedrich Nietzsche der Social- 
Philosoph der Aristokratie," Nord und Sud (March, 1891), LVI, 225; T. 
Achelis, "Friedrich Nietzsche," Westermanns Monatshejte (April, 1894), 
LXXVI, 99; E. von Hartmann, "Nietzsches neue Moral," Preussische ]ahr- 
bticher (May, 1891), XLVII, 505. This is by no means an exhaustive list. See 
H. Albert, "Friedrich Nietzsche," Mercure de France (Jan. 1893), VII, 47, 
notes 2 and 3 for a good bibliography of the "discoverers" of Nietzsche in 
Germany. 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 177 

Nordau's Degeneration appeared, and spread rapidly in trans- 
lation through all the important languages. Nordau's huge 
public learned that Nietzsche, though undoubtedly a literary 
genius, had been insane all his life, that his books were written 
during acute spasms of dementia, that he was a characteristi- 
cally modern degenerate. Nordau seems to have known nothing 
of Nietzsche beyond some of his more notorious books, and the 
contemporary periodical literature we have just described. 
Degeneration at least further stimulated interest in Nietzsche. 
It seems to have made Elizabeth all the more determined to 
publish at once what she considered the real truth about her 
brother, her sound, steady, normal brother, whose health had 
been destroyed by bad eyesight, hard work, and malevolent 
enemies. The first of her piously untrustworthy biographies 
of her brother appeared in 1895. 

Nietzsche had become one of the spiritual heroes of the 
1890'$, a decade which professed to distrust both spirit and 
heroes. In 1897, Ferdinand Tonnies began a pamphlet on "The 
Cult of Nietzsche" with the words: 

A philosophical writer who is read by many is already a remarkable 
thing. But suppose this writer should be read with enthusiasm, that 
readers should call themselves disciples, that his thoughts should be 
received as an emancipation and a revelation, that these people should 
feel that in the thinker they had found a leader (Fuehrer) ? 7 

The kind of people whose pushing adulation of Wagner had 
so sickened Nietzsche at Beyreuth were now worshipping 
Nietzsche himself. And the object of their worship, secluded 
once more under Elizabeth's loving care, was dragging out his 
life quite unconscious of this sudden glory. It is a situation 

7 F. Tonnies, Der Nietzsche-Kultus (1897), J * 



178 NIETZSCHE 

that tempts to rhetoric; and the Nietzscheans have been quite 
willing to improve the situation. How the Master, had he 
known what was going on, would have scorned this unwelcome 
tribute from the herd! How his irony would have whipped 
back these fawning fools! Perhaps. But success has achieved 
some remarkable transvaluation of values on its own account. 
The gods, we may believe, find pleasing the incense that 
reaches their nostrils- above the sweat of their worshippers. It 
is possible that Nietzsche would have enjoyed his success. 

From Germany Nietzsche's reputation quickly spread to 
France, a country whose intellectuals have ever since Madame 
de Stael been much more closely in touch with German 
thought than is commonly realized though recent pronounce- 
ments from Vichy should drive the fact home to all. Here, too, 
as in Germany the periodical press led the way, and in the early 
1890'$ called attention to the remarkable writer who could 
make the ponderous German language flash into aphorisms 
worthy of a La Rochefoucauld. Barely behind the French 
were the English, whose magazines and reviews began to take 
up Nietzsche by the middle of the decade. 8 With the interest 
of writers in French and English stirred, Nietzsche's European 
reputation was made. Translation into the major modern lan- 
guages soon followed. 

At his death in 1900, Nietzsche's reputation had conquered 

"For instance: T. de Wyzewa, "Friedrich Nietzsche, le dernier metaphysi- 
cien," Revue bleue (7 Nov. 1891), XLVIII, 586; J. de Nethy, "Nietzsche- 
Zarathustra," Revue blanche (Apr. 1892), II, 206. G. B. S.[haw], "Nietzsche 
in English," Saturday Review (n Apr. 1896), LXXXI, 373. The decisive 
article in English it is still worth reading appeared as "The Ideals of 
Anarchy Friedrich Nietzsche" in the Quarterly Review (Oct. 1896), 
CLXXXIV, 299. 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 179 

almost all the elaborate channels of publicity in the modern 
world. His works were appearing in new editions; books were 
being written about his life and his ideas; a steady stream of 
articles and reviews was flowing through the periodical press; 
and he was about to achieve the final consecration, about to be 
the subject of a doctoral dissertation. 9 His name was heard from 
pulpits and from lecture-platforms. Editorial writers were 
finding him an admirable subject for indignation. He had 
arrived. A French critic wrote of him in 1893: 

No matter what critical review one thumbs, one finds Nietzsche's 
name in the table of contents. His work, commented on even in its 
minor details, exalted to the skies by some, attacked energetically by 
others, has provoked a whole literature of pamphlets, booklets, articles. 
Every day the army of his disciples and imitators increases. . . . The 
anthologies are adorned with his sayings, the poets make use of his 
magnificent aphorisms as epigraphs for their verses. 10 

II 

We are today hesitant about referring to the "influence" of a 
writer, partly no doubt because of the influence of Nietzsche 
himself. Ideas are no longer for us the wonder-workers they 
were for our grandfathers. We distrust studies in the affiliation 
or genealogy of ideas. Some of our more innocent anti-intel- 
lectuals apparently hold that all generalizations except 
perhaps those of Marx when properly interpreted are increas- 
ingly useless disguises for our simpler lusts. Yet in those impor- 

9 One of the first of these was W. Jesinghaus, Der innere Zusammenhang 
dcr Gedan\cn vom Uebermcnsch bci Nietzsche. Inaugural Dissertation at 
the University of Bonn (1901). There have been dozens and dozens of them 
since and on some very remarkable phases of Nietzsche's life and influence. 
My own favorite is F. Sprengel, Nietzsche und das Ding-an-sich (1933). 

10 H. Albert, "Friedrich Nietzsche/* Mercure de France (Jan. 1893), VII, 
47-48. 



l8o NIETZSCHE 

tant moments of carelessness which reveal the habits of routine, 
uninspired, and useful thinking, the most conscientious anti- 
intellectual is likely to let drop the phrase "influence of the 
ideas of" so-and-so. Nietzsche's influence on the world, in the 
sense of mere stir in the world, has been considerable, and very 
varied. Without attempting yet to come to grips with the 
problem of what relation if any that stir has had on events, 
on the actions of men, we may try to see first what kind of men 
the discoverers of Nietzsche were, what they found in him in 
this first decade of his fame. 

The intellectuals of the 1890'$ were not as wicked as they 
aspired to be. What strikes one looking back on them from the 
1940'$ is the energy, liveliness, indeed the optimism, with which 
they sought disillusion. They could defy most enjoyably the 
philistine conventions of middle-class society. The middle 
class was still there, apparently solidly established and well 
worth defying. Anarchism was one of the very best of attitudes 
for defying the middle class. On the whole, it seemed to give 
more substantial nourishment to the pride of the defiant artist, 
writer, and thinker than socialism though of course, the two 
together made a nice combination. Nietzsche's ideas seemed to 
most of those who read him in the 1890'$ a new and attractive 
variant of anarchism, an aristocratic, radical, aesthetic anar- 
chism, unsullied by the vulgar conspiratorial atmosphere and 
silly humanitarian aims of traditional anarchism. Nietzsche 
appears first, therefore, in the history of opinion as the complete 
anti-philistine, the emancipated poet of dionysian joy, the mas- 
ter of those who live. 

He appears, of course, in no such simple terms. Brandes 
called him the "aristocratic radical," a phrase which gave 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 181 

Nietzsche himself much pleasure. To an early English re- 
viewer, he was the "anarchist par excellence." To Mr. Shaw, 
one of his first English admirers, he was the "champion of 
privilege, of power, of inequality." To von Hartmann he was 
the philosopher of "radical egotism," whose Superman was 
really a modernized version of Plato's philosopher-king, be- 
come philosopher-tyrant. To Franz Mehring, already well- 
known as a Social-Democrat historian, he was "the philosopher 
of finance-capitalism (Philosoph des Gross fyipitals)." To 
Dilthey he had fished up the notion of the Superman from 
Greek and Renaissance history, and turned it into a character- 
istically modern form of irrational individualism. To the 
youthful Andre Gide he was the immoralist, the man who had 
cut through conventions in morals as the earlier scientists had 
cut through the superstitions of astrology and alchemy. 11 

Not to all his critics were words like "anarchism," "individ- 
ualism," "egotism," words of praise. Nietzsche shocked and 
infuriated many people who could not be disarmed by his 
literary gifts. An early critic named Tiirck is as violent as any 
opponent of Nietzsche has ever been. Nietzsche according to 
Tiirck is a degenerate madman, an apologist for all sorts of 
crimes, a perverse scorner of that divinest of human gifts, the 
mind, an exalter of blind, animal striving, in short, a man who 
has made the "human beast" a systematic ideal. 12 British war 

11 Quarterly Review (1896), CLXXXIV, 318; G.B.S. in Saturday Review 
(1896), LXXI, 374; E. von Hartmann, Preussischer ]ahrbucher (1891), 
LXVII, 520; F. Mehring, "Nietzsche/* Neue Zeit, 30. Jan. 1897; W. Dilthey, 
Gesammelte Wer^e (1898), IV, 528; G. Bianquis, Nietzsche en France (1929), 
62. 

18 H. Tiirck, Nietzsches philosophise he Irrwcge, Neue Ausgabe (1894), 
63-69. 



182 NIETZSCHE 

propaganda during the War of 1914-1918 was not more single- 
minded and vehement in condemnation of Nietzsche. All over 
the world, when Nietzsche first is known, he appears as de- 
lightfully or horribly shocking, as a disturbing thinker, a rebel 
not to be dismissed as a mere crank. Almost from the first, he 
interested all sorts of men, and made all sorts of disciples. One 
disciple has not infrequently found in the Master the exact 
contrary in logic and even in commonsense of what an- 
other disciple has found. This, however, is almost a habit 
among disciples. 

Ill 

To some of the reasons for Nietzsche's charm over his readers 
we shall return. The amazing variety of things his readers and 
disciples have said they have found in him is explicable partly 
by the variety of people his charm has attracted. It is also 
explicable partly by the fact that his published writings actually 
do contain varied and in some senses contradictory materials. 

In the first place, Nietzsche seems to have changed direction 
after he left Wagner. Some of his more unyielding worshippers 
insist that, though he may have developed, he never changed, 
that all his writings, of youth as well as of maturity, form one 
splendid unity. 13 Some such remark has certainly been made of 
all thinkers, and about all of them it may have a degree of 
truth. But to many an observer, the Nietzsche of The Birth of 
Tragedy seemed a different man from the aphorisitc Nietzsche 
of The Dawn of Day, and the "philosopher with a hammer" of 
the Twilight of the Idols seemed still another man if, indeed, 

"This is now the fashionable view among the Nazis. See R. Oehlcr, 
'Nietzsche und die deutsche Zu^unft (1935). 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 183 

he were a man at all. In other words, Nietzsche's works can 
be divided into "periods" perhaps a bit more easily than most 
men's. It is then possible to say that the "real" Nietzsche was 
the Nietzsche of a certain period, and that the rest of his work 
is not truly Nietzschean. 

Moreover, Nietzsche wrote almost entirely in brief aphoristic 
passages, composed in moments of high excitement, noted down 
and strung together into a book. Here, too, critics have had no 
trouble finding all sorts of underlying unity. But it is a fact 
that Nietzsche was not tied down by any formal structure in 
his books, that he had no brief to follow, no special audience 
to adapt himself to. He had, it must be admitted, a love for 
neatness and bite in phrasing, a love which he sometimes in- 
dulged at the expense of accuracy in reflecting his actual judg- 
ments. The works are a mass of reflections, a kind of running 
note-book, a written Table-Talk, in which anyone can find 
contradictions. 

Finally, any body of written work, at least outside the natural 
sciences and exact scholarship, lives on at the mercy of fashion. 
What Nietzsche had to say was necessarily inexact, for he dealt 
with matters about which men's feelings and habits have always 
been more trustworthy expressions than their words though 
they cannot, if they are men like Nietzsche, give up the des- 
perate task of fitting them to words. Nietzsche's work survives 
as the subject of great disputes, partly because he failed to say 
exactly what he meant; and no one who has tried to say the 
kind of thing Nietzsche tried to say has succeeded much 
better. We are still disputing about some of the things said by 
Jesus of Nazareth. And so we ought not to be surprised that 
men differ on what Nietzsche wrote, differ in some senses al- 



184 NIETZSCHE 

most totally. A contemporary Nietzschean writes, perhaps a 
little too indignantly: 

An old game of the human imagination has begun. The past is called 
into the present, and there begins that ceremony of consultation, of 
seeking for authority, the end of which is already pretty clear, since the 
consultant and the consulted are substantially one. For this reason 
almost all current writing on Nietzsche has interest only as a part of 
our contemporary history, and one may say of it what Lichtenberg said 
of other books, "Such works are mirrors; when a monkey gapes into 
one, no apostle can look back out." 14 

All sorts of men have looked into Nietzsche's works, and seen 
themselves. Any attempt to classify them will be unworthy of 
their variety. It may be well, therefore, to adopt a frankly 
dualistic device, a neat conceptual polarity. There are two sorts 
of Nietzscheans, the gentle and the tough. There are no doubt 
many in between the extremes, who might almost be called 
medium Nietzscheans. Though the Master himself was most 
immoderate, one might without too much violence to good 
sense find some followers who could be called "moderate" 
Nietzscheans. But the simple polar distinction between gentle 
Nietzscheans and tough ones is a useful one, which is about all 
one may expect of a distinction. 

The gentle Nietzscheans regard the Master, in a nowadays 
cant phrase, as a man of good will. For them, Nietzsche's work 
is in a central great tradition of ethics marked by Socrates, 
Jesus, Buddha, Luther, and other children of God. Nietzsche, 
they hold, wanted men to be good; and by good he meant what 
the great heroes of religion and morals have always meant by 
good, good in a somewhat stoic sense. Because men were not 

14 A. Kesser, "Elemente zur Beurteilung Nietzsches," Neue Schweizer 
Rundschau (1937), IV, 535. 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 185 

good in the nineteenth-century Western world, he lost his tem- 
per with them, and broke into prophetic violence. But at heart 
he wanted them to be peaceful, happy, just, pure, honest, kindly, 
humane. The gentle Nietzscheans have had to do a lot of ex- 
plaining. They have taken in stride paradoxes that would have 
given their Master pause. One of their favorites, phrased in a 
dozen ways, runs something like this: Nietzsche was a most 
Christian anti-Christian; he hated the sham Christianity of his 
age as only a true follower of Jesus could hate it. 

The tough Nietzscheans have had rather easier going, at least 
with their logic. For them the Master was an aristocrat of the 
heart and the head, a man filled with a great contempt for the 
pig-men about him, a tortured, sensitive, subtle soul in rebellion 
against the middle-class stupidities of the nineteenth century. 
When, according to them, he damned Christianity for its slave- 
morality, its compassion for the weak, its distrust of the flesh, 
he meant that he regarded Christianity as a bad thing. They 
add the gloss that Nietzsche did not object to Christianity as a 
solace for the masses, who could never be more than masses, 
but that he hated it for corrupting the minority capable of 
bright strength and cruelty, for preventing aristocrats from 
behaving like aristocrats. Their Nietzsche was the dionysian 
rebel, the unashamed pagan, the joyous fighter, the flashing 
thinker, the superb ironist, whose wit danced merrily through 
the bewildered herd, and now and then knocked down some 
loud bawling beast. 

IV 

Elizabeth's biography of her brother, together with many 
magazine articles pointing out Nietzsche's great literary virtues, 



186 NIETZSCHE 

no doubt helped to lay the foundations on which the gentle 
Nietzscheans have built. Yet it was his adoption as a philoso- 
pher by German academic philosophers that first gave him the 
respectability without which the gentle Nietzscheans might 
have labored in vain. Why these academic philosophers should 
have accepted him as a philosopher is hard to make out. He 
did, it is true, frequently refer to himself as a philosopher; but 
German writers all call themselves philosophers, somewhere, 
before they get through. He left an unpublished set of apho- 
risms labelled The Will to Power, which he often referred to 
as his systematic opus mains, but which looks and sounds ex- 
actly like the rest of his unsystematic works, save that it is 
much duller. The best of Nietzsche's work is in fact more like 
that of Montaigne, Pascal, La Rochefoucauld than like that of 
Kant or Hegel. But the Frenchmen were also philosophers? 
Perhaps, but you will not find much attention paid them in 
formal manuals of philosophy. 15 

The best of German philosophical writing on Nietzsche has 
been of a high order. Books like those of Alois Riehl, Hans 
Vaihinger, Raoul Richter, Richard Meyer have, in a good sense, 
brought him down to earth, have made him an understand- 
able figure. 16 These writers must, on the whole, be classed as 
gentle Nietzscheans. Even when, as with Vaihinger, they limit 
themselves to expounding systematically what Nietzsche wrote 
in a rush of words, they tend to tame him a bit, to subdue him to 

"In one of the best and briefest critical studies of Nietzsche, Vaihinger 
insists that Nietzsche is properly designated a philosopher. But he also makes 
the point I have made above, that Montaigne and his company are properly 
philosophers. H. Vaihinger, Nietzsche als Philosophy 15. Here there is no use 
disputing about words. 

"A. Riehl, Friedrich Nietzsche, der Ktinstler und der Denser (1897); 
H. Vaihinger, Nietzsche als Philosoph (1902); R. Richter, Friedrich Nietzsche 
scin Lebcn und sein WerJ^ (1903); R. W. Meyer, Nietzsche (1913). 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 187 

the kind of professional sobriety he himself could never attain 
or put up with. They classify in terms of individualism, collec- 
tivism, evolution, epistemology, metaphysics, culture-history, 
what Nietzsche had poured out in more concrete, or at least 
more poetic, terms. Some of them carry this process to distor- 
tion. Richter, for instance, classified Nietzsche as an evolu- 
tionist essentially in the Darwinian tradition; his "Will to 
Power" becomes a form of the struggle for life as his century 
understood that phrase. The Eternal Recurrence, and most of 
Nietzsche's metaphysics, can hardly be fitted into such an 
interpretation. 

These gentlemen are not inclined to approve Nietzsche's 
wildest flights and proposals. But on the whole they feel that 
in some valuable way he renewed German philosophy, that he 
restated fundamental problems fundamentally. They do not 
however, like the extremists among the gentle Nietzscheans, 
attempt to make him a Christian in spite of himself. They 
soften, but they do not bowdlerize him. To their ranks may 
well be added a Frenchman, Henri Lichtenberger, whose little 
book on Nietzsche came out in France in 1898. Lichtenberger 
knew Germany and its intellectual life so thoroughly that 
he fell quite naturally into the professorial interpretation of 
Nietzsche. 

France is the country which has nursed the gentlest Nie- 
tzscheans, and perhaps also the greatest variety of Nietzscheans 
of all sorts. It is probably impossible to give a satisfactory ex- 
planation of the great interest Frenchmen have shown in the 
writings of Nietzsche. 17 Perhaps they were overcome with 
admiration at finding a German who wrote like a Frenchman. 

17 The facts are admirably assembled in G. Bianquis, Nietzsche en France 
(1929). The bibliography, pp. 119-126 is especially useful. 



l88 NIETZSCHE 

Many of them were doubtless attracted to Nietzsche by his 
violent and well-phrased hatred for Bismarck's new Reich. 
Others were impressed with his profundity, his prophetic wis- 
dom, his dionysian contempt for stupid geometric "reason" 
in short, with the whole apparatus of Zarathustra, which im- 
presses a Frenchman the more because it is utterly incredible 
in French. Still others were touched by the sorrows of Nie- 
tzsche's life ; here was a martyr to ideas, to the life of the spirit, 
a thinker bloody but unbowed. This again has long been a 
subject which can bring out to the full the great French capacity 
for sentimentality. 

In this latter vein is one of the most popular short lives of 
Nietzsche, by Daniel Halevy, published in French in 1909 and 
shortly thereafter translated into English. This life throbs 
throughout with pity. Nietzsche is the great compassionate 
one, the tender idealist, embittered by exposure to the vulgarities 
and crudities of the expanding Germany of his day, driven to 
mockery by his intelligence and his wounded sensibilities, 
driven possibly to certain exaggerations. But at heart Nietzsche 
is for Halevy a witness to the eternal strength of the human 
spirit, a witness against Bismarck, against Moltke, and the great 
German industrialists, against Wagner and the vicious pan- 
Germanists, against the anti-Semites, against the materialist 
successes of the day. Nietzsche follows in the footsteps of 
Luther. But Luther was in a worldly way successful. Nie- 
tzsche's greatness lies partly in his worldly failure. 

The late Charles Andler, however, made something even 
more extraordinary and unrecognizable out of Nietzsche. 
He made him a Socialist. Whether Nietzsche himself, in the 
flesh, would have been angrier at being called a Socialist than 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 189 

at being called a Christian is a nice question. Since the Socialists 
were committed to even more love for the common man than 
the Christians of his day, one suspects that he felt a stronger 
contempt for Socialists than for Christians, and this in general 
is borne out by his writings. Yet Andler could write "one may 
legitimately call the system of Nietzsche a socialism." The 
Master wanted "a European working-class which would be a 
class of masters." 18 Before Andler worked himself up to this 
point, he had written four volumes on Nietzsche, in which he 
had gradually built up a picture much like that of Halevy's. 
Andler's great work is an invaluable source of information 
about Nietzsche and his circle. But the man who finally 
emerges from this huge accumulation of facts looks very little 
like the Nietzsche most other men have seen. Nietzsche radical- 
socialiste Nietzsche in the cartel des gauches and the repu- 
blique des professeurs? Surely the Master never meant his 
famous phrase, "the transvaluation of all values" to be taken 
quite so fantastically? 

Not all Frenchmen have been as innocent about Nietzsche as 
Halevy and Andler. Andre Gide, one of his earliest French 
discoverers, seems at first glance to be almost a tough Nie- 
tzschean. Joy, not sadness, inspires the man, writes Gide; it is 
a mistake to think of him as a destroyer. Yet Gide soon comes 
to his own curious formula: Nietzsche is a Jansenist. "Nie- 
tzscheanism is at once a manifestation of abundant life . . . 
and a tendency which, according to the times, has been called 

18 C. Andler, Nietzsche, sa vie et sa pensce, V, 321. Andler was not the 
first to call Nietzsche a Socialist. E. Gystrovv, in the Sozialistischc Monatsheft 
for October 1900 wrote ecstatically, "He was one of us!" See F. Mess, Nietzsche 
der Gesetzgcbcr (1930), 183-184. 



190 NIETZSCHE 

'Jansenism/ or 'Protestantism/ and which will now be called 
Nietzscheanism, because Nietzsche dared formulate to the very 
extreme that which was still latently murmuring in it." 19 

One of the most thorough jobs of softening Nietzsche's doc- 
trines was done by an American, the late W. M. Salter, whose 
Nietzsche the Thinker appeared in 1917. Salter is no Andler; 
he does not try to make Nietzsche out a lover of his fellow-men, 
nor even a primitive Christian. At no one point does he seem 
to do much more than quote or paraphrase Nietzsche. Yet the 
net impression one gets from Salter's book is of a Nietzsche no 
longer very excited or exciting. All the impatience, all the 
drum-beating, all the mystic exaltation have disappeared, and 
we are left with a wise old gentleman thoughtfully pursuing 
dp6T7J and virtu for the good of generations to come. 20 Salter 
feels constantly obliged to defend the personal qualities of his 
hero his sanity, modesty, honesty, attractiveness, general all- 
around balance of character. Nietzsche has to be a sage, and 
sages have to be mellow, like Goethe or Emerson. But nothing 
can be more certain than that Nietzsche's personal qualities 
were most unendearing, that during the decade in which he 
wrote his great books he was as unpleasant a person as any 
clinical record of literature can show. Nietzsche's greatness 
may have come from his more than Promethean suffering; but 
it is a tortured, frenetic, shrilly intellectual cry that comes from 
his suffering, a cry one does not hear in Salter's conscientious 
book. 

The English Nietzscheans formed in the earlier years of the 
century a devoted band, now rather broken up by time and two 

19 Gide, Oeuvres completes, III, 237, "Lettres a Angcle." 
80 W. M. Salter, "Nietzsche the Thinker, especially p. 375. 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 191 

wars against Nietzsche's fatherland. Some of them were, at 
least in appearance, tough Nietzscheans. As a band, however, 
they tended to support, and spread abroad among literate Eng- 
lishmen, the conception of Nietzsche as at bottom a profound 
evolutionist, a moralist who really wanted what Herbert 
Spencer wanted, peace and plenty, but saw that nineteenth- 
century Englishmen weren't getting it very fast. They were a 
somewhat disparate and not very popular group, who centered 
their work around the eighteen-volume translation of the 
Master into English, edited by Oscar Levy. J. M. Kennedy, who 
translated some of the volumes, was perhaps their leading 
pundit. He published during the War of 1914-1918 a short 
volume on Nietzsche, ironically sub-titled "The Mind that 
caused the Great War," and aiming to prove that Nietzsche 
had in no sense influenced the Germans to make war. That 
evil thing Treitschke had done, not Nietzsche. The good 
Master, urging force, wrote "with an ideal Europe in mind." 21 
Kennedy indeed, as did most of the English Nietzscheans, took 
the Master's anti-democratic ideas very seriously. Some of 
Kennedy's schemes for keeping the lower classes lower sound 
almost tough. But so do some of Plato's schemes for achieving 
the same end, and no one ever called Plato tough. 

The philosophical and the aesthetic strains are the ones most 
heard among the gentle Nietzscheans of any country. Brandes, 
d'Annunzio, Andre Gide, Havelock Ellis, otherwise a strange 
gathering, are all gentle Nietzscheans who found the Master 
first of all a Poet. 22 Poets, in spite of the authority of Shelley, 

81 J. M. Kennedy, Nietzsche (1914), 9. 

"Ellis's essay on Nietzsche was published in Affirmations (1898) and re- 
mains an admirable specimen of the aesthetic touch applied to the Master. 



192 NIETZSCHE 

are not commonly legislators. Few of the gentle Nietzscheans 
have specific programs of reform for a world they feel needs a 
spiritual rebirth deeper than any program. Now and then there 
are exceptions. Andler and his followers in France have tried 
to tie Nietzsche into a popular front. Some of the German 
Nietzscheans hoped to translate the Master's ideas into action 
in ways not strictly conforming to Nazi achievements. Such, 
for instance, is Dr. Mess, who saw Nietzsche as a kind of poten- 
tial German Lycurgus, a law-giver who might inspire a code 
for a stratified society, a society of Supermen, but not of storm 
troopers and Labor Fronts. 23 

The tradition of Nietzsche as a man of good will, once 
established, has continued in spite of the tough Nietzscheans, 
and in spite of the identification various interested persons, from 
propagandists to philosophers, have tried to make between the 
ideas of Nietzsche and the practises of modern German gov- 
ernments. It has been largely instrumental in making Nietzsche 
a great and respected figure in the world of culture, a figure 
about whom a small library has already been written. It has, 
especially in the last twenty years, given rise to many admirable 
studies, some of which are actually more interested in under- 
standing Nietzsche than in defending him. At long last, Nie- 
tzsche's contributions to our knowledge of how human beings 
behave have been pointed out and evaluated. Nietzsche's place 
in the history of thought has been studied without undue 
emphasis on the uniqueness of that place. 24 There are signs 

23 Nietzsche der Gesetzgeber (1930). The book is almost, but not quite, 
good Nazi doctrine. It is a wonderful example of the Teutonic gift for 
spinning endless and exact details in the air. 

24 For instance, M. Scheler, Ober Ressentimcnt und moralischcs Werturteil 
(1912); K. Joel, Nietzsche und die Romantit^ (1923). 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 193 

that the gentle Nietzscheans as a sect are dying out. But they 
are far from extinct. The increasing use of Nietzsche's name 
by the German National Socialists in defense of the way of life 
of the Third Reich, the attempt to make of him a kind of John 
the Baptist for the Savior Hitler, has infuriated the gentle 
Nietzscheans, and made them vocal again. One of them writes: 

The herald of 'The Higher Man/' of the "roaming blond beast," this 
aberration from the main line of his productivity, is played up [by the 
Nazis] against the "good European/' which he remained his whole 
life long. . . . He, who appreciated the chivalrous greatness of the 
English spirit just as he did the deep leaning to psychology of the Rus- 
sians, he the enthusiastic worshipper of Stendhal, the admirer of Sterne, 
Heine, Voltaire, is above every suspicion of having glorified Power in the 
sense of nationalistic racial arrogance. What final tragic fate it is, that 
this martyr of thought, whose life has been an eternal battle against the 
traditional and the outworn in his own heart, this actual martyr to 
truthfulness, should be held aloft as their approving prophet by the 
untruthful of today. 25 

And a French Nietzschean of the gentlest sort, a follower of 
the Left in politics, devotes a whole book to defending the 
Master against the wicked calumniators who maintain that 
Hitler actually learned from Nietzsche. He begins by remark- 
ing that great spirits are always hounded by the pack: for 
Socrates the hemlock, for Christ the cross, for others silence, 
calumny. Nietzsche has undergone all three forms of persecu- 
tion. But like Socrates and Christ . . . The rest is unfortu- 
nately not silence. 26 

25 P. Gutmann, "Nict/schc, The 'Good European,'" Queen's Quarterly 
(Spring, 1938), XLV, 21. 

20 M. P. Nicolas, DC Nietzsche </ Hitler (1936), 9. English translation pub- 
lished as From Nietzsche Down to Hitler (1937). 



194 NIETZSCHE 

V 

The tough Nietzscheans were at first recruited from literary 
and artistic circles, and their toughness was entirely a matter 
of words. Early admirers like Brandes were perpetual adoles- 
cents in rebellion, on the hunt for new Byrons like themselves. 
And here was Nietzsche, by far the best prospective Bryon in a 
generation, the best since Heine! Here was a Byron incredibly 
mixed with a Buddha. The old line of romantic heroes was 
dying out, and some new touch was needed to renew the 
popularity of the wicked, defiant rebel, the picturesque egotist, 
the scorner of convention, the eternal Artist crucified in a world 
of Business Men. Nietzsche gave the nineties a new variation 
on the old theme. Gabriele d'Annunzio took him up: Nietzsche 
had reached his lowest point. 

George Bernard Shaw still looks like a tough Nietzschean, 
one of the better ones. He seems to have discovered Nietzsche 
around 1894, when he had already made a place for himself in 
dramatic and musical criticism. Most of his habits of mind had 
already been formed, and it is highly unlikely that Nietzsche 
changed Shaw in any important sense. Moreover, as an ardent 
Wagnerite, Shaw could not accept one whole side of Nietzsche's 
work. Shaw had no gift or stomach for German metaphysics, 
and was annoyed by Nietzsche's elaborate distinctions between 
Dionysian and Apollinian, and the rest of the German profes- 
sor's apparatus which Nietzsche never wholly discarded. 
Whether Shaw learned anything of the art of self-advertising 
from the author of the chapters on "Why I am so clever" and 
"Why I write such good books" in Ecce Homo is perhaps 
debatable. Certainly "Man and Superman" owes to Nietzsche 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 195 

more than the last word of the title. Shaw on women, Shaw on 
middle-class morality, Shaw on Christianity, Shaw on noble 
words sounds so much like Nietzsche on these subjects that we 
are confronted, if not with a case of influence, at least with a 
most touching meeting of noble minds. Shaw was, however, 
wiser than some of the French Nietzscheans. The rather vola- 
tile set of beliefs he called his socialism he kept fairly well out 
of the way of Nietzsche. 

Some, if not most of the inner circle of English Nietzscheans 
a circle rather too confining for Shaw may be classified as 
tough in the literary sense. As a lot they look rather seedy, 
rather on the unpicturesque side of the lunatic fringe. One of 
the best-known of them is Anthony Ludovici, who in younger 
days made a specialty of knowing about women. Ludovici 
agreed with Nietzsche that women are dangerous and unscrupu- 
lous sentimentalists in politics and such high matters, but 
sensible and realistic technicians in their proper sphere of family 
life. That England should actually propose to give women the 
vote was to him a final sign of English decadence. His social 
and political ideas are more closely patterned after Nietzsche's 
loudest affirmations on such matters than is usual outside Nazi 
circles; he was against democracy, industrialism, socialism, 
pacifism, feminism, and in general all the fashionable pre- 
occupations of English intellectuals of Edwardian times. Like 
his Master he was for the rule of the true aristocrats not the 
Cecils or the Howards, of course, nor even the Asquiths and 
the Morleys, but the Ludovicis. He went over, consistently 
enough, to the Nazis, and wrote in 1937 that Hitler was work- 
ing to restore the true "biological" values of mankind, to bring 



196 NIETZSCHE 

back on earth that pre-Socratic lustiness and innocence the 
Master praised as Dionysian. 27 

Nietzsche crossed the Atlantic with almost as much ease as 
he had crossed the Channel. The first decade of the new cen- 
tury saw his name familiar to most of our literary scouts. If in 
W. M. Salter we produced an admirably tender Nietzschean, 
in H. L. Mencken we produced a much more amusing specimen 
of the tough Nietzschean. Mr. Mencken's first book was a study 
of Nietzsche, published in 1908, when he was still far from the 
temporary deanship of American letters to which he was called 
in the 1920'$. The prose style of the book is subdued, though 
now and then one gets a glimpse of the coming Father of the 
American language. Mr. Mencken refused to follow Nietzsche 
into the Eternal Recurrence, and he had his doubts about some 
of Zarathustra's finer moments. But he delighted, in 1908, in 
Nietzsche's advice to go to women with a whip, and he shared 
to the full Nietzsche's soul-satisfying dislike for the English, 
for pious improvers of all sorts, for dull Christian folk, for the 
as yet unnamed Babbitts of the world. The book is still one of 
the best and liveliest accounts of Nietzsche's ideas taken liter- 
ally, cheerfully, and with a fine disregard for the bowing and 
scraping to Philosophy and Depth so common in German writ- 
ing on Nietzsche. 

Another American Nietzschean, the late Willard Huntington 
Wright, deserves mention, for he illustrates Nietzsche's peculiar 
appeal to the balked intellectual. Wright, who was associated 
with Messrs. Mencken and Nathan on the old Smart Set, han- 
kered after the good literary life impossible in vulgar America. 

27 A. Ludovici, "Hitler and Nietzsche," English Review (January and Feb- 
ruary 1937), XLIV, 44-52; 192-202. 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 197 

He flourished, but only at the price of becoming S. S. Van Dine, 
and creating the best-seller detective Philo Vance. Wright had 
early found consolation in Nietzsche, and before he turned to 
pot-boiling he published in 1915 What Nietzsche Taught, a 
conscientious summary of the Master, but one so dull, sober 
and humorless that it seems almost to be the work of a gentle 
Nietzschean. 

Tough Nietzscheans in the literary tradition are hard to find 
in Germany. The Germans are an earnest people, and the liter- 
ary life is to them more than a consolation or an amusement. 
German books explaining Nietzsche have unfortunately, since 
1889, ceased to be written by Nietzsche himself; the followers 
have not the literary gifts of the Master. Theirs are occasionally 
good books, but never light books, and they are very frequently 
written to prove that Nietzsche's philosophical system is a 
happy anticipation of the author's, or that Nietzsche can be 
wrapped up in a few choice and moving German abstractions 
as an "eleusischer Mystagoge, als grosse Erzieher durch Ge- 
heimnisse zum Geheimnis." 28 

It is true that beneath all the verbiage that learned Germans 
have consecrated to Nietzsche in the last forty or fifty years a 
reader sufficiently patient and imaginative can distinguish a 
kind of ground-swell of sentiment, a ground-swell stronger and 
stronger as the triumph of the Nazis approaches. This is the 
identification of Nietzsche with something basically German, 
something better than narrow French logic or stupid British 
empiricism, something grand and nameless, not so much irra- 

*"an Eleusinian Mystagogue, as a great educator through mysteries to the 
Mystery." E. Bertram, Nietzsche (1919), 354-355- There is lots more like 
this, and better. 



198 NIETZSCHE 

tional as supra-rational. It is a claim not new in German in- 
tellectual history, but it has rarely been made more exorbitantly 
or more loosely than by such commentators on Nietzsche as 
Ludwig Klages, for whom Nietzsche was the great pioneer in 
transferring the current of living thought from dead logic to 
the living unconscious. 29 From a reasonably gentle aesthetic 
Nietzscheanism to a tough if rather ecstatic Nietzscheanism, 
the course in Germany is clear. Vaihinger, Riehl, and Richter 
gave place to Klages and Bertram. The really tough Nietzsche- 
ans are not far off. They are no longer nice professors. 

The tough Nietzscheans in contemporary Germany are gen- 
erally the people who try to use Nietzsche's ideas in actual life, 
the politicians, the journalists, the educators of the triumphant 
revolutionary party that came to power in 1933. The need and 
therefore the test of actually applying in concrete cases their 
fine notions have never confronted the lively Nietzscheans of 
other countries. Mr. Ludovici in power is simply not conceiv- 
able. Mr. Shaw in power, at the height of his maturity, is just 
barely within the bounds of human imagination. One suspects 
that his actions would have been those of an Anglo-Irish gentle- 
man, not those of a tough Nietzschean. As for Mr. Mencken, 
he is not in any sense a political figure. But were he magically 
given power, one suspects that he would have left the "boob- 
oisie" unpurged. In other words, even with the liveliest of our 
tough Nietzscheans outside Germany, ideas flow on in a more 
than academic irresponsibility. Not so in contemporary Ger- 
many. There important people profess to be guided in action by 

"See S. Aberdam, "Nietzsche et le 3 me Reich," Mercure dc France (15 
April, 1937), CCLXXV, 232. Aberdam adds, "The influence of Klages on the 
mystagogs of Nazism is difficult to exaggerate." 



THE GROWTH OF A REPUTATION 199 

Nietzsche, not the martyred Nietzsche of Halevy and Andler, 
but the triumphant Nietzsche of Zarathustra, "glowing and 
strong, like a morning sun coming out of gloomy mountains." 
These are Nietzscheans such as we have not yet seen; they are 
worth a separate chapter. 



CHAPTER VIII 
NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 

earliest disciples and lovers of Nietzsche were, as we 
JL have seen, all intellectuals who drew a pure intellectual 
joy from their Master's work. There was a joy in knowing you 
were a master-man among the slave-men of the herd. But the 
knowledge was enough. You didn't go about spitting in the 
faces of the herd, or beating their flanks, or trying to stampede 
them. As a matter of fact, you kept as far away from them as 
possible, savoring your superiority. Even when, fairly shortly, 
there arose the division between gentle Nietzscheans and tough 
Nietzscheans, the Master was still regarded by both sorts of 
followers as essentially a poet, a consolation and inspiration for 
the few, a philosopher in the great and happily useless tradition 
of philosophy. 

It is true that from the very first some critics of Nietzsche 
paid him the clear compliment or is it a dubious one ? of 
assuming he meant what he said. These critics were in the 
early days almost all bitterly opposed to Nietzsche, may, indeed, 
well be labelled anti-Nietzschean. They did not like what they 
understood him to mean. When he wrote in praise of immoral- 
ism, when he praised cruelty, lying, treachery, they understood 
him to mean that he thought it good for some men to be cruel, 
dishonest, tricky. When he wrote rejoicingly about the "blonde 
beast," they thought he was actually exulting about the blood- 
shed and rapine achieved by flesh-and-blood German soldiers. 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 201 

When he wrote that war is good, they took him to mean by 
war real fighting in which men get killed and maimed, and by 
good that he approved of it. When he wrote of herd-men and 
slaves they held he must have meant men like themselves, if not 
men like you and me. That his followers should deny this the 
anti-Nietzschean critics considered annoying, but not surprising. 
Indeed, one anti-Nietzschean who wrote as early as 1899 feh 
that the Nietzscheans were applying to the work of their Master 
an exegetical skill and impertinence worthy of the Bible itself. 1 

The outbreak of the Four Years' War in 1914 gave the anti- 
Nietzscheans something concrete to point to as a product of 
Nietzsche's wicked doctrines. Yet there is little to indicate that 
these doctrines in their original sources were ever taken up by 
the small group that made policy under William II. No doubt 
numbers of young Germans had read their Nietzsche, and may 
have got partly from him a resolve to be hard, realistic, aggres- 
sive, not the metaphysical, sentimental, music-loving beer- 
drinkers of tradition. Yet no organized group, either of 
intellectuals or of politicians, had as yet taken up Nietzsche, 
save only the hopelessly impractical and faithful workers of the 
Nietzsche-Archiv. Any influence Nietzsche may have had in 
producing what seems, in comparison with Hitler, the modest 
little aggression of William II, is imponderable if not doubtful. 
For once, we may perhaps grant that the Nietzscheans, both 
gentle and tough, were right in their indignant replies to the 
accusation that Nietzsche brought on the war in 1914. 

The accusation was made in many forms and in many diflfer- 

1 0. Henne am Rhyn, Anti-Zarathustra (1899), IX. Hcnne am Rhyn 
was especially grieved by a gentle Nictzschean who had asserted that Nietzsche 
preached "Freedom and the Dignity of Woman." 



202 NIETZSCHE 

ent organs, from The Times to popular broadsheets. The Eng- 
lish were most vocal, with the French much less certain that 
Nietzsche was worth blaming when there were plenty of live 
Germans to attack. In the first few months of the war, Nie- 
tzsche, Treitschke, and von Bernhardi were linked together in 
British propaganda as mainly responsible for working the Ger- 
mans, leaders and led alike, up to an immoral lust for conquest 
never yet seen on this earth. Dr. Oscar Levy, who had edited 
the English edition of Nietzsche, then just completed in eighteen 
volumes, reports that he found one morning on his doorstep a 
copy of "The Scotsman" containing a leader attacking Nietzsche 
as a ruthless preacher of violence, on which someone had 
indignantly written in ink "You have brought this poison to 
England." He adds that in one Piccadilly bookshop window a 
bookseller had spread out all eighteen volumes with a large 
sign "The Euro-Nietzschean War. Read the Devil in order to 
fight him better." 2 Even Punch took up the cudgels, and 
announced that "One touch of Nietzsche makes the whole 
world sin." Dr. Levy seems to have taken this pun seriously; 
but the inner circle of the English Nietzscheans always were a 
beleaguered lot, well fortified against puns. 

The little band around Dr. Levy stood by their principles 
or illusions and insisted that Nietzsche loathed the German 
Empire and would have loathed Schrecklichkfit. Havelock 
Ellis also, putting out a second edition of his Affirmations early 
in 1915, stated the position of the gentle Nietzscheans as clearly 
and as innocently as it has ever been stated. 

a O. Levy, "Nietzsche im Krieg," Die weissen Blatter (1919), VI, 277-278. 
This article contains a good list of those who attacked and those who de- 
fended Nietzsche in relation to "war-guilt" 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 203 

The idea of Power and the idea of War both entered into the work 
the later work, it is important to remember of Nietzsche. But in his 
hands they became spiritualized and transformed. Power was no longer 
the force of success in this world, and War was no longer a method of 
overcoming mere human enemies, but both alike belonged to the sphere 
of the evolving soul. . . . My study of Nietzsche is not a study of the 
Nietzsche of the moment but of the essential and significant Nietzsche. 3 

It is remarkable that Ellis refrained from adding the "eternal 
Nietzsche." He probably thought it unnecessary. Even in 
war-guilty Germany, the followers of Nietzsche refused to be- 
lieve him in any way responsible for the war. Professor Messer 
of Giessen used almost the same words as Ellis. 

The chapter 'Of War and Warriors' [in Zarathustra] is to be taken 
throughout as based on a spiritual sense of War He who will take the 
trouble to sound the depths of Nietzsche's ideal of the Superman, will 
find there something quite other than mere worship of the 'physically 
strong man.' 4 

This line of defense has been continued to the present day, 
whenever the acts of a German government seemed to illustrate 
simple exercise of the Will to Power. When Nietzsche praised 
war, the argument runs, he meant a nice spiritual War, not a 
bloody one. Another line of apology has been the old assertion 
that Nietzsche was a poet, that his work has solely an aesthetic 
significance. Still another argument rests fundamentally on the 
assertion that Nietzsche was in no sense a German nationalist, 
that he was a good European who would have condemned the 
march into Belgium. This position can be backed by citing 
Nietzsche's biting criticisms of everything and everybody suc- 

8 Ellis, Affirmations, Preface to the second edition, xii. 
4 A. Messer, "Nietzsche und der Militarismus," Frankfurter Zeitung, 
15 Oct. 1914. 



204 NIETZSCHE 

cessful in late nineteenth-century Germany. Some of what was 
successful in 1890 was still successful in Germany in 1914, so 
Nietzsche can readily be quoted in condemnation. He wrote 
much against Germany and the Germans, against nationalism, 
against anti-semitism, against intellectuals. In a positive sense 
it is harder to find anything in Nietzsche to gainsay those who 
insist that he preaches violence and aggression. He wrote very 
little in favor of the milder virtues. The gentle Nietzscheans 
delight, however, to point out that personally he was in no sense 
frightful, that he lived simply, indeed ascetically, that he looks, 
in short, more and more like a saint as we gaze on him more 
steadily and from a greater distance. They delight in such 
stories as the one about how, during the first onset of madness 
in Turin, he saw a poor old nag maltreated by its driver, rushed 
out in the street, and, weeping, threw his arms around the poor 
creature's neck. 5 Surely, the gentle Nietzscheans say, a man 
who could behave this way was at heart a kindly soul, and no 
militarist. 

Freud had not yet become fashionable save in very forward- 
looking circles in 1914, and the study of semantics was still in 
the stage of infancy. About all the anti-Nietzscheans could do 
in rebuttal to the above arguments was to reiterate that they 
thought the actions of the Kaiser illustrated the Will to Power, 
and that the Germans who were doing such unspeakable things 
in Belgium were examples of the "wrath of the blond Teuton 
beast." As the war went on, Nietzsche, Treitschke, and von 
Bernhardi tended to fade out of the picture a bit, to be replaced 
by more immediate matters. They were revived again in their 
full horror in the middle of the war, when it became necessary 
to key the Americans up to the fight. 

5 Podach, Nietzschcs Zusammenbruch, 82. 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 205 

Nietzsche's role in the Four Years' War is, however, for vari- 
ous reasons less interesting and less enlightening for us today 
than his role in the contemporary German revolution. The 
Nazi revolution was produced partly by the activities of a 
relatively small group, the National Socialist Party and its 
leaders, whose professions of faith are much easier to determine 
than the vaguer hopes that spread through all classes of Ger- 
mans in the years before 1914. Nietzsche's thought was revolu- 
tionary in many senses of that inexact word, and its currency 
can best be tested in a revolutionary period. The year 1933 saw 
a real revolution in Germany, a revolution in which men defi- 
nitely appealed to the words of Nietzsche, among others, for 
justification. The year 1914 did not see a revolution in Germany. 
Neither, as we can now see, did 1918. At most the Four Years' 
War and the Weimar Constitution began a long disturbance in 
German life, the end of which we cannot yet predict. Nietzsche 
was in 1914 brought into court by British propagandists anxious 
to paint the Germans as black as possible; he was not in Ger- 
many itself appreciably more conspicuous than he had been 
before. 6 Since the rise of Hitler, however, the philosopher has 
been talked of and written about as one of the Early Fathers of 
National Socialism. The problem of Nietzsche's relations to the 
Four Years' War is then but an introduction to that of his role 
in Germany today, a sample of the difficulties among which we 
must now try to thread our way. At the very least, the facts of 
Nietzsche's vogue in Nazi Germany are much clearer than the 
facts of his vogue in the Germany of 1914. 

* The current war has seen in allied countries and in America a mild 
revival of the old argument that Nietzsche is to blame for everything evil in 
German actions. Witness, for example, the following headlines: "Hitler War 
Urge Blamed on Insane Philosopher: Nietzsche Nazi Chief's Favorite Author, 
Catholic Women Told," Boston Evening Transcript, April 24, 1940. 



206 NIETZSCHE 

II 

National Socialism, like almost all successful revolutionary 
movements, has in it elements which are also found in religious 
bodies. One of these is the possession of holy writings. The 
National Socialist canon is not yet completed, has not yet indeed 
reached even the rough state of fixity attained by wholly estab- 
lished religions. This is perhaps no more than to say that Na- 
tional Socialism is still a growing and active faith. Mein Kampf 
is already the central piece of the Nazi canon; but Hitler's 
gospel needs some reinforcing. It needs antecedents, and if pos- 
sible antecedents that will give it a philosophical respectability 
it does not in itself seem especially to the unconverted to 
have. Gobineau, H. S. Chamberlain, Treitschke, Spengler, 
Alfred Rosenberg have all made their contributions to the 
articles of faith. Nietzsche, too, has been drafted into service. 
There can be no doubt that there is being made by important 
people in contemporary Germany a conscious effort to enlist 
Nietzsche as one of the pillars of the Nazi society. 

The books and articles published on Nietzsche in Nazi Ger- 
many are in themselves quite adequate evidence that such an 
effort is being made. It should be clear from what has already 
been said in this study about the vogue of Nietzsche since the 
mid-nineties that there is nothing new in the mere fact that 
articles and books on the Master keep appearing. But hitherto, 
especially in Germany, such writing has been mainly addressed 
to scholars, philosophers, lovers of the beautiful; and even when 
it has been directed at popularizing the Master, it has been the 
work of gentle Nietzscheans. What is striking in the Nietzsche 
literature of the last dozen years in Germany is the emergence 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 207 

of short popular books expressly intended to make Nietzsche 
clear to ordinary literate Germans, and to show just how his 
ideas fit into the Nazi voltysche Weltanschauung? 

Fair samples of such books are Alfred Baeumler's Nietzsche 
der Philosoph und Politikfr (Nietzsche the Philosopher and 
Political Thinker), published in 1931 in Reclams Universal- 
Bibliothe^ which is a sort of German equivalent of our Home 
University Library; Hans Prinzhorn's Nietzsche und das XX 
Jahrhundert (Nietzsche and the Twentieth Century), which in 
1928 already anticipates official Nazi interpretations of Nie- 
tzsche's work ; Dr. Gottlieb Scheuffler's Friedrich Nietzsche im 
Dritten Reich (Friedrich Nietzsche in the Third Reich), pub- 
lished late in 1933, * n celebration of the linking of the spiritual 
children of Nietzsche, the two great natural aristocrats, Hitler 
and Mussolini; Richard Oehler's Friedrich Nietzsche und die 
deutsche Zufytnft (Friedrich Nietzsche and the German Fu- 
ture), published in 1935; and the handbook which Heinrich 
Haertle brought out in 1937 under the title of Nietzsche und 
der Nationalsozialismus (Nietzsche and National Socialism). 
This last went into a second edition in 1939. Nietzsche's name 
appears frequently in current German periodicals, and by no 
means solely in philosophical and other learned journals. Here 
again it is clear that the writers are working to impress Nie- 
tzsche into the service of the new Nazi society. 8 

T A good Nazi writer says this specifically: "And now it has come about 
that the hitherto purely learned interest in the philosopher Nietzsche has 
been broadened into love and reverence towards the man." F. Erdmann, in 
the Ostdcutschc Monatshcjte (1936), XVIII, 515. Erdmann is reviewing the 
first volumes of the historisch-kritischc Ausgabe of Nietzsche. He adds that 
now everything of Nietzsche must be printed. His work has become too 
sacred for mere editors to pick and choose from it. 

"For instance, "Nietzsche und wir" (Nietzsche and Ourselves), by M. O. 



208 NIETZSCHE 

The Historisch-fyitische Gesamtausgabe of the works and the 
letters of Nietzsche is coming along slowly with the aid of 
the Nietzsche-Archiv in Weimar. It is being undertaken with 
the care, reverence, and detail given usually only to great men 
of letters or great prophets. The four volumes of the works so 
far issued reach only to Nietzsche's days as a student at Leipzig 
they are all, in fact, mere juvenilia or philological apprentice- 
work and notes. Apparently any scrap of paper on which he 
traced his childish fancies or student needs seems to the editors 
worth reprinting. The war has undoubtedly slowed up this 
edition, but only a catastrophe will stop it. As a thorough edi- 
torial job and also, though this must be an accident, some- 
what in format and general appearance this Gesamtausgabe 
resembles another famous Gesamtausgabe that used to come out 
of Germany before 1933, that of Marx and Engels. There may 
be something symbolic here. 

Finally, the Fuehrer himself has publicly gone on record as 
having learned from Nietzsche. Hitler does not specifically 
mention Nietzsche among the authors he read in his Vienna 
days of unemployment, but it seems quite likely that many of 
Nietzsche's notions filtered down to him second-hand even 
before he went actively into politics. Since the revolution of 
1933, Hitler has made several public visits to the Nietzsche- 



Johannes in Hammer for January 1938 [Hammer is a well-known anti-semitic 
organ]; "Nietzsche iiber Staat und Volk" (Nietzsche on State and Folk), by 
K. Kassler in Deutschlands Erneuerung, Vol. XX (1934); F. Derm's "Nie- 
tzsches Prophetic der Gottlosigkeit" (Nietzsche's Prophecy of Atheism) in 
Die Furche, vol. XXIII (1937); O. Haug, "Nietzsche und das Judentum" 
(Nietzsche and Jewry) in Weltfampf, Vol. XIV (1937). He has penetrated 
even into the trade journals: see Stahl und Eisen (Steel and Iron) for 1935, 
56th Jahrgang, II, 772. 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 209 

Archiv in Weimar and has had himself photographed there. 
One of these photographs, printed as the frontispiece in Richard 
Oehler's Nietzsche und die deutsche Zukjunjt, may have quite 
unintentional symbolism. It shows the Fuehrer in profile, 
staring with an expression of bilious and determined reverence 
at a bust of the Master. But though Hitler's face is fully shown, 
the photographer cut Nietzsche's in half, leaving one stone 
mustache curving off into nothing. 

The Nietzsche-Archiv itself, as custodian of the Master's 
tradition, has not hesitated to identify itself with the "world 
revolution" of the Fascists and the Nazis. Elizabeth, then a very 
old lady, actually had the Archiv send Mussolini on his fiftieth 
birthday the following telegram: 

To the noblest disciple of Zarathustra, whom Nietzsche had dreamed 
of, the inspired re-awakener of aristocratic values in Nietzsche's sense, 
the Nietzsche-Archiv sends in deepest respect and admiration the warmest 
good wishes. 9 

The professional Nietzscheans can hardly contain themselves. 
Their hero has now come into his own. Even the academic 
Nietzscheans the academic ones who are good Nazis burst 
into ecstasy. "And when we call out to this youth, marching 
under the swastika: Heil Hitler! at the same time we greet 
with this call Friedrich Nietzsche!" 10 

Yet liberal and cultivated Germans, gentle Nietzscheans by 
education, are still reluctant to admit that Hitler owes anything 
personally to Nietzsche's work even to Nietzsche's work 
misinterpreted. One of them writes from exile in Massachusetts : 

9 G. Scheuffler, Friedrich Nietzsche im Dritten Reich (1933), 7. 
10 A. Baeumler, "Nietzsche und dcr Nnzionalsozialismus," in his Studicn 
zur deutsche Gcistcsgeschichte (1937), 294. 



210 NIETZSCHE 

Nothing is more absurd than to sec in him [Hitler] a disciple of 
Nietzsche, the philosopher of "the hammer." . . . "The hammer" of 
which Nietzsche wrote was the hammer of antiquity, the other which 
Hitler swings is the hammer of Thor. 11 

It is, indeed, likely that Wagner's direct influence on Hitler 
personally is much greater than Nietzsche's. But, justly or un- 
justly, the makers of public opinion in Nazi Germany have 
called Nietzsche to their aid. Of that there can be no doubt. 
They are, as we shall see, quite capable of putting Thor's 
hammer and a lot of other old Germanic war-gear in Nie- 
tzsche's hands. 

Nietzsche, then, has been admitted into the Nazi pantheon, 
and his works have become a part of Nazi education. The num- 
ber and popular nature of recent German works on his life and 
writings are facts which make this clear. Indeed, Haertle in the 
introduction to the second edition of his little handbook on 
Nietzsche and National Socialism is evidently a little irritated 
by the continued existence of remnants of old-fashioned, aes- 
thetic, perhaps even gentle, Nietzscheans. He is writing for no 
"Nietzsche-circle," but for Nazi youth. He is making "an at- 
tempt to render Nietzsche's spiritual treasure fruitful for the 
development of the national socialistic attitude towards the 
world" (nationalsozialistische Weltanschauung a quite un- 
translatable phrase). "I do not," he continues, "belong to any 
group of esoteric devotees of Nietzsche; I wish merely to show 
the worth of Nietzsche as a great ally in the spiritual warfare 
of the present age." 12 

Many others agree with Haertle as to that worth. We need 

11 Aucrnheimer, Raoul, Prince Metternich (New York: 1940), p. viii. 
u Haertle, Nietzsche und der Nationalsozialismus y 2. Auflage (1939), 7. 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 211 

not here attempt to fathom their reasons. On the surface it is 
clear that Nietzsche brings to the miscellaneous and unimpres- 
sive collection of works which make up the Nazi holy writings 
an element otherwise almost lacking in them. For Nietzsche, 
hated though he may be, is yet commonly accepted in the 
Western 'world as a person who counts, as a sensitive artist, a 
master of German prose, a philosopher, a Great Mind. No 
such distinction has yet been conferred by the outside world 
upon the race-theorists, the anti-Semites, the crank sociologists 
and philosophers of history of the Hitlerite movement. Rosen- 
berg, the most favored intellectual of the movement, seems 
hardly more respectable, more strieux in comparison with the 
long tradition of Western thought, than Hitler himself. As for 
Mein Kampf, however holy it might seem to the faithful, to 
outsiders it is at the very mildest a book lacking in the final 
distinctions of literary form and philosophical penetration. It 
too is the book of a crank, a man outside the pale. With Nie- 
tzsche, however, the Nazis have been able to acquire, if not 
respectability, at least distinction. Nietzsche belongs. 

Ill 

Nazi exegetes have been obliged to quote Nietzsche directly 
and exactly in these days of cheap printing, simple falsifying 
of such texts is difficult. It should be plain, even from the 
necessarily brief and schematic outline of Nietzsche's ideas 
given in previous chapters of this study, that they can find 
much in the Master which they can appropriate directly for 
their own uses. Whatever their ultimate destiny, the Nazis are 
revolutionists, and they are revolting against a society Nietzsche 
had earlier revolted against. A good Nazi curls his lips as 



212 NIETZSCHE 

scornfully around the word "bourgeois" as any Marxist does. 
Nietzsche's contempt for the nineteenth century and all its 
works, his attacks on Christianity, on humanitarian movements, 
on parliamentary government, that "destructive" part of his 
writings which in verve and clarity is the best of his work 
all this is just what the convinced Nazi wants to hear. 

Democracy has in all ages been the form under which organizing strength 
has perished. . . . Liberalism, or the transformation of mankind into 
cattle. . . . Modern democracy is the historic form of the decay of the 
state. . . . The two opposing parties, the socialist and the national or 
whatever they may be called in the different countries of Europe are 
worthy of each other; envy and laziness are the motive powers in each 
of them. . . . The equality of souls before God, this lie, this screen for 
the rancunes of all the baseminded, this anarchist bomb of a concept, 
which has become the last revolution, the modern idea and principle of 
the destruction of the whole social order this is Christian dynamite. 13 

There is also much in Nietzsche that helps to picture, with 
proper vagueness, the new society which, like all revolution- 
aries, the National Socialists are sure they are building. If the 
old society was parliamentarian, pacific, at least in hope, tol- 
erant of individual differences, devoted at least in principle 
to free speech and other civil rights, and contented with an 
unheroic and comfortable present, the new society will be 
authoritarian, militant, contemptuous of such outmoded eight- 
eenth-century notions as those of natural rights and individual 
happiness, a society harsh and heroic, a new Sparta of Super- 
men. Nietzsche's praise of war and the soldier is already a 
commonplace: 

The future of German culture rests with the sons of Prussian officers. 
. . . Peace and letting other people alone this is not a policy for which 

Twilight of the Idols, "Skirmishes in a War with the Age," 39, 38; 
Human, All Too Human, Part I, 472, 480; Antichrist, 62. 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 213 

I have any respect whatever. To dominate (herrschcn) and to help the 
highest thought to victory that would be the only thing that could 
interest me in Germany. . . . The same discipline makes the soldier 
and the scholar efficient; and, looked at more closely, there is no true 
scholar who has not the instincts of the true soldier in his veins. . . . 
Ye shall love peace as a means to new wars and the short peace more 
than the long. . . . War and courage have done more things than 
charity. Not your sympathy but your bravery hath hitherto saved the 
victims. . . , 14 

Now and then in the midst of Nietzsche's aphorisms there 
stands out a passage that might have been written today 
has, indeed, been written a hundred times today: 

Is it not high time, now that the type "gregarious animal" is develop- 
ing ever more and more in Europe, to set about rearing, thoroughly 
artificially, and consciously, an opposite type, and to attempt to establish 
the latter's virtues? And would not the democratic movement itself 
find for the first time a sort of goal, salvation, and justification, if someone 
appeared who availed himself of it so that at last, beside its new and 
sublime product, slavery (for this must be the end of European democ- 
racy) that higher species of ruling and Caesarian spirits might also be 
produced, a kind of men who would stand upon it, hold to it, and 
would elevate themselves through it? This new race would climb aloft 
to new and hitherto impossible things, to a broader vision, and to its 
task on earth. 15 

The Fuehrerprinztp has nowhere been better stated. Here, 
notably, is an ambiguity useful, if also dangerous, to Nazi 
leaders. "Caesarian" suggests that the superiors are very few 
and rule over Germans as well as other peoples; "race" suggests 
that they are fairly numerous, and that all Germans may 
"climb aloft" over the inferior peoples without the Gospel. 

The Nazis can also find support for their current racial doc- 

14 Genealogy of Morals, "Peoples and Countries," 14, 17; Will to Power, 
912; Zarathustra, Part I, chap. 10. 

15 The Will to Power, 954. 



214 NIETZSCHE 

trines in the work of Nietzsche. One passage is especially 
famous, since Allied propaganda in the Four Years' War 
singled it out: 

It is impossible not to recognize at the core of all these aristocratic races 
the beast of prey; the magnificent blonde brute, avidly rampant for 
spoil and victory; this hidden core needed an outlet from time to time 
the Roman, Arabic, German, and Japanese nobility, the Homeric heroes, 
the Scandinavian Vikings, are all alike in this need. It is the aristocratic 
races who have left the idea "Barbarian" on all the tracks in which they 
have marched. . . . The profound, icy mistrust which the German pro- 
vokes as soon as he arrives at power, even at the present time, is always 
still an aftermath of that inextinguishable horror with which for whole 
centuries Europe has regarded the wrath of the blonde Teuton beast. 16 

Haertle quotes this passage with explicit approval in his hand- 
book, and stops short, as do most tough Nietzscheans who quote 
it, at the "blond Teuton beast." Actually Nietzsche continued, 
". . . although between the old Germans and ourselves there 
exists scarce a psychological, let alone a physical, relationship." 
This suppression is indicative of one of the ways in which 
Nietzsche can be adapted for direct political use in the Third 
Reich. 17 

There is even more concretely apposite material for Nazi 
educators in Nietzsche. There is no doubt that the Master 
dabbled in notions of Rassenhygienc (race-hygiene). He wrote 
a good deal about the degeneration of the European upper- 
classes, which he thought came from the reckless breeding of 
true noble families with those who had succeeded in such 
vulgar pursuits as business, banking, the law and medicine. His 

16 Genealogy of Morals, Part I, n. Note that already in 1883, the Japanese 
arc apparently "honorary Aryans." 

"Haertle, Nietzsche und der Nationalsoziatistnus, 62. 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 215 

views, especially in so far as they depend on a knowledge of 
genetics, are not as unzeitgemasse as he liked to think. Nie- 
tzsche accepts the notion of blended inheritance in its simpler 
forms. Occasionally he comes very close indeed to the Nazi 
program, as in the following recommendations in a matter of 
which he probably had less actual experience than is usual, 
even among German philosophers: 

Concerning the future of marriage A super-tax on inherited property, 
a long term of military service for bachelors. . . . Privileges of all sorts 
for fathers who lavish boys upon the world, and perhaps plural votes 
as well. A medical certificate as a condition of marriage, endorsed by 
the parochial authorities, on which a series of questions addressed to the 
parties and the medical officers must be answered ("family histories"). 
As a counter-agent to prostitution, or as its ennoblement, I would recom- 
mend leasehold marriages, to last for a term of years or months, with 
adequate provision for the children. 18 

Scattered through Nietzsche's work is a good deal of material 
suitable for anti-semitic use. Nietzsche himself had Jewish 
friends if one may use the word friendship of any relation 
between Nietzsche and another human being and some Jew- 
ish writers have for years been among the most ardent and 
uncritical of Nietzscheans. Yet most of the stock of profes- 
sional anti-semitism is represented in Nietzsche: the Jews are 
intellectuals with a grievance, hence destroyers of what makes 
for stability in society; they run the press and the stock- 
exchange, to the disadvantage of the slower-witted but more 
honest and healthy Gentiles; they are parasites, decadents; they 
are responsible for the three great evils of modern civilization 
Christianity, Democracy, Marxism. 19 

" Will to Power, 733. 

"For examples, see The Joyful Wisdom, 301; Twilight of the Idols, 



216 NIETZSCHE 

Even when Nietzsche is trying his best, according to his own 
standards, to be fair to the Jews, to be moderate and even- 
tempered, he provides good ammunition for Nazi leaders, who 
have only to excise a few of his qualifying phrases. Take for 
instance one of his most famous and often-quoted passages on 
the Jewish question: 

I have never yet met a German who was favorably inclined to the 
Jews: and however decided the repudiation of actual anti-semitism may 
be on the part of all prudent and political men, this prudence and policy 
is not perhaps directed against the nature of sentiment itself, but only 
against its dangerous excess, and especially against the distasteful and 
infamous expression of this excess of sentiment: on this point we 
must not deceive ourselves. That Germany has amply sufficient Jews, 
that the German stomach, the German blood, has difficulty (and will 
long have difficulty) in disposing of this quantity of "Jew" as the 
Italian, the Frenchman, and the Englishman have done by means of a 
stronger digestion: that is the unmistakable declaration and language 
of a general instinct, to which one must listen and according to which 
one must act. "Let no more Jews come in! And shut the doors, especially 
towards the East (also towards Austria)!" 20 

Nietzsche, then, fits into National Socialist needs both in what 
he damned and in what he praised. He damned democracy, 
pacifism, individualism, Christianity, humanitarianism, both 
as abstract ideals and as, in some vague way, actual descriptions 
of modern European society. He praised authority, racial pu- 
rity, the warrior spirit and practise, the stern life and the great 
health, and urged upon his fellow-citizens a complete break 
with their bad old habits and ideas. The spirit in which he 



Part IV, 26; Will to Power, 184, 864; Beyond Good and Evil, 251; and 
especially Antichrist, 24-27. 

20 Beyond Good and Evil, 251. Clearly a discerning Nazi would need 
to make suppressions here, but the substance is good Nazi doctrine. 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 217 

urged this break, and the book which he hoped would be the 
bible of the new dispensation, are both worth our attention 
here. It may well be that the relatively concrete hatreds and 
hopes we have just been outlining are more fundamental in 
current Nazi education than such Nietzschean abstractions as 
the "transvaluation of all values/' the "Superman" and the 
"Will to Power," or such Nietzschean poetic and prophetic 
strains as resound in Also sprach Zarathustra\ none the less, 
both Nietzsche's metaphysics and his prophetic writings are 
popular in contemporary Germany, and throw additional light 
on the nature of National Socialist plans for the Good Society. 

In fact, most of Nietzsche's grand abstract terms, though 
they can be given a variety of interpretations, contain overtones, 
implications, admirably suited to Nazi uses. The famous phrase 
"Will to Power" suggests ruthlessncss, aggression, a policy of 
expansion perfectly illustrated since Hitler's accession to power. 
The concept of a new race of Supermen, though Nietzsche 
himself left it as obscure in form and in detail as are most such 
eschatological concepts of recent invention, has proved very 
flattering to an aspiring Nazi elite, who have considered that 
they were at least making possible the development of a new 
race of men. 21 

This most famous Nietzschean doctrine is, however, danger- 
ous as well as useful for the purposes of Nazi leaders. It does, 
as we have seen, sketch out a Fuehrcrprinzip; but it also sug- 
gests an inner conflict which may give them real trouble. 
Hitler himself does not conceal that he shares the contempt for 

21 This notion is strong in Oehler, Nietzsche und die Deutsche Ztt^unft, 
and is discernible even in so restrained a book as Haertle's Nietzsche und der 
National sozialism us. 



218 NIETZSCHE 

the masses which is an essential part of the Nietzschean doctrine. 
Such scorn is clear in the famous chapter on "War Propa- 
ganda" in Mein Kampf and in the exposition of the Fuehrer- 
prinzip in the chapter on Personlichfeit und voltyschcr Staats- 
gcdanke. The organization of the State "must in itself be the 
embodiment of the endeavor to put the heads above the masses 
and to subject the masses to the heads," since the masses are 
"incapable of thinking (nicht den^fdhig) or incapable of doing 
so competently," but can attain what is best for them "only 
under the leadership of those whom Nature has endowed with 
special gifts." 22 

And yet, surely eighty million Germans cannot be regarded 
as mere members of the herd, subject to slave-morality ! What 
good is Aryan supremacy if only a chosen few are to share it ? 
The fact is that, however attractive Nietzsche's rather intellec- 
tualized and ascetic ideas of aristocratic leadership may be to 
Nazi leaders, they are hard to adapt to the popular teaching of 
a party which has carefully preserved the word "socialist" in its 
official name. Official Nazi propaganda, in the midst of Kraft 
durch Freude and Labor Fronts, cannot prudently dilate upon 
the theme that ignoble workers exist only for the sake of the 
Supermen above them. Clearly, there are problems in adapting 
Nietzsche to the common men he loathed so vocally. 23 

The "transvaluation of all values" is a phrase admirably revo- 

M Hi tier, Mein Kampf (1932), 497. 

88 Haertle is fully aware of this difficulty. Nietzsche, he admits, "denies 
democracy in itself." This will not do. "Historical experience and the [Nazi] 
organic idea of the Vofy make it impossible for us to follow Nietzsche here." 
But, Haertle continues, Nietzsche was absolutely right in his uncompromising 
struggle against the vicious liberal Egalitdts-Demo\ratie of the West Haertle, 
"Nietzsche und der Nazionalsozialismus, 23. 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 219 

lutionary in character. Indeed, Nietzsche was obsessed with 
the desire for a catastrophic renewing of the world for which 
the word "revolution" is much too mild. As to what could be 
done to achieve this renewal, this transformation, Nietzsche 
was appropriately vague. Nonetheless, as an attack on what 
may be roughly called Christian values, Nietzsche's work is one 
of the most thorough ever made. It seemed in his day and 
still seems much fresher and more effective than the usual 
complaints of weary nineteenth-century Voltaireans or posi- 
tivists, or even of Marxians, since it was directed not merely 
against the theological dogmas but the moral temper and basic 
values of Christianity. The Nazis have found in his philosophy 
a much better base for sniping at organized Christianity than 
in mere conventional free-thinking, partly because it goes so 
well with Nazi scorn for so "Latin" (or "Jewish") an activity 
as reason. 

Positively, they have had a hard time finding much help in 
Nietzsche in their task of restoring Thor and Woden to German 
worship. Amongst so much else, Nietzsche did throw off vari- 
ous remarks in praise of the dionysian spirit of the early Ger- 
mans, and commentators like Baeumler have embroidered 
these remarks and for all, and rather more than all, they are 
worth. 24 However doubtful and obscure Nietzsche's own "Ger- 
manismus" may have been the Nazis can see it clearly now. 
And what is more important, they find Nietzsche's spirit use- 
fully contagious. The passion for remaking, for renewing, the 
desire to be born again, which is found in all great revolutionary 
movements, and especially among the revolutionary elite, finds 

* Baeumler, Nietzsche der Philosoph und Politi1(er, especially Part II, 
section i, "Germanische Grundhaltung." 



220 NIETZSCHE 

among the Nazis a justification and a vocabulary in the words 
of Nietzsche. 

Zarathustra has long been the most read of Nietzsche's books, 
in Germany and out. It is an obscure and deliberately prophetic 
book. Yet the long white robes, prophetic beard, and phospho- 
rescent glance of Zarathustra, though, to anyone with eyes 
trained to look distrustingly on prophets, they look like the 
stage-trappings they are, have unquestionably helped Nietzsche 
to his present prestige in a Germany made by post-war diffi- 
culties a place increasingly suitable for the activities of prophets. 
Zarathustra does not have a program. He never comes out in 
the open with a specific suggestion for reform. But most of the 
ideas Nietzsche works out more sharply in his more analytical 
books appear in Also sprach Zarathustra^ impressively shrouded 
in poetic inspiration. Here Nietzsche trumpets loudly his great- 
est discovery: u God is dead!" Here he calls out: "I teach you 
the Superman. Man is something that is to be surpassed. . . . 
What is the ape to man ? A laughing-stock, a thing of shame. 
And just the same shall man be to Superman, a laughing-stock, 
a thing of shame. . . . Verily a polluted stream is man. One 
must be a sea, to receive a polluted stream without becoming 
impure. Lo, I teach you the Superman: he is that sea; in him 
can your great contempt be submerged." Now and then a 
passage or two stands out, ready for immediate use as a Nazi 
text: "No people could live without first valuing; if a people 
will maintain itself, however, it must not value as its neighbor 
valueth." 25 Zarathustra sounds as far-off as any Hebrew 
prophet, and much more unreal. All the better for Nazi use. 
The vagueness, the dithyrambic energy, the mantic arts, the 
Spa1(e Zarathustra^ Prologue, chaps, ii, iii; Part I, chap. xv. 



NIETZSCHE AND THE.NAZIS 221 

tortured rhetoric of Nietzsche-Zarathustra seem able to move 
men in a way no concrete proposals at the level of mere laws 
or arrangements ever can move them. 

IV 

So much for what the Nazis find good and immediately 
quotable in the work of Nietzsche. There is all told a very 
great deal of it, especially in The Will to Power and in some 
of the unpublished fragments which Baeumler has published 
under the title The Innocence of Becoming. 2 * Yet there is a lot 
more that it would be indiscreet, and indeed dangerous, to 
announce publicly in Germany today without very careful 
attribution to Nietzsche, and some very ingenious explanation 
to boot. Here are a few passages of the sort that the gentle 
Nietzscheans have been flinging back at the tough ones for 
forty years: 

The Germans may well be the most mixed of all peoples. . . . Bismarck 
a Slav. Let anyone look upon the face of the Germans. Everything that 
had manly, exuberant blood in it went abroad. Over the smug populace 
remaining, the slave-souled people, there came an improvement from 
abroad, especially by a mixture of Slavic blood. . . . What a blessing a 
Jew is among Germans! See the obtuseness, the flaxen hair, the blue eye, 
and the lack of intellect in the face, the language, and the bearing . . . 
among Germans. . . . The Jews are beyond all doubt the strongest, 
toughest, and purest race now living in Europe. 27 

Similarly with much more that Nietzsche has to say about 
the Germans, about the Jews, about nationalism, patriotism, 
obedience to law, the future of Europe, and many other topics. 

M A. Baeumler, ed., Die Unschuld des Werdens: Der Nachlass (1931). 
27 Genealogy of Morals, "Peoples and Countries," 13; Beyond Good and 
Evil, 251. 



222 NIETZSCHE 

The Nietzsche who wrote about "we good Europeans" would 
doubtless be in danger of spending a term in a concentration 
camp, were he alive in contemporary Germany. Whether this 
Nietzsche or the Nietzsche who wrote the following remark- 
ably timely passage is the "real" man is not for us to decide: 

I observe more inclination towards greatness in the feelings of the Russian 
nihilists than in those of the English Utilitarians. We require an inter- 
growth of the German and Slav races, ... for us to become masters of 
the world. 

(a) The sense of reality. 

(b) A giving-up of the English principle of the people's right of 
representation. We require the representation of the great interests. 

(c) We require an unconditional union with Russia, together with 
a mutual plan of action which shall not permit any English notions to 
obtain the mastery in Russia. No American future? 

(d) A national system of politics is untenable, and embarrassment by 
Christian views is a very great evil. In Europe all sensible people are 
skeptics, whether they say so or not. 28 

This was written in the i88o's. The ellipsis indicated by the 
three dots in the second sentence above is not Nietzsche's. It 
marks our own deliberate omission of the following words : "and 
we require, too, the cleverest financiers, the Jews." No Nazi 
leader would dare utter those words as Nietzsche wrote them. 
The Master cannot be used without omissions, or exegesis. The 
point is clear. Nietzsche wrote much the Nazis find delightful ; 
he also wrote much they cannot bear to hear, and certainly 
cannot bear to have repeated. In this predicament the gentle- 
men who have set themselves up as interpreters of Nietzsche 
to the people of the Third Reich have pursued various courses, 
some not altogether consistent one with another. 

* Genealogy of Morals, "Peoples and Countries," 17. 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 223 

The simplest solution would of course be to suppress those 
passages in Nietzsche's works which, like those we have just 
quoted on the Jews and the Germans, are flagrantly in violation 
of the best-known and firmest Nazi doctrines. It would be 
almost as simple to deny that Nietzsche ever wrote the offend- 
ing passages, and to reinforce the denial by asserting that the 
offending passages are forgeries, or "Jewish conspiracies," wick- 
edly intended to undermine faith in Nazi saints. The Nazis 
might discover perhaps they have discovered that the Jew 
Paul Ree inserted the offending passages without the Master's 
knowledge. It is still, however, too early for such steps to suc- 
ceed. We are still too near Nietzsche's own time, and know 
too much about the Master. Moreover, the invention of printing 
and the consequent wide distribution of books may actually 
make such suppression or falsification forever impossible. This 
seems a lot to hope for, but perhaps we have grown too despond- 
ent over other failures of invention and enlightenment in this 
world. 

Some Nazi use of Nietzsche's work is at the fairly innocent 
and almost honest level of neglecting the difficulties, of omitting 
all reference to them. Oehler appears to belong in this category. 
His book, Nietzsche and the German Future, is frankly adula- 
tory, almost the work of a gentle Nietzschean. One hardly 
feels, reading it, the supprcssio vcri on which it is based. 
Whether or not it is good propaganda only the faithful can 
judge. It is full of passages like this: 

And so we might turn a sharp passage in the Antichrist quite around, 
and get thereby simply a National Socialist confession of faith. 

"The Cross [Krcuz] as sign . . . against health, beauty, sense, 
bravery, intellect, kindliness of soul against Life itself." 



224 NIETZSCHE 

The Swastika [Hafen^reuz] as sign for health, beauty, sense, 
bravery, intellect, kindliness of soul for Life itself. 29 

If, indeed, Nietzsche's ideas are "sublimated" sufficiently in 
interpretation, they can suit almost anyone and serve almost 
any use. Even in Hitler's Germany, the old professorial tradi- 
tion of the gentle Nietzscheans goes on, and the war he preached 
is still for these kindly souls the sublime war of the spirit. It 
is a war anyone can fight, for it makes no demands on food, 
munition, or oil supplies. 

If suppression outright is impossible, and neglect sometimes 
dangerous, good careful editing can be very useful. Anthologies 
of wisdom from Nietzsche can be constructed out of the most 
impeccable material, and the dangerous passages can be left 
out. Baeumler has done just this with Nietzsche in an ingeni- 
ous popular work entitled "Nietzsche's philosophy as wit- 
nessed by himself," which is composed of extracts from all the 
philosopher's works arranged in two parts, "The System" and 
"Europe's Crisis." 30 It need hardly be said that the nice orderly 
system Baeumler finds in Nietzsche has no place for shocking 
remarks about the virtues of the Jews. Baeumler's carefully 
chosen five hundred-odd passages are all of a kind that could 
be taught any young Nazi. 

Yet the whole works of Nietzsche exist in thousands of copies 
in Germany. The offending passages are there, and may fall at 
any time under eyes ill prepared to distinguish between good 

29 Oehler, Nietzsche und die deutsche Zufanft, 24. 

80 A. Baeumler, Nietzsches Philosophic in Selbstzeugnissen (1931). This 
is the fourth volume of Nietzsches Werke: Auswahl in 4 Baenden published 
in a popular low-priced edition by the Reclam house. Baeumler's Nietzsche 
der Philosoph und Politifer, though also published separately, is bound in 
with this fourth volume of the Reclam edition of Nietzsche's selected works. 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 225 

and evil, and certainly not prepared to go beyond good and evil. 
There are still serious problems before Nazi educators who 
wish to use Nietzsche properly. Probably the commonest solu- 
tion is to blame Nietzsche's errors on his environment. Haertle, 
for instance, admits that Nietzsche did make mistakes. He is 
quite frank about the matter. Some parts of Nietzsche's writ- 
ings, he admits, are really the opposite of Nazi truth. "In the 
measure that the interest in Nietzsche grows, the danger of 
misunderstanding grows" that is, the danger that young 
Germans may actually accept what is anti-Nazi in him as just 
as valid as what is pro-Nazi. Haertle therefore lists "errors" 
very carefully, under headings such as "race," "the Jewish 
question," "state" and so on. But he minimizes their place in 
Nietzsche's work, and always he is able to explain them, usually 
as an effect of the nineteenth-century environment. Nietzsche 
saw many and great truths; but he saw them as from the midst 
of a swamp, the swamp of nineteenth-century liberalism and 
democracy, and inevitably the rising mists obscured his vision. 
When he agrees with the Nazis, he is the prophet to whom is 
granted the true vision of things to come; when he disagrees 
with them, he is the mortal who cannot be expected to rise 
entirely above his environment. 31 

There are variations on this explanation. Such, for instance, 
is the assertion, dear to Baeumler, that Nietzsche had to push 
his thoughts to paradoxical and violent extremes in order to 
make any impression on so stupid an age; that, for instance, he 
had to pretend to see some good things in the Jews and many 
bad things in organized anti-semitism, in order to get any 

81 Haertle, Nietzsche und dcr Nationalsozialismus, especially Part I, "Ein- 
leitung." 



226 NIETZSCHE 

attention, and in order to shake his contemporaries out of their 
fatuous complacence over Bismarck's Reich. Baeumler even 
goes so far as to assert that, since so much of Nietzsche's pub- 
lished work is necessarily cut to fit the author's Machiavellian 
purposes in his warfare with the age, his unpublished work is 
therefore a more trustworthy index of what he really thought. 
Herr Baeumler has, accordingly, published and arranged Nie- 
tzsche's copious literary remains. 32 In the Master's unpublished 
work Baeumler discerns a perfect unity, and points out the way 
in which Nietzsche may ultimately be shown to be infallible 
something always desirable, if not absolutely essential, in a 
Founding Father. Baeumler, whose labors in the cause have 
won him a chair in the University of Berlin, is the leading 
expert in the exegetical study of Nietzsche. He does not, un- 
fortunately, possess any of the Master's grace and vigor of style. 
In fact, his German is heavier and more lumbering than is 
usual even in the learned world. He has, however, great de- 
termination in dialectic, and a lack of humor which in many 
ways makes up for a lack of finesse. 

Baeumler's method is best shown by specific examples. He 
does, it is true, proceed on the blanket assumption outlined 
above that Nietzsche's work is perfectly consistent and per- 
fectly Nazi, and that where it seems to conflict with the party 
doctrine we have either misinterpreted the Master, or misunder- 
stood his immediate purpose in the conflict he waged single- 
handed against an age steeped in liberal and democratic error. 
Baeumler's point-by-point analysis is, however, his really great 
achievement. Nietzsche, for instance, wrote a great deal that 

M See the preface to Baeumler's edition, Nietzsche, Die Unschuld des 
Werdens: Der Nachlass, ix-xl. 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 227 

seems on the surface to be the kind of individualism, even 
anarchism, popular with the superior aesthetic souls of the late 
nineteenth century. 33 Nietzsche has even, by unenlightened 
critics, been coupled with Max Stirner, the author of The Ego 
and Its Own. Certainly one of the things Mr. H. L. Mencken 
and Mr. G. B. Shaw found to admire in Nietzsche was this 
insistence that really strong men are not to be tied down to any 
sentimental identification of themselves with the state or with 
society, or with any other group composed largely of stupid 
men. 

Now in the Nazi state, individualism, anarchism, distrust of 
the state, are forbidden doctrines. Baeumler feels that he has to 
show that Nietzsche under proper conditions would have identi- 
fied himself as whole-heartedly with the state as does any good 
brownshirt. When Nietzsche says he scorns the state, Baeumler 
glosses, he is thinking of the second Reich. The second Reich 
was a state based on the defeat and subordination of the German 
people by Roman and Christian elements. It was based on 
nearly two thousand years of corruption. Nietzsche rightly 
hated this romanized Teutonic (deutsch) state, and when he 
writes that he is "unpolitical" he means he is unpolitical in such 
a state. Similarly, whenever he says cruel things about the 
Germans, he is thinking of these romanized and christianized 
Germans. But Nietzsche always admired the basic German 

tt "We arc feeling the consequences of the doctrine, preached lately from 
all the housetops, that the state is the highest end of man and that there is 
no higher duty than to serve it: I regard this not as a relapse into paganism, 
but into stupidity." Thoughts out of Season, "Schopenhauer as Educator," 
chap. iv. Needless to say this passage, which could be duplicated in essentials 
from any of Nietzsche's works, save perhaps The Will to Power and others 
of his very latest period, is not used as a text by the Nazi preachers. 



228 NIETZSCHE 

(germanisch) qualities of virility, joy, simplicity, strength, and 
so on. Were there on earth a state germanisch instead of 
deutsch, Nietzsche would at once submit himself gratefully to 
such a state. There is now such a state, the Third Reich, and 
Nietzsche is undoubtedly smiling down upon it from Valhalla. 
Baeumler then clinches his argument: Nietzsche hated a Reich 
governed by a Kaiser^ a bad Teutonic copy of the Roman 
Caesar; he would have loved a Reich governed by a head 
ineffably German, a Fuehrer 

It is hardly necessary to pursue Baeumler much further. The 
dialectical skill reported above is characteristic enough. Noth- 
ing, in fact, stumps him. Did Nietzsche call himself something 
that sounds like "freethinker," and does freethinker suggest to 
the uninitiated Voltaire, Tom Paine, and other clearly non- 
German writers? Mistake. "Not Latin freethinking (latein- 
ische Freigeisterei} but Siegfried stands back of Nietzsche's 
attack on Christianity." Even when Nietzsche praises the 
Renaissance, he is praising nothing Latin. He is praising the 
fighting spirit of the period; moreover, the north and central 
Italians Nietzsche admired came of the nobility, and were 
"extremely probably" of German blood. Baeumler ends with 
a little prophetic flight of his own: "The German state of the 
future will not be a continuation of the work of Bismarck; it 
will rather be built out of the spirit of Nietzsche and the spirit 
of the Great War." 35 

The Italians themselves have made Nietzsche a good fascist. 

84 Baeumler, Nietzsche, 88-97. 

85 Baeumler, Nietzsche, 103; 97; 183. My own favorite bit of Baeumler is 
the following: "Only with Nietzsche did the Middle Ages really come to an 
end" (p. 12). 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 229 

These honorary Nordics have also to exercise great skill in dia- 
lectic. One of them writes in a vein worthy of Baeumler: 

Deirintelletto, inteso piuttosto neH'arido senso francesc, che nel gran 
senso romano (che allora, come vide lo stesso Nietzsche, non e piu in- 
telletto, ma superiore ragione) Nietzsche fu nemico asperrimo: e tutta 
la sua vita e tutto il suo pensiero fu piuttosto una musica, musica religiosa 
e cosmica, che tutto distrugge e ricrea dalle fondamenta: musica che 
sorge dal golfo mistico dell'essere, e profonda 1'essere nella notte pura 
del sentimento, nel puro volere, sintesi infinita d'infiniti opposti, rottura 
d'ogni forma, gorgo d'infiniti nembi di possibilita di vita. 36 

The form, as well as the matter, of this sentence seems to show 
that the fascists are actually trying to write Italian as if it were 
German and succeeding pretty well. 

In fact, the easiest and most satisfactory way to use Nietzsche 
is to emphasize grand words and passages which contain a pre- 
ponderance of the kind of words some modern anti-intellectuals 
like to call "meaningless." These words are not, of course, 
meaningless in any but a very narrow sense; their meanings are 
as many as, and as complex as, the "occasions of experience" in 
which they arise. "Freedom" will do as a sample clean 
German Freiheit, not the vicious Liberty Latins and Anglo- 
Saxons use. Haertle writes: 

Against the liberal conception of Freedom, which destroys all organic 
relations, breaks up all natural sense of community, and finally leads to 

W G. Cogni, "Nietzsche e la Germania," Bibliografia jascista (May, 1935)} 
X, 452. (Of the intellect, taken rather in the arid French sense than in the 
grand Roman sense (for then, as Nietzsche himself saw, it is no longer intel- 
lect, but higher reason) Nietzsche was the bitterest enemy; and all his life and 
all his thought was indeed a music, religious and cosmic music, which destroys 
and rebuilds all, from the foundations, music which springs from the mystic 
gulf of being, and sounds the depths of being in the pure night of feeling, in 
pure will, infinite synthesis of infinite opposites, breaking up of all forms, 
whirlpool of infinite storm-clouds of possibilities of life.) 



230 NIETZSCHE 

anarchy or to its counterpart, despotism, against this atomistic conception 
of Freedom, Nietzsche puts squarely the Freedom of the Warrior, which 
grows out of overcoming, out of struggle, Freedom as Victory? 1 

This passage needs no comment. It is sound, uninspired preach- 
ing, for which Nietzsche makes as ready inspiration as any 
other thinker who has great prestige in Nazi Germany. 

Though Baeumler is among Nazi philosophers perhaps the 
ablest at the subtleties of Nietzschean exegesis, even innocent 
folk-teachers like Haertle are obliged to argue and explain: 
Nietzsche's anti-anti-semitism is a particularly hard obstacle 
for Haertle, but one which he has to surmount, for he has de- 
cided that Nietzsche was a Jew-hater. "Priest means for him a 
stylized, typified Jew. . . . The Jews are the bearers of slave- 
morality, the Nordic race the bearers of master-morality." 38 
Why then, was Nietzsche not with those who were seeking to 
stamp out the Jews? Easy. Nietzsche was a Lamarckian, and 
believed in the inheritance of acquired characteristics, in the 
possibility of achieving physiological change by willed changes 
in environment. He therefore thought it possible to make the 
Jews good Germans. This belief was very excusable in 1880. 
But were Nietzsche alive now, he would no longer be a 
Lamarckian. He would no longer believe that the Jewishness 
of German Jews could be altered. He would be a good Nazi, 
eager to cleanse Germany of the Jewish race. 39 

87 Haertle, Nietzsche und der Nazionalsozialismus, 14. That "organic- 
German" and "atomistic- Western" contrast is one of the staples of German 
intellectual life. 

48 Haertle, Nietzsche und der Nazionalsozialismus^ 50. He writes, "ein 
stilisicrter, typisierter Jude." How these corrupt Mediterranean words will 
creep into a Nordic's vocabulary! 

* Haertle, Nietzsche und der Nazionalsozialismus , 44-50, 



NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 231 

The Nazis then, and their fascist followers are tough Nie- 
tzscheans in a more than literary and aesthetic sense. Nietzsche 
is held in high honor today in his native land. He has become 
one of the Early Fathers of the revolutionary Nazi faith. Point 
for point he preached, along with a good deal else which the 
Nazis choose to disremember, most of the cardinal articles of 
the professed Nazi creed a transvaluation of all values, the 
sanctity of the will to power, the right and duty of the strong 
to dominate, the sole right of great states to exist, a renewing, 
a rebirth, of German and hence European society. More 
vaguely, Nietzsche preached the coming of the Superman; and 
though many different ethical values can be, and have been, 
attached to this concept of the Superman, both the Nazi idea 
of the Master-race and the Nazi appeal to the principle of 
leadership (Fuehrerprmzip} are among the most obvious and 
congruous derivatives of that concept. Finally, the emotional 
tone of Nietzsche's life and writings, as distinguished from his 
ideas, is much like what we hear of the emotional tone of inner 
Nazi circles. The unrelieved tension, the feverish aspiration, 
the driving madness, the great noise Nietzsche made for him- 
self, the Nazi elite is making for an uncomfortably large part 
of the world. But these are vague, grand terms. The situation 
can be described much more simply. Nietzsche, like the Nazi 
leaders, was never really house-broken. 



CHAPTER IX 

NIETZSCHE IN WESTERN THOUGHT: 
PROPHECY ON A PROPHET 

NIETZSCHE'S work has been given different interpreta- 
tions. That, at any rate, seems a safe induction from 
experience. Baeumler and Haertle find something very differ- 
ent in Nietzsche from what Andler found, and Andler found 
something very different from what Brandes found. But Nie- 
tzsche was a definite person, and it ought to be possible to agree 
on what he meant ? Perhaps, but if there really was a Nietzsche- 
in-himself, a "true" Nietzsche, he is gone, and what lives after 
him in his books is not one thing but many. Or so it seems to 
the relativist critic. 

No doubt the relativist who likes to be uncompromising a 
paradoxical position, but there are absolute relativists might 
assert that there are as many Nietzsches as there are readers of 
Nietzsche, that his work is therefore subject to n interpretations, 
all of them "true." We shall not attempt here to defend so 
extreme and so meaningless a position. It is possible, however, 
to make several rough classifications of what men have done 
with Nietzsche. We have already developed at some length one 
of them, the distinction between the "gentle" and the "tough" 
Nietzscheans. This is a useful distinction, but it needs refining 
and supplementing. We shall here suggest another, which in 
part cuts across the simple dualism of "gentle" and "tough" 
Nietzscheans, and which attempts to classify interpretations of 



NIETZSCHE IN WESTERN THOUGHT 233 

the Master's works according to the uses to which they are put 
by those who read him today. It is by no means an exhaustive 
classification no useful classification ever is. But after fifty 
years, it is fairly clear that men go to Nietzsche's writings for 
three different purposes, put them to three different uses, which 
are not mutually exclusive. Some go to Nietzsche for an 
aesthetic experience at once tonic and sedative, exalting and 
consoling. Others go to him for his contributions to a "real- 
istic" study of the behavior of men in society, for his tenta- 
tive sketches of a "natural history of morals." Still others go to 
him for support in what looks now like a new religious faith, 
the faith of the Nazis and the fascists. 

Ever since the young and the would-be young rebels of the 
nineties discovered him, Nietzsche has been a refuge and a hope 
for young men and women undergoing the manifold troubles 
of adolescence. To the bright and sensitive youngster who is 
just coming to appreciate with how little wisdom the world is 
governed, how dull, muddled, and unenterprising his once- 
reverenced elders really are, how unending and unearthly are 
the hidden possibilities of life these elders have withheld from 
him, Nietzsche is an incomparable ally. The lad learns with 
delight that in communion with Nietzsche he becomes a free 
spirit, a master; and that his parents and teachers remain no 
more than browsing animals among the herd. He finds con- 
solation in the midst of dull and pointless studies when he 
learns from Nietzsche that the Supermen will be above science, 
grammar and history as well as beyond good and evil. His 
day-dreams are now more than mere day-dreams; they are 
down-goings and over-goings with Zarathustra, as harsh, stoic, 
and masculine as reality indeed, harsher, more stoic and more 



234 NIETZSCHE 

masculine than the petty realities of his daily life. Thus Spake 
Zarathustra has been for many an adolescent a magic land in 
which he at last begins to live. Everything in it is right its 
poetry is chanting ecstasy, its philosophy a white light, its 
message a final evangel. Safe in Zarathustra's bosom, his 
doubts and pains are resolved in a transcendent wisdom. He 
can face his fellow-men, looking down upon them. 

Not, usually, for long; so lofty a position involves a strain. 
The boy grows up, and finds that he is not a Superman, and 
that it is rather tiring to keep on pretending, even to himself, 
that he is one. The world in all its dullness and imperfection 
floods in upon him, and he finds it not unacceptable without 
Nietzsche. There are, of course, perpetual adolescents. There 
are those who, having found Poe a great poet when they are 
sixteen, continue at sixty to find him a great poet. So too with 
some of those who, at sixteen, find Nietzsche a great poet. But 
most of them either find greater poets, or cease to concern 
themselves with poetry. 

There are, however, always fresh generations of adolescents, 
and for them Nietzsche still remains a discovery of their own. 
There is no one who can quite take his place. Aesthetic fashions 
do, it is true, change somewhat, and in our own time some 
youths have found a rather different sort of consolation in the 
poetry of Anglo-Catholicism or in that of high Marxism. But 
if Nietzsche did not exist, it would seem almost necessary to 
invent him. No matter how much simple romanticism may 
be out of fashion, no matter how many good causes invite to 
doing or dying, there seems to be among the young a Welt- 
schmerz a syndrome, not a simple disease for which Nie- 
tzsche is almost a specific, a better one than Byron, or Heine, 
or Poe, or Schopenhauer. These latter are useful, of course, and, 



NIETZSCHE IN WESTERN THOUGHT 235 

since cases are so varied, sometimes even more useful than 
Nietzsche. And there is another specific, often taken along 
with Nietzsche, and valuable as a counter-agent to his exces- 
sively tonic effects. Nietzsche would not have liked it so, but 
Thus Spakf Zarathustra, at least in the English-speaking world, 
belongs in the medicine-cabinet of the adolescent along with 
another near-Eastern brew, Fitzgerald's version of the Rubaiyat 
of Omar Khayyam. 

We have already pointed out that, especially in Beyond Good 
and Evil and The Genealogy of Morals, as well as in many 
aphorisms of his middle period, Nietzsche made no inconsider- 
able contribution to the study of how men behave, and more 
particularly to the study of the relation between their actual 
behavior and their professed beliefs and systems of belief, their 
religions, ethics, philosophies. Much of his work belongs to 
the cumulative study of such problems, of which in our Western 
tradition we have examples as far back as Thucydides and 
Aristotle, and which seems to many of us today to be genuinely 
cumulative, to be on the point of consolidation into something 
like a science of sociology. 1 If we are right, then Nietzsche's 
attempt at a "natural history of morals" will have the permanent 
value of all successful pioneering in scientific work. Its theo- 
rems, so far as they are still useful, will be incorporated in the 
general structure of the science, and will be modified and im- 
proved upon by those who are seeking to advance the science. 
And, even if they are largely superseded, they will continue to 
have a place in the history of the science. 

If, however, we are wrong, and if in spite of Pareto, Freud, 

1 Talcott Parsons, in The Structure of Social Action (1937) endeavors to 
bring out this common cumulative character in the work of men as different 
as Weber, Alfred Marshall, Durkheim, and Pareto. 



236 NIETZSCHE 

Nietzsche, and many another worker in the field, the study of 
man should continue to be rather a part of literature and phi- 
losophy than of science, should continue to vary as do taste and 
fashion rather than to grow cumulatively as do the sciences, 
even then Nietzsche's work as a student of men would seem 
likely to have permanent value. For the "realist," the observer, 
the skeptic, the cynic if you prefer bad names Nietzsche's 
work will probably continue to have a kind of attractiveness 
perhaps not wholly different from the attractiveness it has for 
the romantic adolescent. This second, or "realistic," group is 
naturally on an average rather older in years than our first, or 
"romantic" group. Indeed, it not infrequently happens that an 
individual grows out of the first group into the second. The 
youth for whom Nietzsche was above all the poet of Thus SpaJ^e 
Zarathustra becomes the man for whom he is above all the 
subtle aphorist of The Dawn of Day, the admirable psycholo- 
gist of The Genealogy of Morals. As long as men are attracted 
by the writings of Machiavelli, Montaigne, La Rochefoucauld, 
the Due de St. Simon, as long as they find the pleasant tang of 
unpleasant truth in such remarks as "there is something not 
altogether displeasing to us in the misfortunes of our friends," 
they will be attracted by the Nietzsche who could write: "Our 
sense of observation for how far others perceive our weaknesses 
is much more subtle than our sense of observation for the weak- 
nesses of others. It follows that the first-named sense is more 
subtle than is necessary." 2 
To the third sort of use men have made of Nietzsche's work 

3 La Rochefoucauld, Maxims, "Dans 1'adversite de nos meilleurs amis, nous 
trouvons toujours quelque chose qui ne nous deplait pas." This is the twenty- 
first maxim in the so-called "maximes supprimees." Nietzsche, Human, All 
Too Human, "The Wanderer and his Shadow," 257. 



NIETZSCHE IN WESTERN THOUGHT 237 

we have already consecrated a long chapter. Some of the things 
he wrote have been incorporated into the canons of a hitherto 
very successful revolutionary faith. Whether the treatment 
given Nietzsche's works by the totalitarian world-revolutionists 
is a legitimate use or a shocking abuse is a question for our 
present purpose quite beside the point. Enough that Nietzsche's 
distinction between master-men and herd-men is on the lips, 
and probably also in the heart of many a good Nazi and helps 
give him that sense of justification without which revolutionists 
are mere rioters or conspirators. Enough that Nietzsche's Will 
to Power, immoralism, his Yea-saying with a hammer, all his 
lofty and prophetic rhetoric of violence, help to keep Germans 
and Italians keyed to battle, the battle of the laboratory, factory, 
farm, office, and home as well as the more deadly, but in a sense 
less exhausting, battle of actual war. Enough that Nietzsche's 
writings help and help perhaps more than any other writ- 
ings to give to Germans especially a feeling of mission, of 
alliance with God, Destiny, the World-Spirit, an unbreakable 
alliance with an undefeatable ally. Enough that at the present 
moment Nietzsche-Zarathustra does really look to many ordi- 
nary Germans and not merely to the very literate or the very 
adolescent like the prophet of a new religion. 

Will this role of Nietzsche's also last ? If it does, it will prove 
far more important than his other roles, will perhaps quite 
overshadow them. If it does, Nietzsche will be remembered not 
as a poet, critic, and psychologist, but as a prophet, a founder 
of religion. He will be ranked not with Goethe or Schopen- 
hauer or La Rochefoucauld, but with Buddha, with Christ, 
with Mohammed. 

We cannot sensibly attempt to prophesy very confidently 



238 NIETZSCHE 

about Nietzsche's future as a prophet. Far too many variables 
are involved, for Nietzsche's place as a prophet depends on the 
success of a totalitarian world-revolution, or at least on its par- 
tial success, and on what happens to it under the stimulus 
and sedative of success. The social sciences do not yet afford 
us instruments adequate to handling such variables, and in mat- 
ters so complex and far-reaching, rule-of-thumb wisdom is a 
poor substitute for scientific knowledge. Furthermore, an 
American writing in 1940 is extremely likely to make his pre- 
diction the child of his hopes and fears; he can hardly help 
wanting to have the totalitarians fail, to have them and all their 
works perish from the earth. 

We may, however, risk a few tentative conclusions based, as 
well as we can base them, on the way revolutionists endeavoring 
to establish a new society and a new set of religious and moral 
beliefs have behaved in the past. This may be an unjustified 
procedure. The totalitarians may have achieved something new 
and unprecedented instruments of social control, machines, 
military power that make revolt impossible, some combination 
of means to perpetuate the new order they are working for. 
Nietzsche's doctrines may in themselves have some new com- 
pelling power. But none of these possibilities seems at all like 
a probability. The armies of the totalitarian powers, their 
Gestapos, their one-party organizations, their factories, their 
labor-fronts, their elaborate controls over the sentiments and 
opinions of their citizens that is, their various substitutes for 
the Church are all run by human beings. And it is still fairly 
safe to assume, as the historian must assume, that in the long 
run human beings will continue to behave like human beings. 

We may, then, hazard the opinion that even if the totali- 



NIETZSCHE IN WESTERN THOUGHT 239 

tarians are victorious in the present struggle; even if under 
German hegemony the totalitarian revolutions are as successful 
in establishing for the immediate future the spiritual values of 
the Western world as were for us the English, American and 
French revolutions of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries; 
and even if Nietzsche comes to be a sort of Locke-Rousseau- 
Jeflferson for the 'new order even then there will be no 
Nietzschean "transvaluation of values." If established Chris- 
tians failed to be heroically compassionate, it is likely that 
established Nazis will fail to be heroically cruel. If established 
democrats failed to make men quite equals, it is unlikely that 
established totalitarians will succeed in making them quite un- 
equals. We may appeal from Nietzsche the prophet to Nie- 
tzsche the observer, and urge with the latter that a natural 
history of morals shows that men have never lived up to their 
moral professions, and that there is a kind of moral equilib- 
rium of average human conduct, neither very "good" nor very 
"bad" in terms of any moral code ever devised. This equilibrium 
seems to be determined by social and biological factors very 
slow to change rather than by theories, ideas, ideals, preachings, 
which can change very rapidly. When under the impetus of 
revolution this equilibrium suffers a disturbance, all sorts of 
men are temporarily lifted or impelled into "living danger- 
ously," into a desperate attempt to bring Heaven or Hell to this 
earth. But with almost the regularity and certainty of a physico- 
chemical reaction, the impetus exhausts itself, and something 
like the original equilibrium returns. 8 

8 1 have attempted to study this general process in more detail as regards 
the English, American, French, and Russian revolutions in my Anatomy of 
Revolution (1938). 



240 NIETZSCHE 

In the kind of crisis the world is now undergoing, there seems 
something unpleasantly, and indeed dangerously, Laodicean in 
such reflections. There's no use trying to beat the Nazis, we 
may seem to imply; they will beat themselves anyway. Better 
sit back and do nothing; the equilibrium will take care of 
itself it always has. Any such interpretation, however, con- 
tains a serious misunderstanding of what we have been trying 
to bring out. Any such interpretation is a shocking simplifica- 
tion, even of logic. The equilibrium is no static absolute. It 
changes, develops, certainly in part under the impetus of revo- 
lutions, certainly in part under the control of thinking and feel- 
ing men, certainly in part even under the influence of prophets 
like Nietzsche-Zarathustra. No sensible person would main- 
tain that because it is impossible, even with all our practical 
and scientific knowledge of animal husbandry, to make a sheep 
into a gazelle, it is therefore impossible, if we want to, to breed 
more agile and graceful sheep, or even, by careful training, 
feeding and other kinds of control, to make existing sheep a 
trifle more agile and graceful. The Nazis will not make men 
into Supermen; they will not even very greatly change them. 
But they may change them, indeed they already have probably 
changed some of them, slightly in directions that must seem to 
most persons brought up in the United States very undesirable 
directions. 

It may be that in order to oppose most effectively what the 
Nazis are trying to do, we must believe they are devils about to 
transform all humanity into devils. It may be that we cannot 
fight effectively unless we are all of us conditioned to belief in 
absolutes, to intolerance, to a single-minded concentration on 
the task of achieving the impossible. We may have to be 



NIETZSCHE IN WESTERN THOUGHT 241 

fanatics to prevail over fanatics, drunken to beat the drunken. 
But one of the strongest strains in the intellectual tradition we 
like to think of as that of the Western world is the rational and 
scientific strain. We are committed by that tradition to attempt 
to understand the social process and to guide that process slowly, 
realistically, and with as little violence as possible, by rational 
means towards rational ends. And neither Nazi means nor 
Nazi ends, as expressed in the deeds of their leaders and the 
words of their prophets, can seem to us rational. We cannot 
believe that their means will possibly attain the ends they 
profess to be working for; but we must believe that their means 
are bad ones, and that they should be checked. We may not 
succeed in checking them. Certainly we understand pathetically 
little about social change, but we must work with what little 
we have, or Nietzsche will indeed be enthroned as a prophet. 

There is certainly a difficulty not too well concealed in all 
these fine words. It is probably a difficulty insoluble in words. 
We have argued that if we try to think rationally, "scientifi- 
cally," about what the Nazis are doing, we come to the conclu- 
sion that they are not behaving sensibly. But does that mean 
anything more than that they are not behaving as we should 
like to have them behave ? Or to put it another way, granted 
that it is possible to make sense out of the phrase "rational 
means," is it at all possible to make sense out of the phrase 
"rational ends"? Is not the scientific method limited to the 
study of means? Is it not therefore silly to maintain that a 
preference for democracy over totalitarianism can find any 
justification in the scientific attitude ? 

Certainly we are driven back ultimately to questions of value, 
of ends, of which we can only say, we want it so. Even the 



242 NIETZSCHE 

device, a favorite one with rationalists and empiricists, of call- 
ing an end "useful" instead of "good" is perhaps only a dodge. 
But we live by dodges, unless we are philosophers. And the 
absolute can be dodged; we can make even our superlatives 
comparative. We can, with an effort, put the most attractive 
paradoxes out of our minds, if only by having recourse to a final 
paradox: the unattainable is unattainable. 

Simply as a matter of faith, if you like, we may unworriedly 
assert that our way of life is more rational than the Nazi way 
of life. And we may unworriedly try to make our way of life 
prevail, even though we think that, since it is rational, it is 
bound to prevail. Indeed, experience gives excellent grounds 
for believing that men get more nearly what they want when 
they think they are bound to get what they want because God, 
Destiny, Nature, or Dialectical Materialism is on their side. 
We need not be ashamed to claim that Science and Reason are 
on our side. They are rather pale and colorless, as gods go, but 
they have got on well for quite a while with other gods the 
Christian God, for instance. They promise less, but they may 
give more, than the god the Supergod of Nietzsche and 
the Nazis. 

For this god is a little too new, a little too shiny and brassy. 
A really effective god is very hard to invent. Indeed, it was 
Nietzsche's failure to realize this that made his notion of the 
"Jewish conspiracy" so inadequate an explanation of the origins 
of Christianity. It does not seem that even in an attenuated 
form, even in a "transvaluation," Nietzsche's positive doctrines 
the Supermen, the Will to Power, the transvaluation of all 
values, the Eternal Recurrence, and the rest can be made the 
stuff of a religion to hold large numbers of men together. Great 



NIETZSCHE IN WESTERN THOUGHT 243 

religions may be a striving after the impossible, but not a striv- 
ing after the paradox. There is something abstractly, noisily 
yes, and coldly intellectual about Nietzsche's work that 
makes it almost unadaptable to the religious needs of ordinary 
men. His excitements, his transportments are cerebral; his 
absolute a little squirrel running frantically about the cage of 
Nietzsche's mind. There is nothing earthy in this scorner of 
the Christian heaven. Even his madness is not divine, not even 
commonplace, but intellectual. The Supermen, if they come, 
will probably forget him, along with the rest of history. Until 
they come, his work will doubtless continue to look rather 
more like a Rubaiyat than a Koran. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

There are already hundreds of books on Nietzsche, and probably 
thousands of articles. Most writing about Nietzsche is in German 
but all the modern languages are well represented. The following 
bibliography represents a very considerable winnowing process. It 
is meant chiefly to afford the student a guide to the intensive study 
of Nietzsche, and is directed especially at English-speaking students. 
I have marked with an asterisk books I consider essential to the 
minimum basic Nietzsche collection. The division between works 
primarily biographical and those primarily critical is, of course, no 
more than a rough one. Most big books on Nietzsche are, like 
Andler's, both critical and biographical. 



NIETZSCHE'S WORKS 
A. THE WRITINGS 

Die Gcburt der Tragodie (The Birth of Tragedy), 1872. 

V nzeitge masse Betrachtungen (Thoughts out of Season), 1873-1876. 

Menschliches, Allzumenschliches (Human, All Too Human), 1878. 
With the above in most current editions are now included: Vermischte 
Meinungen und Spriiche (Miscellaneous Maxims and Opinions), 1879, 
and Der Wanderer und sein Schatten (The Wanderer and his Shadow), 
1879. 

Morgenrote (The Dawn of Day), 1881. 

Die Frohliche Wissenschaft (The Joyful Wisdom), 1882. 

Also sprach Zarathustra (Thus Spake Zarathustra), 1883-1884. 

Jenseits von Gut und Bose (Beyond Good and Evil), 1886. 

Zur Genealogie der Moral (The Genealogy of Morals), 1887. 

Der Fall Wagner (The Case of Wagner), 1888. 

Gotzendammerung (Twilight of the Idols), 1889. 

Der Antichrist (The Antichrist), 1902. 



248 NIETZSCHE 

Nietzsche contra Wagner, 1901. 

Ecce Homo, 1908. 

The three last titles above, published posthumously, are works de- 
signed as such by Nietzsche himself. 

Der Wille zur Macht (The Will to Power), 1909-1910. 

This book is a collection of Nietzsche's fragments, put together under 
his sister's directions. It is no more than scattered materials for the 
book of that name Nietzsche planned as his great work. 

Nietzsche, Historisch-}(ritische Gesamtausgabe: Werfo (Munich: 
C. H. Beck'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1933-). 

This is the standard collected edition. Unfortunately only the follow- 
ing have appeared up to 1940: Vol. I, Jugendschriften, 1854-1861; 
Vol. II, Jugendschrijten, 1861-1864; Vol. Ill, Schriften dcr Studenten- 
und Militdrzeit, 1864-1866; Vol. IV, Schrijten der Studenten- und 
Militarzeit. Letztc Leipziger Zeit, 1866-1868. A most complete and 
scholarly edition. But at present it stops short of Nietzsche's real 
work. 

Nietzsche's Wer\e, 19 vols. (Leipzig: 1895-1913). 

This is the so-called Grossoctavausgabe, edited by Nietzsche's sister. 
It includes, besides the usual books, three volumes called Philologifa 
now vols. Ill and IV of the new historisch-kritische Gesamtausgabe 
just mentioned. There is also a Kleinoctavausgabe with the same 
pagination, in which Philologifo is not available. Both these sets are 
now out of print. 

Nietzsche, Die Unschuld des Werdens: Der Nachlass, edited by 
A. Baeumler, 2 vols. (Leipzig: Philipp Reclam, 1931). 

This is a valuable collection of odds and ends of Nietzsche's remains, 
some not elsewhere available. 

There are numerous German reprints of separate works, especially 
of Also sprach Zarathustra, pocket editions, and so on. 
*The Complete WorJ(s of Friedrich Nietzsche, edited by Dr. Oscar 
Levy, 1 8 vols. (London: 1909-1913). 

This is the authorized English edition! It really is "complete" save 
for the juvenilia, the philological writings, and some fragments. The 
translations, by various hands, are usually adequate, sometimes ex- 
cellent. 

*The Philosophy of Nietzsche, a "Modern Library Giant," with an 
introduction by W, H. Wright (New York: 1937). 

A single volume, an admirable choice of the most representative of 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 249 

Nietzsche's writings Zarathustra, Beyond Good and Evil, The 
Genealogy of Morals, Ecce Homo, and The Birth of Tragedy and 
quite sufficient for a general reader who wants a direct acquaintance 
with Nietzsche. 

B. CORRESPONDENCE 

Nietzsche, Historisch-\ritische Gesamtausgabe: Brief e (Munich: C. H. 
Beck'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1938-). 

Of this only the following have appeared: Vol. I, Briefe der Schuler 
und Banner Studentenzeit, 1850-1865-, Vol. II, Briefe der Leipziger 
und ersten Easier Zeit, 1865-1869. This is in some ways more valuable 
than the Wcrfy in the same edition, for a great deal of careful anno- 
tation makes the edition very easy to use; and there are no other 
adequate editions of the letters. 

Friedrich Nietzsche's Gesammelte Briefe, 5 vols, Vol. V in two parts 
(Berlin and Leipzig). The separate volumes exist in different print- 
ings, up to 1909. 

This edition is the work of Nietzsche's sister. It certainly contains 
Nietzsche's most important letters. But it omits many proper names 
of then living persons. There are many scattered letters which pre- 
sumably will be brought together in the new historisch-ftritische 
Gesamtausgabe. Meanwhile, many of them are listed in K. Jaspers, 
Nietzsche (Berlin and Leipzig: 1936). 

^Selected Letters of Friedrich Nietzsche, edited by Dr. Oscar Levy 
(London: William Heinemann, 1921). 

Based on the five-volume edition in German mentioned above. The 
translator is A. M. Ludovici. These are the best collected letters avail- 
able in English. 

La vie de Frederic Nietzsche d'apres sa correspondance, textes choisis 
ct traduits par Georges Walz (Paris: Rieder, 1932). 

This is a more generous choice of Nietzsche's letters than is available 
in English. 

An indispensable tool for a thorough study of Nietzsche is the 
concordance to the works, by R. Oehler, published as Vol. XX of the 
Grossoctavausgabe in 1926 and separately as Nietzscheregister (Leip- 
zig: F. Kroner, 1926). It refers to pages and volumes of either the 
Gross or the Klcinoctovausgabc. 



250 NIETZSCHE 

n 

MAINLY BIOGRAPHICAL 

*Andlcr, Charles, Nietzsche, sa vie et sa penstc, 6 vols. (Paris: Bossard, 
1920-1931). 

Vol. II, La jeunesse de Nietzsche and Vol. IV, La maturite de Nietzsche 
jusqua sa mort are mainly biographical. This is the most scholarly 
study of Nietzsche's life. It neglects no important evidence, and tries 
to hold the balance between the Nietzschc-Archiv and Bernoulli- 
Overbeck. But it is frankly adulatory, the work of a very gentle 
Nietzschean. Andlcr actually thinks Nietzsche was at heart a socialist! 

Andreas-Salome, Lou, Friedrich Nietzsche in seinen Werfan, new 
edition (Dresden: C. Reissner, 1927). 

Unaltered reprint of the original edition of 1894. Lou "reveals" less 
personally than might be expected. Remains an interesting source for 
Nietzsche's biography. 

*Bernoulli, C. A., Franz Overbec\ und Friedrich Nietzsche: Eine 
Frcundschajt, 2 vols. (Jena: 1908). 

This, with its opposite, the work of Elizabeth Forster-Nietzsche, is 
the basis of any study of Nietzsche biography. Bernoulli has on the 
whole kept himself out of his book, content to put together material 
Overbcck had accumulated. Overbeck was a sensible man, who liked 
and admired Nietzsche, but who was aware of, and reported, traits 
not brought out by Elizabeth. The publication of this book began 
a most undignified feud, carried on in the best traditions of the 
German learned world, between Elizabeth and Bernoulli. Elizabeth 
got a court judgment suppressing from Vol. II of OverbecJ^ und 
Nietzsche certain letters of Peter Cast's which the court decided 
were her property, as Nietzsche's heir. These passages arc inked 
over in most copies of this volume, but with patience the words can 
be made out beneath the inking. They are not important. 

Brann, H. W., Nietzsche und die Frauen (Leipzig: Meiner, 1931). 
A very fair treatment of a difficult subject. Inevitably a certain amount 
of psychiatric and psychological jargon. Brann's general view is that 
Nietzsche wanted very much to have a normal sexual life, and that 
his failure to attain that purpose further disturbed his mental and 
physical balance. 

Cohn, P., Urn Nietzsches Untergang (Hannover: Morris- Verlag, 1931). 
A modernized version of the pietistic Nietzsche- Archiv attitude to- 
wards Nietzsche's health. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 251 

*F6rster-Nietzsche, E., The Life of 'Nietzsche, translated by A. M. Ludo- 
vici, 2 vols. (London and New York: 1912-1915). Vol. I, The 
Young Nietzsche] Vol. II, The Lonely Nietzsche. 

This is for most purposes the most useful of the various biographical 
writings his sister Elizabeth devoted to Nietzsche. It is pure worship, 
straight hagiographical writing. Elizabeth had all of her brother's 
determination, energy, and sense of being right. Otherwise, she was 
very stupid. She has no capacity at all for handling ideas. The book 
does, however, give biographical details nowhere else available. 

Halvy, D., The Life of Friedrich Nietzsche, translated from the French 
by J. M. Hone (London: 1911). 

This is a good translation of a well-known French short life of 
Nietzsche, published in France in 1909. It is based largely on Eliza- 
beth Forster-Nietzsche's work, but put together with infinitely more 
literary skill and tact. It is most sympathetic towards Nietzsche, who 
is pictured as a heroic martyr to Truth and Beauty in a vulgar, 
anarchic society. Halevy writes with full French sentimentality. 

Meyer, R. M., Nietzsche, sein Leben und seine Wer\e (Munich: 1913). 
One of the pleasantest and soberest of German lives. 

Miigge, M. A., Friedrich Nietzsche. His Life and Wor\, third edi- 
tion (London: 1911). 

Part IV, pages 385-442, is headed "Bibliography and Iconography." 
It is very thorough, covering magazine articles in the major European 
languages. That a bibliography in 1911 could be so huge is sympto- 
matic. It could no doubt be tripled in length today. Miigge's Life 
is not a distinguished one. 

Podach, E. F., Nietzsches Zusammenbruch (Heidelberg: N. Kamp- 
mann, 1930). French translation, L'Effondrement de Nietzsche 
(Paris: Librairie Gallimard, 1931). English translation, The Mad- 
ness of Nietzsche (London and New York: Putnam, 1931). 

The soundest general treatment of Nietzsche's physical and mental 
ills. Podach's notes incorporate a very full bibliography of the sub- 
ject up to 1930. 

Der Kran\e Nietzsche: Briefe seiner Mutter am Franz Qverbcc\, 
edited by E. F. Podach (Vienna: Bermann-Fischer Verlag, 193?) 
These letters from his mother to Ovcrbeck cover the years 1889 to 
1897, and give all sorts of details of Nietzsche's last illness. 



252 NIETZSCHE 

III 

MAINLY CRITICAL 
A. NIETZSCHE'S IDEAS 

*Andler, C., Nietzsche, sa vie et sa pensie. 

Vol. Ill, Le pessimisms esthetique de Nietzsche, Vol. V, Nietzsche et le 
transjormisme intellectual} stc, Vol. VI, La derniere philosophic de 
Nietzsche arc concerned with the exposition and criticism of Nietzsche's 
ideas. This part of Andler's work has been especially criticized in 
Germany, on the ground chiefly that Andler is not "philosopher" 
enough, that he is mere literary historian. There is no doubt some 
nationalistic feeling involved here. Andler 's work is somewhat un- 
systematic and rambling. Its chief defect is its softening of Nietzsche's 
doctrines into the spiritual equivalent of French radical socialism. 

*Baeumler, A., Nietzsche der Philosoph und Politi\er (Leipzig: 
Philipp Reclam, 1931). 

The orthodox, modern Nazi interpretation. The section on Nietzsche 
as philosopher is not too obviously tied up with politics. 

Bertram, E., Nietzsche: Versuch einer Mythologie (Berlin: G. Bondi, 
1918). Translated into French as Nietzsche, Essai de Mythologie, 
by R. Pitrou (Paris: Rieder, 1932). 

This is a very popular work in Germany, where it has gone through 
many editions. It is literary, imaginative, "profound," in the tradition 
of German gentle Nietzscheans, with post-war elaborations. Like the 
later work of laspers, it gives glimpses of what the Nazis were to 
make of Nietzsche, but it is basically contrary to Nazi ideas and prac- 
tices. 

Brock, W., Nietzsches Idee der Kultur (Bonn: F. Cohen, 1930). 

Buscher, G., Nietzsches Wirfyches Gesicht (Zurich: A. Rudolf, 1928). 
One of the relatively few thoroughly hostile German works on 
Nietzsche. Incidentally, it was published in Zurich. 

Cams, Paul, Nietzsche (New York: 1914). 

A very hostile book. Carus attacks from the point of view of a nine- 
teenth-century "progressive," a positive empiricist. Nietzsche himself 
was very fond of ridiculing these people, having begun with David 
Strauss. Not a good, nor even a well-composed book. Nietzsche's 
opponents generally have not been of the intellectual calibre of his 
supporters. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 253 

*Faguct, E., En lisant Nietzsche (Paris: 1904). 

A very neat job of exposition, in some ways the best French writing 
on Nietzsche. Insufficiently appreciated by most Nietzscheans. 

Figgis* J- N., The Will to Freedom, or the Gospel of Nietzsche and the 
Gospel of Christ (London: 1917). 

The author of From Gerson to Grotius is not at his best in this book, 
which is badly organized and hastily written. But it is a good example 
of Nietzsche's hold over men of culture everywhere. Figgis resists 
Nietzsche, but feels his "charm." 

Fischer, Hugo, Nietzsche Apostata oder die Philosophic des Aergcr- 

nisses (Erfurt: K. Steuger, 1931). 

Havenstein, M., Nietzsche als Erzieher (Berlin: E. S. Mittler and 
Sohn, 1922). 

Treats rather of Nietzsche as philosopher than as "educator" in a 
specific sense; on the whole not out of the ruck of German books 
on Nietzsche, of which there are many too many. 

Horneffer, E., Nietzsche-Vortrdge (Leipzig: A. Kroner, 1920). 

Jaspers, K., Nietzsche (Berlin and Leipzig: W. de Gruyter, 1936). 
One of the last, and most subtle and thorough studies of Nietzsche 
in the German academic tradition, essentially a form of "gentle" 
Nietzscheanism. Jaspers is almost willing to admit that Nietzsche 
is what the reader finds in Nietzsche but not quite. This book also 
has an admirable bibliography, in which Jaspers goes beyond con- 
ventional listing of books into a discussion of what kinds of writing 
on Nietzsche we still need. 
Joel, K., Nietzsche und die Romanti^ 2te Auflage (Jena: E. Diederichs, 

1923). 

Klages, L., Die Psychologischen Errungenschajten Nietzsches (Leip- 
zig: J. A. Barth, 1926). 

A long over-due study of Nietzsche's place as a psychologist, and his 
part in modern anti-intcllectualism. An important book, if only for 
its influence. Klages is a romantic wildman, who sees Nietzsche as 
freeing men from the tyranny of Geist and giving them over to the 
unconscious, irrational, ecstatic capacities civilization has not wholly 
stifled at least, not in Germany. 

Knight, A. H. J., Some Aspects of the Wor\ of Nietzsche, and Par- 
ticularly of his Connection with Gree\ Literature and Thought 
(Cambridge: The University Press, 1933). 
Sound, pleasant scholarship. 



254 NIETZSCHE 

Lasserre, P., Les idies de Nietzsche sur la musique (Paris: Garnicr 
Freres, 1919). 

*Lichtenbergcr, H., The Gospel of Superman, translated from the 
French by J. M. Kennedy (New York: Macmillan, 1926). 

For English-speaking students, this is the handiest form of Lichten- 
berger's La philosophic de Nietzsche, first published in French in 
1898. It has the advantage of containing a later preface (1925) by the 
author. Lichtenberger was one of the early French Nietzscheans, but 
he remained a sensible and restrained one. He is less maudlin about 
the Master's gentle soul than Halevy or Andler; but he is sure 
Nietzsche is un homme de bonne volonte. 

*Mencken, H. L., The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, third edition 
(New York: 1913). 

One of Mr. Mencken's earliest literary efforts. A good, colorful, ex- 
position, assimilating Nietzsche to Mr. Mencken's own comfortable, 
hearty contempt for democratic mediocrity. 

Mess, F., Nietzsche der Gesetzgeber (Leipzig: F. Meiner, 1930). 
An enthusiastic jurist sees in Nietzsche a law-giver, Lycurgean rather 
than Hitlerian. 

More, P. E., Nietzsche (Boston: 1912). 

A slender booklet, one of the relatively few thoroughly repudiating 
Nietzsche's whole work. Unlike Figgis, More was not "charmed" 
by Nietzsche. More's position is that of a cultivated Christian admirer 
of Plato, on whom almost every sentence of Nietzsche's grates pain- 
fully. 

Obenauer, K. J., Friedrich Nietzsche, der eJ(statische Nihilist (Jena: 
E. Diederichs, 1924). 

Richter, R., Friedrich Nietzsche: sein Leben und sein Wer\, y.t 
Auflage (Leipzig: F. Meiner, 1917). 

Sixteen lectures delivered at the University of Leipzig. Emphasizes 

Nietzsche as a philosopher of growth, evolution. Clear, a bit heavy. 

Riehl, A., Friedrich Nietzsche, der Kunstler und der Denser (Stutt- 
gart: 1897). 

One of the best of the early critical expositions of Nietzsche's philosophy. 

Rittelmeyer, Friedrich Nietzsche und die Religion. Vier Vortrdge 
(Ulm: 1904). 

This is a good example of the respect German protestant ministers 
often held for Nietzsche. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 255 

Salter, W. K., Nietzsche the Thinker: A Study (New York: 1917). 
Thorough, conscientious exposition and defense of Nietzsche as a 
gentleman and seer, written partly against the Anglo-American clamor 
about Nietzsche's responsibility for the War of 1914. 

Stein, L., Friedrich Nietzsches Weltanschauung und ihre Gefahren 
(Berlin: 1893). 

An early cry of alarm. 

Vaihinger, H., Nietzsche als Philosoph (Berlin: 1902). 
An admirable analysis and commentary. 

Wright, W. H., What Nietzsche Taught (New York: 1915). 

The creator of Philo Vance here makes a routine analysis of Nietzsche's 
writings, book by book. 

B. NIETZSCHE'S RELATIONS WITH OTHER THINKERS 

The whole field of Nietzsche's Belesenheit, of his reading, his in- 
tellectual debts to predecessors and contemporaries, is best covered 
by Andler. The whole of Vol. I, Les precurseurs de Nietzsche, is a 
meticulous, sometimes far-fetched, study of possible "influences" on 
Nietzsche. The other five volumes touch frequently on Nietzsche's 
intellectual debts. All such studies in the affiliation of ideas are, of 
course, weakened by the fact that we don't know very much about 
how ideas breed. Andler's assumptions as to the origins of ideas and 
their spread are those of the ordinary nineteenth-century French 
scholar trained as a literary historian. 

Belart, H., Friedrich Nietzsche und Richard Wagner (Berlin: 1907). 
One of the standard brief treatments. Of course all the biographers of 
Nietzsche have paid particular attention to the Wagner episode. This 
is true of the major three: Elizabeth Forster-Nietzsche, C. A. Bernoulli 
(Overbeck) and Charles Andler. 

Dippel, P. G., Nietzsche und Wagner (Berlin: P. Haupt, 1934). 
(Reprinted from Sprache und Dichtung, Vol. LIV.) 

General essay on their relations, main interest psychological. 

*The Nietzsche-Wagner Correspondence, edited by E. Forster- 
Nietzsche, translated by Caroline V. Kerr (New York: Boni 
and Liveright, 1921). 

Elizabeth's pathetic attempt to agree with Wagner and her brother 

at the same time. 



256 NIETZSCHE 

Griesser, L., Nietzsche und Wagner (Vienna: Holder-Pichler-Tempsky, 

19*3)- 

A rather prolix account of their psychological and "ideological" rela- 
tions. 

Hildebrandt, K., Wagner und Nietzsche: Ihr Kampf gegen das XIX 
Jahrhundert (Breslau: F. Hirt, 1924). 

An indication of the coming National Socialist use of both of these 
German culture-heroes. 

Lessing, T., Schopenhauer, Wagner, Nietzsche (Munich: 1906). 

One of the best comparative studies of the ideas of Nietzsche and his 
two "masters." 

Lowith, K., Kierkegaard und Nietzsche (Frankfurt am Main: V. Klos- 

termann, 1933). 
Podach, E. F., Gestalten um Nietzsche (Weimar: E. Lichtenstein, 

I93 2 )- 

Extremely valuable work on some of Nietzsche's friends and their 
relations with him that on Cast is especially good. 

Rosengarth, W., Nietzsche und George (Leipzig: R. Hadl, 1934). 
Simmel, G., Schopenhauer und Nietzsche, 3te Auflage (Munich: 

Duncker and Humblot, 1923). 
Strecker, K., Nietzsche und Strindberg (Munich: G. Muller, 1921). 

IV 

NIETZSCHE'S REPUTATION AND INFLUENCE 
A. GENERAL 

It is too bad that the late Charles Andler, who knew more about 
Nietzsche than any scholar ever has known, did not add a volume 
on Le rayonnement des idees de Nietzsche. This most important 
study of what men have made of Nietzsche's ideas is the most neg- 
lected phase of Nietzschean scholarship. I have had to piece together 
my chapters on Nietzsche's reputation and influence from very diverse 
materials. Here I list only those books that deal with fairly large 
aspects of Nietzsche's influence. 
Benda, J., La trahison des clercs (Paris: B. Grasset, 1927). Translated 

into English by R. Aldington as The Treason of the Intellectuals 

(New York: W. Morrow, 1928). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 257 

Nietzsche is for Benda one of the most important of the literary men 
of our time who have "betrayed" us. 

Bianquis, Genevieve, Nietzsche en France (Paris: F. Alcan, 1929). 
By a disciple of Andler. Thorough and very useful. Good bibliography. 

Deesz, Gisela, Die Entwic\lung des Nietzsche-Bildes in Deutschland 
(Wurzburg: K. Triltsch, 1933). 

A doctoral dissertation, and rather slender. Deals chiefly with the 
interpretation of Nietzsche by German academic philosophers from 
Vaihinger to Baeumler. A useful, if limited, summary. 

Gundolf, E. and Hildebrandt, K., Nietzsche als Richter unser Zeit 
(Breslau: F. Hirt, 1923). 

Homeffer, E., Nietzsche als V or bate der Gegenwart (Diisseldorf: 
A. Bagel, 1935). 

Nicolas, M. P., De Nietzsche a Hitler (Paris: Fasquelle, 1936). English 
translation, From Nietzsche down to Hitler (London: W. Hodge 
and Company, 1938). 

A warm defense of Nietzsche from "abuse" by the Nazis. Nicolas 
insists that nothing in Nietzsche's writings can be legitimately and 
logically given a sense favorable to the Nazis. The notes cover a good 
range of the literature on Nietzsche. 

Spengler, O., "Nietzsche und sein Jahrhundert," in his Reden und 
Aujsatze (Munich: C. H. Beck'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1937). 
More of Spengler. 

Spenle, J. E., "Nietzsche mediateur spirituel entre la France ct 1'Alle- 
magne," Mercure de France (Paris), CCLXXVI (1937), 275. 

Alas! 

Stewart, H. L., Nietzsche and the Ideals of Modern Germany (Lon- 
don: 1915). 

A good example of a book produced by the Four Years* War. Stewart 
thinks Nietzsche had a large part in preparing Germany to make 
the aggression of 1914. 

B. NIETZSCHE AND THE NAZIS 

A bibliography here, especially if extended to magazine articles, 
would be very extensive. The following will, I think, give the reader 
a satisfactory notion of the official place Nietzsche now (1940) has in 
the "ideology" of the Nazi movement. 



258 NIETZSCHE 

Abcrdam, S., "Nietzsche et le 3 me Reich," Mercure de France (Paris), 
CCLXXV (1937), 225. 

The old French Nietzschean tradition, always dear to the Mercure dc 
France. Nietzsche was really doux, tendre> and the Nazis are 
abusing his memory. Contains some useful material. 

Baeumler, A., Nietzsche der Philosoph und Politil(er (Leipzig: Philipp 
Reclam, 1931). 

A brief popular statement, now become authoritative in view of 
Bacumler's present chair at the University of Berlin. 

Baeumler, A., "Nietzsche und der Nationalsozialismus" in his Studicn 
zur dcutschen Geistesgeschichte (Berlin: Junker and Diinnhaupt, 

I937)- 

Cogni, G., "Nietzsche e la Germania," Bibliografica fascista (Rome), 
loth year (1935), 451. 

A long review of the French translation of Bertram's Nietzsche> with 
many side-lights on the fascist view of Nietzsche. 

Gawronsky, D., Nietzsche und das Dritte Reich (Bern: Herbert 

Lang* I935)- 
Giinther, H. F. K., Der nordische Gedan\e unter den Deutschen 

(Munich: J. F. Lehmann, 1927). 

Haertle, H., Nietzsche und der Nationalsozialismus, 2te Auflage 
(Munich: F. Eher Nachfolger, 1939). 

A veritable handbook, listing what of Nietzsche a good Nazi can 
accept, and what he must reject. First published in 1937, it has 
already had a second edition. 

Kirchner, E., "Nietzsches Lehren im Lichte der Rassenhygiene," 
Archiv fur Rassen- und Gesellschajtsbiologie (Berlin), XVII (1926), 

379- 
Lauret, R., "Nietzsche et le 3 me Reich," Le Temps (Paris, October 22, 

1934)- 

Lefebvre, H., Nietzsche (Paris: Editions sociales internationales, 1939). 
Chapter iii is entitled "Nietzsche et notre temps." Lefebvre on the 
eve of the current war concludes that Nietzsche was in no sense a 
fascist, Nazi, or totalitarian. He was a socialist, and his ideas "fall 
naturally in with the Marxist conception of man." Lefebvre and 
Haertle (see above) are almost word for word and on almost every 
point in complete contradiction as to what Nietzsche meant: this, no 
doubt, is a sign of Nietzsche's final success as a philosopher. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 259 

Lonsbach, R. M., Nietzsche und die Juden (Stockholm: Bermann- 
Fischer Verlag, 1939). 

Lonsbach is a gentle Nietzschean, who maintains that Nietzsche meant 
the nice things he said about the Jews, but that the bad things he said 
about them must be worked into a higher synthesis. The book was 
not published in Germany. 

Ludovici, A., "Hitler and Nietzsche," English Review (London), 
LXIV (1937), 44, 192. 

Ludovici was rather more than an appeaser at this time he was 
frankly pro-Hitler. He holds that the Nazis have restored the "bio- 
logical" and "pre-Socratic" values, and arc hence good Nietzscheans. 
Mie'ville, H. L., Nietzsche et la volonte de puissance, ou faventure 

Nietzscheenne et le temps present (Lausanne: Payot, 1935). 
Mis, L., "Nietzsche et Stefan George, pr^curseurs dc 3 rac Reich," 
Revue d'histoire de la philosophic (Paris), nouvelle scrie, fascicule 
ii (July 15, 1935), 204. 
Oehler, R., Friedrich Nietzsche und die deutsche Zu\unjt (Leipzig: 

Armanen- Verlag, 1935). 
Prinzhorn, Hans, Nietzsche und das XX Jahrhundert (Heidelberg: 

N. Kampmann, 1928). 

Scheuffler, G., Friedrich Nietzsche im Dritten Reich (Erfurt: E. 
Scheufflcr, 1933). 

A little pamphlet, emphasizing the curious notion that Nietzsche 
would have approved especially the National Socialist effort to do 
away with classes. 



INDEX 



INDEX 

Abcrdam, S., i98n Dehn, F., 2o8n 

Adams, H., 140 Deussen, P., 20, 173 

Andler, C., 14, 172, 188 Dilthey, W., 181 

Andreas-Salome, Lou, 55, 94, 175 Dionysian, 39 
d'Annunzio, G., 191, 194 

Apollinian, 39 Ellis, H., 191, 202 

Ariadne, 70 Emerson, 81 

Aristotle, 170 Engadine, 51 

Auernheimer, R., 2ion Erdmann, F., 207n 

Eternal Recurrence, 76, 139 

Babbitt, I., 91, 161 Euripides, 39 
Bachofen, J. J., 27 

Bacumler, A., 65, 207, 209n, 221, 224, Forster, B., 68 

225 Forster-Nietzschc, E., 7, 22, 32, 56, 
Basle, 27 67, 71, in, 177, 209 

Bayrcuth, 45, 46 Franconia Corps, 17 

Bergson, 95 Frederick the Great, 126 

Bernhardi, von, 202 Fuehrerprinzip, 213, 217 
Bernoulli, C. A., 32, 73n 

Bertram, E., i97n Cast, P., 49, 51, 67, 72, 173 

Bismarck, 126 Gersdorff, C. von, 20, 31 

Brandes, G., 69, 174, 191 Gide, A., 189, 191 

Brann, H. W., i6n Gobineau, 206 

Bridgman, P. W., 132 Granier, R., nn 

Buddha, 100 Gutmann, P., I93n 
Burckhardt, J., 27, 31 

Halevy, D., 188 

Carlyle, 80 Hartmann, E. von, 176 

Chamberlain, H. S., 206 Haertle, H., 207, 210, 214, 225, 230 

Chase, S., 132 Haug, O., 2o8n 

Christianity attacked by Nietzsche, 97 Hegel, 39, 130, 145 

Cogni, G., 229n Herder, 39 

Comte, 145 Hitler, 171, 193, 208, 217 

Crocc, 95 

Jaspers, K., 73n 

Dante, 116 Joel, K., i92n 

Darwin, 81, 145, 147 Johannes, M. O., 20811 



264 INDEX 

Kant, 19, 87, 115, 153 

Kasslcr, K., 2o8n 

Kennedy, J. M., 191 

Klages, L., 94, 198 

Klingenbrunn, 47 

Koran, 243 

Kosselitz, P. (Peter Cast), 49, 51, 67, 

73> i?3 
Krug, G., 9n 

Lamarck, 27, 230 
Levy, O., 191, 202 
Lichtenberger, H., 187 
Ludovici, A., 195, 198 

Mann, H., 172 

Mark Twain, 81 

Mehring, F., 181 

Mein Kampj, 218 

Mencken, H. L., 97, 196, 227 

Mess, F., 192 

Messer, A., 203 

Meysenbug, M. von, 49, 51, 56, in 

Mill, J. S., 81 

Mobius, P. G., 72n 

Mussolini, 171, 209 

Napoleon, 133 
Naumburg, 6 
Nicolas, M. P., i93n 
Nietzsche, Elizabeth (Frau Forster- 
Nietzsche), 7, 22, 32, 56, 67, 71, 
in, 177, 209 
Nietzsche, F. W.: 

admirer of Renaissance, 31, 92 

ambulance worker, 33 

ancestry, 3 

anti-anti-semitism, 230 

anti-idealist, 87, 151 

anti-rationalist, 84 

anti-romanticist, 91, 161 

anti-semite, 105, 215 



Nietzsche, F. W. (cont.) : 
aphoristic methods, 74, 183 
appearance, 21, 54 
aristocratic aspirations, 29 
attack on Christianity, 97 
attack on democracy, 107 
classical background, 77 
critic, 161 

education, 8, 14, 24 
Eternal Recurrence, 76, 139 
final insanity, 69 
finances, 50 

French influences, 48, 61, 79 
friendships, 31 

Germany and the Germans, 114 
health, 5, 15, 22, 33, 43, 52, 69 
ideas on priests, 101, 134 
ideas on race, 99, 114, 122, 127, 221 
ideas on warriors, 134 
influences upon, 19, 76 
middle-class background, 6 
moralist, 164, 235 
musical tastes, 13, 113 
nationalist, 99 
observer, 168 
philologist, 18, 42, 77 
philosophy of history, 144, 162 
poetry, 66, 160, 234 
professors, in 
program, 119, 222 
prophet, 237 
publishers, 59 
reformer, 168 

relation to his own times, 142 
relation to modern anti-intellectu- 

alism, 83, 95, 149, 235 
relations with Wagner, 35, 48, 49, 

112 

religious background, 78, 94 
reputation in England, 190, 194, 202 
reputation in France, 178, 187 
reputation in Germany, 175, 186, 198 



INDEX 



265 



Nietzsche, F. W. (cont.): 

reputation in United States, 190, 196 

reputation in war of 1914-1918, 200 

social life, 28, 67 

socialism, 125 

subject of doctoral theses, 179 

Supermen, 123, 129, 138, 217 

teacher, 41, 43, 121 

transvaluation of all values, 136 

unity of his ideas, 75, 182 

visits to Italy, 51 

Will to Power, 132, 217 

women, 109 

womenfolk, 7 

writer, 25, 58, 157 
Nietzsche, F. W., writings: 

Antichrist, The, 64, 65 

Beyond Good and Evil, 62 

Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit 
of Music, The, 38 

Case of Wagner, The, 63 

Dawn of Day, The, 60 

De Laertii Diogenis fontibus, 19 

Ecce Homo, 64, 65 

Genealogy of Morals, The, 62 

Human, All Too Human, 49 

Joyful Wisdom, The, 60 

Thoughts out of Season, 45 

Thus Spa^e Zarathustra, 52, 61, 220 

Twilight of the Idols, The, 64 

Will to Power, The, 65 
Nietzsche-Archie, 13, 18, 22, 201, 209 
Nietzscheans, "gentle," 184, 197, 221; 

"tough," 185, 194, 231 
Nordau, M., 177 

Oehler, R., 207, 223 
Overbeck, F., 32, 69, 71 

Paine, T., 84, 228 
Parsons, T., 235n 
Plato, 90, 150, 170 



Podach, E. F., i5n, 23n, 72n 
Prinzhorn, H., 207 

Raabe, H., i6n 
Ranke, L. von, 154 
Rassenhygiene, 121, 214 
Ree, P., 49, 55, 223 
Ritschl, F., 18 
Robespierre, 124 
Rohde, E., 20, 31, 42, 67, 173 
Romundt, H., 32, 34 
Rosenberg, A., 206 
Rousseau, 91 
Rubaiyat, 235, 243 
Russia, 126 
Riitimeyer, L., 27 

Saint Paul, 100, 133, 166 

Sainte Beuve, 80 

Salome, Lou (Frau Andreas-Salome), 

55> 94, i?5 
Salter, W. M., 196 
Scheler, M., i92n 
Scheuffler, G., 207 
Schiller, 39 

Schopenhauer, 18, 45, 78, 131 
Schulpforta, 10 
Shaw, G. B., 194, 198, 227 
Sils-Maria, 51, 69 
Socrates, 39, 83 
Spencer, H., 95, 155, 191 
Spengler, 39, 206 
Spinoza, 90 
Stirner, M., 227 
Strauss, D., 45, 84, 115 
Strindberg, A., 69, 174 

Taine, H., 174 

Tonnies, F., 177 

Treitschke, H. von, 191, 202, 206 

Triebschen, 35 

Turin, 51, 68 



266 INDEX 

Vaihinger, H., 175 Whitehead, 95 

Voltaire, 49, 228 Wilamowitz, U. von, 42 

Wright, W. H., 196 
Wagner, Cosima, 35, 70, in 
Wagner, R., 20, 35, 40, 42, 45, 70, 78, Zola, 92 

173 Zoroaster, 61 



