
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON LIBRARIES 



Estate of Solomon Katz 



PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 
IN THE MIDDLE AGES 



LONDON : HUMPHREY MILFORD 
Oxford University Press 



LOUIS CLARK VANUXEM FOUNDATION 

PHILOSOPHY 

AND CIVILIZATION IN 

THE MIDDLE AGES 

BY 
MAURICE DsWULF 

PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LOUVAIN 

AND IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY 
MEMBER OF ACADEMIES OF BRUSSELS AND OF MADRID 



PRINCETON 

Princeton University Press 
1922 



Copyright, 1921, Princeton University Press 



PUBLISHED, 1922 
REPRINTED, 1924 



The Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, U.S.4. 



PREFACE 

THE material of these lectures, which I had the 
honor of delivering at Princeton University, on the 
Vanuxem Foundation, was prepared, during the 
War, at the Universities of Harvard, Poitiers, and 
Toronto. Certain portions of the work, relatively 
few, have already appeared in the form of articles, 
viz. : part of Chapter I in the Revue de Mttaphys- 
ique et de Morale, July, 1918; Chapter IV, ii, in 
the Philosophical Review, July, 1918; Chapter V, 
iii, in the International Journal of Ethics, January, 
1919; Chapter III, ii, and Chapter VII, i-v, in the 
Harvard Theological Review, October, 1918. 
These now take their place as integral parts of 
what may be regarded as a supplement to my His- 
tory of Mediaeval Philosophy. 

The purpose of the study as here presented is to 
approach the Middle Ages from a new point of 
view, by showing how the thought of the period, 
metaphysics included, is intimately connected with 
the whole round of Western civilization to which it 
belongs. My work represents simply an attempt 
to open the way; it makes no pretense to exhaustive 
treatment of any of the innumerable problems in- 
volved in so vast a subject. 

I desire to express my cordial thanks to the 
friends who have aided me in translating these lee- 



Vi PREFACE 

tures, in particular to Mr, Daniel Sargent, of Har- 
vard University. And it is a special duty and 
pleasure to acknowledge my obligations to Profes- 
sor Horace C. Longwell, of Princeton University, 
who has offered many valuable suggestions while 
assisting in the revision of the manuscript and in 
the task of seeing the work through the press. 

Harvard University 
January, 1022 



ANALYTICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 

CHAPTER ONE 

INTRODUCTION 

i. Relational aspects of philosophy in the Middle Ages. ii. 
Methods, iii. The importance of the twelfth century and 
of the thirteenth century in mediaeval civilization* iv. Sur- 
vey of these centuries. 

CHAPTER TWO 

SURVEY OP CIVILIZATION IN THE TWELFTH CENTURY 

i. Feudal Europe, ii. Catholic influences: Cluny, Citeaux, 
the bishops, the Pope. iii. A new spirit: the value and 
dignity of the individual man. iv. New forms of art. v. The 
twelfth century one of French influences. 

CHAPTER THREE 

THE CIVILIZATION AS REFLECTED IN PHILOSOPHY 

i. Location of philosophical schools; invasion of French 
schools by foreigners, ii. Delimitation of the several sci- 
ences; philosophy distinct from the seven liberal arts and 
from theology, iii. Harmony of the feudal sense of personal 
worth with the philosophical doctrine that the individual 
alone exists, iv. The feudal civilization and the anti-realistic 
solution of the problem of universals. 

CHAPTER FOUR 

THE GREAT AWAKENING OF PHILOSOPHY IN THE 
THIRTEENTH CENTURY 

i. The causes: The acquired momentum, ii. The rise of the 
Universities (Paris and Oxford), iii. The establishment of 
the mendicant orders (Dominicans and Franciscans), iv. 
The acquaintance with new philosophical works; translations, 
v. General result: among the numerous systems the schol- 
astic philosophy issues as dominant, vi. The comprehensive 
classification of knowledge. 



Viii CONTENTS 

CHAPTER FIVE 

UNIFYING AND COSMOPOLITAN TENDENCIES 

i. Need of universality; the "law of parsimony." ii. Excess 
resulting from the felt need of simplifying without limit; 
the geocentric system and the anthropocentric conception, 
iii. The society of mankind ( (f university humana") in its 
theoretical and practical forms, iv. Cosmopolitan tenden- 
cies. 

CHAPTER SIX 

OPTIMISM AND IMPEBSONALITT 

i. Optimism in philosophy, in art, in religion, ii. Imperson- 
ality, iii. History of philosophy and literary attribution. 
iv. Perenniality. 

CHAPTER SEVEN 

SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY AND THE RELIGIOUS SPIRIT 
i. Common definition of scholastic philosophy as a religious 
philosophy, ii. Reflective analysis of the distinction between 
philosophy and theology, iii. The religious spirit of the 
epoch, iv. Connections of philosophy with religion not af- 
fecting the integrity of the former, v. Subordination of phi- 
losophy to Catholic theology in the light of this analysis, vi. 
Solution and adjustment of the problem, vii. Influences of 
philosophy in other fields. Conclusion. 

CHAPTER EIGHT 

INTELLECTUALISM 

i. Intellectualism in ideology, ii. In epistemology. iii. In 
psychology (free volition), iv. More generally (psychology, 
logic, metaphysics, ethics, aesthetics), v. In other forms of 
culture. 

CHAPTER NINE 

A PLURALISTIC CONCEPTION or THE WOELD 

i. What metaphysics is. ii. Static aspects of reality, iii. 
Dynamic aspects; the central doctrine of act and potency, 
iv. Application to substance and accident; to matter and 
form. v. The problem of individuation. vi. Human per- 
sonality, vii. God: as pure existence. 



CONTENTS IX 

CHAPTER TEN 

INDIVIDUALISM AND SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY 

i. Social theory the last addition to scholastic philosophy. 
ii. Fundamental principle: the group exists for its mem- 
bers, and not conversely, iii. Ethical foundation of this 
principle, iv. The idea of the group in the teaching of can- 
onists and jurists, v. Metaphysical basis: the group not an 
entity outside of its members, vi. Comparison of the group 
with the human body. vii. Conclusion. 



CHAPTER ELEVEN 

THE THEOEY OP THE STATE 

i. Sovereignty from God. ii. It is a function; morality of 
governors not different from that of the governed; what 
the function implies, iii. Sovereignty resides in the people 
who delegate it iv. The best form of government according 
to the philosophy of Thomas Aquinas, v. Making of laws 
the essential attribute of sovereignty: natural law and hu- 
man law. vi. This form of government compared with the 
European states of the thirteenth century; with the modern 
nationalities; with the theories of preceding centuries. 



CHAPTER TWELVE 
THE CONCEPTION OP HUMAN PEOGEESS 

i. The constant and the permanent, ii. Progress in science, 
in morals, in social and political justice, in civilization. 

CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

PHILOSOPHY AND NATIONAL TEMPERAMENT IN THE 
THIRTEENTH CENTURY 

i. Scholastic philosophy reflected in the temperament of the 
peoples who created it. ii. Three main doctrines: the value 
of the individual; intellectualism ; moderation, iii. Schol- 
astic philosophy the product of Neo-Latin and Anglo-Celtic 
minds; Germanic contribution virtually negligible, iv. Latin 
Averroism in the thirteenth century, v. The lure of Neo- 
Platonism to the German, vi. The chief doctrines opposed 
to the scholastic tendencies: lack of clearness; inclination to 
pantheism; deductive method d outrance; absence of moder- 
ation. 



X CONTENTS 

CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

EPILOGUE 

i. Influence of thirteenth century philosophical systems on 
later thought in the West. ii. Pedagogical value of scholasti- 
cism for the history of modern philosophy. 

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
INDEX OF NAMES 



PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 
IN THE MIDDLE AGES 



CHAPTER ONE 

INTRODUCTION 

i. Relational aspects of philosophy in the Middle Ages. ii. 
Methods, iii. The importance of the twelfth century and of 
the thirteenth century in mediaeval civilization, iv. Survey 
of these centuries. 



THE study of mediaeval philosophy has undergone 
considerable change in recent years, and the de- 
velopments in this field of research have been im- 
portant. On all sides the soil has been turned, and 
just as in archaeological excavation, as at Pompeii 
or at Timgad, here too discoveries unexpectedly 
rich are rewarding our search. For such men as 
John Scotus Eriugena, Anselm of Canterbury, 
Abaelard, Hugo of St. Victor, John of Salisbury, 
Alexander of Hales, Bonaventure, Albert the 
Great, Thomas Aquinas, Duns Scotus, Siger of 
Brabant, Thierry of Freiburg, Roger Bacon, Wil- 
liam of Occam, these are truly thinkers of the 
first order, and their labours are worthy of the 
notable studies now increasingly made of them. 



2 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

There is, further, a host of other philosophers whose 
thought has been unveiled, and whose significance 
will become the more clear as historical research 
progresses. 

The study of mediaeval philosophy, however, has 
heretofore contented itself chiefly with establishing 
actual doctrines, and with indicating their develop- 
ment or the connection between one philosopher 
and another, while little attention has been given 
to the historical setting of these doctrines in the 
mediaeval civilization itself . But in the throbbing 
vitality of a civilization there is an interdependence 
of the numerous and complex elements constituting 
it; such, for example, are the economic well-being, 
the family and social institutions, the political and 
juridical systems, the moral and religious and aes- 
thetic aspirations, the scientific and philosophical 
conceptions, the feeling for progress in human de- 
velopment. The interdependence of these various 
momenta is perhaps more readily apparent in the 
realms of economics and politics and art, but it is to 
be found also in the operation of the intellectual 
and moral factors. 

It might seem at first sight that philosophy would 
enjoy a certain immunity from the vicissitudes of 
temporal change, because of the problems with 
which it deals; but closer view reveals that it too 
is caught inevitably within the meshes of the tem- 
poral net. For the work of Plato or of Aristotle, 
this is admitted as a commonplace by the historians 



IX THE MIDDLE AOES 8 

of philosophy; the thought of these philosophers 
reflects the conditions of the Athenian society of 
their day. Similarly, no one pretends to arrive at 
a proper understanding of such thinkers as Francis 
Bacon 'and Hobbes except in the light of the politi- 
cal and economic and the broadly cultural condi- 
tions of their age. Just so in our study of 
mediaeval philosophy, we may not properly con- 
sider Anselm, or Thomas Aquinas, or William 
of Occam as men whose thoughts float free without 
anchorage. They too are the sons of their age. 
Nay more, there is a certain philosophical atmo- 
sphere which is created by the collective thought 
of numerous thinkers; and this is subject to influ- 
ences issuing from the spirit of the age, in its eco- 
nomic, political, social, moral, religious and artistic 
aspects. Moreover, while philosophical thought 
is thus affected from without, it also exerts its own 
influence in turn upon the general culture with 
which it is organically connected. 

For the thought of the Middle Ages the time has 
come when we must take account of this mutual 
dependence. Indeed we may even regard with ad- 
vantage the example of natural history, whose mu- 
seums no longer exhibit their specimens as so many 
lifeless objects in a bare cage, -on the contrary, 
they are represented as if they were still alive in 
their native jungle. 

The point of view, therefore, which we choose 
for our treatment in these lectures, is that of the 



4 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

relational aspects in mediaeval philosophy a study 
which relates the philosophy to the other factors in 
that civilization taken as an organic whole. We 
shall be concerned therefore less with isolated per* 
sonalities than with the general philosophical mind 
of the age, its way of conceiving life and reality. 

II 

Before indicating the chronological limits and the 
general outline of our study, it is of paramount 
importance to examine a question of method which 
confronts us at the outset, the right solution of 
which is of great consequence: Just how may we 
understand the mediaeval civilization in order to 
judge it aright? 

To understand the mediaeval civilization, to 
penetrate into its very spirit we must first of all 
avoid forcing parallels with the mentality and cus- 
toms of our own age. Many a study has been 
marred because its author was unable to resist this 
temptation. Mediaeval civilization is not the same 
as that of our own age. Its factors have a differ* 
ent meaning; they were made for men of a differ- 
ent age. Charlemagne's famous sword can now be 
wielded only with great difficulty, and the heavy 
armor of the iron-mailed knights no longer suits 
the needs of our twentieth-century soldiers. Nor is 
it otherwise with the mediaeval civilization consid- 
ered as a whole; it is not fitted to our own con- 
ditions. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 5 

Further, in order to understand the Middle Ages, 
we must think directly after their manner of think- 
ing. When a beginner commences the study of a 
foreign language, he is invariably advised to think 
directly in that language, instead of painfully trans- 
lating words and phrases from his native tongue. 
Just so a right study of the civilization of the Mid- 
dle Ages must take it in and for itself, in its in- 
ternal elements and structure; it must be under- 
stood from within. To this end each factor must 
be separately considered and defined, in itself 
and also with due regard to the particular signifi- 
cance attaching to it at any given epoch. 

Furthermore, the several factors that make up 
a civilization should be collectively examined and 
viewed as a coherent whole; for only so is its unique 
harmony revealed. Such a harmony varies from 
one period to another. Therefore, we should vio- 
late the most elementary principles of historical 
criticism, if we were to predicate of the fifteenth 
century truths which apply only to the twelfth and 
the thirteenth centuries; or to attribute to forma- 
tive periods such as the tenth and the eleventh cen- 
turies what is evidenced only in the central period 
of the Middle Ages. 

If the above principles of internal criticism are 
necessary in discerning the spirit of mediaeval civi- 
lization, they are no less indispensable for arriving 
at a just estimate of that spirit. While this civili- 
zation is different from our own, it is not to be 



PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

judged as either worse or better. To determine its 
worth we must not compare its institutions with 
those of to-day. It is positively distressing to see 
historians, under the spell of special sympathies, 
proclaim the thirteenth century the best of all cen- 
turies of human history and prefer its institutions 
to our own. Such laudatores temporis acti really 
injure the cause which they intend to serve. But it 
is equally distressing to see others, more numerous, 
decry thirteenth-century civilization, and strenu- 
ously declaim against the imprudent dreamer who 
Would carry certain of its ideas and customs into 
our modern world. To go back to the Middle Ages 
is out of the question; retrogression is impossible, 
for the past will ever be the past. To prefer to our 
railways, for instance, the long and perilous 
horseback rides of that age is of course absurd; 
but in the same way, to depreciate the Middle 
Ages by contrasting them at all with our modern 
ways of living, thinking, or feeling seems to me 
meaningless. 

This would be tantamount to reviving the errors 
of the Renaissance, which was infatuated with its 
own world and disdained everything mediaeval. 1 
This error has been strangely persistent, and it 
merits examination because of the lessons entailed. 
Disdain for the past begot ignorance, ignorance be- 

iThe very name "Middle Ages" was disparaging; it implied an in- 
termediary stage, parenthetical, with no value saving that of con- 
nection between antiquity and modern times. 



IN THE MIDDLE AQES 7 

got injustice, injustice begot prejudice. Being un- 
able or unwilling to go back to thirteenth-century 
documents, the critics of the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries judged the whole period by reference to 
late and decadent scholasticism; the golden age was 
thus involved in the condemnation deserved only by 
the age of decadence. The historians of the eight- 
eenth century, and of the beginning of the nine- 
teenth century, inherited the estimate thus erron- 
eously made by the men of the Renaissance and the 
Reformation; they accepted it uncritically and 
passed on the error unchanged. That, in brief, is 
the story of the perpetuation of the reproach at- 
taching to the Middle Ages. 2 

A singular instance of the loss involved in thus 
failing to appreciate the merits of the past is the 
contempt which was professed for the "Gothic" 
architecture, both because of its mediaeval origin 
and because the term came to be synonymous with 
"barbaric." One can understand, to be sure, how 
through ignorance or routine or education cul- 
tured minds in the Renaissance period might refuse 
to open dusty manuscripts and bulky folios; their 
preference for humanistic works, such as those of 
Vives or of Agricola or of Nizolius or of others even 
more superficial to the dry subtleties of the con- 
temporary "terminists" is perfectly intelligible. 
But it is inconceivable to us how the great cathe- 

2 Cf. my Histoire de la Philosophic MMUvak, Louvain, 191% p. 
106. 



8 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

drals of Paris, Rheims, Amiens, Chartres, Cologne, 
and Strasbourg failed to find favour with men of 
cultivated taste, and how they could have been in* 
eluded in the general condemnation of things me- 
diaeval. For, those wonders in stone were not hid- 
den in the recesses of library cases. On the con- 
trary, they raised high above the cities their spires, 
their arches, their silhouettes, and, indeed, as an 
heroic protest against the injustice of men. That 
a revival of Greek architecture might have aroused 
enthusiasm is easily intelligible; but it is hard to un- 
derstand how Montesquieu, Fenelon, Goethe, who 
passed daily such Gothic cathedrals, could turn 
away from them and speak of them disparagingly 
and even refuse to cross their thresholds, being, as 
they said, the remnants of a decadent age. Goethe's 
confession on this point is significant indeed. He 
tells us how at the beginning of his stay at Stras- 
bourg, he was wont to pass the cathedral with in- 
difference; but one day he entered, and as he did so 
his eyes were fascinated with a beauty which he 
had not before seen; thereafter, not only did he 
give up his prejudices against Gothic art, but he be- 
came enamoured of the beautiful cathedral that 
raises its red-brown spires above the plains of 
Alsace. "Educated among the detractors of Gothic 
architecture," he writes, "I nourished my antipathy 
against these overloaded, complicated ornaments, 
which gave the effect of gloomy religion by their 
very oddity. . . . But here I seemed suddenly to 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 9 

see a new revelation; what had been objectionable 
appeared admirable, and the reverse, the percep- 
tion of beauty in all its attractiveness, was im- 
pressed on my soul." 8 

The discredit in which mediaeval art was held 
has now definitely yielded to a more just estimate. 
Romanesque and Gothic architecture are now uni- 
versally acknowledged to be things of beauty in 
and for themselves; certainly, in any case, without 
reference to the architecture of the twentieth cen- 
tury. Again, we acknowledge the merit of Giotto's 
frescoes, of the translucent stained glass of Char- 
tres, without estimating them by modern standards 
of painting. 

Similarly, no one today would commit himself 
to the prejudice, also not so old, that before Rous- 
seau nature was not understood and that the thir- 
teenth century was ignorant of its beauty. All of 
those who are familiar with the sculpture of the 
cathedrals and with illuminated manuscripts, or 
who have read the Divine Comedy of Dante and 
the poems of St. Francis, know how unjust that re- 
proach is; and they never compare the thirteenth- 
century interpretation of nature with that of our 
modern writers. 

This marked contrast, between our appreciation 
of mediaeval art and the condemnation of it in the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, indicates the 
canons to which we should adhere in reaching a just 

a Goethe, Dichtung und Wahrheit, Buch IX, Teil 2. 



10 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

judgement of the past. Plainly, in order to under- 
stand the value of things mediaeval, we must have 
recourse to a standard other than that set by the 
conditions of our own time. For, what is true of 
art is also true of all other factors in a civilization. 
If, then, we are to estimate aright the civilization 
of the thirteenth century, we must refer it to a 
fixed norm: the dignity and the worth of human 
nature. This will be readily granted by all who be- 
lieve that human nature remains essentially the 
same, in spite of historical changes; and of course 
this was the common mediaeval doctrine.* By this 
standard a civilization stands high when it achieves 
its own intense and coordinated expression of the 
essential aspirations of the individual and the col- 
lective life; when it realizes, in addition, an adequate 
degree of material welfare; when it rests also on a 
rational organization of the family, the state, and 
other groups; when it allows, further, for full de- 
velopment in philosophy, science and art; and 
when its morality and its religion foster their ideals 
on a basis of noble sentiments and refined emotions. 
In this sense the civilization of the thirteenth cen- 
tury must be counted among those that have suc- 
ceeded in attaining to a high degree of perfection; 
for, certain unique functions and aspirations of 
humanity are therein revealed, and indeed in rare 
and striking form. Hence it furnishes us with 
documents of the first importance for our under- 

Seech. XII, i. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 11 

standing of humanity; and for this reason it may 
instruct our present generation as it surely can all 
those to come. Homo sum, nil humaru a me alie- 
num puto. 

From this point of view, and from this alone, 
may we properly call good or bad let us not say 
better or worse certain elements in our heritage 
from the Middle Ages. The praise or the blame 
which may be given to things mediaeval in these 
lectures will not proceed from a comparison of me- 
diaeval conditions with those of our own age, but 
rather by reference to their harmony, or lack of it. 
with the essential nobility of human nature. We 
may speak then of things good and beautiful 
achieved by the Middle Ages; for they are human 
realities, even though they are enveloped within the 
historical past. The Fioretti of St. Francis, the 
Divine Comedy of Dante, the cathedrals, the feudal 
virtues, these are all sparks of the human soul, 
scintillae ardmae, whose lustre cannot be obscured; 
they have their message for all of humanity. And 
if certain doctrines in scholastic philosophy have 
maintained their value, as have certain doctrines of 
Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, Descartes, Leibnitz, 
and others, this must be because they have a deeply 
human meaning which remains everlastingly true. 

Within these limits it would be neither proper 
nor possible to abstain from praise and criticism. 
For, the historian is no mere registering machine, 
unmoved by love and hatred. On the contrary, he 



12 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

cannot be indifferent to good and evil, to progress 
and decline, to lofty aspirations and social evils; 
therefore, he cannot refrain from approving and 
condemning. 

Ill 

This method of historical reconstruction and ap- 
preciation is especially necessary in studying the 
twelfth and the thirteenth centuries, perhaps 
more so than for any other mediaeval period. To 
this period, as the very heart of the Middle Ages, 
we shall limit our study, and for certain reasons 
which we may now consider. 

First of all, this is the period when mediaeval 
civilization assumes definite form, with outlines and 
features that characterize a unique age in the life 
of humanity. 

Before the end of the eleventh century, the me- 
diaeval temperament is not yet formed; it is only 
in process of elaboration. The new races, Celts 
and Teutons 5 (the Teutons including more espe- 
cially Angles, Danes, Saxons, Franks, Germans, 
and Normans) had passively received something of 
the culture of the Graeco-Roman world, certain ele- 
ments of organization, juridical and political, and 
some fragmentary scientific and philosophical ideas. 
During the ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries, 
these new races react upon what they have received 

s The terms Teuton and German are sometimes employed in the 
inverse sense; but I prefer the usage above indicated. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 18 

and subject everything to an elaboration of their 
own. They apply themselves to it, with their vir- 
tues and their defects ; and the outcome begets the 
new order of things. Christianity directs the whole 
work, and it is not a light task to soften the rough 
mentality of the barbarians. The work is nearly 
completed at the dawn of the twelfth century, and 
the period of groping is over. Thus there are 
three factors in the process of forming the me- 
diaeval civilization: the heritage from the ancient 
world, the reactive response of the new races, and 
the directing guidance of Christianity. 

With the twelfth century the results of this long 
and gradual process of formation begin to appear. 
This is the springtime period. And just as the 
springtime of nature excludes no plant from her 
call to life, so the springtime of civilization buds 
forth in every branch of human activity; political, 
economic, family and social regime, morals, reli- 
gion, fine arts, sciences, philosophy, all of those 
sublime emanations of the human soul which form 
a civilization, and determine its progress, now re- 
veal their abounding vitality and burst forth in 
bloom. Of these factors, the political organization 
ripens first, very naturally, while philosophy comes 
to its maturity the last of all. The former is, as it 
were, the body; the latter belongs to the com- 
plex psychic life. And since civilization is essen- 
tially the expression of psychic forces, the real 
mediaeval man must be sought for in his religious 



14 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

feelings, his moral aspirations, his artistic work, 
his philosophical and scientific activities. 

With the thirteenth century we reach definitely 
the climax of the development, that is, the period 
of maturity. At this stage the total complex of 
the mediaeval civilization reveals its striking and 
compelling features. 

A second reason exists for concentrating our at- 
tention upon the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 
These are also the centuries in which the philo- 
sophical temperament of the Occident is definitely 
formed. 

All historians agree in ascribing to the French 
genius the leadership of the world during this 
period. It was in France that the feudal mind was 
formed. A moral, artistic, and religious tradition 
began to appear on the soil of French provinces. 
Chivalry, feudalism, the Benedictine organization, 
monastic and religious reforms, Romanesque and 
Gothic art are just so many products born of the 
French temperament; and these spread throughout 
the whole western world by virtue of the current 
travel and trade, the Crusades and the migrations 
of religious orders. From France the ideas of the 
new civilization spread over the neighboring coun- 
tries, like sparks from a blazing fire. The twelfth 
and the thirteenth centuries were centuries of 
French thought; and this leadership of France was 
retained until the Hundred Years War. Natural- 
ly, therefore, the same leadership was maintained 
in the field of philosophy, as we shall see. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 15 

Moreover, the thirteenth century is the period 
when both the Neo-Latin and the Anglo-Celtic 
minds distinguished themselves clearly from the 
Germanic type. If one seeks the origin of the dif- 
ference in mentality found in the nations of the 
West, one is forced inevitably back to the thir- 
teenth century. This century witnessed the for- 
mation of the great European nations, the dawn of 
a more definite conception of patria, the decisive 
outlining of the ethnical features of the peoples 
who were henceforth to fill history with their al- 
liances and rivalries. The thirteenth century is 
characterized by unifying and cosmopolitan tenden- 
cies; but, at the same time, it constitutes a great 
plateau whence are beginning to issue the various 
channels which will later run as mighty rivers in 
different and even opposite directions. Many 
peculiarities in the mediaeval way of conceiving 
individual and social life and many of their philo- 
sophical conceptions of the world have entered in- 
to the modern views; and, indeed, many doctrines 
which are now opposed to each other can be traced 
to their origin in the thirteenth century. 

TV "' " """"" " 

JLV ^ 

We may now outline broadly the plan of these 
lectures. From the general point of view, . the 
twelfth century is perhaps of more decisive im- 
portance. But from the philosophical standpoint 
the thirteenth century is supreme, and therefore it 
will demand more of our time and attention. This 



16 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

difference is due to the fact that civilization always 
develops more rapidly than philosophy, the latter 
being a tender fruit which thrives tardily and only 
when the general growth has been attained. 

The twelfth century is a creative and construe* 
tive era, and the development of thought and of 
life is extraordinarily rapid in all directions. All 
the forces are in ebullition, as in a crucible. The 
heritage from the Graeco-Roman world, the reac- 
tion of the new races, the direction of Christianity: 
these three factors in the making of mediaeval civi- 
lization are now in process of compounding, and 
the result is a conception of life, individual and so- 
cial, which is sui generis. A new spirit pervades 
the policy of kings. The particularism of the local 
lords comes into diverse conflict with the aspira- 
tions of the central power, whilst the rural classes 
welcome the dawn of liberty and the townsfolk 
awake to the possibilities of vast commercial enter- 
prises. Men are seeking governmental forms in 
which all classes of society can find their place and 
play their part. The Crusades, once begun, recur 
at brief intervals and bring the various peoples to- 
gether and direct their attention to the Orient; at 
the same time they foster in a manner hitherto un- 
paralleled the ideal of a great human brotherhood, 
resting upon the Christian religion. The Church 
pervades all circles, through her monks, her clerics, 
her bishops. The Papacy, which has been central 
since the days of Gregory VII, assumes interna- 
tional significance and gradually organizes itself 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 17 

into a theocratic government. The customs of 
feudalism and of chivalry arise, as characteristic of 
the age. The early mediaeval man is developing; 
he may go to excess in his virtues and his vices, but 
beneath his rough exterior he cherishes a Christian 
ideal, and often at the cost of his life. A new form 
of art arises which finds its most ardent promoters 
in Churchmen. Other Churchmen give themselves 
to the cultivation of science and letters, and thus are 
laid the foundations of that imposing philosophical 
monument, scholasticism, which is to guide and di- 
rect the thought of centuries. Thus philosophy is 
only one of the elements in this new civilization. 
In reality it receives more than it gives. Some of 
the influences which operated upon it from the sur- 
rounding environment we shall outline in due time. 8 
But first we shall make a rapid survey of French 
mediaeval society and of the type of mentality 
which passed over from it to the intellectual circles 
of the West. 7 Concluding the present chapter, let 
us consider briefly the thirteenth century. 

In the thirteenth century mediaeval civilization 
brings forth its full fruit. The feudal monarchy 
receives into its organic being all those social forces 
which make for national life. Material welfare in- 
creases and the relations between nations grow 
apace. Art speeds on its triumphal way. Gothic 
architecture springs up beside the Romanesque; 
painting comes into existence; and literature be- 

e See ch. III. 
T See ch. II. 



18 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

gins to take wing in a flight which issues in Human- 
ism. Religion contributes more than ever to unity; 
it enters into all the sentiments and the life of the 
age. The Papacy reaches the apex of its power; 
and, supreme over kings and emperors, it domi- 
nates every aspect of social activity. Everywhere 
a sort of stable equilibrium prevails. Men are 
proud of the way in which they have organized 
human existence. Philosophical ideas and systems 
appear in abundance, exhibiting a luxuriance un- 
equalled since the Hellenistic age. 8 Among these 
numerous systems scholasticism is most in harmony 
with the age, and as its completest expression be- 
comes the reigning philosophy. Its roots are to be 
found everywhere in the civilization of the thir- 
teenth century. First, because it exhibits those re- 
lational aspects which unite it with all the other 
spheres of activity. 9 Second, because many of its 
doctrines bear the stamp of characteristically me- 
diaeval ideas, both social and moral. 10 Third, be- 
cause scholasticism is above all, the philosophy of 
those people who are at the head of the cultural 
movement in the thirteenth century. 11 In what 
follows we shall endeavour to substantiate these 
statements. 

8 See ch. IV. 
See chs. V-VII. 
loSeechs. VIII-XII. 
ch. XIII. 



CHAPTER TWO 

SURVEY or CIVILIZATION IN THE 
TWELFTH CENTURY 

i. Feudal Europe, ii. Catholic influences: Cluny, Citeaux, 
the bishops, the Pope. iii. A new spirit: the value and dig- 
nity of the individual man. iv. New forms of art. v. The 
twelfth century one of French influences. 



To understand how the civilization of the twelfth 
century is reflected in its philosophy, we must view 
in a general way the elements of that civilization 
which are most intimately connected with intellec- 
tual life, namely, political institutions, moral and 
social ideals, standards of art, and religious beliefs. 

These several elements operate in various ways 
in the different countries of Europe; but in our 
general survey we shall consider rather the resem- 
blances, without meaning thereby to deny or to be- 
little the differences. Since it is in France that this 
civilization produces its choicest fruits, it is there 
especially that we must seek its most original and 
coherent forms. 

In the political and social orders feudalism had 
become general. Barons, dukes, earls, and lords 
lived independently in their own castles and 
usurped more or less of the sovereign right. Not 



20 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

only did relations of personal loyalty exist between 
them, but obligations founded upon a free contract 
bound one man to another, according to some privi- 
lege or some land given and received. The one, the 
vassal, was bound to render service; the other, the 
lord, was equally bound to protect and defend. 

In France, where the new organization appears 
in its purest form, nothing is more complicated 
than the scheme of feudalistic relations. At the 
head, theoretically, but not always practically, stood 
the king. The greatest lords were vassals of other 
lords. Were not the feudal relations of Henry II 
of England and Louis VII of France the starting 
point for all their wars and quarrels? For, the 
first became the vassal of the second on the very day 
he married Eleanor of Aquitaine, whose duchy was 
granted by the French king to the English mon- 
arch. The particular and local lords were forced to 
fight against the centralizing tendencies of the 
kings, and the antagonism of the vassals and the 
king, their suzerain, was the main feature of French 
policy in the twelfth century. 1 Particularism re- 
mained, but it was on the decline, and the following 
century witnessed the triumph of the centralizing 
principle. 

A similar development occurred in England. 
For, that country was so closely connected with 
France that their combined territories may be called 

iA. Luchaire, "Louis VII, Phffippe Auguste, Louis VIII," JETfr- 
toire d* France, pub. par Lavisse, 190$, vol. III. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 21 

the common soil of the mediaeval civilization. 
English society, as a whole, had its origin in French 
soil; at any rate, the seeds were planted in 1066 
by William the Conqueror and his French barons, 
Kings of French blood, who came from Normandy 
and from Anjou, ruled over the British Isles; but 
much of their time was spent in their French prov- 
inces. French was the court-language; they made 
provision for burial in the Norman abbey of Caen 
or the Angevine abbey of Fontevrault; they drew 
their counsellors from France and favoured the 
establishment of French clfergy and French monks 
in England. The English King Henry II, the 
first of the Plantagenet dynasty, was one of the 
most thorough-going organizers of the age; indeed 
one might well take him for a contemporary of 
Philip the Fair of France. 2 Is it then surprising 
that we find England too being divided into feudal 
domains, and the royal policy exhibiting the same 
centralizing tendency? 

But while monarchy and feudalism were so close- 
ly akin in France and in England, they presented 
quite a different aspect in Germany. The reason 
was that at the very time when the king's power 
was weakening in France, the Saxon dynasty of the 
Ottos had established in Germany an autocratic 
regime, patterned after that of Charlemagne. The 
German kings, who had been crowned Emperors 

2 A. Luchaire, op. cit. f p. 49. Henry II, 1133-1189; Philip the 
Fair, 1969-1314. 



22 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

of the West, held the nobles in a sort of military 
servitude; they appointed bishops and abbots and 
bound them to military service. However, little by 
little, the principalities asserted their rights; the 
fast developing towns gained more freedom. We 
shall see 8 how the monks of Cluny contributed to 
this change. Thus, by a process of decentraliza- 
tion, Germany gradually assumed in the twelfth 
century a more feudal aspect, while France and 
England were developing toward centralization. 

During the eleventh and twelfth centuries, the 
destiny of Italy is intimately connected with that 
of Germany. The reason for this was that the Ger- 
man imperial ambitions involved the seizure of 
Italy, a great country which was also divided into 
various principalities. The emperors were success- 
ful for a time; but much opposition developed. 
Hence their long struggle against the Lombard 
cities, which were true municipal republics; against 
the Papacy, which was to triumph finally; against 
the great southern realm of the Sicilies, which had 
been founded by Norman knights and was a centre 
of French feudal ideas, being governed by French 
princes. 

As for Spain, situated as it was on the confines 
of the western and the Arabian civilizations, it pre- 
sents a unique aspect. The Christian kingdoms of 
Castille, of Leon, of Navarre, of Aragon, had un- 
dertaken to "reconquer" the Peninsula from the 

* See ch. II, ii. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 28 

Mussulman, and they were organized on French 
feudal principles. On the other hand, the South 
remained in the hands of the Infidels, and the in- 
filtration of Arabian civilization was to have its 
part in the philosophical awakening of the thir- 
teenth century, as we shall see. 4 

Hence, when we consider the outstanding fea- 
tures of the political and social situation, feudal 
divisions are found everywhere. France, which 
seems to be the starting point for the system, Eng- 
land after the Conquest, some parts of Italy and of 
Spain, and also Germany the whole of western 
Europe, in fact, presents the appearance of a check- 
erboard. 

II 

The Catholic Church was intimately connected 
with this feudal system, through her bishops, who 
were lords both temporal and spiritual, and more 
especially through the abbots of her monasteries. 
The twelfth century is the golden age of the abbeys. 
In no period of history has any institution had a 
closer contact with both religious and social back- 
ground than had the abbeys of Cluny and Citeaux. 
These were the two great branches of the Benedic- 
tine stem, the two mother-houses whose daughters 
were scattered throughout France and Europe/ 

The ninth century had witnessed a disastrous re- 
laxation of religious discipline, and it was Cluny 

4 See ch. IV, iv. 



24 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

which first returned to the faithful observance of 
the rule of St. Benedict. The monastery was 
founded in Burgundy in 910 by a feudal lord, Duke 
William of Aquitaine. And just here we meet 
with a peculiar phenomenon, which shows how the 
religious spirit had become the great moral force 
of that period. "The abbeys built in the ninth and 
the tenth centuries," says Reynaud, 5 "to restore the 
ancient rule of St. Benedict, were all, or nearly all, 
the work of the military class." After a life of ad- 
venture and war, or after a stormy youth, these 
proud feudal lords often shut themselves up in cloi- 
sters, to do penance. They renounced the world, 
and henceforth their austerities were performed 
with the same ardour which they had formerly ex- 
hibited in their exploits of war. Thus, Poppo of 
Stavelot was affianced to a wealthy heiress, when 
one evening, on his way home after visiting her, a 
bright light suddenly shone about him; whereupon 
he was terrified, and in remorse for his past life he 
donned the Benedictine cowl. Examples of such 
conversions are numerous. 

The monks of Cluny not only instilled a new 
religious zeal within their own cloister, not only did 
they restore discipline and vows and piety, not only 
did they sustain and augment the fervid faith of the 
people depending on them ; they also awakened the 
same spirit in a great many other monasteries. 

0L. Reynaud, Les originea de V influence frangaiae en Allemagne, 
Paris, 1913, p. 43. 



IN THE MIDDLE AQES 25 

This was effected through a far reaching reform: 
the federation of monasteries. For, up to that time, 
the Benedictine monasteries had been independent. 
But Cluny organized these groups and placed it- 
self at the head of a strongly centralized regime. 
It became a mother-house whose daughters spread 
rapidly abroad throughout all France and England 
and Germany and Northern Spain and Hungary 
and Poland. At the beginning of the twelfth cen- 
tury, two thousand Benedictine houses were de- 
pendent on the Cluny system ; and today dozens of 
French villages still bear the name of St. Bene- 
dict, in memory of one or another of those Bene- 
dictine monasteries. All western Christendom was 
enmeshed in a great network of monastic institu- 
tions, of which Cluny was the soul and the inspira- 
tion; and thus one mind and one polity permeated 
the whole system. 

In this process of federalization the abbey of 
Cluny was successfully modelled after the feudal 
system ; but it then in turn proceeded to impregnate 
that same feudalism with its own spirit. Thus, the 
feudal conception appears in the vow of devotion 
which attached a monk to his monastery as a vassal 
to his lord, and which he might not break without 
his superior's consent; in the sovereignty of the ab- 
bot ; in his visits as chief to his subordinates ; in the 
contributions of the affiliated monasteries to the 
mother-house; and in the graded sjeries of federated 
groups. But, by its far reaching influence, so 



26 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

mighty a power could successfully combat the 
forces of evil in contemporary society, and it could 
also turn current ideas to the service of Christian- 
ity. Cluny christianized feudalism. This influence 
is revealed to us in four main aspects, which we 
shall now consider. 

First, the monks treated their serfs with justice 
and kindness; those fellow human beings who were 
born on their land and who worked with them in 
forest and field. And this was done at a time when 
the lay barons considered their serfs as slaves and 
mere instruments. "We exercise the same author- 
ity as the seigneurs," writes Peter the Venerable, 
abbot of Cluny at the beginning of the twelfth cen- 
tury, "but we make a different use of it. ... Our 
serfs are regarded as brothers and sisters. Servos 
et andllas, non ut servos et andllas, sed ut fratre* 
et sorores habent" 6 

Second, and most important, the monks intro- 
duced Christian ideals into the minds of feudal 
barons. By the sublime morality of Christ, com- 
pounded of gentleness and love, they tempered all 
that was brutal in the ways of those developing 
Gallo-Franks and Anglo-Celts, whose blood was 
eager for war and for combat and for cruelty. 
Cluny imposed on them the Peace and Truce of 
God, wherein we find something of those rights of 
humanity that exist for all time. Once the Truce of 
God is established, so runs the enactment, all clerks, 

*Epist. 98, Mlgne, Patr. lat. vol. 189, col. 146. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 27 

peasants, merchants, and non-combatants in gen- 
eral, shall be entitled to relief from the violence of 
the warriors. Even animals must be respected. 
Religious edifices and public buildings are to be 
safeguarded. Furthermore, hostilities shall be 
suspended between Wednesday evening and Mon- 
day morning during all of Advent and Lent and 
the Emberdays, as well as on all principal holidays. 
When any community of human beings exhibits 
consciousness of such duties, it has already emerged 
from barbarism; and, whatever its structure in de- 
tail may be, it must be counted among those socie- 
ties of mankind that are destined to a high civi- 
lization. 

Moreover, in the third place, Cluny moulded the 
moral sense of chivalry, transformed its ideals, and 
introduced religion into its ceremonies. Once the 
knight came in contact with Christian morality, he 
was no longer an egotistic, ambitious, and brutal 
warrior; he learned to be loyal and generous; he 
became the born-defender of the Church, the cham- 
pion of the weak, the opponent of violence. When- 
ever conferences were called to discuss peace, the 
monks urged charity and forgiveness upon the 
nobles, who frequently repented in tears; or, 
indeed, the very men who had pillaged on the pre- 
vious day would forthwith set out on long pilgri- 
mages to St. James of Compostella or to Rome or 
to Jerusalem, to expiate their crimes. And so the 
monks of Cluny galvanized into life the nascent 



28 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

virtues of the race. The word "Frank/' originally 
the name of a people inhabiting Gaul, came to be 
synonymous with "loyal." 7 It is under this aspect 
that chivalry is represented in the numerous twelfth 
century romances, in the Chansons de Geste of 
which the Chanson de Eoland furnishes the most 
beautiful example. The union of the martial spirit 
with the religious, and the alliance between feudal 
system and Church became indissoluble. When 
the time came to preach the Crusades, Cluny could 
call with confidence upon the nobles to carry their 
arms into the Holy Land. The First Crusade was 
in fact a strictly Cluniac enterprise, and Pope Ur- 
ban II, who proclaimed it at the famous council of 
Clermont, had been himself a monk of Cluny, 
And where, indeed, does the influence of the mo- 
nastic ideal, as a social force, appear more clearly 
than in those epics of audacity, those distant jour- 
neys on which so many young nobles lost their 
lives? 

But the abbots of Cluny performed a fourth so- 
cial service ; they undertook the reform of the secu- 
lar clergy, both priests and bishops. They con- 
demned the scandalous abuses of married bishops, 
who lived like feudal barons, wholly given over to 
feasting and war. They also worked to free the 
bishops from the patronage of the great feudal 
lords, who sold the episcopal offices, and they pro- 
claimed aloud that the bishops ought to be elected 

7 Reynaud, op. cit. t p. 839. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 29 

by the people and by the clerics, in the famous in- 
vestiture strife. The abuse, however, exercised its 
most baneful influence in Germany, where the dukes 
and abbots and bishops were, as we have seen, mere 
creatures of the Emperor. 8 Moreover, the Pope 
himself had served as a German functionary ever 
since Otto I had conquered Italy and placed upon 
his own head the crown of Charlemagne. It was 
the great abbey of Cluny which altered this state 
of affairs. It was Cluny that by one of its 
daughter-houses, the abbey of Hirschau in the 
Black Forest, introduced the ideas of the French 
feudal system along with its monastic reform. The 
French influence of Cluny not only softened the 
barbaric habits of the German feudal lords, but it 
also put an end to that dangerous privilege of 
naming the Pope, which the German Emperors 
had appropriated to their own advantage; and thus 
it delivered the Papacy from that humiliating yoke. 
The famous Hildebrand had been formerly a monk 
of Cluny; and, as Pope Gregory VII, he waged the 
famous investiture strife against the Emperor, 
Henry IV. This duel issued in the defeat of the 
Emperor at Canossa. In that dramatic scene, 
which concluded the struggle, were symbolized with 
early mediaeval harshness the humiliation of the 
Emperor and the triumph of the Cluniac ideas. 
Henry IV was forced to cross, in midwinter and 
without escort, the snow covered Alps, and for 

a See above, p. 22. 



80 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

three days to await audience with the Pope. Hugh, 
the abbot of Cluny, was witness of the Emperor's 
humiliation. For the first time, French ideas had 
triumphed over the power of Germany, 9 and these 
French ideas were the ideas of Cluny. It was be- 
cause of such widespread and profound influence, 
exercised on the mentality of the Middle Ages by 
the celebrated monastery, that in 1910, at the mil- 
lennial congress which reunited at Cluny learned 
men from everywhere, one of them could say, "We 
are come to Cluny to sing a hymn to civilization." 10 

But the very prosperity of Cluny, especially with 
its extraordinary wealth, became one of the chief 
causes of its declining influence. At the beginning 
of the twelfth century its monastic life had become 
more lax, and henceforth its influence as a social 
force waned. 

But, after the order of Cluny had performed its 
great service, there was established another Bene- 
dictine congregation, which renewed that famous 
rule: the order of Citeaux in Burgundy, which im- 
mediately spread throughout all France, and Eu- 
rope generally, in the twelfth century. This new 
order, commonly called Cistercian, was also a fed- 
eration of Benedictine houses, although /each of 
them was more independent than was the case in the 
system of Cluny. The congregation of Citeaux 
continued the work of reformation, moral and 

9 Cf. Lamprecht, Deutsche Geschichte, III, pp. 192 and 193. 
ivMillenaire de Cluny, Academic de Magon, 1910, voL XV, p. Ixxiv. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 81 

religious, with which Cluny had occupied itself; but 
it attached more importance to that part of the rule 
which called for manual labour, and, indeed, by 
undertaking works of public utility, such as drain- 
ing swamps and clearing vast expanses of territory, 
the Cistercians changed the agricultural map of 
Europe. At the same time, they did much to 
abolish serfdom. 

The religious and social spirit of Citeaux is most 
apparent in the authoritative and energetic figure 
of St. Bernard, who dominated the whole twelfth 
century. Abbot of Clairvaux a monastery 
founded by him and a dependent of Citeaux this 
extraordinary monk was not only saint, and ascetic, 
but he was surprisingly man of action as well. He 
was a leader, an eloquent orator whose sermons 
moved multitudes, and he dared to reprove the 
great and the humble alike. Thus, he criticizes the 
monks of Cluny as men "whose cowl is cut from the 
same piece of cloth as the dress of the knight," and 
whose churches are decorated with useless luxury. 
He criticizes the abuses of the Roman court, and he 
has no eye for the successor of Peter adorned with 
silk and borne upon a white palfrey and escorted 
by clamorous ministers. He criticizes the abuses 
in the lives of the clerics, and he cries out to their 
teachers: "Woe betide you who hold the keys not 
only of knowledge but also of power." He dares 
to correct the most renowned professors, like Abae- 
lard and Gilbert de la Porree, and summons them 



82 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

to ecclesiastical councils. He urges men and wo- 
men alike to crowd into the monasteries; he pro- 
motes the Second Crusade; he encourages the ris- 
ing order of the Templars, that military order 
whose members were at once monks and warriors, 
and who added to the vows of religion those of de- 
fending the Holy Land and the pilgrims; he takes 
interest in the founding of the order of the Car- 
thusians, in 1182, and of the Premonstratensians, in 
1120; he dreams of moulding all society after the 
plan of an ascetic ideal. His own ideal was even 
more lofty than that of his age; and when he died, 
in 1158, mediaeval society had already achieved the 
height of its monastic ideal. 11 

But our picture of the mentality of the period 
would be incomplete if we rested simply with the 
activities of the Benedictine orders; in addition we 
must point out briefly the activities of bishops and 
Pope. 

The bishops were involved more intimately in 
the working of the feudal machinery than were the 
monasteries ; for they were temporal princes within 
the limits of their fiefs and prelates in their dioceses. 
They owed to their overlords support in time of 
war, and such bishops as Hugh of Noyers, at Aux- 
erre, or Mathew of Lorraine, at Toul, were war- 
riors of a rough and primitive type. Others, like 
Etienne of Tournai, Peter of Corbeil, William of 
Champagne, were humanists and men of letters. 

11 See Vacandard, Vie de 8. Bernard, 2 vol. Paris, 1909. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 38 

Maurice of Sully, elected bishop of Paris in 1160, 
was a model administrator in the days of the great 
changes in studies effected at Paris. The bishops 
of Chartres, of Laon and of Tournai play no less 
important a part in the domain of letters. 

Finally, we could not understand the political 
and social spirit of Europe, in the twelfth century, 
without taking into account the growing prestige 
of the Papacy. After having been freed, by the 
action of Cluny, from the humiliation of the Ger- 
man Emperor, the way was open to the Papacy of 
becoming the greatest moral force in the world. 
During the twelfth century it was in process of or- 
ganizing the theocracy, which was to reach its 
zenith in the following century, under Innocent 
III. On those pious Christian kings of France, 
the action of the Papacy exerted always a power- 
ful political influence. "In the Middle Ages, the 
French crown and the Papacy could be near to 
falling out with each other, but they were never 
separated." 12 

12 Luchaire, op. cit., p. 149. The bourgeoisie of the towns, or com- 
munes, should be mentioned also in this connection. The towns first 
rose, in Italy and elsewhere, at the beginning of the eleventh cen- 
tury, and during the twelfth century they became real factors hi the 
general progress. The bourgeoisie, or body of merchants, assumed 
organized form, and it adapted itself to feudalism. "Z/air de la 
ville donne la Uberte," since a serf who lived in a town for a year 
and a day secured thereby his freedom and retained it. In the 
thirteenth century the nouveaux riches of the merchant class laid the 
foundations of a "patriarcat urbain" which was destined to riv&l the 
nobility in wealth. 



84 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

III 

We have now seen how a new spirit was in 
process of formation. What then constitutes the 
essence of this spirit the spirit which arose from 
the depths of the mediaeval soul, and which became 
impregnated with Christianity, and which, from 
England and France, penetrated the whole of 
western Europe? 

The feudal sentiment par excellence, which is 
still so deeply embedded in our modern conscience, 
is the sentiment of the value and dignity of the in- 
dividual man. The feudal man lived as a free man ; 
he was master in his own house; he sought his end 
in himself; he was and this is a scholastic expres- 
sion propter seipsum ezdstens; all feudal obliga- 
tions were founded upon respect for personality 
and the given word. The scrupulous observance of 
feudal contract engendered the reciprocal loyalty 
of vassal and lord; fraternal feelings and self-sacri- 
fice among men belong also to this class. 

Under the influence of Cluny, this feudal senti- 
ment became Christian in character, because Chris- 
tianity placed upon each soul purchased by Christ's 
sacrifice an inestimable worth, and it furnished the 
poor and the rich and the great and the small with 
the same standard of value. The scrupulous ob- 
servance of the feudal contract engendered loyalty. 
When loyalty became a Christian virtue, it in- 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 35 

creased respect for women and probity in the 
poor, that probity which St. Louis IX said was 
like sweet honey to his lips. Honour became the 
pass-word of chivalry a sort of moral institution 
superimposed on feudalism. The social habits of 
educated laymen were made gentler by the warm 
contact of chivalry, and courteous manners spread 
far and wide. 

IV 

But the twelfth century gave birth also to en- 
tirely new forms of art, and, indeed, in a marvel- 
ous way. All branches on the tree of art began 
quickly to flower under the grateful zephyrs of the 
new spring that was come: chansons de geste, or 
romances invented by the troubadours; the letters 
of Abaelard and Heloise, which, however restrained, 
reveal all the fervour of human love; those hymns 
of purest Latin writen by men like St. Bernard, 
whose flow suggests now the murmuring of a brook 
and anon the roaring of a river in flood or those 
stanzas penned by Adam of St. Victor, that won- 
derful poet who, in the silence of his cloister at 
Paris, sang the festivals of divine love in most 
perfect Latin form. 18 

But, above all, there were built at that time 
those magnificent Romanesque abbeys and 

is C/. Henry Adams, Mont St. Michel and Chartres, ch. XV: 
"The Mystics." 



86 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

churches with their varied new forms, such as 
barreled vaults, towers, doorways, cruciform 
ground-plan, choirs with surrounding ambulatories 
and radiating chapels. In these forms the func- 
tions of the Church shine forth with marvelous 
clarity, and yet in them the virile power of the 
period is harmoniously revealed. Local schools of 
architecture appeared, such as those of Normandy, 
of Auvergne, of Poitou, of Burgundy; and the 
Benedictine abbots were promoters of the new stan- 
dard of architecture. They did not adopt a uni- 
form Romanesque style; rather they took over and 
developed the architecture of the region in which 
they happened to be. At the same time, they 
pressed into the service of architecture all the de- 
vices of ornamentation. The bare pillars were 
clothed with life, their capitals were covered with 
flowerings in stone; the portals were peopled with 
statues; painted glass was put in the windows of 
the sanctuaries ; frescoes or mural paintings covered 
the walls and concealed the nakedness of the stone: 
the whole church was covered with a mantle of 
beauty. Artist-monks were trained in sculpturing 
columns and statues and they travelled from one 
workshop to another, while yet others opened 
schools of painting, as in St. Savin near Poitiers 
where the twelfth-century frescoes still retain their 
bright colouring. 14 

i* In these frescoes the "courtesy" of the time is very striking, 
especially in the bearing of ladies and knights, so full of elegance. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 87 



It is generally admitted that the feudal customs 
and the manifestations of art born in France spread 
thence into other countries, and the Benedictines 
of Cluny and of Citeaux were the principal agency 
in this diffusion. In England the infiltration of 
feudal customs is easily explained by the close re- 
lations existing between the two countries ; and the 
orders of Cluny and Citeaux swarmed thither like 
bees from a hive. The abbey churches of St. Al- 
bans and Malmesbury and Fountains Abbey were 
built upon principles brought over from Nor- 
mandy. But for all their borrowing, whatever it 
may have been, they certainly possess the charm of 
originality. Epic literature, however, which at- 
tained such a high degree of perfection in Chaucer, 
shows still the influence of the French fabliaux. 
For, in the twelfth and in the thirteenth centuries 
"France, if not Paris, was in reality the eye and 
brain of Europe, the place of origin of almost every 
literary form, the place of finishing and polishing, 
even for those forms which she did not originate." 15 

German historians, such as Lamprecht and 
Steinhausen, recognize the same hegemony of 
French ideas in Germany. 16 The Cistercians, who 
poured forth from France, undertook in Germany 

is Saintsbury, The Flourishing of Romance and the Rise of Alle- 
gory, London, 1897, p. 266. 

10 Steinhausen, Qetchichte der deufrchen Kultur, Bd. I, 1913, p. 
313: "Frankreich wird das kulturell-fUhrende Land." 



88 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

and Bohemia and Hungary the work of clearing 
the forests which so changed the economic face of 
Central Europe. But it was also Frenchmen who 
introduced at the Swabian court the hahits of cour- 
tesy, from the manner of greeting and the way 
of comporting oneself at table to the habit of con- 
trol and moderation in all things. The monks of 
Cluny carried Romanesque architecture along the 
Rhine, while the Cistercian monks became later the 
propagators of Gothic architecture. 

Finally, Romanesque architecture borne on the 
wings of French influence was carried, together 
with chivalry, across the Alps. They crossed the 
Pyrenees as well, and the Moorish genius imparted 
its smile to the severer forms of Occidental art. 

So, turn where we will, the twelfth century is a 
constructive one; great forces are in the making, 
though their action is not yet a combined one. The 
local spirit, which splits France, England, and the 
other countries into small feudal municipalities, and 
is revealed even in the separate workshops of the 
artists, appears in every detail of the organized 
social and religious life. 



CHAPTER THREE 

THE CIVILIZATION AS REFLECTED IN PHILOSOPHY 

i. Location of philosophical schools; invasion of French 
schools by foreigners, ii. Delimitation of the several sciences ; 
philosophy distinct from the seven liberal arts and from the- 
ology, iii. Harmony of the feudal sense of personal worth 
with the philosophical doctrine that the individual alone 
exists, iv. The feudal civilization and the anti-realistic solu- 
tion of the problem of universals. 

I 

SUCH a civilization was ripe for the things of the 
spirit. And so it came about that culture, both 
intellectual and philosophical, burst into bloom in 
this flowering season of things mediaeval. As a 
plant of rare nature, it shot up in the midst of an 
exuberant garden. We shall limit ourselves to a 
threefold consideration of the reflection of civiliza- 
tion in philosophy during the twelfth century: 
namely, the localization of schools ; the definite dis- 
tinction of the several branches of learning; the 
affirmation in philosophical terms of the worth of 
human personality. 

First, it was quite natural that philosophical life 
should be subjected to the confinement of that same 
local spirit which appeared everywhere. 

All over France numerous independent schools 
were gathered about the cathedrals and the abbeys. 



40 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

Each was a child of liberty, a literary republic, de- 
pending only on bishop or abbot; for in the twelfth 
and thirteenth centuries there was no government 
control of education. Each school sought to out- 
rival the others by increasing its library, by attract- 
ing professors of renown, and by drawing students 
to its intellectual tournaments. 

This educational regime was salutary, for it pro- 
moted the study of the sciences and raised a legion 
of remarkable humanists, theologians, lawyers, and 
philosophers. We need but cite the schools of 
Cluny and Citeaux in Burgundy; of Bee in Nor- 
mandy; of Aurillac and of St. Martin at Tours; of 
Lobbes; of St. Omer; the cathedral schools of 
Laon, of Chartres, of Rheims, of Paris; and many 
others. All of them developed in the midst of 
feudal principalities, in spite of the fact that the 
overlords were generally at war. This was possi- 
ble at that time because war interested only the 
professional fighting men, and did not affect the 
living conditions of any country as a whole. Among 
the most famous teachers of the twelfth century 
were Anselm of Laon, William of Champeaux, 
Abaelard, Hugo and Richard of St. Victor, Adel- 
ard of Bath, Alan of Lille, and the scholars of 
Chartres ; but there were many others, whose names 
will appear as we proceed. They liked to go from 
one place to another, and we see a certain system of 
exchange professors in vogue. William of Cham- 
peaux taught philosophy successfully in the cathe- 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 41 

dral schools of Laon and of Paris, and in the abbey 
of St. Victor in Paris; Theodoric of Chartres was 
professor at Chartres, and also at Paris; William 
of Conches and Gilbert de la Porree went to Char- 
tres and to Paris; Adelard of Bath was at Paris 
and at Laon; Peter Abaelard the knight-errant of 
dialectics, who summoned to the tourney of syllo- 
gisms as others of his family summoned to the 
tourney of arms lectured in Melun, in Corbeil, in 
his private school at the Paraclete, and he returned 
several times to the cathedral schools in Paris. 

In the time of Abaelard, the invasion of the 
French schools by foreigners had reached its height. 
Above all, the influx of English students was ever 
increasing. This was due to the close relations ex- 
isting between both countries and to the lack of 
educational centres in the British Isles. More than 
one remained to teach where he himself was taught. 
For example, there was Adelard of Bath, who 
speaks of the Gallicarum sententiarum constantia, 
and who left his nephew at Laon to master the 
Gallica studio, while he himself travelled in Spain; 1 

i "Meministi nepos, quod septennio jam transacto, cum te in gallicis 
studils pene parvum juxta Laudisdunum una cum ceteris auditori- 
bus in eis dimiserim, id inter nos convenisse, ut arabum studia ego 
pro posse meo scrutarer, gallicarum sententiarum constantiam non 
minus adquireres." Adelardi Batensis de quibusdam naturalibus 
quaettionibus, Man. lat. Escorial, O III, 2, fol. 74 R. C/. P. U. 
Antolin, Catalogo de los codices latinos de la real Bibl del Escorial, 
vol. Ill, p. 226. I have not succeeded in finding a copy of the in- 
cunabel edition of this interesting treatise. 



42 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

also there was the Scotchman Richard of St. Vic- 
tor in the mystic cloister of St. Victor in Paris; and 
there was Isaac of Stella, also an Englishman, in 
the abbey of Stella close to Poitiers; and the most 
famous of all was John of Salisbury, who became 
bishop of Chartres after having taught in its cathe- 
dral school. Others settled in their native country, 
after having studied at Paris, such as Walter Map 
and Alexander Neckham. Meanwhile, French 
scholars also went to England and settled there; 
such were, for example, Peter of Blois and Richard 
Dover. 2 All of these men agree in recognizing the 
ihiportance of the training afforded by the French 
schools. 

As for Germany, the attraction of French learn- 
ing was no less irresistible. Even in the tenth 
century the German Emperors recognized this su- 
periority, and summoned to their court French 
masters. Thus, the Emperor Otto III wrote a let- 

With the above compare the expression: "Franci(a)e magistri," 
in an unpublished thirteenth century manuscript, in connection with 
the difficulty of translating Aristotle's Posterior Analytics (C. H. 
Raskins, "Mediaeval Versions of the Posterior Analytics." Harvard 
Studies in Classical Philology, 1914, vol. XXV, p. 94.) "Nam trans- 
latio Boecii apud DOS Integra non invenitur, et id ipsum quod de ea 
reperitur vitio corruptionis obfuscatur. Translationem vero Jacobi 
obscuritatis tenebris involvi silentio suo peribent Francie magistri, 
qui quamvis illam translacionem et commentaries ab eodem Jacobo 
translates habeant, tamen noticiam illius libri non audent proftteri." 

2 J. E. Sandys, "English Scholars of Paris and Franciscans in Ox- 
ford," in The Cambridge History of English Literature, vol. I, pp. 
199 ff. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 48 

ter to the famous Gerbert, professor in Rheims and 
who later became Pope Sylvester II, in which he 
said: "We heartily desire your presence here, dis- 
tinguished man, that you may relieve me of my 
Saxon rusticity, Saxonica rusticitas"* Otto was 
successful in creating an interesting intellectual 
movement within the confines of his country. But 
this renaissance of learning was not of long dura- 
tion; and from the eleventh century on the schools 
of Fulda and Reichenau and St. Gall fell into de- 
cline and decay. In the twelfth century the same 
fate befell the schools at Liege, which were depen- 
dent on the Empire. 4 The German clerics also 
went to French schools, to Rheims, Chartres, 
Laon, Paris, Le Bee and the young barons con- 
sidered it a privilege to be educated at the court of 
Louis VII. Otloh of St. Emmeram, Otto of Frei- 
singen, Manegold of Lautenbach, Hugo of St. 
Victor, in fact all German theologians and philoso- 
phers and humanists of repute in that century, 
were educated in French schools. Paris is the 
source of all science, writes Cesaire of Heister- 
bach; 5 scientists, adds Otto of Freising, have emi- 
grated to France, and both chronicles merely 
reecho the saying of the time: "To Italy the 
Papacy, to Germany the Empire, and to France 
learning." 

*Lettres de Gerbert (983-997), ed. Havet, Paris, 1889, p. 173. 

* Cf. my Histoire de la Philosophie en Belgique, Louvain, 1910, 
pp. 18-22. 

* Stcinhausen, op. cit., p. 355. 



44 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

Italy also sent men in no small numbers. In the 
eleventh century the monk Lanfranc, a type of 
wandering professor, serves as an example. From 
Pavia and from Bologna he went to the abbey of 
Bee, and there was joined by another Italian, the 
Piedmontese Anselm of Aosta. In the twelfth 
century, Peter Lombard and Peter of Capua, and 
Praepositinus of Cremona all taught at Paris. Ro- 
lando Bandinelli, the future Pope Alexander III, 
pursued his studies under Abaelard; and he who 
was to become Innocent III learned his theology 
and his grammar at Paris. It must be said, how- 
ever, that in Italy more than in England and in 
Germany, there were independent centres of intel- 
lectual life. Suffice it to mention the schools of Bo- 
logna, whence arose a university as ancient and as 
influential as that of Paris, and the Benedictine 
schools of Monte Cassino, where in the eleventh cen- 
tury Constantine of Carthage established one of the 
first Occidental contacts with the world of Arabian 
learning, and where later on Thomas Aquinas re- 
ceived his early education. 

But not all French schools enjoyed equal celeb- 
rity; they were rated according to the fame of their 
professors, just as today a school's reputation and 
its worth depend upon the excellence of its teaching 
staff. Hence, we can understand the change in 
the fame of the schools. Thus, for example, with 
the opening of the twelfth century, the cathedral 
schools of Tournai (Odon of Tournai), of Rheims 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 45 

(Alberic of Rheims and Gauthier of Mortagne), 
of Laon (Anselm of Laon), had shed their last 
splendour. For they were eclipsed by the cathedral 
schools of Chartres, founded by Fulbert, at which 
there developed during the first half of the twelfth 
century a humanist movement, which devoted it- 
self to achieving a Latin style of rare elegance, a 
perfect knowledge of the classics, and an acquain- 
tance with the complete Organon of Aristotle. 
Bernard of Chartres, in 1117, became the first of a 
line of famous masters; and Thierry of Chartres, 
about 1141, wrote his celebrated treatise on the 
liberal arts, the Heptateuchon, written just as 
the south portal of the cathedral was receiving its 
ornamentation, with its detail of sculptured figures 
which represent the trivium and quadrivium. 

But even before this Paris had been in position 
to assert the superiority of her schools. The fame 
of Abaelard at the schools of the cathedral and of 
St. Genevieve drew a host of students and masters 
to Paris; the monastery of St. Victor, where Wil- 
liam of Champeaux founded a chair of theology, 
became a centre of mystical studies; and the uni- 
versity was all but born. 

The localism of these schools did not, however, 
prevent a certain uniformity in method of teach- 
ing and in curriculum and in scholarly practise ; and 
this uniformity helped to pave the way for the cos- 
mopolitan character of the teaching of philosophy 
in the universities. The localism and the centraliz- 



46 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

ing tendency commingled, very much as the au- 
tonomy of the feudal barons and the unifying 
policy of the kings did in the political realm. 

Studying and teaching were monopolized by one 
social class, the clergy. The international hier- 
archy of the Church, and the universal use of Latin 
as the scientific language established a natural 
union among the masters of the West; the frequent 
migration of students and scholars, from school to 
school, facilitated the spread of every innovation 
in method, program, and vocabulary. 

II 

The twelfth century remained faithful to the 
traditional program of the seven liberal arts, but 
the frame was enlarged in every direction. This 
brings us to a second group of ideas connected with 
the spirit of the civilization, and which I call the 
demarcation of boundaries between the sciences. In 
the early centuries of the Middle Ages, the pro- 
gramme of studies included grammar-rhetoric-dia- 
lectic (logic), which comprised the trivium, and 
arithmetic-geometry-astronomy-music, which com- 
prised the quadrivium; in this programme one readi- 
ly recognizes the beginnings of our modern second- 
ary education. 

Grammar included not only the study of the 
ancient and mediaeval grammarians (Donatus, 
Priscian, and Remi of Auxerre) , but also a study 
of the classics themselves, such as Virgil, Seneca, 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 47 

Horace, and others. Cicero and Quintilian and 
Marius Victorinus are mentioned as among the 
authors preferred for instruction in rhetoric. 6 For 
a long time law was also regarded as a branch of 
rhetoric; and it was not until the time of Irnerius 
of Bologna that law was taught as a branch dis- 
tinct from the liberal arts course. 6 * About the mid- 
dle of the twelfth century the study of dialectics in- 
cluded all the Organon of Aristotle, As for the 
teaching of the quadrivium, it always lagged behind 
that of the trivium. Euclid is the master in mathe- 
matics. The study of astronomy was given a cer- 
tain impulse by Adelard of Bath, who was initiated 
into the Arabian science in Spain about the middle 
of the twelfth century. 

But such a programme was felt to be too narrow 
in the twelfth century, and philosophy notably re- 
ceived a definite place outside the liberal arts, 
which it leaves below, with theology above. 

It has been long supposed, and people still say, 
that philosophy in the Middle Ages was confused 
with dialectics (one of the three branches of the 
trivium above described) ; that it reduced to a hand- 
ful of arid disputes quarrels on the syllogism and 
on sophisms. This thesis has a seeming founda- 
tion, thanks to certain dialectical acrobats who, in 

6 Clerval, Les tcolea de Chartres du moyen Age du V'e an XVI'e 
sttcle, pp. 221 ff. 

Be it observed, however, that the study of Roman law had never 
been wholly abandoned in Western Europe. 



48 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

the eleventh and twelfth centuries, emptied philoso- 
phy of all ideas and rendered it bloodless and bar- 
ren ("exsanguis et sterilis," are John of Salisbury's 
words). But the truth is quite otherwise. These 
"virtuosi," with their play on words and verbal 
discussions, were strongly combated; and the men 
of real worth such as Anselm of Canterbury, 
Abaelard, Thierry of Chartres, John of Salisbury, 
and others not only practiced dialectics or formal 
logic with sobriety and applied it in accordance 
with doctrine, but they created a place for philoso- 
phy separate from and beyond the liberal arts, and 
consequently beyond dialectics. Their writings 
treat of the problems of metaphysics and psychol- 
ogy, which is matter quite different from formal 
dialectics. 

While it hardly exists in the "glosses" of the 
Carlovingian schools, philosophy rapidly progresses 
towards the end of the eleventh century, and in the 
middle of the twelfth century consists of a con- 
siderable body of doctrine, which the following 
centuries were to make fruitful. 

Now when philosophy had gained its distinct po- 
sition, the propaedeutic character of the liberal 
arts became evident: they serve as initiation to 
higher studies. Men of the twelfth century take 
them into consideration, and the first who are en- 
gaged with the classification of the sciences ex- 
press themselves clearly on this subject. Speak- 
ing of the liberal arts, ' Sunt tanquam septem viae" 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 49 

says a codex of Bamberg; they are, so to speak, the 
seven ways that lead to the other sciences physics 
(part of philosophy), theology, and the science of 
law. 7 Hugo of St. Victor and others speak in the 
same sense. At the end of the twelfth century, the. 
iconography of the cathedrals, the sculptures, and 
the medallions in the glass windows, as well as the 
miniatures in manuscripts, confirm this thesis. The 
philosophy which inspired artists is represented as 
existing apart from and by the side of the liberal 
arts; for instance, at Laon and at Sens, and much 
more so in the window at Auxerre placed above the 
choir. The copy, still preserved at Paris, of the 
Hortus Deliciarum by Herrad of Landsberg (the 
original at Strasburg was burnt during the bom- 
bardment in 1870) places philosophy in the centre 
of a rose with seven lobes disposed around it, 8 and 
in the mosaic pavement of the cathedral of Ivrea, 
philosophy is seated in the middle of the seven arts. 9 
But the twelfth century did more than clearly 
distinguish the liberal arts from philosophy; it also 
inaugurated a completer separation between phi- 

T"Ad istas tres scientias (phisica, theologia, scientia legum) 
paratae sunt tanquam viae septem liberates artes que in trivio et 
quaclrivio eontinentur." Cod. Q. VI, 30. Grabmann, Die Gexchichte 
der scholastichen Methode., 1909, Bd. II, p. 39. 

a E. Male, L'art religieux du XHIe siecle en France, Etude sur 
Viconographie et sur ses sources ^inspiration, Paris, 1910, pp. 113 ff. 
Cf. L. Br6hier, L'art chrttien. Son developpement iconographique 
des origines a nos jours. Paris, 1918. 

A. K. Porter, Lombard Architecture, New HaTen, 1907, vol. I, 
p. 847. 



50 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

losophy and theology. And the establishment of 
this doctrine of scientific methodology is of the 
highest importance in the study in which we are 
engaged. The question of the existence of philoso- 
phy as distinct from theology is, for philosophy, a 
matter of life or death; and it is now definitely 
answered, we may say unhesitatingly. But here 
also there are historical stages, and their study is 
illuminating and suggestive. The Middle Ages, in 
the beginning, took up the Neo-Platonic and Au- 
gustinian idea of the entire identification of philos- 
ophy with theology. Thus it is that John Scotus 
Eriugena wrote in the ninth century: "Quid est 
aliud de philosophia tractare nisi verae religionis, 
qua summa et principalis omnium rerum causa 
Deus et humiliter colitur et rationabiliter in- 
vestigatur, regulas eocponere." But at the end 
of the eleventh century, and especially after St. 
Anselm had given his solution of the problem of the 
relation between faith and reason, the distinction 
between the two sciences was practically accepted; 
and it is easy to see that St. Anselm, for example, 
speaks sometimes as a philosopher and sometimes 
as a theologian. The twelfth century advances a 
step further, and the distinction between philoso- 
phy and theology becomes one of its characteristic 
declarations. A codex of Regensburg of the 
twelfth century clearly distinguishes philosophers, 

10 De dtvina praedestinatione, 1, 1 (Patr. lat vol. 183, c. 357-858). 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 51 

"humanae videlicet sapientiae amatores" from the- 
ologians, "divinae scripturae doctores" 11 

I am of course aware that besides these texts 
there are others in which philosophy is abused or 
misunderstood; that reactionary minds, narrow the- 
ologians or disdainful mystics, condemned profane 
knowledge as useless, or if they admitted philoso- 
phy, they reduced it to the rank of a vassal and a 
serf of theology. In the eleventh century Otloh 
of St. Emmeram forbade monks the study of it; 
they, he said, having renounced the world, must 
occupy themselves only with divine things. Peter 
Damien wrote concerning dialectics, that even 
though sometimes (quando), by way of exception, 
it is allowed to occupy itself with theological mat- 
ters and with mysteries of divine power (mysteria 
divinae virtutis) , it should nevertheless renounce all 
spirit of independence (for that would be arro- 
gance), and like a servant place itself at the ser- 
vice of its mistress, theology: Velut andlla domi- 
nae quodam famulatus obsequio subservire. 12 

Here for the first time this famous phrase ap- 
pears. It is repeated in the twelfth century by a 
united group of so-called "rigorist theologians" 
Peter of Blois, Stephen of Tournai, Michael of 
Corbeil, and many others. The lofty mystics of the 
convent of St. Victor at Paris Walter and Absa- 

iiGrabmann, op. tit., I, 191. cod. Clm. No. 14401. 

t*Z> divina omnipotontia, c. 5 Patr. lat vol. 14, c. 603. 



52 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

Ion of St. Victor went so far as to say that phi- 
losophy is the devil's art, and that certain theolo- 
gians who used it were "the labyrinths" of France. 
But one must not forget that these detractors of 
philosophy were a minority, just as the quibbling 
dialecticians formed an exceptional class also, and 
that already in the eleventh and the twelfth century 
the best minds rejected the unhappy phrase of 
Damien. St. Anselm had disavowed it. The Char- 
trains, John of Salisbury, Alan of Lille, either ex- 
pressly oppose it or show by their writings that they 
reject it. Moreover, the speculative theologians 
who appeared at the beginning of the twelfth cen- 
tury and almost immediately formed three great 
schools Abaelard, Gilbert de la Porr6e, Hugo of 
St. Victor condemned the timidity of the "rigor- 
ists," and the apologetic which they created (of 
which we shall speak further on) 18 is an effectual 
counterpoise to the tendencies of Damien. Peter 
Lombard himself, in spite of his practical point of 
view, protests against such excessive pretensions. 
The formula is condemned by the majority of intel- 
lectual philosophers and theologians. Hence it is 
very unfair to judge the philosophers of the Mid- 
dle Ages by the doctrines of a minority and that 
in the twelfth century against which the best 
openly rebel. To make clear the origin of the 
formula, that philosophy is the handmaiden of the- 
ology, should suffice to do justice in the matter. 

is See ch. VII, iv. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 53 

This consideration should relieve the philosophy of 
the Middle Ages of that grave contempt which has 
weighed upon it so long, a contempt resting upon 
the belief that it had no raison d'etre, no proper 
method, no independence! 

To say that philosophy, by the twelfth century, 
had become clearly distinguished from the liberal 
arts on the one hand and from theology on the 
other hand, is to recognize that its Jimits were 
clearly defined and that it had become conscious of 
itself. Now this great first step in organization 
had been made simultaneously by other sciences as 
well, and they were thus all given independence, 
though in different degrees. For example, there 
was the development in dogmatic theology, which 
progressed rapidly, as we have just said, and 
spread widely in the great schools of Abaelard, of 
Gilbert de la Porree, of Hugo of St. Victor, and 
of Peter Lombard. It appeared also in the liberal 
arts, of which one branch or another was more espe- 
cially studied in this school or that; for example, 
grammar at Orleans and dialectics at Paris. It 
was evidenced, moreover, in the appearance of 
medicine, as a separate discipline, and especially of 
civil (Roman) and canon law. Thus the impor- 
tant mental disciplines, on which the thirteenth 
century was to thrive, had asserted their indepen- 
dence and intrinsic worth. 

These demarcations, which seem to us so natural 
and matter of course, have come at the cost of great 



54 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILISATION 

effort in every period of history which has attempt- 
ed their establishment and necessarily so. Thus 
the first Greek philosophers encountered the same 
difficulty in this regard as did the scholastics of the 
twelfth century. Even today, when classification 
is so far advanced, discussions arise in fixing the 
limits of new sciences ; witness the example of soci- 
ology. But this delimitation of philosophy in the 
twelfth century was only one aspect of a rapidly 
developing civilization. Do we not see a similar 
movement in the political, the social, the religious, 
and the artistic life? The royal prerogatives, the 
rights and duties of vassals, the status of the bour- 
geoisie and of the rural population, the distinction 
between temporal charge and spiritual function of 
abbots and prelates, the monastic and episcopal 
hierarchy, the clear establishment of new artistic 
standards, all of these are features of an epoch in 
process of definition. The chaos and the hesitation 
of the tenth and the eleventh centuries have disap- 
peared. The new era exhibits throughout a sense 
of maturing powers. 

Ill 

We may now penetrate more deeply, and con- 
sider the mass of philosophical doctrines which is- 
sued out of the efforts of the twelfth century. As 
one does this, one cannot help noting how the chief 
doctrines of the developing metaphysics harmo- 
nize with the predominant virtues of the feudal 



IX THE MIDDLE AGES 55 

spirit. And this brings us to our third point, and 
indeed the most interesting one, concerning the re- 
flection of the civilization in the philosophy : name- 
ly, the harmony of the feudal sense of personal 
worth with the philosophical doctrine of the reality 
of the individual. 

The feudal man was athirst for independence, 
his relations with his overlord being determined by 
free contract; moreover, by a kind of contagion, 
the desire for a similar independence spread to the 
townspeople and to the rustic population. This 
natural disposition took on a Christian tone by vir- 
tue of the Church teaching concerning the value of 
the individual life, the individual soul bought at a 
price. It was according to this humanitarian prin- 
ciple that Peter the Venerable called the serfs his 
brothers and sisters. 14 

Roman civil law and canon law and feudal law 
the three forms of jurisprudence which developed 
so rapidly from the eleventh century onward had 
come to remarkable agreement regarding the ex- 
istence of natural right; and in the name of this 
right, based on human nature, they had proclaimed 
the equality of all men. With this beginning, they 
came to regard all differences of rank as conven- 
tional; and slavery and serfdom were declared to 
be contrary to natural law. If, however, the three 
forms of law recognized the legitimacy of serfdom, 
it was because of the special conditions of the time. 

i* See above, p. 26. 



56 PHILOSOPHY AKD CIVILIZATION 

Serfdom was considered a social necessity. Under 
the influence of Christianity, all three systems of 
law sought to mitigate serfdom; and this was espe- 
cially true of the civil lawyers and the canonists, 
who put into effect a series of measures for the 
benefit of the serf, which guaranteed the indissolu- 
bility of his marriage, assured him his right of 
sanctuary, encouraged his emancipation, and pre- 
scribed rules in regard to his ordination and his 
entry into a monastery. These ideas made head- 
way, slow, to be sure, but steady toward that 
state of society wherein the serf could be set free 
with the liberty which is due all human beings. 15 
Now the scholastic philosophy of the twelfth 
century based these juridical declarations upon 
metaphysical foundations; and they came, after the 
many centuries of discussion, to this important con- 
clusion a conclusion no longer doubted that the 
only existing reality is individual reality. Indi- 
viduals alone exist; and only individuals ever could 
exist. The thesis was general in its application. 
Whether man or animal or plant or chemical body 
or what not, a being must exist as an individual, 
incommunicable, and undivided in itself. Simi- 
larly, everything that affects an existing being is 

IB For the conceptions of natural right and of serfdom among 
the feudal theorists of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, see Carlyle, 
A Hiitory of Mediaeval Political Theory in the West, vol. Ill, Part 
II, ch. I; among the civil lawyers, ibid., vol. II, Part I, ch, IV; 
among the canonists, ibid., voL II, Part II, ch. V. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 57 

particularized; man's act of thinking, the shape of 
an animal, the height of a plant, the activity of a 
chemical molecule, everything that exists, exists in 
the condition of particularity. Scholastic philoso- 
phy is pluralistic; it regards the real world as a 
collection of individuals and particulars. 10 

Individuality when applied to a human being is 
called personality. Throughout the twelfth cen- 
tury the philosophers are unanimous in repeating 
the words of Boethius: persona est rationalis na- 
turae individua substantial 

For a long time, the schools had oscillated be- 
tween the extreme realism which taught with Plato 
that universal essences, such as humanity, have a 
real existence, and the anti-realism which denied 
the existence of such realities. But by the twelfth 
century the debate had been closed in favor of anti- 
realism. Notwithstanding their various shades of 
difference, 18 the theory of respectus advanced by 
Adelard of Bath in Laon and in Paris, the doctrine 
of status taught by Walter of Mortagne, the so- 
called "indifference-theory" and the "collection- 
theory" reechoed by the anonymous author of the 
De Genenbus et Speciebus, all of these theories, 
mentioned by John of Salisbury in his Metalogi- 
cus agree in maintaining that universal essences 

18 See below, Chapter IX. 

IT Boethius, De duabus naturit. 

is Cf. my Histoire de la Philosophic MtdUval*, pp. 217-221. 

i II, 17. 



58 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

could not exist, and that only the individual pos- 
sesses real existence. 

Hence, the human perfection which constitutes 
human reality is of the same kind in each person, 
king or subject, seigneur or vassal, master or ser- 
vant, rich or poor, these all have a similar essence. 
The reality that constitutes the human person ad- 
mits of no degrees. According to scholastic philos- 
ophy, a being is either man or not man. No one 
man can be more or less man than another, al- 
though each of us possesses more or less powerful 
faculties which produce more or less perfect acts. 20 
In this sense Abaelard and Gilbert de la Porree, 
and scores of others, agree with Peter the Venerable 
and declare in philosophical terms, based on meta- 
physical principles, that "serfs are no less and no 
more human beings than are their masters." 

But Abaelard went a step further. As has been 
only recently disclosed by the important discovery 
of his Glossulae super Porphyrium? 1 we can now 
say definitely, that to Abaelard belongs the great 
credit of having solved the problem of the universal 
in the form that was followed throughout the 
twelfth, the thirteenth, and the fourteenth centuries. 
Indeed, to the metaphysical doctrine, Abaelard adds 

20 See ch. IX. 

21 By Grabmann and Geyer in the libraries of Milan and Lunel. 
For the publication of this important text, see Bernhard Geyer, 
"Peter Abaelards philosophisehe Schriften. I. Die Logica Ingredi- 
entibus. 1. Die Glossen zu Porphyrius," (Beitrdge zur Geschichte 
der Philosophic des Mittelalters, Bd. XXI, Heft 1, Miinster, 1919). 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 59 

the psychological, which may be briefly summar- 
ized as follows: Although there exist only individ- 
ual men, although each one is independent of the 
other in his existence, the mind nevertheless pos- 
sesses the general notion of humanity which belongs 
to each of them; but this form of generality is a 
product of our conceptual activity and does not 
affect the real existence. 22 Therewith was given in 
compact form essentially the scholastic solution of 
the famous problem of the relation between the uni- 
versal and the particular. 

This doctrine had grown up gradually, and its 
formation runs parallel with that of the feudal 
sentiment. Even while it is being clearly expressed 
in the various philosophical works, the feudal feel- 
ing of chivalry appears in all its purity and 
strength in the Chansons de Geste. The most ar- 
dent defenders of the philosophical solution are the 
sons of chevaliers, the impetuous Abaelard, heir 
of the seigneurs of Pallet; Gilbert de la Porree, 
bishop of Poitiers; the aristocratic John of Salis- 
bury, who writes concerning this question: "The 

22 "Illud quoquc quod supra meminimus, intellectus scilicet universa- 
lium fieri per abstractionem et quomodo eos solos, nudos, puros nee 
tamen cassos appelemus . . ." Edit. Geyer, pp. 94 ff. The epistemo- 
logical solution appears clearly in the following text: "Cum enim 
hunc hominem tantum attendo in natura substantiae vel corporis, non 
etiam animalis vel horn in is vel grammatici, profecto nihil nisi quod 
in ea est intelligo, sed non omnia quae habet, attendo. Et cum dico 
me attendere tantum earn in eo quod hoc habet, illud tantum ad at- 
tentionem refertur, non ad modum subsistendi, alioquin cassus esset 
intellectus," Ibid., p. 35. 



60 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

world has grown old treating of it, and has taken 
more time for its solution than the Caesars took to 
conquer and govern the world." 28 

The great scholastics of the thirteenth century 
will appropriate this doctrine to their purposes, 
bringing it into harmony with psychology and 
ethics and social and political theories; and they 
will incorporate it in that great synthesis which is 
the most commanding product of the mediaeval 
mind, that is, scholasticism. 

To sum up. The twelfth century witnesses a 
new civilization established in a striking form. The 
struggles of kings with vassals, the coming of the 
communes, the establishment of citizenship, the 
freedom of the serfs, all of these facts are evi- 
dence that the balance is being established among 
social forces. New habits, based upon the dignity 
and the self-respect of the individual, were born out 
of feudalism, and the Church impressed upon them 
the stamp of Christianity. A new art springs into 
life, and intellectual culture makes noteworthy 
progress. The spirit of localism, which was the 
result of split-up feudalism, breaks out in the nu- 
merous schools of the West; and herein appears 
first the reflection of the age in its philosophy. The 
demarcation of boundaries between philosophy and 
all other disciplines discloses a further harmony be- 
tween its philosophy and the general spirit of the 
age, an age which constructs in all departments 

**Polycraticu* t VII, IS. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 61 

and destroys in none. Finally, the fundamental 
quality of feudalism is reflected in one of the chief 
doctrines of their metaphysics: the self-sufficiency 
of the individual, whether thing or person, is pro- 
claimed in the schools of France and of England; 
and the French and the English have never for- 
gotten this proud declaration of their ancestors, the 
scholastics of the twelfth century. 



CHAPTER FOUR 

THE GREAT AWAKENING OF PHILOSOPHY 
IN THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY 

i. The causes : The acquired momentum, ii. The rise of the 
Universities (Paris and Oxford), iii. The establishment of 
the mendicant orders (Dominicans and Franciscans), iv. The 
acquaintance with new philosophical works; translations, v. 
General result: among the numerous systems the scholastic 
philosophy issues as dominant, vi. The comprehensive classi- 
fication of knowledge. 



IT is now generally agreed, that the thirteenth 
century marks the climax in the growth of philo- 
sophical thought in western Europe during the 
Middle Ages. With the decade 1210-1220 begins 
a development of extraordinary vitality which ex- 
tends over a period of one hundred and fifty years. 
Let us examine the causes and the results of this 
movement of thought. 

What are the causes of this remarkable develop- 
ment of philosophical thought? How does it hap- 
pen that we see the appearance of so many vigor- 
ous systems, as though the seed had been thrown 
with lavish hand upon the fertile soil of western 
Europe? 

The first cause is what I shall call the acquired 
momentum. The intellectual labours of the twelfth 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 63 

century gave the initial impulse. We have already 
observed some of their achievements; for example, 
their contributions in methodology, by which the 
limits of each science and discipline were estab- 
lished, and without which no intellectual progress 
would have been possible. We have noted also the 
deliberate and unanimous declaration, that the indi- 
vidual alone can be endowed with actual existence 
and substantiality. To the individual man, lord 
or vassal, freeman or serf, clergyman or layman, 
rich or poor philosophy spoke these bold words: 
"Be yourself; your personality belongs only to 
yourself, your substance is an independent value; 
keep it; be self-reliant; free contract alone can bind 
you to another man." 

There are many other philosophical theories 
which the twelfth century contributed to later gen- 
erations. Among them are the distinction between 
sense perception and rational knowledge, and the 
"abstraction" of the latter from the former; the 
many proofs of the existence of God, the studies in 
his Infinitude, and the essays in reconciling Provi- 
dence and human freedom; the relation between es- 
sence and existence; the views on the natural equal- 
ity of men and the divine origin of authority. But 
these doctrines had not been combined into an inte- 
gral whole; and therefore the philosophers of the 
thirteenth century used them as material in the con- 
struction of their massive edifice of knowledge. 



64 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

But not alone in philosophy was the growth ex- 
traordinary and the ripening rapid; the same was 
true of all domains. The constitution of the 
Magna Charta (1215), the granting of privileges 
by Philip Augustus to the University of Paris, the 
birth of St. Louis and of Thomas Aquinas, the 
death of St. Francis, these are all events closely 
coinciding in time; and the height of development 
in scholastic philosophy followed closely upon the 
height of development in Gothic architecture. 

The best proof, however, of the value of the work 
already accomplished lies in the very celerity of the 
development during the thirteenth century; for the 
succeeding generations of that century took swift 
advantage of the favourable conditions which had 
already been created for them. Thus, a few years 
after these happy conditions obtained, that is about 
1226-30, William of Auvergne, bishop of Paris, 
and the Franciscan Alexander of Hales conceived 
their great systems of thought; and then almost 
immediately there appeared such men as Roger 
Bacon, Bonaventure, Thomas Aquinas, and Ray- 
mond Lully. What they did would not have been 
possible if their age had not been prepared to ac- 
cept their work, a preparation already assured in 
the twelfth-century leaven of doctrine, with its 
promise of growth and of increase. 

But there were also external causes which hast- 
ened this elaboration of doctrine. Among these 
there are three to be especially noted. Namely, the 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 65 

rise of the University of Paris; the establishment 
of the two great religious orders, both of them de- 
voted to learning; and the circulation of a large 
number of new philosophical works, which were 
brought from the Orient and which had been un- 
known to the Occident before that time in the Mid- 
dle Ages. These three causes cooperated in a 
unique manner. For, the University of Paris was 
the centre of learning; the new orders supplied the 
same University with professors; and the books 
brought from the Orient made a notable increase in 
its working library. 

II 

During the last years of the twelfth century, the 
French metropolis monopolized, to its advantage, 
the intellectual activity which previously had been 
scattered in the various French centers. The Uni- 
versity eclipsed the episcopal and monastic schools, 
and thereby replaced the spirit of localism with that 
of centralization in study. 1 

Towards the middle of the twelfth century the 
schools of Paris were divided into three groups: (a) 
the schools of the cathedral of Notre Dame, under 
the authority of the chancellor and, through him, of 
the bishop of Paris; (b) the schools of the canons 
of St. Victor, which had become the throbbing cen- 

i See RashdalPs excellent work: The Universities of Europe in the 
Middle Ages. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1895. Cf. H. Denifle, Die 
Universitdten des Mittelalters bis 1400, Berlin, 1885. 



66 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

tre of mysticism, but where also William of Cham? 
peaux had opened a school in which he had been 
teaching philosophy for some time; (c) the outside 
schools of the abbey of St. Genevieve. But the 
schools of Notre Dame occupied the foremost place, 
and it was from them that the University sprang. 
It arose not indeed through a decree of the govern- 
ment or a committee of trustees, but as a flower 
grows from its stem, by a natural convening of 
masters and pupils; for their number had multi- 
plied as a result of the constant development of 
studies. Masters and pupils were grouped in four 
faculties according to their special interests the 
University documents compare them to the four 
rivers of Paradise, just as the iconography of the 
cathedrals symbolically represents the four evange- 
lists as pouring water from urns toward the four 
points of the compass. These are the faculties of 
Theology, of Arts (thus called in memory of the 
liberal arts of the early Middle Ages) , of Law, and 
of Medicine. 

The programme of studies in the University is a 
living and moving thing. It takes form in the 
second half of the thirteenth century, and at that 
moment it is revealed in great purity of outline, like 
something new and fresh, a distinctive and pleas- 
ing product of the Middle Ages. If one should 
take, as it were, a snap-shot of the faculty of arts 
or of philosophy as it was about 1270, he would 
find that it is entirely distinct from the other fac- 



IX THE MIDDLE AGES 67 

ulties, even from that of theology, as in our own 
day. But the studies under its control fill a very 
special place in the University economy, because 
they are the usual, or even required, preliminary to 
studies in the other faculties. They have a forma- 
tive and preparatory character, and for this reason 
the faculty of arts appears in the documents with 
the title of inferior faculty, facultas inferior, in dis- 
tinction from the three other faculties which are 
placed over it and hence are called superior, facili- 
tates superiores. 2 On this account the student popu- 
lation of the faculty of arts was young and numer- 
ous, a population of adolescents pueri, the char- 
ters say. They entered at fourteen years ; at twenty 
they might have finished their course in arts and 
graduated. Then usually they entered another fac- 
ulty. But they had received the imprint of their 
masters; and the impressions given by philosophical 
teaching are indelible, be it remembered. On their 
side the masters or professors of the faculty of arts, 
recruited from among the graduates in arts by a 
curious custom of which we will speak in a moment, 
also constituted the youthful, and therefore stir- 
ring, element in the teaching staff. 

It is easy to distinguish in the faculty of arts the 
two main features which characterise the entire 
University: the corporate spirit and the extension 
of instruction. The University as a whole is a cor- 

2Denifle et Chatelain, Char tutor ium Univerttitati* Parisientit, I, 
p. 600. 



68 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

poration, or group of masters and scholars. It 
is even nothing but that; the word "universitas" is 
taken from the Roman law and means corporation 
or group; and the mediaeval period applies this 
term to every kind of grouping, to the city, to the 
parish, even to the universal Church; while docu- 
ments name the University proper, a general centre 
of studies, "stwttum generate." The corporation 
idea appears therefore in the organization of facul- 
ties, and gives to the faculty of arts or philosophy 
a characteristic meaning. It includes masters and 
apprentices. Indeed, the student at Paris is an 
apprentice-professor, a candidate for the master- 
ship. His career is normally crowned, not by re- 
ceiving a diploma which is simply the recognition 
of knowledge but by teaching in the corporation 
of his masters. The studies, too, constitute simply 
a long apprenticeship for the mastership or the pro- 
fessorship. He becomes a professor by doing the 
work of a professor, as a blacksmith becomes a 
blacksmith by forging. Indeed, the whole situa- 
tion strongly resembles the organization of work- 
men, of stonecutters and masons, who about this 
time were building and carving the great cathedrals 
of France. They, too, had their working-men's syn- 
dicates; and professional schools were organized in 
their midst. The apprenticed workman was sub- 
jected to a severe and long initiation, and worked 
under the direction of a master. To become master 
in his turn, he must produce a work judged worthy 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 69 

and called a masterpiece. The process was none 
other for the future professors of philosophy at 
the University of Paris. 

During his six years of attendance, the pupil 
cleared the three stages of baccalaureate (baccha- 
laureus), licentiate (licentiatus) , and mastership 
(magister). But the tests for the baccalaureate 
had already included an attempt at public lecture. 
After the new member had been subjected to some 
preliminary examinations (responsiones et eoc- 
amen), he was required to mount a platform, and 
invited to defend a systematically prepared thesis 
a process which sometimes lasted all through Lent 
and to answer the objections of those present. 
This public defense was called determinatio, and 
the student left it as a bachelor, a term which was 
employed by the corporation of workmen in a 
special sense, the bachelors being "those who have 
passed as masters in the art but who have not been 
sworn in." The examination for the baccalaureate 
is surrounded with the corporate ceremonial so dear 
to the thirteenth century. The student puts on a 
special cap. Then, the seance ended, wine is served 
and a banquet arranged. Youth is everywhere the 
same the great days of university life must be 
gaily celebrated. Between the baccalaureate and 
licentiate there was a period of variable length, dur- 
ing which the bachelor was at once student and ap- 
prentice-professor. As student, he followed the 
master's lessons and continued to acquire knowl- 



70 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

edge; as apprentice-professor, he himself explained 
to others certain books of Aristotle's Organon. 
When his term of six years had rolled around and 
he had reached his nineteenth or twentieth year, 
the bachelor could present himself before the chan- 
cellor to be admitted to the licentiate. Ceremonies 
multiply: thus, the new examination to be under- 
gone before some of the professors of the faculty 
(temptatores) , and then before the chancellor as- 
sisted by four examiners chosen by him and ap- 
proved by the faculty; the public discussion at 
St.-Julien-le-Pauvre upon a subject left to the 
choice of the bachelor; and finally, amid great 
pomp, the conferring of the long-coveted right to 
teach and to open his own school. 

There was still the third step to be taken the 
mastership; and here we are taken back to the 
purest conceptions of the mediaeval corporation. 
The mastership is the enthroning of the newly li- 
censed member before the faculty or society of 
masters that close organization, so jealous of its 
monopoly, to which one had access only through the 
agreement of all the members, and after having 
given a pledge of fidelity to the rector and to the 
faculty which bound the master for life. 

The mastership was in principle a free profes- 
sion, with no rules except the rules applying to the 
organization as a whole, and with no limit upon the 
number of the members. In consequence of this 
arrangement, there was a great increase in the 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 71 

teaching profession. The right to teach could not 
be withheld from any student who had completed 
the regular course of studies; and the number of 
masters of arts incorporated in the faculty was 
theoretically unlimited. We readily recognize cer- 
tain characteristic features in this system of uni- 
versity instruction of the thirteenth century: free 
competition in teaching among all those who have 
taken their degree; freedom of the students who 
have become doctors, or "masters," to open schools 
beside their former masters; and freedom of the 
students to select their own masters, the clearest 
in exposition, the most eloquent in delivery, the 
most profound in thought entirely according to 
choice. 

This freedom in the teaching career was reflected 
in the teaching itself, in the spirit and action of 
the masters. There was really great freedom of 
thought and of speech in the thirteenth century, 
notwithstanding what is now commonly believed on 
this subject. A very striking example may be 
taken from the end of the century, in the person 
of the philosopher Godfrey of Fontaines, who was 
also a "Doctor in Theology." From the teacher's 
chair, and aware of his privilege and responsibil- 
ity he directs the severest criticism against his su- 
perior, the Bishop of Paris, Simon of Bucy. 3 lie 

s For details see my study of Godfrey of Fontaines; Etudes sur la 
vie, les oeuvre* et I'influence de Godtfroid d$ Fontaines, Louvain, 
1904. 



72 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

justifies his audacity by invoking the principle that 
a Doctor of the University is bound to declare the 
truth, however his speech may offend the rich and 
the powerful. "Few there are to be found," he 
says, "who can be blamed for excess of frankness; 
but many indeed for their silence." Pauci invent- 
untur qui culpari possunt de eoscesm in veritate di- 
cenda, plurimi vero de taciturnitate. 4 One could 
cite many more examples of this great freedom of 
speech among the masters ; the University sermons 
especially are full of it. 5 

Although the University of Paris possessed four 
faculties, it was especially famous for its teaching 
of philosophy and theology, just as Bologna, the 
twin sister of Paris, was famed for its juridical 
learning. Paris outstripped by far the University 
of Oxford, which was its only rival in this particu- 
lar field. 6 Thus Paris became the philosophical 
centre of the West, the international "rendez-vous" 
for all those who were interested in speculative 
thought, and their name was legion. By way of 

4 Godefridi de Fontibus Quodlibeta, XII, q. vi, (fol. 978 Kb), Latin 
MS. No. 15849, Bib! Nat. I am editing these Quodlibeta, with the 
aid of former pupils; three volumes have appeared (in the series: 
Les PhiloBOphes Beiges, vols. II and III, Louvain, 1904 and 1914), 
and two or three more will follow. 

See, for example, C. Langlois: "Sermons parisiens de la pre- 
miere moitte du XIH'e s. contenus dans le Ms 691 de la Bibl. d'Ar- 
ras" (Journal de* Savants, 1916, pp. 488 and 548). 

Many other universities were established on the model of Paris 
and Bologna; for instance, Cambridge, Montpellier, Toulouse, Sala- 
manca, Valladolid, Naples, all of the thirteenth century. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 78 

glorifying this philosophical speculation at the 
University, the documents refer to Paris in the 
most pompous terms: parens sdentiarum, the alma 
mater of the sciences; sapientiae fons, fountain of 
wisdom, that is, the fountain of philosophy. 

Paris drew to itself an endless stream of 
strangers interested in these subjects. During the 
thirteenth century all of those who have a name in 
philosophy or in theology come here, sooner or 
later, for a more or less prolonged sojourn. Ital- 
ians such as Bonaventure, Thomas Aquinas, Peter 
of Tarantaise, Gilles of Rome, James of Viterbo, 
meet with masters from German provinces such as 
Albert the Great, Ulric of Strasburg, Thierry of 
Freiburg. From the region of Flanders or from 
the Walloon country come Gauthier of Bruges, 
Siger of Brabant, Henry of Ghent, Godfrey of 
Fontaines, and they meet Danes, such as Boethius 
the Dacian, and especially the English masters, 
such as Stephen Langton, Michael Scot, Alfred 
Anglicus (of Sereshel), William of Meliton, Alex- 
ander of Hales, Richard of Middleton, Roger 
Bacon, Robert Kilwardby, Walter Burleigh, Duns 
Scotus and William of Occam. Spain also is rep- 
resented by notable men, such as Peter of Spain, 
Cardinal Ximenes of Toledo, and Raymond Lully. 
Indeed, one can count on one's fingers the philoso- 
phers of the thirteenth century who were not trained 
at Paris, such as the Silesian Witelo or Robert 
Grosseteste, the organizer of the University of Ox- 



74 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

ford, and even the latter was indirectly influenced 
by Paris. All of these strangers mingle with the 
masters of French origin, William of Auxerre, 
Bernard of Auvergne, William of St. Amour, Wil- 
liam of Auvergne, bishop of Paris, John of La 
Rochelle, and Vincent of Beauvais. From their 
midst are recruited the artificers of that great cos- 
mopolitan philosophy which is to mould the minds 
of the educated classes. 

Ill 

The vigorous growth of the philosophical and 
theological schools of Paris was singularly quick- 
ened by the rise of the two new religious orders, 
the Dominicans and the Franciscans and by their 
incorporation in the University. This stimulus 
was so important that it justifies treating these or- 
ders as a further cause of the rapid development of 
philosophy in the thirteenth century. 

The Benedictine monasteries had fallen into de- 
cline, chiefly through excess of wealth which had 
finally weakened their austerity. Francis of Assisi 
and Dominic, who founded the two celebrated or- 
ders of Franciscans and Dominicans at about the 
same time, effected a return to evangelical poverty 
by forbidding the possession of this world's goods, 
not only to each of their disciples, but also to the 
religious communities themselves. Hence their 
name of "mendicant" orders; and Francis, called 
II poverino, spoke of poverty as his bride. It was 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 75 

because they wished to preach to the multitudes 
and to mingle more intimately in public and social 
life that the Franciscans and the Dominicans estab- 
lished themselves in the town, whilst the Benedic- 
tines and the Carthusians had settled in the country. 
At the same time the Dominicans and the Fran- 
ciscans were not slow in forming an intellectual 
elite. For both orders, each in its own way, fos- 
tered learning in their members; and so they be- 
came, almost on the day of their inception, nurseries 
of philosophers and theologians. It is really very 
wonderful to follow the intense intellectual life 
which is developed in the midst of these vast corpo- 
rations of workers. Hardly are they founded be- 
fore they establish themselves at Paris, in 1217 and 
1219 respectively; they create in the young Uni- 
versity centre separate establishments of advanced 
studies, "studio, generalia" for their own members. 
But at the same time, they are engaged in incorpo- 
rating themselves in the intellectual life of the Uni- 
versity, by obtaining chairs in the faculty of The- 
ology. Fortune favoured the rapid rise of the or- 
ders in the University faculty. In 1229 a strike of 
the secular professors, at the schools of Notre 
Dame, gave them their initial opportunity. The 
voice of Parisian learning had become silent, as the 
documents put it, in omni facilitate silet Parisien- 
sis vox doctrinae. At this juncture the Dominicans 
and the Franciscans offered their services to the 
chancellor, and they were accepted. When later 



76 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

the strike was concluded, the orders succeeded in 
maintaining themselves in the faculty of Theology, 
in spite of the opposition from the other members 
of the faculty. The Dominicans had obtained two 
chairs (one in 1229 and one in 1231), and at the 
same time the Franciscans had secured a chair, of 
which Alexander of Hales was the first incumbent. 
The burning fever for work and the need of re- 
considering doctrine, in the light of the new philoso- 
phies brought from Arabia and Spain and Byzan- 
tium, created among the Franciscans and the 
Dominicans a unique spirit of emulation and served 
as a spur to zealous discussion. In every branch of 
their activities and in every country the rivalry be- 
tween the two great orders breaks out. In religious 
matters, they discuss the merits of their respective 
ideals; in matters of art, their best artists glorify 
the remarkable men of their own orders, thus, fol- 
lowing a capricious impulse intelligible in artists, 
the Dominican Fra Angelico shows in his pictures 
of the Last Judgement certain Franciscans tumb- 
ling toward hell, while the Dominicans are received 
into heaven! But nowhere are they more eager to 
surpass each other than in the realms of philosophy 
and theology. Those who would hold back are 
shaken from their torpor; thus, in the vigorous 
though rude style of the day, Albert the Great 
speaks of the reactionaries of his order as "stupid 
animals who blaspheme philosophy without under- 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 77 

standing it," 7 In 1284 the Franciscan John Peck- 
ham, who reminds one of Roger Bacon, in his im- 
pulsive character and in his tendency to exagger- 
ate writes to the Chancellor of the University as 
follows: "Certain brothers of the Dominican order 
boast that the teaching of truth has a higher place 
of honour among them than in any other existing 
order," 8 

On the other hand, a certain blind rivalry per- 
sists between the "regulars" (those subjects to 
Dominican or Franciscan rule), and those who call 
themselves "secular" teachers (seculares). The 
latter could not conceal their animosity toward 
their monkish colleagues: and the University writ- 
ings of the period are full of the quarrels which re- 
sulted. Thus, as Dominicans and Franciscans op- 
posed each other on points of doctrine, the seculars 
reveal their malice by comparing the twin orders to 
Jacob and Esau who quarrelled in the very womb 
of their mother. However, these twin brothers ac- 
complished great things, and Roger Bacon, the en- 
fant terrible of his time, in spite of his quarrels with 
his fellow friars could not refrain from writing in 
1271, with his usual exaggeration, that in forty 

7". . . tanquam bruta animalia blasphemantia in iis quae igno- 
rant," In Epist. Btati Dionysii Areopagitae, Epist. VIII, No, 9. 

8"Quidam fratres ejusdem ordinis praedicatorum ausi sunt se 
publice jactitari doctrinam veritatis plus in suo ordine quam in alio 
contemporaneo viguisse." Epistola ad cancellarium. Oxon., Decemb., 
1984. 



78 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

years no "secular" had written anything of any 
value either in Philosophy or in Theology, 9 

IV 

The extreme fondness for philosophy, however, 
which appears in the University of Paris during the 
thirteenth century, is explained only in part by the 
acquired momentum, the influx of foreigners to 
Paris, the place given to philosophy and theology 
in the program of studies, and the feverish activity 
of the impressive Dominican and Franciscan cor- 
porations with their remarkable masters. In addi- 
tion, and finally, we must consider the introduction 
of new philosophical texts, which served as food 
for individual reflection and for discussion and for 
writing. 

It is hard for us adequately to realize what this 
enrichment must have meant at that time. The 
great treatises of Aristotle, his Metaphysics, his 
Physics, his Treatise on the Soul, works of which 
doctors had spoken for five hundred years, but 
which no westerner had read since the days of 
Boethius were brought to them from Greece and 
from Spain. Neo-Platonic works were added to 
these, principally the "Liber de Causis" written 
by a compiler of Proclus, and the "Elementa The- 
ologiae" of Proclus himself. Henceforth the West 
knows the best that Greek thought had produced. 
Nor is that all. Along with these works, the Paris- 

Compendium Studii, cap. V, ed. Brewer p. 428. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 79 

ian doctors receive a vast number of commentaries, 
made by the Arabs of Bagdad and of Spain. Fi- 
nally, they also come into possession of a large col- 
lection of Arabian and Jewish works, having their 
sources in Alfarabi, Avicenna, Averroes, Avice- 
bron, not to mention others. 

All of these riches, in Latin translation, were 
brought to Paris, to France, to England, to Italy, 
to Germany ; and the study and evaluation of these 
translations is one of the most difficult and far- 
reaching problems connected with the history of 
that age. In the last century, work on this great 
problem was begun by eminent scholars; nor can 
we even now say that it is solved. Will it ever be 
solved? For, it continually enlarges as further in- 
sight into it is gained. But results have been ob- 
tained; and within recent years specialists of all 
nationalities have taken the work in hand. 9 " 

We get some idea of the difficulties, with which 
these scholars have to deal, when we recall that the 
work of translation was accomplished in a century 
and a half; that the Latin translations were made 
from Greek works, pseudo-Greek works, and books 
of the Jews and Arabs; that the Greek works were 
nearly all twice translated into Latin and in two 
different ways, the one including the direct transla- 

Menendez y Pelayo in Spain, Marches! in Italy, Vacant in 
France, Man don net in Switzerland, Little in England, Charles Has- 
kins at Harvard, Pelzer in Rome, besides a number of Germans 
(such as Rose, Wiistenfeld and Grabmann). 



80 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

tions from the Greek and the other the translations 
by a sort of cascade of intermediate languages 
(Arabic and Hebrew and even the vernacular) ; 
and, finally, that it was carried on in three main 
centres, in Greece itself, in the Greek speaking 
countries of southern Italy (The Sicilies), and in 
Spain. Often the same work was translated many 
times and at different places; many were anony- 
mous or undated. 

Through the three great frontiers raised between 
West and East Spain, Byzantium, Sicily the 
influence of these ideas is set in motion; but it is 
especially through Spain that the influx is the 
greatest. It is at Toledo, indeed, the most ad- 
vanced post of Christianity, and where the kings of 
Castille are contending against the ever-menacing 
invasion of the Mussulmans, that Christian civiliza- 
tion gives welcome to the science and philosophy 
and art of the Arabs. There, in the Archbishop's 
palace, was founded a college of translators who, 
for three-quarters of a century, carried on this 
formidable task, and indeed to a happy conclusion. 
Englishmen, Italians, Frenchmen, and Germans 
worked side by side with Jews and christianized 
Arabs, under the encouragement and stimulus of 
the two learned Archbishops, whose names are 
worthy of being engraved on tablets of bronze, 
Raymond of Toledo and Rodriguez Ximenes. 

The actual acquisition of so much new knowledge 
was made by the masters of Paris in comparatively 



IX THE MIDDLE AGES 81 

rapid stages. Its elaboration, however, took longer. 
The first who came in touch with it were dazed. 
In addition to the Greek thought, which took time 
to master, there was that further world swimming 
into ken, so new and enchanting, the Oriental phi- 
losophy of the Arabian people; born of Neo- 
Platonism, with its mystical, misleading concep- 
tions, and its profound idealism, this philosophy 
was very different from the cold, clear speculation 
of the Neo-Latins and Anglo-Celts. 

It was not until 1270, or thereabouts, that the 
West completed its elaboration of these foreign 
treasures, and the initial chaos gave place to order 
and equilibrium; it was then that Thomas Aquinas, 
the great systematizer among the intellectual giants 
of that age, laid hold of his opportunity and won 
his secure place in the history of thought. 



We are now ready to enumerate the general re- 
sults of the great network of causes which func- 
tioned in the philosophical development of the thir- 
teenth century. Among these general results we 
shall confine our attention to two outstanding facts 
which dominate the entire thought of the thirteenth 
century, like two high peaks towering above the 
rest in a mountain range. On the one hand, there 
is the predominance, in western Europe, of a great 
system of philosophy, the scholastic philosophy; 
on the other hand, there is the impressive classifica- 



82 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

tion of human knowledge. It is important now to 
note carefully the significance of these facts; we 
shall seek to analyze them in the chapters that fol- 
low. 

First, then, the scholastic philosophy. Numer- 
ous philosophical systems rose up on every side as if, 
as I said at the outset, a great variety of seed had 
been scattered on fertile soil by some generous 
hand. The thirteenth century is rich in personali- 
ties. But, among the numerous philosophical sys- 
tems to which the century gave birth, there is one 
which overshadows and surpasses all others in its 
influence. It is the scholastic philosophy. This is 
the system of doctrines which attains the height of 
its perfection in the thirteenth century, and to 
which the majority of the ablest minds subscribe, 
such as William of Auvergne, Alexander of Hales, 
Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventure, and Duns Scotus, 
to mention no others. There is a great fund of 
common doctrines, which each interprets in his own 
way, following his individual genius; just as there 
is also a common Gothic architecture, which appears 
in a great many cathedrals, each of which expresses 
its own individuality. This system of doctrines 
constitutes the binding tie in an important school 
of masters, who are thereby united like the mem- 
bers of a family. They themselves call it, in the 
manuscripts of the period, the "sententia com- 
munis" the prevalent philosophy. This common 
fund of doctrine, to which I was the first to limit 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 83 

the name of "scholastic philosophy," 10 presents an 
imposing mass of ideas. 

To be sure, there were rival and opposing phi- 
losophies. Never, at any time in the history of 
mankind, has contradiction lost its right. The 
thirteenth century is full of clashes of ideas and 
conflicts issuing therefrom. For instance, they ex- 
perienced the shocks of materialism, of Averroism, 
and of Latin Neo-Platonism. Thus, Latin Averro- 
ism, which caused so much disturbance at the Uni- 
versity of Paris, about 1270, denies the individual- 
ity of the act of thinking, by asserting that all men 
think through the instrumentality of a single soul, 
the soul of the race. 11 Again, the Neo-Platonic 
philosophies, which appear in the schools of Paris, 
deny all real transcendence of God by making crea- 
tion an emanation from God, that is to say a part 
of God Himself. 12 Very naturally, therefore, 
against this common peril a coalition was formed, 
both defensive and offensive; and a legion of war- 
riors, such men as Roger Bacon, Bonaventure, 
Thomas Aquinas, Duns Scotus forgot their quar- 
rels and faced the common foe. 

The scholastic philosophers of the thirteenth 
century also exhibit reasoning superior to all the 
systems which were trying to batter a breach in their 
systems of thought. A celebrated painting of 

it> Of. my I! Moire de to Philowphie MddMvale, pp. Ill ff. 

See ch. XIII, iv. 

12 See ch. XIII, v and vi. 



84 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

the beginning of the fourteenth century, which is 
preserved at Pisa, furnishes a striking confirmation 
of this fact; for it reveals the recognition in society 
at large that the scholastic philosophy was the pre- 
dominating philosophy of the time. The painter, 
Traini, represents Thomas Aquinas as crowned in 
glory and with Averroes at his feet crouching in 
the attitude of a defeated warrior. The triumph 
of Aquinas is the triumph of scholasticism, and the 
defeat of Averroes indicates the defeat of the entire 
Oriental and Arabian mentality. This painting of 
Traini, celebrating the triumph of Thomism, be- 
came a theme of the studio, that is to say a common 
opinion, a recognized fact. 18 It is reproduced in a 
host of well-known paintings. We find it splen- 
didly developed, by an unknown painter of the 
Sienna school, in the Capitular Hall built by the 
Dominicans in 1350, at Florence (Chapel of the 
Spaniards) . The subject attracted Gozzoli (in the 
Louvre) ; the Spaniard Zurbaran (Museum of 
Seville) ; then Filippino Lippi (Church of Mi- 
nerva, Rome), who in turn directly inspired Ra- 
phael's "Dispute of the Blessed Sacrament." 14 

VI 

The second great fact resulting from the intel- 
lectual life of the thirteenth century is the classifi- 

18 See below ch. VII, ii, and ch. XIII, iv. 

i* Gillct, Hittoire artistique des ordres mendiants, Paris, 1919, pp. 
139 ff. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 85 

cation of human knowledge. All of the philosophi- 
cal system, riot only the dominating or scholastic 
philosophy, but also those anti-scholastic systems 
with which it was in perpetual struggle and con- 
tradiction rested upon the conception of a vast 
classification, a gigantic work of systematization, 
the fruit of many centuries of speculation, and one 
of the characteristic achievements of the mediaeval 
mind. For more than a thousand years it has satis- 
fied thinkers athirst for order and clarity. In what 
does it consist? 

One may compare it to a monumental structure, 
to a great pyramid consisting of three steps, with 
the sciences of observation as the base, with philoso- 
phy as the middle of the structure, and with theol- 
ogy as the apex. 14 " Let us consider each of these 
in order. 

At the base are the natural sciences such as as- 
tronomy, botany, physiology, zoology, chemistry 
(elements), physics (in the the modern sense of 

"The general scheme is: 

I. Particular sciences, such as botany, zoology, etc. 
II. Philosophy. A. Theoretical a. Physics 

b. Mathematics 

c. Metaphysics 

B. Practical a. Logic 

b. Ethics 

c. Social and political philosophy 

C. Poetical 

III. Theology. A. Doctrinal a. Scriptural (auctoritates) 

b. Apologetical (rations) 
B. Mystical 



86 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

the word) ; and instruction in these precedes in- 
struction in philosophy. In this there is a very in- 
teresting pedagogical application of a ruling prin- 
ciple in the philosophical ideology of the Middle 
Ages; that is that since human knowledge is con- 
tained in the data of sensation, the cultivation of 
the mind must begin with what falls under the ob- 
servation of the senses; nihil est in intellectu quod 
non prius fuerit in sensu. But more especially 
there is implied, in this placing of the experimental 
sciences at the threshold of philosophy, a concep- 
tion which inspires the scientific philosophies of all 
times; namely, that the synthetic or total concep- 
tion of the world furnished by philosophy must be 
founded on an analytic or detailed conception 
yielded by a group of special sciences. These lat- 
ter study the world minutely; and for this reason 
they are called special sciences. They investigate 
the world in one domain after another; the phi- 
losophers of the thirteenth century speak clearly 
concerning this method the basis of the particu- 
larity of a science. 

In every science, say the scholars of the thir- 
teenth century, 18 it is necessary to distinguish the 
objects with which it is concerned (materia) from 
the point of view from which these objects are 



is See ch. VIII, i. 

i Thomas Aquinas, Summa TheoL, 1" q. I, arts. 1-3, passim; 
Contra Gentiles, II, 4; Henricus Gandavensis, Summa Theolog., art. 
7, q. I-VI. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 87 

sidered (ratio formalis). The objects with which 
a science is concerned are its material; for example, 
the human body constitutes the material of an- 
atomy and of physiology. But every science takes 
its material in its own way; it treats this material 
from some one angle, and this angle is always a 
point of view upon which the mind deliberately 
centers, an aspect of things which the mind sepa- 
rates out, "abstracts" (abstrahit) from its ma- 
terial. Thus the point of view of anatomy is not 
that of physiology; for anatomy describes the or- 
gans of the human body, while physiology is con- 
cerned with their functions. The point of view of 
the one is static and of the other dynamic. 

From this it obviously follows that two science* 
can be engaged with the same material, or to bor- 
row the philosophical terminology of the Middle 
Ages possess a common material object (objec- 
tum materiale) ; but they must possess in each case, 
under penalty of being confused, a distinct point 
of view, a unique formal object (objectum for- 
male), which is the special "good" of each science. 
And, indeed, whatever group of sciences we maj^ 
consider, we do, in fact discover everywhere the 
operation of this law, regulating the distinctions 
among the sciences; geology, inorganic chemistry, 
and physics are concerned with the same object 
the inanimate world but from different points of 
view. Biology, paleontology, anatomy, and physi- 
ology study the organism but in its different as- 



88 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

pects. The material common to political economy, 
civil law, and criminal law is human action, but 
each of these sciences regards the complete reality 
of human action from a special angle. From this 
intellectualistic conception of the sciences, which 
bases the specific character of the science upon the 
point of view, it follows that a new science must be 
born whenever research and discovery reveal a new 
aspect, a point of view hitherto unsuspected in the 
unending pursuit of reality; the further the mind 
extends its view of things, the further does it pene- 
trate into the secrets of reality. 

This theory of science helps us to understand 
what makes a science "special," and how in the thir- 
teenth century "special" sciences are opposed to 
"general" science. The particularity of the sciences 
rests upon two considerations which supplement 
each other, and an examination of a few of the sci- 
ences which we have named as examples will suffice 
to show in the concrete the value of these consider- 
ations. Anatomy and physiology, we said, are con- 
cerned with the human body, but they are not con- 
cerned about geological strata or stars. The ma- 
terial studied is a particular bit of reality; a re- 
stricted, specialized department or to use again 
the mediaeval terminology their material object 
(objectum materiale) is restricted. On the other 
hand, precisely because anatomy and physiology 
are concerned with only a particular group of ex- 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 89 

istences, the point of view (objectum formale) un- 
der which they include this group of existences is 
also restricted; it is not applied to other categories 
of the real. 

But, and this is the second point the detailed 
examination of the world for which the special sci- 
ences take up particular positions does not suffice 
to satisfy the mind ; after the detail it demands total 
views. Philosophy is simply a survey of the world 
as a whole. The man of science is like a stranger 
who would explore a city bit by bit, and who travels 
through its avenues, promenades, museums, parks, 
and buildings one after the other. When at last 
he has wandered over the city in all directions, 
there will still remain another way for him to be- 
come acquainted with it; from the height of a plat- 
form, from the summit of a tower, from the basket 
of a balloon, from an aviator's seat, the city would 
disclose to him another aspect, its framework, 
plan, and relative disposition of parts. But that 
way is the way of the philosopher, and not of the 
scientist. The philosopher is thus the man who 
views the world from the top of a lookout and sets 
himself to learn its structure; philosophy is a syn- 
thetic and general knowledge of things. It is not 
concerned with this or that compartment of exis- 
tence, but with all beings existent or possible, the 
real without restriction. It is not a particular but 
a general science. General science or philosophy 



90 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

constitutes the second stage of knowledge. It is 
human wisdom (sapientia) , science par excellence, 



This generality has a twofold aspect; for in two 
ways the general character of philosophy is op- 
posed to the special character of the particular 
sciences. In the first place, instead of dealing with 
one department of reality, philosophy plunges into 
the immensity of the real, of all that is. Its mat- 
ter (material object) is not general of course in the 
sense of an encyclopedia (as was supposed in the 
early Middle Ages by Isidore of Seville and by 
Rhabanus Maurus, or by Vincent of Beauvais in 
the thirteenth century) into which is thrown pell- 
mell, and in a purely artificial order, a formidable 
array of information in regard to all that is known 
and knowable. An encyclopedia is not a science 
and does not pretend to be. If philosophy deals 
with all reality it does so by the way of viewing 
things in their totality. But, in the second place, 
these total views are possible only when the mind 
discovers, in the totality of reality, certain aspects 
or points of view which are met with everywhere 
and which reach to the very depths of reality. To 
return to the technical scholastic language, with 
which we are familiar, its formal and precise object 
is t he study of something that is found everywhere 
and which must be general because it is common to 
everything. Philosophy is defined as the under- 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 91 

standing of all things through their fundamental 
and universal reasons. 16 * 

The thirteenth century directs us to the signifi- 
cance of synthesis or generality which belongs to 
philosophy, by taking up and completing Aristo- 
tle's famous division of philosophy, which was ac- 
cepted as valid down to the time of Wolff in the 
seventeenth century. Philosophy is first, theoreti- 
cal, second, practical, and third, poetical. This 
threefold division of philosophy into speculative, 
practical, and poetical is based upon man's differ- 
ent contacts with the totality of the real, or, as it 
was put then, with the universal order. 

Speculative or theoretical (fcwpctv, to consider) 
philosophy gives the results of acquaintance with 
the world in its objective aspect; it includes the phi- 
losophy of nature, mathematics, and metaphysics, 
which consider (consider at sed non facit) change, 
quantity, and the general conditions of being, re- 
spectively, in the material world. There are three 
stages through which the mind passes in order to 
secure a total view of the world of which it is spec- 
tator. The Middle Ages defines physics, or the 
philosophy of nature, as "the study of the material 
world in so far as it is carried in the stream of 
change, motus" Change! Whether, indeed, it is 
a question of the inorganic kingdom or of the realm 

ie* Thomas Aquinas, Jn Metaph. I, feet 9. "Sapientia cst scientia 
quae considerat primas et universales causas." 



92 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

of the living, of plants or of human life, of the 
atom or of the course of the stars: all that is in the 
sensible world, becomes, that is to say, changes, 
evolves; or, to use the expression of the Middle 
Ages, everything is in motion (mover e). To 
study, in its inmost nature, change and its implica- 
tions, in order to explain the movements of the ma- 
terial world, this is the task of the philosophy of 
nature." It is easy to see that this study is of a 
regressive and synthetic kind, that it is general, 
that is to say, philosophical, on account of the gen- 
eral character of the material investigated (ma- 
terial object), and the generality of the point of 
view from which the inquiry is undertaken (formal 
object). But through all their changes and trans- 
formations bodies preserve a common attribute, the 
primary attribute of body quantity so that the 
study of quantity forces us to penetrate reality still 
further. Mathematics, which studies quantity as 
regards its logical implications, was for the ancients 
a philosophical and therefore a general science, and 
in our day many scientists are tending to return to 
this Aristotelian notion. Metaphysics enters deep- 
est of all into reality and deals with what is beyond 
motion and quantity, for the sole purpose of con- 
sidering the general determinations of being. 

But practical philosophy is no less general in 
character, although it is not concerned with the uni- 

17 Be it observed that, since man is a part of the world of sense- 
perception, psychology also belongs to physics. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 93 

versal order in its objective reality, but with the 
activities (^rrw) of conscious life, through which 
we enter into relation with that reality (consider at 
faciendo). Hence, as Thomas Aquinas explains, 
practical philosophy is occupied with an order of 
things of which man is at once spectator (since he 
examines it by turning upon himself) and maker 
(since he forms it through his conscious function, 
that is, knowing and willing). Practical philos- 
ophy includes logic and ethics and politics. 
Logic sets up a scheme of all that we know, of the 
method of constructing the sciences; and there is 
nothing that the human mind cannot know in some 
imperfect way. Ethics studies the realm of our 
acts, and there is nothing in human life that cannot 
become the material of duty. Politics is concerned 
with the realm of social institutions, and there is 
nothing which has not its social side, since man is 
made to live in society (animale sodalc). Going 
more deeply into the analysis of practical philos- 
ophy, one might show that logic draws in its train 
speculative grammar, for it invades the fields of 
grammar and rhetoric its former associates in the 
trivium to draw thence material for controversy. 
Furthermore, Paris saw the birth of some true phi- 
losophers of language, in the speculative grammars 
of Siger of Courtrai and of Duns Scotus; 18 and the 

i* The authenticity of the Grammatica vpeculativa, attributed to 
Duns Scotus, has been doubted. However this may be, it is a re- 
markable work. 



94 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

lexicographical codes of Donatus and Priscian 
which had satisfied the twelfth century were finally 
rejected with scorn. Logic, ethics, and politics all 
claim to be in touch with the immensity of the re- 
ality with which man enters into relation. 

The same quality of universality should pertain 
to the third group of the philosophical sciences, the 
poetical (woieiv, to make) sciences, which study the 
order achieved by man externally through the 
guidance of reason. Man is at once the spectator 
and maker of an order which he creates. But this 
order is outside of him, in matter, 19 This third 
group is the least developed of all. It would seem 
as if the human product par excellence, the work of 
art, endowed with beauty, should here occupy a 
large place. But the thinkers of the thirteenth cen- 
tury regard the productive activity of the artisan, 
maker of furniture or builder of houses as on the 
same level with the human creative activity which 
inspires epics and which makes cathedrals to rise 
and stained windows to flame and granite statues 
to live. Dante has no special thought of beauty, 
when he speaks of the work of art, as "the grandson 
of God." 20 The professional philosophers bury their 
reflections on beauty in metaphysical studies; 
hence the fragmentary character of their thought 
in that realm. Possibly this omission as regards 
aesthetic theory has its explanation in the corporate 

10 Of. Thomas Aquinas, In Ethic. Nicom., I, 1. 

20 The Inferno, XI, 103. "... a Dio quasi nepote." 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 95 

character of their labours. The artisan was devoted 
to his calling; and this devotion was such that every 
artisan was, or might become, an artist. The dis- 
tinction between artes liberates and artes mechani- 
cae did not rest upon any superiority of the artistic 
activity as such, but upon the difference in the pro- 
cesses employed; both were possessed of the ratio 
artis in like manner. 20 * Furthermore, we must bear 
in mind that the contemporaries of an artistic apo- 
gee do not realize the significance of the develop- 
ment witnessed by them; theories always come later 
than the facts which they are meant to explain. In 
any event, we should note how large and human is 
the philosophical conception of art in the Middle 
Ages; there is no work of man which it cannot 
clothe in the royal mantle of beauty. 

It remains only to mention the last order of stud- 
ies which is placed above philosophy, and which cor- 
responds, in the comparison that we have been mak- 
ing, to the highest part of the structure, to the apex 
of the pyramid. This is theology, doctrinal and 
mystical. 21 The part relating to doctrines is an ar- 
rangement of dogmas founded upon the Christian 
revelation, and we shall see later 22 that it takes a 
double form, being both scriptural and apolo- 
getical. 

Theology aside, this classification of human 

20* "Nee oportet, si liberates artes sunt nobiliores, quod magis eis 
convetilat ratio artis/' Summa TheoL, la ae, q. LV1I, art. 3, t'n fine. 

21 For its plaee in the general scheme see above, p. 85. 

22 See ch. VII. 



96 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

knowledge is Aristotelian in origin. The Aristo- 
telian spirit appears not only in the very notion of 
"science," which aims at unity; but also in the rela- 
tion between the particular sciences and philos- 
ophy. Since the latter rests upon the former, it re- 
mains in permanent contact with the facts; indeed, 
it is anchored to the very rocks of reality. The 
abundant harvest of facts, supplied by Greeks and 
Arabians, was enriched by fresh observations in 
physics (in the modern sense of the word), chem- 
istry (elementary), botany, zoology and human 
physiology. Moreover, Thomas Aquinas and God- 
frey of Fontaines and others borrowed material 
from the special sciences which were taught in the 
other university faculties, notably from medicine 
and from law (civil and canon). Facts about na- 
ture and about the physical and social man, in- 
deed, observations from all sources are called 
upon to supply materials for the synthetic view of 
philosophy. They all claim with Dominicus Gun- 
dissalinus, that there is no science which may not 
contribute to philosophy. Nulla est scientia quae 
non sit aliqua philosophiae pars. 23 Scholastic phi- 
losophy is thus a philosophy based upon science, 
and it is perhaps not superfluous to observe that 
we are now more than ever returning to these con- 
ceptions. 

But in order to appreciate at their true worth the 

28 D divitione Philosophiae, Prologug, p. 5, edit. Baur (BaUm- 
ker's-Beitrdge, IV, 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 97 

applications made by the scholastics, we must make 
a twofold reservation. First, facts were studied 
much more for the purpose of furnishing material 
for philosophy than for their own sake; hence the 
Middle Ages never recognized the distinction be- 
tween common experience and scientific experi- 
ment, which is so familiar to us. Second, this ma- 
terial secured out of observation and experience, 
represented a mixture, a mixture of facts artifi- 
cially obtained and of exact observation. The 
former necessarily lead to erroneous conclusions, 
examples of which we shall see later. 24 The latter, 
however, were adequate for establishing legitimate 
conclusions. 

Finally, the Aristotelian spirit appears also in 
the inner articulation of philosophy itself. During 
the first centuries of the Middle Ages the Platonic 
division of philosophy into physics, logic, and ethics 
had been in vogue ; and for a long time it persisted. 
The thirteenth century definitely rejects it, or 
rather absorbs it into new classifications. Com- 
pared with Aristotle the most brilliant teacher 
whom humanity has known Plato is only a 
poet, saying beautiful things without order or 
method. Dante was right when he called Aristotle 
"the master of those who know" But to know is 
above all to order; sapientis est ordinary it is the 
mission of the wise man to put order into his knowl- 
edge. Even those who do not accept the ideas of 
the Stagyrite acknowledge his kingship when it is 

24 See ch. V, ii. 



98 % PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

a question of order or clearness. "Three-quarters 
of mankind," writes Taine, 25 "take general notions 
for idle speculations. So much the worse for them. 
What does a nation or an age live for, except to 
form them? Only through them does one become 
completely human. If some inhabitant of another 
planet should descend here to learn how far our 
race had advanced, we would have to show him our 
five or six important ideas regarding the mind and 
the world. That alone would give him the measure 
of our intelligence." To such a question the scho- 
lars of the Middle Ages would have replied by ex- 
hibiting their classification of knowledge, and they 
would have won glory thereby. Indeed, it consti- 
tutes a remarkable chapter in scientific methodol- 
ogy, a kind of "introduction to philosophy," to use 
a modern expression. Whatever may be one's 
judgement regarding the value of this famous classi- 
fication, one must bow in respect before the great 
ideal which it seeks to promote. It meets a need 
which recurrently haunts humanity and which ap- 
pears in all great ages: the need for the unification 
of knowledge. The thirteenth century dreamed of 
it, as Aristotle and Plato did in ancient times, and 
as Auguste Comte and Herbert Spencer have done 
in our day. It is a splendid product of greatness 
and power, and we shall see in the chapters that 
follow how closely bound up it is with the civiliza- 
tion to which it belongs. 

25 Le pofitivitme anglais, Paris, 1864, pp. 11, 19. 



CHAPTER FIVE 

UNIFYING AND COSMOPOLITAN TENDENCIES 

i. Need of universality; the "law of parsimony." ii. Excess 
resulting from the felt need of simplifying without limit; the 
geocentric system and the anthropocentric conception, iii. 
The society of mankind ("universitas humana") in its theo- 
retical and practical forms, iv. Cosmopolitan tendencies. 



WE have seen that there are two outstanding re- 
sults of the various causes that make for the great 
development of philosophy in the thirteenth cen- 
tury. On the one hand, there is the great classifica- 
tion of human knowledge, in which each science had 
its own particular place a pyramid of three stages, 
or if one prefers the figure employed by Boethius. 1 
a ladder for scaling the walls of learning. On the 
other hand, among all the clashing systems which 
rest upon that classification, there is one system of 
thought which prevails, that is scholasticism; and 
it wins widest acceptance because it succeeds in re- 
ducing to one harmonious whole all of the problems 
and their solutions. 

Bearing in mind these two great facts, we shall 
now proceed to show that they possess characteris- 
tics which are found in every sphere of the life of 

i Boethius, De Consolation** Philosophic^, Lib. I, 1. 



100 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

the times; and, indeed, as will appear, they are in 
organic connection with all the other factors of 
mediaeval civilization. 

There is one fundamental characteristic, appear- 
ing in the scientific classification and the scholastic 
philosophy, which is found everywhere; I mean the 
tendency toward unity. The need of ordering 
everything in accordance with principles of unity 
and stability, the search for systems which extend 
themselves over vast domains, is one of the con- 
spicuous marks of a century which saw in the large, 
and which acted on a broad plan. Wherever we 
turn, we find a prodigious ambition of initiators 
and everyone dreaming of universal harmony. 

The policy of kings was filled with this ambition. 
For, at this time, the feeling for unity began to 
vivify great states such as France and England and 
Germany and Spain. Now, this unity could not 
be realized except by introducing principles of 
order, which would bring under a common regime 
social classes scattered over vast territories, and 
previously subjected to local and antagonistic pow- 
ers. The thirteenth century was a century of kings 
who were all organizers, administrators, legisla- 
tors; they were builders of stability, who all mould- 
ed their countries and their peoples: Philip Augus- 
tus and Louis IX in France; Edward I in Eng- 
land; Frederick II of Germany; Ferdinand III 
and Alphonso X in Spain; all had these traits in 
common. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 101 

In France, localistic and centrifugal feudalism 
became more and more feeble, and monarchical 
concentration grew steadily stronger. This con- 
centration, which first appeared under Philip 
Augustus, became more and more evident under 
Louis IX, who perfected the work of unification 
begun by his grandfather. A lover of justice, re- 
spectful of the rights of others, and jealous of his 
own, he made no attempt to crush the feudal lords 
or the cities. There was nothing despotic in his 
rule, and he permitted all kinds of social forces to 
develop themselves. 2 His reign resembled the oak 
under which he held his court of justice; for the 
oak, the lord of the forest, likewise refrains from 
stifling growths of more fragile structure which seek 
protection under its shade. 

Without attempting to establish a parallel be- 
tween the policy and social condition of France and 
the neighbouring countries, one must recognize 
that the stability realized by Louis IX recurs mu- 
tatis mutandis in England. When John Lackland 
rendered to England "the inestimable service of 
losing her French possessions," 3 the country organ- 
ized itself from within outward. The Magna 
Charta of 1215 established a rule of liberty in favor 
of the clergy and thfe nobility; it produced an equi- 
poise between the powers of the king and the repre- 
sentatives of the nation. Parliament came into be- 

z Luchaire, A., Louis VII, Philippe August*, Louis VIII, p. BOB. 
8 See F. Harrison, The Meaning of History, etc., 1016, p. 161. 



102 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

ing. Intelligent princes, like Edward I (1272- 
1307), completed the conquest of the Island and 
perfected the national institutions. 

Much the same thing occured in the Norman 
kingdom of the Two Sicilies, and in the Catholic 
kingdoms of Spain, which grew powerful at the 
cost of the Arab states in the south of the penin- 
sula, and in which later the Cortes checked the royal 
power. Like his relative Louis IX, Ferdinand 
III, king of Castile, had the centralizing idea. He 
organized a central administration of the state; and 
only his death prevented him from achieving legis- 
lative unity, which would have consolidated the mo- 
saic of peoples living within the expanding confines 
of Castile. 4 

But while in France, in England, in the Catholic 
kingdoms of Spain, and in the Norman kingdom of 
the south of Italy, royalty was gaining in influence, 
the German Emperor was losing some of his power. 
The result was that the two types of government in 
the West, feudal particularism and German cen- 
tralized authority, steadily approached each other, 
and the different European states became more like 
a single family. The German barons, bishops, and 
abbots were no longer the "valets" of the emperor; 
the feudal nobility gained more independence; cities 
began to show their power. 

Even in Italy, which the German Emperors had 

* Altamira, Historia de Esparto, y de la civilisation espagnola, 1913, 
I, p. 385. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 103 

so long claimed as their own, Frederic II, son of 
Frederic Barbarossa, had to reckon with the Lom- 
bard cities which were powerful principalities, seek- 
ing to shake off his yoke. In his person the family 
of the Hohenstauf en underwent defeat at the hands 
of the Pope. 

Above this process of beginning nationalization, 
states which were striving towards an autonomous 
national life, stood the Papacy, which assumed in 
the person of Innocent III its most perfect me- 
diaeval expression. Its mission being above all 
regulatory, the Papacy followed a religious and in- 
ternational policy whose effect on the whole century 
will be defined later in this chapter. 5 It was In- 
nocent III who affirmed the unitary role of the 
Papacy in the political life of his age: he was the 
first to set up as a right that which his predecessors 
had practiced in fact that is, the nomination of 
the Emperor. 5 * 

But politics, whether of kings or of popes, con- 
stitute only the body of civilization. Its inner 
life circulates in religious and moral feelings, in 
social, artistic, philosophical, and scientific doc- 
trines. 

Christian dogma and Christian ethics permeated 
the whole human fabric, no activity being exempted 

G Sec below iii. 

cSee the Bull Venerabiltm: "jus et auctoritas examinandi per- 
sonam electam in regem et promovendura ad imperlum ad no* spec- 
tat" 



104 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

from their influence. They endued with a certain 
supernatural sanction the life of individuals, fami- 
lies and peoples, who were all on a pilgrimage (in 
via) towards the heavenly home (in patriam). 
Christianity gave a spirit of consecration to the 
workers in guilds, to the profession of arms (pro- 
vided the war was just), to ateliers of painters and 
of sculptors, to the builders of cathedrals, to cloister- 
schools and universities. The new religious orders 
organized themselves in the new spirit of the age. 
While the Benedictine monks belonged to a par- 
ticular abbey, as to a large family, the Dominicans 
and Franciscans belonged far more to their order 
as a whole, they were delocalized, being sent out 
for preaching like soldiers to a battlefield. 6 

Similarly, in the whole field of art there was the 
same dream of universality, and the same attempt 
to realize rigorously the ideal of order. 

The Gothic cathedrals, which are the most per- 
fect flowering of mediaeval genius, amaze modern 
architects with the amplitude of their dimensions. 
"They were made for crowds, for thousands and 
tens of thousands of human beings; for the whole 
human race, on its knees, hungry for pardon and 
love." 7 At the same time, they astound the mod- 
ern student of art by the logic of their plan. To 

Cf. E. Baker, The Dominican Order and Convocation, Oxford, 
Clarendon Press, 1913. 
T Henry Adams, op. cit., p. 367. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES , 105 

make the edifice a mirror of nature, of the moral 
world, and of history, architecture calls to its aid 
sculpture, painting, and stained glass. Immense 
shrines populate themselves with statues, with fig- 
ures of animals, plants, and foliage, with designs of 
every kind. The visible world was a veritable re- 
flection of the thought of God for the mediaeval 
artists ; hence they thought that all creatures might 
find a place in the cathedral. Likewise, the cathe- 
dral is the mirror of science, and, in fact, all kinds 
of knowledge, even the humblest, such as fitted men 
for manual labor and for the making of calendars, 
and also the highest, such as liberal arts, philosophy, 
and theology, were given plastic form. Thus the 
cathedral could readily serve as a visible catechism, 
where the man of the thirteenth century could find 
in simple outline all that he needed to believe and to 
know. The highest was made accessible to the low- 
est. Architecture has never been more social and 
popular at any other period of history. 

As for literature, while the productions of the 
thirteenth century do not rank with their monu- 
ments of stone, nevertheless they represent great en- 
deavor. A work like the Roman de la Rose is a 
sort of encyclopedia of everything that a cultured 
layman of the middle of the thirteenth century 
ought to know. The Divine Comedy, a work which 
has not been imitated and which is inimitable, is a 
symphony of the whole time. Dante's stage is the 
universe; he is a citizen of the world, and he in- 



106 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

forms us that he writes "the sacred poem to which 
heaven and earth put their hands." 8 

While the artists were thus giving birth to new 
life in art, the intellectual classes were hungering 
and thirsting to know all, to assemble everything 
within the domain of knowledge, and, after having 
completed the collection, to submit all to order. 

There are different levels in that effort toward 
order. At the lower level the encyclopedists ex- 
press the desire of the time for an inventory of all 
that can be known. Thus Jacopo de Voragine, in 
the Golden Legend, gathers together the legends 
of the lives of the saints; William the bishop 
of Mende collects all that has been said about the 
Catholic liturgy. There are compilers like Bar- 
tholomeus Anglicus, author of a treatise De Pro- 
prietatibus. Above all there is Vincent of Beau- 
vais, who wrote an enormous Speculum Quadru- 
ples*, a veritable Encyclopedia Britannica of the 
thirteenth century, Vincent calls attention to the 
brevitas temporum which is at the disposal of his 
contemporaries and to the multitudo librorum 
which they must read, in order to excuse himself 
for giving his ideas on all possible subjects. 9 Much 
the same may be said of the work of the jurists of 
Bologna and of the canonists although doctrine 
has begun to develop, and the unity of precision 

*Divina Commedia, Pa r ad is o, XXV. 

9 Speculum historfale, cap. I (vol. I inclinable, ed. Mentellini, 
1473-6). 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 107 

had made its appearance in their work. Thus, the 
jurists compiled the various theories of Roman law. 
The most famous of these jurists, Accursius who 
died in 1252, united in an enormous compilation 
(the Glossa Ordinaria) all the works of his prede- 
cessors. About the same time, the legistes of 
Philip Augustus translated the corpus juris into 
French; Edward I had a collection made of the 
decisions of his courts of justice; and James I of 
Aragon had a codification made of laws, called the 
Canellas. Furthermore, the canonists, at the wish 
of the Popes, continued the work of codification 
begun by Gratian in his Decretum, and brought 
together the decisions of the Popes (Decretales) 
and the decisions of the councils. 

But in comparison with the philosophers, the 
encyclopedists, jurists, and canonists are as dwarfs 
by the side of giants. The philosophers, as we have 
seen, 10 created that vast classification of human 
knowledge, in which each kind of thinking found 
its place, and in doing so they showed themselves 
to be, as lovers of order and clarity, in intimate sym- 
pathy with the demands of their time. Thus, all the 
particular sciences in existence at the time, and all 
those that might arise through a closer study of in- 
organic matter, or of the moral and social activities 
of man, occupy a place in the plan, marked out in 
advance. 

But the shining example of this urgent need for 

10 See above, ch. Ill, ii. 



108 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILISATION 

universality and unity appears in that massive sys- 
tem of thought which dominates and obscures all 
its rivals, namely, the scholastic philosophy. 
Monumental Summae, collections of public lectures 
called Quaestiones Disputatae, and monographs of 
all kinds, display an integral conception of the 
physical and moral world wherein no philosophi- 
cal problems are omitted. Questions in psychol- 
ogy, ideology, and epistemology; on the constitu- 
tion of matter and corporeal bodies; on being, unity, 
efficiency, act, potency, essence, existence; on the 
logical construction of the sciences; on individual 
and social ethics; on general aesthetics; on specula- 
tive grammar and the philosophy of language all 
of these vital philosophical questions receive their 
answer. The particular sciences are all pressed in- 
to service for philosophy, and they supply it with 
the facts and observations of concrete experience. 
Even the intellectual activities of the jurists and 
the canonists are also drawn within the scholastic 
synthesis. The scholastics of Paris especially, in 
their lectures and in their books, treat from their 
specific standpoint certain questions which the jur- 
ists treat by reference to their technical demands. 
For example, they commonly discuss and study 
questions of private property, of burial, of the right 
to make war, of the relations between Church and 
State; but such questions are approached not from 
the point of view of positive law, but rather from 
that of moral and natural law. Thus, just as the 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 109 

other departments of human knowledge furnish 
their several quotas of material, so civil and canon 
law bring their contributions. 11 In this way, philo- 
sophical thought is endlessly extended, and philos- 
ophy becomes an explanation of the whole. 

But not alone are all vital questions answered; 
everywhere there is coherence, and in the full mean- 
ing of the word (ownwia), so that one may not 
withdraw a single doctrine without thereby com- 
promising a group of others. Everything hangs 
together by implication and logical articulation; 
everywhere appears to the utmost that consuming 
desire for universality and order which lays hold of 
the savants and leads them to introduce the most 
comprehensive and rigorous schema possible. 
Thomas Aquinas, Duns Scotus, and, to a less de- 
gree, Alexander of Hales and Bonaventure are 
systematic minds; their philosophy is an intellec- 
tual monument, and the sense of proportion which 
it reveals is the same as that of the Gothic cathedral 
to which it has so often been compared. It is just 
because everything is so fittingly combined in the 
scholastic philosophy, 12 and because it does satisfy 
the mind's most exacting demands for coherence, 
in which its very life consists, that it has charmed 
through the ages so many successive generations of 
thinkers. 

We must also observe that scholastic philosophy 

iiC/. above, ch. IV, vi. 

12 See below, ch. X, for an example of this doctrinal coherence. 



110 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

accomplishes, by means of a limited number of 
ideas, that doctrinal order to which it is so devoted. 
It simplifies to the full limit of its power. Each 
doctrine which it introduces possesses a real value 
for explanation, and consequently it cannot be sa- 
crificed. Thus, to take only one instance, the 
theories of act and potency, of matter and form, of 
essence and existence, of substance and accident are 
all indispensable to their metaphysics. 13 For them, 
philosophy as well as nature obeys the principle of 
parsimony. Natura non abundat in superfluis, 
writes Thomas Aquinas. 14 Indeed, the thirteenth 
century had already anticipated, in various forms, 
that counsel of wisdom which is usually attributed 
to William of Occam: not to multiply entities with- 
out necessity. 15 In its moderation, indeed, schol- 
ia See ch. IX. 

uSumma TheoL, 1* 2*e, q. XCIV, art. 2. The Leonine edition of 
the Summa contra Gentiles, following the original text of Thomas 
(Rome, 1918), shows what pains the author took in this book to 
realize the internal order I refer to. The deliberate omissions, the 
additions, the studied improvements, all of this reveals much labor. 
Cf. A. Pelzer, "L'^dition l&mine de la Somme contre lea Gentils." 
Revue No-S colas tique de philosophic, May, 1920, pp. 224 ff. 

is See below, p. 117, note 23, for an application of this principle 
made by Dante to universal monarchy. Duns Scotus is familiar with 
the principle. For a note on the formula: pluritas non est ponenda 
sine necessitate, see Mind, July 1918, by Thorburn, who observes 
that it does not originate in Occam. It is in fact a formula which 
moves through the whole thirteenth century, and which expresses 
just the felt need of unity that engages us in this chapter. All 
.philosophers invoke this principle, and each adapts it to his own 
doctrines. 



IX THE MIDDLE AGES 111 

astic philosophy is like the thirteenth-century cathe- 
dral, which admits only those linear forms which are 
required by the rationale of the structure. It was 
not until the fourteenth century that those cumber- 
some theories appeared which weakened the doc- 
trine. 

The same systematic character marks also the 
theology of the time, which is simply a great group- 
ing of Catholic dogmas, each of which is consonant 
with all the rest. 

To sum it all up, then. Need of universality, 
need of unity, need of order: the whole civilization 
is athirst for them. 

II 

However, this passion for systematization, by its 
very fascination, sometimes led the ablest philoso- 
phers to excess, and herein lies a reason for a cer- 
tain peculiarity of the mediaeval mind. So great 
was this felt need of ordering things, that some- 
times, in the lack of reasons to prove, recourse was 
had to fiction to please. 

The astronomico-philosophical conceptions of 
the thirteenth century furnish a striking example 
of this fact. For the men of the time the earth is 
the centre of the universe, and man is the lord of 
the earth. The moon and the planets are conceived 
as fixed in their divers and distant spheres and as 
describing their revolutions around the earth; with 
laborious care they seek to reconcile this conception 



112 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

with the apparent movements of the heavens. As 
regards the fixed stars, they form the last sphere 
of the world, beyond which "place or locus exists 
no more," following the assertion of Aristotle, 
they think of them as held permanently in place by 
nails of gold in a sky of crystal, which the divine 
intelligences cause to revolve in their daily courses 
around this earth of ours, and around man who, in 
the last analysis, is the rcdson d'etre of all. And 
here follows a series of postulates which are made 
simply to satisfy their demand for synthesis, 
postulates which rest not on fact but on feeling. 
Thus, for example, it is thought to be fitting that 
the heavens, so impressive in their eternal mystery, 
should be made of an essence superior to anything 
here below. And being superior, it is equally fitting 
that they should have an influence upon terrestrial 
objects and direct human affairs. Does not the 
superior, writes Thomas Aquinas, command the in- 
ferior? The very order of things demands it. Or, 
once again, since unity is a more perfect thing than 
plurality, and creation is perfect, one must there- 
fore believe in the unity of creation; consequently 
a plurality of worlds is rejected as discrediting the 
work of God. Undoubtedly men of clear vision 
saw through this fragile and naive conception of 
the structure of the world; certainly in a few well 
known passages, 18 Thomas Aquinas and his dis- 

i Thomas Aquinas, In lib. II de Coelo, lectio 17. About 1892 an 
unknown teacher taught the following at Paris: quod si terra move- 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 113 

ciple Giles of Lessines observe that the geo-centric 
system is only an hypothesis, and that the celestial 
movements are perhaps susceptible of explanation 
by theories yet to be discovered by man. To be 
sure, Thomas minimizes the influence of the action 
of the heavens; he restricts this action to the dispo- 
sition of the human body, and rejects any such ac- 
tion upon the intellect and the will. 17 Nevertheless, 
the astronomico-philosophical doctrines are admit- 
ted as parts of the whole, because their incorpora- 
tion satisfies the need of unity. Moreover, they are 
necessary for a proper understanding of their 
magic and alchemy, or, again, of the interdiction 
by the University of Paris against the astrology 
of Roger Bacon, who exaggerated its directive in- 
fluence in human affairs. 

Ill 

There is yet another mediaeval doctrine which 
sounds strangely to our modern ears, and which 
furnishes a further interesting example of their 

retur et coelum quiesceret, esset in mundo melior dispositio (cf. P. 
Duhem, *'Francois de Mayronncs et la rotation de la terre," Archl- 
vum Franacisanum Historicum, 1913, pp. 93-95). Nicholas of Ores- 
mes taught the same doctrine about 1362, over a hundred years 
before the birth of Copernicus (1473). 

It is important to observe, that in regard to astronomical questions 
the scholastics of the thirteenth century had more liberal ideas than 
had their successors of the seventeenth century. The latter refused 
to acknowledge the evidence of the discoveries made by the tele- 
scope, and thus they helped to discredit the very philosophy of 
which they were such unworthy successors. 

17 Swmma Theol, 1 2**, p. IX, art. 5. 



114 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

felt need of ordering things. I refer to their dream 
of a universal brotherhood, which they hoped to 
realize by organizing a kind of Christian republic, 
a republic which should embrace all mankind. 

If we wish to understand this "society "of man- 
kind," to grasp its essential point, we must more 
than ever think directly in the mental terms of the 
time. Let us look then at this universitas humana 
through the eyes of Dante the poet, Thomas Aqui- 
nas the philosopher, and Innocent IV the canonist. 
We shall find that in its theoretical form it is a bril- 
liant manifestation of the centripetal tendencies of 
the time; and that also in its practical form it ap- 
pears in a garb which well suits the thirteenth cen- 
tury. 

God created all beings; all beings are subject to 
His providence. He is the Sovereign, the King of 
the universe. Everywhere in His kingdom there is 
a certain fixed hierarchy and order; yet in such 
wise that all depends upon Him and tends toward 
Him. The angels, who are pure spirit, are ar- 
ranged in degrees of perfection, but are all in His 
service and contemplate His infinitude. Man, who 
is spirit united with matter, dwells in a corporeal 
space, the earth, awaiting a future day when he 
shall realize the supernatural destiny which the re- 
demption of Christ has assured him. 

Just as the earth is the centre of the universe, 
so man is the lord of the earth. He is the end of 
creation, and the most perfect image, here below, 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 115 

of God. Man is like a little world, a microcosmos. 
In the words of Dante as spokesman for his age, 
man resembles the horizon where two hemispheres 
seem to meet. 18 Made to be happy for, all beings 
strive toward happiness man has a twofold des- 
tiny: a temporal end, which he must realize here on 
earth, and a supernatural end, in which he obtains 
a perfect vision and love of God, but the right of 
approach to which he must gain in this life. Now, 
he cannot attain this temporal end and prepare 
himself for the supernatural end, unless he lives in 
society. Without society, he cannot meet the re- 
quirements of the material life, nor develop suffi- 
ciently his personality. He is a social animal, "ani- 
mal politicum." 

The ideal, as Augustine says in the City of God, 
would be to have society on earth an exact copy of 
the divine city where all is peace and unity. In re- 
spect to political groups that are larger than the 
family, it would be best that there should be but 
one in the whole world. But such unity is impos- 
sible, because of discussions among men; masses of 
men, like masses of water, are the more dangerous 
the more abundant they are. 20 If there were no 

i8"Recte a philosophis assimilatur horizonti qui est medium du- 
orum hemisphaeriorum," De Monarchia, L. III. 

i See below ch. X, iii. 

20 Post civitatem vel urbem sequitur orbis terrae, in <Juo tertium 
gradum ponunt societatis humanae, incipientes a domo atque inde 
ad urbem, deinde ad orbem progrediendo venientcs: qui utique, sicut 
aquarum congeries, quanto major est, tanto periculis plcnior. Da 
Civitate Dei, XIX, ch. 7. 



116 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

other reason, divergence in language alone would 
be sufficient cause of dissension hominem alienat 
ab homine for a man has a better understanding 
of his dog than of another man who does not under- 
stand his language. So, different kingdoms are re- 
quired, and the rivalries between these involve wars 
and all their attendant evils. 

The philosophers, theologians, canonists, jurists, 
and publicists of the thirteenth century reproduce 
all these doctrines of the City of God, which pos- 
sessed such a fascination for the whole of the Mid- 
dle Ages. But they wish to correct the defects 
arising from the plurality of the states, by a unify- 
ing theory, the universal community of men, hu- 
mana universitas, as Dante says. 21 They wish, at 
any cost, to recover, in spite of the several king- 
doms, a unity of direction, such as guides the revo- 
lution of the spheres, the general government of the 



universe. 22 



No one at that time doubted that man had a 
double end to fulfill; and consequently everybody 
admitted that there must be in human society 
two kinds of rule, a temporal and a spiritual. The 
spiritual hierarchy is very clearly constituted: 
above the groups in parishes, directed by the rec- 

21 De Monarchia, Lib. I. 

22 Humanum genus est films coeli quod est perfectissimum . . . 
Et cum coelum totum unico motu, scilicet primi mobilis et unico 
motore qui Deus est, reguletur, etc. Ibid. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 117 

tors, are the bishops; above the abbeys directed by 
the abbots are the heads of the order; above all is 
the Pope, who represents Christ on earth. As for 
the temporal domain, above single states which 
were in process of formation, and which, for the 
most part, were governed by kings, the theorists 
proclaimed the rights of a Single Monarch. This 
was a political postulate. It was the Caesarian 
dream which, from the time of Charlemagne, had 
haunted the mediaeval mind, and which was never 
more brilliantly defended. 

One may read, in the De Monarchia of Dante, 
the weighty considerations which the philosophical 
poet urges in defense of the universal monarchy, 
the political panacea which was to restore the 
golden age on earth. A single monarch, raised 
above the different kings of feudal Europe, was re- 
quired to effect the unification of human society. 
There was no other method of establishing unity 
among the scattered groups of human kind, of sub- 
ordinating the parts to the interest of all. 28 

After introducing these philosophical considera- 
tions, Dante enters upon the practical bearings of 
the problem. This is, he says, the only method of 
avoiding contentions in the world. Since he would 
be the most powerful ruler on earth, the Single 

23 Constat quod totum humane genus ordinatur ad unum .' . . Partes 
humanae universitatis respondent ad ipsam per unum principium. , . . 
Humanum genus potest regi per unum principem . . . quod potest fieri 
per unum melius tat fieri per unum quam per plura. Lib. I, passim. 



118 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

Monarch must necessarily be just, and exempt 
from all covetousness, just as Plato's ideal philos- 
opher by very conception must practice justice. 
For, his jurisdiction would not be like those of the 
kings of Castile and Aragon, whose kingdom is 
limited; quite the contrary, he would rule from 
ocean to ocean. 

Not that the universal monarch need occupy him- 
self with each municipality. There needs must be 
a number of kingdoms ; for the Scythians, who live 
in a country where the days and the night are un- 
equal, cannot be ruled by the same laws as the 
Garamantes who live at the equinox. Still there 
are interests common to all peoples, and these can 
be entrusted only to a single ruler. 24 The universal 
monarch should therefore occupy himself above all 
with universal peace, and it is from him that the 
kings of the single states should receive rules for 
their conduct with this end in view. Once more re- 
curring to a philosophical comparison, but in poeti- 
cal form, he says that this rule of conduct, to insure 
harmony among mankind, should be prescribed by 
the monarch to the individual kings, just as the 
speculative intellect furnishes to the practical in- 
tellect the principles which guide our actions. 25 

24 Ut humanum genus secundum sua communia quae omnibus 
competunt ab eo regatur et communi regula gubernetur ad pacem. 
Ibid. 

25 Constat quod totum humane genus ordinatur ad unum . . . 
Partes humanae universitatis respondent ad ipsam per unum prin- 
cipium. . . . Humanum genus potest regi per unum principem . . . 
quod potest fieri per unum melius est fieri per unum quam per plura. 
Lib. I. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 119 

And Dante's conclusion is that, just as a man's 
peace with himself is the condition of his personal 
happiness, so likewise universal peace, pax univer- 
salis, can alone realize the happiness of the human 
race. Apart from this, Dante says nothing as to 
the functions of this guide, arbiter, and judge. 
But he does say who this monarch shall be. He is 
to be the German Emperor, consecrated by the 
Pope, and regarded by Dante as the heir of the 
Caesars and of Charlemagne. 26 

But another question created a divergence of 
views between canonists and legists. We mention 
it only because it concerned this centripetal ten- 
dency of the time, this fascination of unity; and 
because, too, one of the best known quarrels of the 
thirteenth century seems to us clearly connected 
with the philosophical controversy about this ideal 
human society. The Empire and the Papacy be- 
ing distinct, and involving two heads, there was 
again a new duality which must be reduced at any 
cost to an inclusive unity. 

Canonists, such as Innocent IV, and Johannes 
Andreae, proclaimed the subordination of the Em- 
peror to the Pope, that is, of the temporal power 
to the spiritual. Christ, they said, is the sole King 
of humanity, and the Pope is his viceroy on earth. 
Emperors and kings cannot exercise temporal 

26 J) MonarcMa, Lib. III. 



120 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

power except by a delegated authority which is al- 
ways revocable, so that "the principle of separa- 
tion was applicable merely to the mode in which 
those powers were to be exercised." 27 

Not so, replied Dante with all the legists. We 
are as desirous as you are of introducing unity of 
command over mankind, but this unity is the effect 
of a co-ordination between two distinct powers, 
each of which proceeds directly from God. 28 "Im- 
perium et Papae aeque principaliter sunt constituti 
a Deo" and "imperium non dependet ab ecclesia" 2 * 
are the shibboleths of the legists. At best, adds 
Dante, since temporal felicity is subordinated to. 
the eternal, the Emperor owes a certain kind of 
respect to the Pope, just as there is an obligation 
upon the eldest son to ensure a respectful under- 
standing between himself and the head of the 
family. 30 

Thus, for the legists as well as for the canonists, 
human society is conceived as a single association 
in which order prevails throughout. 

Did the theory of the universal monarchy as 
maintained by the legists, and the theory of the 
omnipotence of the Pope as defended by the canon- 
ists, remain nothing more than a subtle academical 

27Gierkc, Political Theories of the Middle Ages (English trans- 
lation by F. W. Maitland), Cambridge, 1900, p. 12. 

28 De Monarchia, Lib. III. 

29 Gierke, op. cit., p. 17 and note 40. 

so Ilia igitur reverentia Caesar utatur ad Petrum qua primogeni- 
tus films debet uti ad Patrem. Lib. III. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 121 

thesis? Or did they descend from theory to living 
practice? History gives the reply to these ques- 
tions, and it is sufficient briefly to recall the facts. 

Under the name of the Holy Roman Empire, the 
Emperors of Germany sought to establish a hege- 
mony over the peoples of the West* They main- 
tained, as Dante teaches us, 81 that they were the 
heirs of Charlemagne, and that they were thus the 
heirs of the Roman Caesars. Hence their claims to 
the right of dominating Italy and of dictating to 
the princelings (reguli) of the West. Hence also 
the enforced claim, by the ambitious dynasty of the 
Saxons, and by the even more ambitious dynasty of 
the Hohenstaufen, of the right to nominate the 
bishops, the abbots, and even the Pope. 

Everyone knows what the result was. At Ca- 
nossa (1077) Gregory VII breaks the power of 
Henry IV, and delivers the bishops and the Papacy 
from the will of the Emperors; a century later 
Alexander III resists the claims of Frederic Bar- 
barossa; a few years thereafter, Innocent III re- 
verses the roles, and disposes of the imperial crown 
to whomsoever he will. During the course of the 
thirteenth century, the Emperor, in the person of 
Frederic II, is definitely defeated. The kings of 
Europe, however, continue vigorously their resis- 
tance to the interference of the Emperors. And 
even as late as the beginning of the fifteenth cen- 
tury, Antoninus of Florence points to the same fact, 

81/6W., Lib. II, III. 



122 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

when he says: "Although all the secular lords and 
kings should be subjected to the Emperor, there 
are, however, many kings who do not recognize him 
as their superior, invoking either a privilege or an- 
other kind of right, or the simple fact, as for in- 
stance the King of France, the doge of Venice and 
certain other lords." 82 It might be added, that the 
German Emperor was not the only one who as- 
serted a right to the title of heir of Charlemagne, 
and that certain kings for instance Louis VII of 
France laid claim, though in vain, to the same 
right. At all events, the Hohenstaufen did not 
succeed in playing the role of peacemakers, such as 
Dante assigned to the universal monarch. Far 
from being agents of peace, they passed their lives 
in making wars in all possible directions. Pan- 
germanic supremacy in the thirteenth century suf- 
fered complete bankruptcy. 

The fact was that the true agents of internation- 
alism were the Popes, the representatives of the 
theocracy, which attained during the thirteenth 
century its greatest extent of authority. The kind 
of internationalism imposed by the Popes upon 
Christian nations, which were indistinguishable 
from the civilized world, was based upon the catho- 
licity of the Christian faith and morality, and upon 

s2"Quum omnes domini et reges seen lares deberent esse sub Im- 
peratore, niulti tamen reges non cognoscunt- eum ut superiorem 
suum, tuentes se vel privilegio, sive alio jure vel potius de facto, ut 
rex Franciae et dux Venetiarum et alii domini." Summa Theologica, 
Titulus III. De dominis temporalibus, C. 1. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 128 

the discipline of the Roman Church. Catholicity 
means universality. One head recognized by all is 
the guardian of the great ideal by which the society 
of the time is guided. Gregory VII had already 
planned the deliverance of Jerusalem and the re- 
storation of the Church of Africa. 38 His successors 
organized and encouraged the Crusades. Innocent 
III made use of the new mendicant orders for in- 
ternational and Catholic purposes. Doubtless 
there were plenty of heresies after the middle of 
the twelfth century; they underlay society like the 
ground-swell of the ocean, not breaking through 
to the surface. The thirteenth century had not yet 
heard the warnings of the great displacements 
which were to come, and the Catholic faith pre- 
served its internationalism, thanks to the prestige 
of the Papacy. 

As guardian of the faith and morality of the 
time, the Pope was also absolute master of disci- 
pline. The most autocratic form of the pontifical 
authority was attained by Innocent III. He in- 
tervened time and again in the government of the 
individual dioceses. All kinds of cases could be 
brought before him; his decisions were universal 
and supreme. 84 Innumerable appeals were made 
to his decisions. The moment came when Innocent 
III thought he could restore the schismatic Church 

as Rocquain, La cour de Rome et I' esprit de Reforme avant Luther. 
vol. I. "La Theocratic, apoge*e du Pouvoir Pontifical," Paris, Thorln, 
1893, p. 48. 

rf., 54, 412; Rocquain, La papaute" au moyen dge, 1881, p. 162. 



124 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

of the Orient to his obedience. He could see upon 
the episcopal throne of Constantinople a patriarch 
who recognized his authority. The Serbs and the 
Bulgarians did him homage, and it seemed for a 
moment that the Russians would follow their ex- 
ample. 

At this point, it is clear that the Pope not only 
affirmed his super-national role, as head of the 
Church, but also his role as arbiter of European 
politics, and as the guardian of international mo- 
rality. He did not limit himself to the defense 
and extension of the temporal patrimony, but pro- 
claimed himself the sovereign of all Christendom, 
by invoking the principle "that the church has the 
supreme right over the countries upon which she 
has conferred the benefit of Christian civilization." 
"Christ," as Gregory VII wrote in 1075, "substi- 
tuted his reign on earth for that of the Caesars, and 
the pontiffs of Rome have ruled more states than 
the Emperors ever possessed." 85 By virtue of this 
doctrine, his successors recognize kings, or absolve 
their subjects from their duties of obedience; they 
confer feudal possessions; they make themselves the 
judges of the election of the German Emperors; 
they receive the homage of the great of the earth; 
those smitten with excommunication tremble with 
fear. 

This political supremacy was far from being 

85 Ep. II, 75. Cf. Rocquain, op. cit. 9 p. 54. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 125 

pleasing to all the secular princes. History Is 
filled with the record of their resistance; and every- 
one knows the reply which Philip Augustus made 
to the legates of Innocent III : "The Pope has no 
right to interfere in the affairs which take place be- 
tween kings." 86 But even when rising against the 
Popes, kings respected the Papacy, We see this 
clearly when Innocent protested against the divorce 
by Philip Augustus of his first queen, excommuni- 
cated the king, and obliged him to take back his 
lawful wife. Although in various other cases he 
abused his authority, this act of the Pope, in con- 
demning the violation of the moral law by a great 
king, is one of the noblest instances of the exercise 
of his theocratic power. Likewise, he was respected 
when he intervened to prevent wars which he held 
to be unjust, and when he resorted to arbitration in 
order to put an end to dispute. Over the society 
of states as well as that of individuals he exercised 
supreme authority. "Each king has his kingdom," 
wrote Innocent III, "but Peter has the pre-emi- 
nence over all, inasmuch as he is the vicar of Him 
who governs the earth and all that is therein." 37 

After this statement of historical facts, it seems 
superfluous to point out that the humana universi- 
tas of the thirteenth century did not constitute a 
society of nations in the modern sense of the term. 

as Paul Janet, Histoire de la science politique dans ses rapports 
avec la morale, Paris, 1887, vol. I, p. 350. 
T Rocquain, op. cit., p. 358. 



126 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

It could not be more than a society of the Euro- 
pean states as they then existed, each more or less 
unformed and including heterogeneous races and 
diverse languages. 38 

Augustine has left to us this fine definition of 
peace: it is order which gives us tranquillity, pax 
omnium rerum tranquillitas ordinis. Once every- 
thing is in place, and each thing is as it ought to 
be, a grateful repose hovers over all. The whole 
thirteenth century is under the influence of this 
formula. All the human sciences, present and to 
come, have their place marked out in the classifica- 
tion of knowledge; all the problems of philosophy 
had engaged them, and they had been worked out 
and co-ordinated in the dominating scholastic phi- 
losophy; all that art could endow with beauty was 
reassembled in the cathedrals; all the great social 
factors which enter into the life of a state were 
combined in equilibrium; and the theorists dreamed 
of a universal society of mankind. Everybody be- 
lieved, and believed with conviction, that the world 
had arrived at a state of repose as the end of its 
destined course. To them as to the contemporaries 
of Augustus, or of Louis XIV, a stability ap- 
proaching close to perfection seemed to have been 
attained. A general feeling of content prevailed, 
and this state of complacency continued for a full 
hundred years after the middle of the thirteenth 
century. 

ss Compare below ch. XI. 

**De Civitate Dei, Lib. XIX, cap. 13. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 127 

IV 

In the light of this tendency toward unity, we 
can better understand another aspect of the mediae- 
val civilization; an aspect which permeates all de- 
partments of their social life, and which appears 
also in the two outstanding facts of their philoso- 
phical activity already noticed. This other aspect 
is: cosmopolitanism, their tendency to evaluate 
by a universal standard. 

The classification of knowledge which we have 
referred to 40 is not a matter of some individual con- 
ception, as was the effort made by Auguste Comte 
or Ampere or Herbert Spencer; on the contrary, 
the results are accepted by the general consensus 
of learned opinion. 

The twelfth-century groping has disappeared, 
the attempts of Radulfus Ardens, and even of the 
Didasccdion of Hugo of St. Victor, and of the 
numerous anonymous classifications of that cen- 
tury. The treatises of the thirteenth century deal 
definitely with methodology. Thus, for example, 
the De divisions philosophiae* which Dominions 
Gundissalinus wrote at Toledo about 1150 under 
the influence of Aristotle and the Arabs, pursues 
in detail the relation of the sciences to philosophy 
and the superposition of the various branches of 
philosophy. And the work of Michael Scot, one of 

o See above ch. IV, v. 

41 L. Baur, "Gundissalinus, De divisione philosophiae," Baiimker's- 
Beitr&ge, 1903, IV. 



128 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

his successors at the Institute of Toledo, is inspired 
by the ideas of Gundissalinus. Again, there was 
the important work of Robert Kilwardby, the De 
ortu et divisione philoaophiae* 2 (written about 
1250, and perhaps the most noteworthy introduc- 
tion to philosophy produced in the Middle Ages) ; 
this work perfects the outline of his master of To- 
ledo, and while it introduces certain distinctions, it 
adds nothing new, and does not pretend to do so. 
Further, the same classification is found in the 
Compilatio de libris naturalibiis written by an 
anonymous author of the thirteenth century, which 
makes a place therein for the works of Aristotle 
and of the Arabians; and the plan therein fol- 
lowed is in accord with the programme of the Uni- 
versity of Paris which was published in 1255. 44 

In short, one finds the same classification in all 
the writers of the period, in Robert Grosseteste. 
Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventure, Siger of Brabant, 
Duns Scotus, Roger Bacon and others; their 
knowledge is all run into the same mould. Dante 
refers to this classification at the beginning of his 
treatise De Monarchia. It exists not only in the 
programme of studies at the University of Paris, but 

42 L. Baur, "Die philosophische Werke des Robert Grosseteste, 
Bischofs von Lincoln," Baumker'a-Beitrage, 1913, IV. 

48 M. Grabmann, "Forschungen iiber die lateinischen Aristoteles- 
Ubersetzungen des XIII Jahrhunderts," Batimker's-BMrfl0*, 1916, 
XVII, h. 5, 6. 

44 See further my study: "The Teaching of Philosophy and the 
Classification of the Sciences in the Thirteenth Century," Philosophi- 
cal Review, July, 1919. 



IN THE MIDDLE AOE8 129 

it is found also at Oxford and at Cambridge; 
moreover, it is the basis of private instruction. I 
have found it also in a treatise as yet unedited, the 
Speculum divinorum et quorumdam naturalium 
which was written toward the end of the thirteenth 
century, by Henry Bate of Malines, for the use of 
Count Gui of Hainaut, whose instruction he had 
undertaken; it is one of the few pedagogical treat- 
ises of that century written for the use of a lay 
prince. 45 This classification constitutes the frame- 
work for the various doctrines; and, indeed, such 
divergent philosophical systems as those of Tho- 
mism and Averroism, for example, are readily in- 
cluded within it, much as plants essentially differ- 
ent may grow in the same soil. It is, so to speak, 
the atmosphere in which all the systems are im- 
mersed, the common mental life which hovers over 
systems and parts of systems. It was not the habit 
in those days for one set of thinkers designedly to 
destroy the presuppositions built up by another 
set; they lacked that spirit of negation which later 
became so characteristic of modern philosophers. 

This cosmopolitan tendency in evaluating was 
also the result of the remarkably widespread agree- 
ment with the one dominant philosophy, that is, 
the scholastic philosophy. This great system had 
its rise at Paris, the "cosmopolis of philosophy," 
and there, after a crisis in its development, it at- 

See my study: "Henri Bate de Malines" (Bulletin de L'Acadt- 
fRt'0 royale de Belgique, 1907). 



130 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

tained its full growth and displayed the "plenitude 
of its power. The existence of this common centre 
of learning, especially of speculative thought, con- 
tributed in a large measure to safeguard for a cen- 
tury and a half the unity of doctrine. From Paris 
this philosophy spread in great waves to Oxford 
and Cambridge, to Italy, to Germany, to Spain 
and everywhere. Borne on the wings of French in- 
fluence, it became international. It reunited the 
numerous host of those who were loyal to philoso- 
phy, and so it can lay claim to the greatest names, 
in England, Alexander of Hales and Duns Scotus, 
in Italy, Bonaventure and Thomas Aquinas, the 
Flemish Henri of Ghent, and the Spanish Lully, 
each of whom gave it his own interpretation and 
marked it with his own personality. Thus, the en- 
tire West accepted the same explanation of the 
world, the same idea of life. Of course the same 
was true for theology, both speculative and mysti- 
cal. Such unity of thought has seldom existed in 
the history of mankind. It occurred in the third 
century of our era, at the time of the glory of the 
Neo-Platonic philosophy. And since the thirteenth 
century, this phenomenon has never repeated it- 
self. 

Far from being an anachronism, this remarkable 
fact of universal agreement in the West satisfies the 
profound aspirations of the time. For, there was 
one system of education for princes, lords and 
clerks; one sacred and learned language, the Latin; 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 181 

one code of morals; one ritual; one hierarchy, the 
Church ; one faith and one common western interest 
against heathendom and against Islam; one com- 
munity on earth and in heaven, the community of 
the saints ; and also one system of feudal habits for 
the whole West. Customs, characteristic of the 
courtesy and chivalry which were born in France 
in the preceding century, had spread to all coun- 
tries, and had created among the nobility of the 
various nations a sort of kindred spirit. The net- 
work of feudalism embraced all social classes, and 
everywhere the system had common features. The 
Crusades had taught the barons to know each other. 
Commerce, also, established points of contact be- 
tween the French and the English and the Flem- 
ish and the Italians, and predisposed men to a 
mode of thinking, which was no longer local. 
Everywhere work was organized on the principles 
of guild and corporation. 

The rapid expansion of Gothic art is another ex- 
ample of the felt need of a conception of beauty not 
limited to any one people. A marvelous architec- 
ture and sculpture saw the light of day in the Isle 
of France. The cathedrals of Sens, Noyon, Sen- 
lis, Laon, Notre Dame de Paris, Chartres, Aux- 
erre, Rouen, Rheims, Amiens, Bourges were then 
either in process of building or completed. The 
garland of masterpieces, begun under Louis VII 
in northern and central Europe, and by Henry II 
Plantagenet in the West, was completed and en- 



182 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

riched under Philip Augustus; and the forms of 
the pointed arch attained then a purity and a 
beauty which have never been surpassed. The new 
style of art passed almost immediately to the Eng- 
lish cathedrals of Canterbury, Lincoln, Westmin- 
ster, and York. In Spain, the cathedral of Burgos 
(1230) was inspired by that of Bourges; the cathe- 
dral of Toledo was due to a French architect; the 
cathedral of Leon, the most perfect of all, was built 
on the basis of French ideas; and the same is true 
also of the German Gothic style generally, thus, 
for example, the cathedrals of Miinster, Madge- 
burg, Cologne, and Bamberg were patterned after 
French standards, and the pointed arch is definitely 
called "French style" by the builders of the Wimp- 
fen cathedral, opus francigenum. 4 * As Male has 
so well shown, the new art became "oecumenical." 47 
We also observe a kind of uniformity, the cos- 
mopolitanism of which we have been speaking, in 
the political institutions of the European states 
which were then in process of formation. Every- 
where this process proceeds on the same general 
principle, the feudal monarchy, a representative 
system of government. 

*e Compare the interesting work of E. Mdle, L'art allemand et 
Vart frangais du moyen dge, Paris, 1917. At Wimpfen, the priest 
Richard summons an architect "qui tune noviter de villa parisiensi 
e partibus venerat franciae, opere francigeno basilicam e sectis lapid- 
ibus construi jubet," p. 148. 

47 MAle, L'art religieux du 13 B siecle en France, p. 5. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 188 

Finally, as we have already seen, 48 the Popes 
were genuine cosmopolitan forces of a practical 
kind; for in their view the society of mankind was 
to be extended universally. 

In conclusion, it should be stated, the foregoing 
does not imply that the mentality of the thirteenth 
century was on a dead level of uniformity. By no 
means. Human nature is always complex; and no 
matter how general a phenomenon may be in any 
condition of society, there always arise by the side 
of it certain secondary phenomena of a contradic- 
tory character. Of these account should of course 
be taken, but without exaggerating their signifi- 
cance or bearing. It will always be true that moth- 
ers in general love their children, notwithstanding 
the fact that some heartless mothers exist. Just so, 
respect for authority was prevalent in the thir- 
teenth century, in spite of the evidence of some 
germs of rebellion against the discipline of the 
Church and the power of the State. The unity of 
the catholic faith was not prejudiced by the various 
heresies and superstitious practices; nor did the ex- 
cesses of some barons weaken the virtues of the 
feudal customs. The protests of a small group of 
zealous mystics against the rich decoration of the 
churches did not annul the delight of the whole 
age with the beauty of their original art; nor did 
the low morality of some of the clergy serve as a 
general detriment to the purity of life in that class, 

*8 See above, pp. 122-126. 



184 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

The spirit of the Middle Ages cannot be gath- 
ered accurately out of a mere catalogue of anec- 
dotes, nor from the exclusive perusal of satirists, 
preachers and fable- writers, nor again from the his- 
tory of certain chroniclers and writers, whose tem- 
perament or office might prompt them to exagger- 
ate. On the contrary, the real task and point is to 
ascertain whether these facts and anecdotes and 
caricatures (whose name is legion) describe the 
usual or the exceptional instances; whether they 
are mainly characteristic of the period; and whether 
they reach and express the real depths of the me- 
diaeval soul. 

So also in philosophy, a few isolated instances of 
scepticism do not derogate from the general doc- 
trinal assurance which is characteristic of the me- 
diaeval philosophers. And similarly the great 
number of systems of thought, and the atmosphere 
of emulation in which they were conceived, can be 
readily reconciled with the predominance of a phi- 
losophy which was truly cosmopolitan, as was the 
scholastic philosophy. 



CHAPTER SIX 

OPTIMISM AND IMPERSONALITY 

i. Optimism in philosophy, in art, in religion, ii. Imper- 
sonality, iii. History of philosophy and literary attribution, 
iv. Perenniality. 



THE optimism of the mediaeval mind is another 
feature which stands out as distinctive of the 
whole civilization. The thirteenth century is a con- 
structive period in every domain. But such exer- 
cise of constructive powers and such realization in 
practice involved confidence in human resources and 
capacities. That confidence the age possessed 
abundantly. Not only had it a passion for ideals, 
but it knew how to realize them in concrete form 
and in practical life. 

When dealing with scientific classifications and 
philosophical systems, optimism means confidence 
in the powers of reason, serenity in intellectual 
work. Without such confidence, could they have 
found the courage to set in order all the human sci- 
ences, and especially could they have spent their 
energies in meticulously ordering the manifold 
parts of a system so extensive as is the scholastic 
philosophy? 



186 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

They were in no doubt concerning the power of 
the reason to grasp external realities, to know 
everything to some extent, 1 Subjectivism, which 
confines the mind within the closed circle of its im- 
pressions, was foreign to the spirit of the times. 
Thus, when Nicholas of Autrecourt, called some* 
times the Hume of the thirteenth century, taught 
in Paris that the existence of the external world 
cannot be demonstrated, that the principle of caus- 
ality is without objective validity, he was plainly 
an exception; and so he was regarded as an ama- 
teur in paradoxes. The cultivated minds of the age 
relied upon human reason unanimously. Frankly 
dogmatic, the scholastic philosophy considers hu- 
man intelligence to have been created to know the 
truth, just as fire was made to burn. To be sure, 
the philosophers of the thirteenth century believe 
that human intelligence has its limits, it knows 
all things in a very imperfect manner but within 
these limits they give it full credence; it is for them 
a spark lighted at the torch of eternal truth. This 
conception of certitude neither includes nor ex- 
cludes our modern epistemology; like all that be- 
longs to the mediaeval genius it is sui generis. 

Scholasticism is not less optimistic in its moral 
teachings. It makes happiness to consist in the 
fullest possible development of personality. It 
teaches that nothing can efface from conscience the 
fundamental principles of moral law. It maintains, 

i See ch. VIII, 1 and ii. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 187 

accordingly, that even the most wicked man still re- 
tains a fundamental tendency toward goodness, 
a tendency which renders his improvement always 
possible. 2 

In the realm of art, optimism and serenity 
are still more evident; for art springs from the 
heart, which realizes joy even better than the spirit. 
There appear in the Chansons de geste a joy of liv- 
ing and a freshness of imagery which enrich the 
love between knights and ladies, an exhalation of 
nature which reveals the profound happiness felt in 
living in the midst of its bounties and wonders. We 
all know what clear and vibrating poems the "Lit- 
tle Flowers" of St. Francis are, and how they ex- 
press as does the Divine Comedy of Dante, not only 
a glorification of the Divine Creation and of the 
Redemption, but also songs of delight in the pres- 
ence of the spectacle of nature. 

Is it necessary to mention the Gothic cathedrals, 
as they too sing a hymn of joy, the triumph of na- 
ture and of God? Their lofty arches flooded with 
light, their windows sparkling in* the sun like ori- 
ental tapestry, their noble and expressive vaults, 
their profusion of paintings and of figures and of 
symbols, this is not the work of men who are skep- 
tical of life. The sculptors of the Middle Ages 
"looked on the world with the wondering eyes of 
children." They depict nature in its perfection of 
beauty. 

2 See below, p. 969. 



188 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

Finally, a still more elevated motive stimulates 
the optimistic view of life in society at large. It 
is Christian idealism, the hope of future happi- 
ness, the belief in the religious value of work ac- 
complished. Can we explain in any other way, 
the wonderful exploits of optimism shown in the 
Crusades? How closely they press upon each other 
in that long succession 1 In spite of the hugeness 
of the enterprise, or the lack of success in each of 
those attempts, still the Crusades continued to 
arouse an ever-recurring enthusiasm. They have 
been well called "epopees of optimism." 

II 

Another feature which is closely connected with 
the optimism of the scholastics and which requires 
equal emphasis, is the impersonal character of their 
work, a certain spirit of personal detachment which 
pervades also their scholarly labors, whether in 
the classification of human knowledge, or the great 
system of scholastic philosophy. Both their optim- 
ism and their impersonalism are simply the product 
of a consciously progressive and collective effort. 

Indeed the thirteenth century was possessed of a 
significant conception regarding truth. Truth is 
a great edifice to be gradually built up. This work 
is necessarily co-operative and over a long period 
of time; and therefore it must be entered into im- 
personally by each worker. The truth, and the 
knowledge which expresses it, is not considered as 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 139 

the personal property of him who finds it. On the 
contrary, it is a great common patrimony which 
passes from one generation to the next, ever in- 
creased by continuous and successive contributions. 
"So shall it be to the end of the world," says Roger 
Bacon, "because nothing is perfect in human 
achievements." And he goes on to say: "Always 
those who come later have added to the work of 
their predecessors; and they have corrected and 
changed a great deal, as we see especially in the case 
of Aristotle, who took up and discussed all the ideas 
of his predecessors. Moreover, many of the state- 
ments of Aristotle were corrected in turn by Avi- 
cenna and by Averroes." 3 Nor does Thomas Aqui- 
nas speak otherwise of the impersonal constitution 
of philosophy and of its improvement. Referring 
to Aristotle's Metaphysics, he writes: "That which 
a single man can bring, through his work and his 
genius, to the promotion of truth is little in com- 
parison with the total of knowledge. However, 
from all these elements, selected and co-ordinated 
and brought together, there arises a marvelous 
thing, as is shown by the various departments of 
learning, which by the work and sagacity of many 
have come to a wonderful augmentation." 4 

3 Nam semper poster-lores addiderunt ad opera priorum, et multa 
correxerunt, et plura muiaverunt, sicut patet per Aristotelem, max- 
ime, qui omnes sententias praecedentium discussit. Et etiam Avic- 
cenna et Averroes plura de dictis ejus correxerunt, Opus Ma jut, 
Pars I, c. 6 (ed. Bridges, vol. Ill, p. 14)* 

4 Jn Kb. II Metaphys., Lectio 1. 



140 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

Do not these declarations call to mind the beauti- 
ful thought of Pascal, who also reflected deeply and 
shrewdly on the role of tradition in the continuity 
of philosophy? "It is owing to tradition," he says, 
"that the whole procession of men in the course of 
so many centuries may be considered as a single 
man, who always subsists, who learns continually." 5 
There is, then, no break in the continuity of philos- 
ophy, any more than there is in the other depart- 
ments of civilization; and a chain of gold joins the 
Greeks to the Syrians, the Syrians to the Arabs, 
and the Arabs to the Scholastics. 

The impersonality of scholastic philosophy is 
further revealed in the fact that those who build it 
disclose nothing of their inner and emotional life. 
Works like the autobiography of Abaelard are as 
exceptional as the Confessions of Augustine. Only 
the mystics speak of that which passes in the soul's 
inmost life. In the voluminous works of Thomas 
Aquinas, for instance, there is only a single passage 
where the philosopher exhibits any emotions; 6 
everywhere else his thought runs without haste or 
emotion, as tranquil and as majestic as a river. 

Ill 

The thirteenth century drew from these princi- 
ples, in the form of corollaries, its characteristic 

e Pascal, Opuscules, dit Brunschvigg, p. 80. 
*De unitate intellect contra Averroittas, (in fine), where his in- 
dignation is deeply stirred. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 

views concerning the history of philosophy and lit- 
erary attribution. The determination of historical 
fact and authorship is subordinated to the truth 
which the scholastics are concerned to advance ; the 
determination of fact has no absolute value as such. 
Consequently, they confine themselves to seeking, 
from the authorities they refer to, a support for the 
thesis they wish to defend. 

From this attitude arises the tendency of the 
mediaeval thinker to attenuate, and even to sup- 
press, all doctrinal divergencies, such as those of 
Plato, of Aristotle, of Augustine, of Isidore of 
Seville, of the Venerable Bede, of Anselm of Can- 
terbury. Are not all these co-workers in a common 
task? To understand this, one must study not the 
common and stock phrases quoted by all, but rather 
the difficult and more subtle texts, to which they 
succeed in giving so many different meanings. The 
thirteenth century has characteristic expressions to 
describe this procedure, for example, "in melius 
interpretari" to interpret in a better way; "reve- 
r enter exponere" to explain with respect; "pium 
dare intellectum" to give a dutiful meaning. These 
are euphemisms of which the greatest make use, 
when it is necessary to adapt some embarrassing 
passage to their own theories on a given subject. 
We recall here the astute words of John of Salis- 
bury concerning the philosophers of his day, 
eager to bring Plato and Aristotle into agree- 
ment, how they worked in vain to reconcile dead 



142 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

people who contradicted each other all their lives! 

Such being the fact, it seems difficult to admit 
that the philosophers of the thirteenth century were 
the slaves of tradition and the scrupulous servants 
of authority. In judging of their critical attitude, 
and of their attitude towards the ancients, one 
should not tie fast to the mere letter of their state- 
ments; on the contrary, one should judge by their 
interpretation of the texts which they are citing, for 
or against their doctrines. If they sin against the 
spirit of criticism, it is due to excess of liberty and 
not to the lack of it. The most eminent philoso- 
phers took great liberties with their authorities. 
"What else is authority but a muzzle?" wrote Adel- 
ard of Bath to his nephew. 7 "Authority has a nose 
of wax, which may be turned in any direction," said 
Alan of Lille. 8 And Thomas declared, as is so 
well known, that the argument from authority is 
the weakest of all, where the human reason is in- 
volved. 9 

On the other hand, their attitude has a significant 
practical implication. If philosophical work is di- 
rected to the collective and progressive construction 
of a fund of truth, as its aim, then of course only 
the work matters, and the name of the worker 

i "Quid enim aliud auctoritas dicenda quam capistrurn?" Adelardi 
Batensis de quibusdam naturalibus quaestionibus, op. cit. t fol. 76 V. 

s Contra Haereticos, I, 30. "Auctoritas cereum habet nasum . . , 
i.e., in diversum potest flecti sentim." 

vSumrna Theol, 1% q. VIII, ad secundum. Locus ab auctoritate 
qua* fundatur super ration* hwmana est inflrmissimus. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 143 

necessarily disappears in face of the grandeur of 
truth. Hence their philosophy attaches little im- 
portance to the name of its collaborators. "Unus 
dicit" "aliquis didt" they say in speaking of con- 
temporaries. It is, as it were, the law of humility 
and silence. It was necessary for a writer to be 
known by everyone to have his name mentioned at 
all (allegari) . One can count on one's fingers those 
who received such an honour in the thirteenth cen- 
tury. 

On such principles the textual interpolations 
made by the copyists were not regarded as any vio- 
lation of the original; rather they were intended 
and taken to improve the expression of truth which 
the author sought to convey, 10 Similarly, literary 
theft was not stealing; it was the utilization of a 
common treasure. In the twelfth century a monk 
by the name of Alcher of Clairvaux had written a 
small book on psychology, and in order to ensure 
it a wide circulation the copyists of the time as- 
cribed it to Augustine. William of Auvergne, 
Bishop of Paris in 1229, reproduced almost word 
for word in his De Immortalitate Animae the simi- 
lar work of Dominicus Gundissalinus, the arch- 
deacon of Toledo. There are numerous examples 
of the same kind. If we recall, further, that the 
negligence of copyists or the modesty of authors 

10 For a striking example of such interpolation, in the Summa 
contra Oentile* of Thomas, see A. Pelzer, K0t\ No-Nrol., May, 1920, 
p. 281. 



144 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

set in circulation a mass of manuscripts without any 
well-determined status, we can readily understand 
some of the insurmountable difficulties which the 
recorder of mediaeval ideas faces; for instance, in 
identifying opponents or in attributing texts or in 
detecting literary theft. 

With this understanding of the matter, we are 
little surprised to learn that the predominant scien- 
tific classification represented such an amalgama- 
tion that the names of all those who were connected 
with its origin or perfection or promulgation were 
either neglected or forgotten. As with popular 
music, so here; each composer appropriates and 
fashions in his own way. 

This same understanding also enables us to see 
just why and in what measure the scholastic phi- 
losophy itself is the soul of a collective body, made 
up 'of men belonging to different peoples. To be 
sure, there were some among them who opposed 
their mighty personalities to this fund of ideas 
which was the common heritage of all, for ex- 
ample, Thomas Aquinas, Duns Scotus, Henry 
of Ghent, and others. But apart from these, as 
the documents show, the great host of men of aver- 
age ability taught and developed the same doctrine, 
without either opposing it or adding anything of 
their own. They were ennobled by it; their little- 
ness was redeemed by its grandeur. Like dwarfs 
on the shoulders of giants, they enjoyed a promi- 
nence which they did not deserve. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 145 

IV 

One last corollary and not the least important 
is born of this impersonal character of learning 
and its progressive constitution. Philosophy is not 
something essentially mobile, some dazzling chi- 
mera, which disappears or changes with the succeed- 
ing epochs, but it possesses a sort of perenniality. 
It forms a monument, to which are always added 
new stones. The truth of the time of the Greeks is 
still the truth of the time of Thomas Aquinas and 
of Duns Scotus. Truth is something enduring. Of 
course, there is left a place for progress and ex- 
tension in human knowledge, there are adaptations 
of certain doctrines to social conditions; this ap- 
pears, for example, in the scholastic doctrine of the 
mutability of ethical laws. But the principles which 
rule the logical, ethical and social activities remain 
unchanged; they are like human nature of which 
they are expressions, and which does not change, 11 
or like the order of essences which is ultimately 
based on divine immutability. Nothing is more 
contrary to the spirit of scholastic philosophy than 
the modern temper of displacing preceding contri- 
butions with one's own, doing away with tradition, 
and beginning de novo the upbuilding of thought. 
From this standpoint we may say that the philoso- 
phers of the thirteenth century are conscious of the 
responsibility of building for eternity. 

11 See below ch. XII, i. 



146 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

Nor is it different in the other branches of knowl- 
edge, in civil and canon law, and in the social and 
political realm. Thus Dante, who on so many 
questions reveals the spirit of his time, begins his 
De Monarchia with a significant statement in this 
connection. I give the opening sentences of that 
unique treatise. "All men," he says, "whose su- 
perior nature inculcates the love of truth, have, as 
their chief care, it seems, to work for posterity. 
Just as they themselves were enriched by the work 
of the ancients, so must they leave to posterity a 
profitable good. Now, of what use would that man 
be who demonstrated some theorem of Euclid 
anew; or he who tried to show again, after Aristotle 
had done so, wherein happiness lies; or again, he 
who attempted after Cicero the defense of the 
aged? . . . This wearying superfluity of work 
would be of no avail." And then he continues: 
"Now as the knowledge of the temporal monarchy 
is to be considered as the most useful of the truths 
which still remain hidden, and as it is extremely ob- 
scure, my object is to bring it out into the open 
with the twofold end of giving humanity a useful 
witness of my solicitude and of gaining for myself 
(keeping in view my own glory) the reward which 
such a work deserves." Like all the rest, though 
with a modest store of ambition besides, Dante 
dreams of writing for eternity. 

This impersonal and eternal note is also found in 
the hymns of the Catholic liturgy, that collection of 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 147 

spiritual outpourings, wherein so often the author 
remains unknown. 

And must not the same be said of the works of 
art? One does not know the names of the artists 
who illuminated the manuscripts of the thirteenth 
century, nor of the glass-makers. Since many of 
these works were made in the cloisters, doubtless 
the monks who did the work were moved by their 
rule of humility to hide their names. 12 

Similarly, the epic poems contain numerous 
themes which are like a treasure of folk-lore upon 
which all may draw alike. 

Above all, this impersonal character is found in 
the Gothic system, which in every respect resembles 
the scholastic philosophy and helps us to under- 
stand it. For, the Gothic system is the property 
of everyone; while each architect may interpret it 
in his own way, it belongs in reality to no one. 
Even now, we do not know the names of all those 
who conceived the plans and directed the work on 
the great cathedrals; or, if they were once known, 
they have since fallen into oblivion. Who now 
speaks of Petrus Petri, the director at the building 
of the cathedral of Toledo? Armies of sculptors 
chiselled the virgins and saints which occupy the 
portals and niches, yet how few of these have sealed 
their works with their names! The builders of 
cathedrals also were builders for eternity; and in 

12 Rule of St. Benedict, cap. 57. Artifices si sint in monasterio, 
cum otnni humilitate facient istas artes. 



148 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

their minds, the materials of their structures were 
to survive for centuries; they were to last not for 
one generation but for all generations to come. 



CHAPTER SEVEN 

SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY AND THE 
RELIGIOUS SPIRIT 

i. Common definition of scholastic philosophy as a religious 
philosophy, ii. Reflective analysis of the distinction between 
philosophy and theology, iii. The religious spirit of the 
epoch, iv. Connections of philosophy with religion not af- 
fecting the integrity of the former, v. Subordination of phi- 
losophy to Catholic theology in the light of this analysis, vi. 
Solution and adjustment of the problem, vii. Influences of 
philosophy in other fields. Conclusion. 



REGARDING western scholastic philosophy in the 
Middle Ages, every one repeats the laconic judge- 
ment, that it is "philosophy in the service, and un- 
der the sway and direction, of Catholic theology." 
It could be nothing else, they say, and it seems that 
one has said everything after pronouncing this 
clear-cut formula. This current definition, suscep- 
tible of the most varied meanings, is found in near- 
ly all the books which deal with scholastic philos- 
ophy. Whether their authors give an extreme or 
a moderate interpretation of it, it is offerfed to the 
reader as an abridged thesis, containing in con- 
densed form all that is worth knowing of the sub- 



150 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

ject. "Scholasticism is philosophy placed in the 
service of doctrine already established by the 
Church, or at least philosophy placed in such a 
subordination to this doctrine that it becomes the 
absolute norm for what they have in common/' 1 

Now this current definition of scholastic philoso- 
phy in the Middle Ages defines it very badly, be- 
cause it contains a mixture of truth and of false- 
hood, of accuracy and of inaccuracy. It must be 
distrusted, like those equivocal maxims which John 
Stuart Mill calls "sophisms of simple inspection," 
which by force of repetition enjoy a kind of Iran- 
seat, or vogue, in science without being questioned. 

To eliminate the ambiguity we must attend to 
the historical setting, and view both philosophy 
and theology in the midst of the civilization whence 
they evolved. For this we must consider what re- 
sults they attained; and the study of this will dis- 
close a new relational aspect, wherein the scholastic 
philosophy and its classification of knowledge 
appear in vital and organic harmony with the gen- 
eral mentality of the epoch. 

i"Die Scholastik 1st die Philosophic im Dienste der bereits beste- 
hende Kirchenlehre oder wenigstens in einer solchcn Unterordnung 
unter dieselbe dass diese auf gemeinsamen Gebeite als die absolute 
Norm gilt," p. 196. Dr. Mathias Baumgartner, in the last (10th) 
edition of the Ueberweg-Heinze Grundriss der Oeschichte der Philos- 
ophie, Zweiter Teil, "Die mittlere oder die patristische und scholas- 
tische Zeit," Berlin, 1915. 



IN THE MIDDLE AQES 151 

II 

That philosophy was a science distinct from the- 
ology, had been universally recognized since the 
middle of the twelfth century; 2 and the masters of 
the thirteenth century laid emphasis upon this dis- 
tinction. The sharp separation of the personnel in 
philosophy (artistae) and in theology is one of the 
first indications that the distinction of the two dis- 
ciplines was clearly maintained. The University 
of Paris simply took over the methodological classi- 
fications of the twelfth century, as one finds them 
in the treatises of Dominicus Gundissalinus, Hugo 
of St. Victor, Robert Grosseteste, and many others. 
The tree of knowledge has the form of a pyramid, 
with the particular sciences at the base, philosophy 
midway up, and theology at the top, as we have al- 
ready explained, 8 What is new at this stage of 
the development is the reflective and reasoned study 
of the mutual independence of philosophy and the- 
ology. 

This independence rests on the difference in the 
points of view (ratio formalis objecti) from which 
philosophy and theology regard the materials with 
which they are occupied (materia). 4 Bearing in 
mind this principle of methodology, we can under- 
stand the declaration with which Thomas Aquinas 

2 See above, ch. Ill, p. 50. 

See above, ch. IV, pp. 85 if. 

* Cf., ch. IV, p. 87. 



152 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

opens his two Summae on the raison d'etre of the- 
ology outside the philosophical sciences (praeter 
philosophical disciplinas) and its distinction from 
philosophy. "It is," he says, "diversity in the point 
of view of knowledge (ratio cognoscibilis) which 
determines the diversity of the sciences. The as- 
tronomer and the physicist establish the same con- 
clusion, that the earth is round; but the astronomer 
uses mathematical arguments abstracted from mat- 
ter, while the physicist uses arguments drawn from 
the material condition of bodies. Nothing, then, 
prevents the questions of the philosophical sciences, 
so far as they are known by the light of natural 
reason, from being studied at the same time by an- 
other science, in the measure that they are known 
by revelation. Thus theology, which is occupied 
with sacred doctrine, differs in kind from theodicy, 
which is part of philosophy." 5 

A contemporary of St. Thomas, Henry of 
Ghent, also maintains this doctrine, accepted by 
all the intellectuals of the time: "Theology is a 
distinct science," he says. "Though theology is oc- 
cupied with certain questions touched on by phi- 
losophy, theology and philosophy are none the less 
distinct sciences, for they differ in the aim pursued 
(sunt ad aliud), the processes (per aliud), and the 
methods (secundum aliud). The philosopher con- 
sults only reason; the theologian begins by an act 

5 Summa Theol, 1*, q. I, art. 1. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 158 

of faith, and his science is directed by a supernat- 
ural light." 6 

It is easy to show that such principles were wide- 
ly applied in the thirteenth century. Philosophers 
reasoned on the origin of ideas, on human liberty, 
on causality and finality in nature, on the relations 
between will and knowledge, and on many other 
problems of a purely rational kind. One would 
seek in vain a religious veneer or a theological ar- 
riere pensee in the solutions given; their constant 
reliance upon Aristotle is the simple fact that 
makes this impossible. On the other hand, the- 
ologians discuss the Trinity, the Redemption, the 
supernatural end of man, and like problems, and 
they invoke Scriptural authority. When certain 
matters are common to the two orders of study, 
such as the existence and the nature of God, there 
is a difference in the point of view, from which the 
philosopher and the theologian respectively discuss 
them. Their arguments meet, like the rays of light 
which set out from distinct foci and are received on 
the same screen; but they are no more confused 
than in our comparison the luminous sources are 
confused. Hence numerous philosophic systems 
could arise, remarkable explanations of the world 

*Summa Theol, art. VI I, q. 1, Nos. 10-13. "Adhuc philos- 
ophus considerat quaeeumque considerat, ut percepta ct intellecta 
solo lumine naturalis ration is; iheologus vero considerat singula ut 
primo credita lumine fidei, et secundo intellecta lumine altiori super 
lumen naturalis rationis infiiso." 



154 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

and of life, capable of being judged and set forth 
as one sets forth and judges the philosophy of Aris- 
totle, or of Plato, or of Descartes, or of Kant. 

It is important to observe that this distinction 
was universally recognized by the scholastics of the 
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. That the pub- 
lic itself was of like mind in the matter is evidenced 
by the painting by Traini, preserved in the Church 
of St. Catherine of Pisa, to which we have already 
referred. 7 In this picture, entitled the Triumph of 
St. Thomas, the great artist of the fourteenth cen- 
tury has symbolized in drawing and in color all the 
intellectual movements of the time. What inter- 
ests us especially here is the diversity of the sources 
by which Thomas is inspired, as he sits upon a gold- 
en throne in the centre of the composition, the 
Summa Theologica open on his knees. From the 
top of the picture Christ sheds upon him rays of 
light, which are reflected by six sacred personages 
Moses, the four Evangelists, and St. Paul whu 
are placed in a semicircle; then, further, by Plato 
and Aristotle arranged on the two sides after the 
same plan. Luminous waves spread the doctrines 
over the world, whilst Averroes, in the attitude of 
one conquered, lies at Thomas's feet. We have 
here a synthetic picture, as it were, which presents 
a striking resume of intellectual speculation in the 
thirteenth century; and it reveals the impression 
received by men like Traini, who was placed in a 

* Cf. above, p. 84. 



ff 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 155 

position that enabled him to see in broad outline. 
It teaches us that theology and philosophy are in 
different planes, with a subordination like that of 
the personages who symbolize the one and the 
other; it shows us that both are joined, as com- 
plementary, in the work of Thomas, that famous 
thinker whom the contemporaries of Traini called 
doctor sanctus." Moreover, the writers of the 
Renaissance and the Reformation, for the most 
part so curt in their treatment of the Middle Ages 
have clearly distinguished the scholastic theolo- 
gians and the scholastic philosophers, reserving 
rather for the latter the name of scholastics: "Cum 
vero duplicem eorum differentiam animadvertamus 
theologos olios, alios pliilosophos, quamquam illis 
hoc nomen potius tributum sit" This judgement, 
which I take from the treatise De doctoribus schol- 
astids of Busse, 1676, is confirmed by Binder, 
Tribbechovius, 8 and by all those who belong to that 
curious category of detractors of scholasticism, on 
whom Rabelais and so many others have rested their 
sarcasm. These "distributers of injuries" are better 
advised than some of our contemporary historians, 
for whom the speculation of the Middle Ages is a 
chaos, a hodge-podge of philosophy and theology, 
and who make the history of mediaeval philosophy 
a department of the history of religion. 

Not to understand the fundamental distinction 

8 Tribbechovius, De doctoribus scholasticis et corrupta per eo$ 
divinarum humanarumque rerum scientia. Giessen. 1665. 



156 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

between the order of nature and that of grace, be- 
tween the rational conception of the world and the 
systematization of revealed dogmas, would be to 
misunderstand the speculative work of the Middle 
Ages, and to substitute arbitrary conceptions for 
the indisputable declarations of its greatest doctors. 

Ill 

The freedom of philosophy from dependence on 
theology rests then on solid methodological 
grounds. But while philosophy and theology are 
objects of speculation, we must riot forget that 
both are vital parts of the civilization in which they 
appear and whose effects they feel. Hence they 
are both touched, the one more than the other of 
course by the religious spirit. 

Could it be otherwise in an epoch in which 
Catholicism leaves its mark on all civilization? To 
judge of this impression it is not enough to turn 
to the Golden Legend, or the Apocryphal Gospels, 
which furnished food for the piety of the people. 
It is not enough to collect popular superstitions, 
such as the charges and stories of Caesar of Heis- 
terbach. It is not enough to note the excesses 
caused by the veneration of relics, the conflicts be- 
tween abbots and bishops or the bourgeois of the 
towns and the feudalists, whom material interests 
divided. These many oddities pale before the great 
fact that the Catholic religion inspires society 
throughout and regulates its morals, its art, and its 
thought. The most individualistic statesmen 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 157 

Philip Augustus or St. Louis in France, Simon of 
Montfort or Edward I in England, Frederick II 
or Rudolph of Hapsburg in Germany, Ferdinand 
of Castile all recognized the Catholic Church as 
the necessary foundation of the social structure, 
even when their politics led them into conflict with 
the Papacy in order to shake off its patronage. 
The same ardent faith which had aroused the Cru- 
sades also gave birth to the new monastic orders of 
Dominicans and Franciscans, who came from the 
most diverse social strata, and so raised the level of 
belief and morality in the masses. Even the hereti- 
cal movement that appeared in Languedoc and 
Champagne and Flanders shows the vitality of the 
religious sentiment. In spite of the spirit of oppo- 
sition to the Church, the century of Philip Augus- 
tus remains an epoch of Catholic faith. By its 
dogmas and its morality, Christianity penetrates 
the lives of individuals and families and peoples. 
Under the influence of Christian ideals and canoni- 
cal law, usury and the taking of interest are for- 
bidden; just prices and just wages rule trade and 
commerce. In the corporation, work is a holy 
thing, masters are equal, art is allied to handicraft, 
the institution of the masterpiece guarantees the 
quality of the product. It was because one worked 
for God that the thirteenth century could cover, 
first the soil of France and then that of Germany, 
with gigantic cathedrals, chiselled like jewels. 

oLuchaire, op. cit., p. 818. 



158 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

Likewise, the intimate union between religion and 
beauty shines forth in the work of the period. The 
"Rationale divinorum offidorum" of William (Du- 
rand) Bishop of Mende, shows in detail how the 
cathedrals are at once marvels of art and symbols 
of prayer. The church of Amiens, which was the 
most perfect of the great French monuments, is a 
striking demonstration of the aesthetic resources of 
the original scheme. That of Chartres no less bril- 
liantly exhibits its iconographic resources. Each 
stone had its language. Covered with sculpture, it 
presents a complete religious programme. It is 
for the people the great book of sacred history, the 
catechism in images. Think of Amiens or Char- 
tres, Paris or Laon. In every line appears the 
function of a temple destined for the masses; from 
every angle the gaze is drawn towards the altar, 
which sums up the idea of sacrifice. The frescoes 
and the glass windows of Giotto breathe forth the 
perfume of religious life; the poems of St. Francis, 
singing nature, raise the soul towards God; and 
Dante wrote to Can Grande della Scala, tyrant of 
Verona, that he wished by means of his poems to 
snatch away the living from their state of wretched- 
ness and put them in the way of eternal happiness. 10 
Art, in all of its forms, shows the unfailing bonds 
between religion and beauty. 

loDicendum est breviter quod finis totius et partis est reraovere 
viventes in hac vita de statu miseriae et perducere ad statum 
felicitatis. See Dantis Alighieri Epistola X, in opere Latin* di 
Dante, ed. G. Giuliani, Firenze, 1889, Vol. II, p. 46. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 159 

The religious spirit that penetrated everything 
was bound to be felt also in the domain of science, 
and notably philosophy. We shall see this ques- 
tion so complicated and so badly understood 
under new aspects, in seeking to understand the 
precise relations of scholastic philosophy and the 
Catholic religion. In what does the bond between 
philosophy and the religious medium consist? How 
can one reconcile it with that doctrinal indepen- 
dence which philosophers so fiercely claim? 

IV 

It is easy to make the reconciliation for a certain 
group of ties, which I shall call external, and which 
therefore cannot really affect philosophical doctrine. 
They are not less suggestive of the mentality of 
the time, and they show the perfect harmony ex- 
isting between scholastic philosophy and mediaeval 
civilization. One can, it seems to me, reduce these 
extra-doctrinal relations to three classes, which we 
must examine briefly. 

The first class results from the social superiority 
of the theologians; and this indicates that philos- 
ophy is for the most part a preparation for theo- 
logical studies. That theology holds the place of 
honor in the complete cycle of studies, and that it 
is the topmost in the pyramid of knowledge ought 
not to surprise u$; for all study whatever .was sub- 
servient to the clerical estate. The thirteenth cen- 
tury in this only continued the traditions of the 
earlier Middle Ages. The University of Paris, is- 



160 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

suing from the schools at Notre Dame, counted 
only clerics among its professors, and these profes- 
sors had the closest relations with the Chancellor 
of Notre Dame and with the Papacy. Many were 
themselves canons, either of Paris or of the prov- 
inces or from abroad. Not to mention the Fran- 
ciscans or Dominicans, who were the most brilliant 
masters in the University, the translation of Greek 
and Arabic works so momentous for the West 
was due to clerks of Toledo or monks of Greece 
and Sicily. In short, all the co-workers in the great 
awakening of the thirteenth century are ecclesi- 
astics. 

It is natural that the masters in the Faculty of 
Theology (sacrae paginae) took precedence of all 
other masters, and notably of philosophers. In 
this, University discipline was only the reflection 
of social life. The intensity of Catholic life makes 
intelligible why so many of these "artists," or phi- 
losophers, desired to undertake the study of theol- 
ogy, after taking their degrees in the lower faculty. 
So much was this the case that the mastership of 
arts was a direct preparation for the grades of the 
Theological Faculty. The documents make this 
clear: "Non est consenescendum in artibus sed a 
liminibus sunt salutandae""* One does not grow 
old in philosophy; one must take leave of it finally 
and engage himself with theology. It is the inten- 

iobicy. Denifle, Die Universitaten des Mittelalters bis 1400 1 fid. 
I, pp. 99-100. 



IX THE MIDDLE AGES 161 

sity of this Catholic life which makes us understand 
how Robert of Sorbonne, founder of the famous 
college of that name, could compare the Last Judg- 
ment, in his short treatise De Conscientia 11 to 
the examination for the degree at Paris, and pursue 
the comparison into a thousand details. In that 
"supreme trial" for the Doctorate, for example, 
the judge will not be accessible to recommendations 
or presents, and all will pass or fail strictly in at- 
cordance with the requirements of justice. It is, 
moreover, the intensity of religious life at that 
epoch which alone can explain certain controversies 
among theologians which contravene our modern 
ideas, such as that on the subject of Christian 
perfection. While ordinary people are enthusiastic 
for a religion that is simple and sturdy, the learned 
at Paris sought to determine whether the life of the 
regulars is nearer to perfection than that of the 
seculars. Between 1255 and 1275 all doctors in 
theology were obliged to declare themselves on this 
question. Certain secular masters treated it with 
an asperity and a passion which served as an outlet 
for their ill-humour against the Dominicans and 
Franciscans, whom they never forgave for having 
taken the three chairs in the Faculty of Theology. 12 
If, for all these reasons both social and religious, 
more credit or honour or importance was attached to 
theology and to religious discussion than to phi- 

11 Edited by F. Chambon, Robert de Sorbon, Paris, 1908. 

12 Of. above, p. 76. 



162 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

losophy, this fact could in no wise change the posi- 
tion of philosophy, which remained what it is and 
must be a synthetic study of the world by means 
of the reason alone. 

The second class of ties results from the penetra- 
tion of philosophy into speculative theology, and 
from its being constituted an apology for Chris- 
tianity, the penetration affecting theology alone, 
and philosophy not at all. This method which was 
so dear to the masters of Paris, has been commonly 
called by modern authors the dialectic method in 
theology. We already know that speculative the- 
ology, which achieved its greatest renown in the 
thirteenth century, aimed at the co-ordination of 
Catholic dogma; therefore its chief method was 
necessarily based upon the authority of the sacred 
books. But by the side of this principal method, 
the theologians employed another one, as accessory 
and secondary. In order to make dogmas intelligi- 
ble, they sought to show their well-founded reason- 
ableness, just as Jewish theologians had done in 
the days of Philo, or Arabian theologians had done 
with the Koran. In the twelfth century, Abaelard, 
and Hugo of St. Victor, and Gilbert de la Porree, 
had founded this apologetic method; and in the 
thirteenth century it had attained the widest ex- 
tension. The same Thomas Aquinas who taught 
the clear distinction between philosophy and the- 
ology, wrote on the subject: "If theology borrows 
from philosophy, it is not because it needs its help, 



IX THE MIDDLE AGES 168 

but in order to make more obvious the truths which 
it teaches/ 518 

The application of philosophy to theology I call 
apologetics. Just as the application of mathe- 
matics to astronomy affects astronomy alone, so 
also the application of philosophy to theology af- 
fects only theology. On this historical point, which 
I have long sought to establish, the writers of the 
thirteenth century give ample support; for they dis- 
tinguish the two theological methods of authority 
and of reason, "auctoritates et rationes" 14 

It clearly follows that the use of philosophy for 
theological ends arises by the side of pure philos- 
ophy, while the latter remains unchanged. If you 
will recall the religious mentality of the thirteenth 
century, you will readily understand how the ap- 
plication of philosophy to dogma led many minds 
into theology. The result was that most philoso- 
phers became theologians; and mediaeval apolo- 
getics arose in the most varied forms. In a society 
where heresy itself sprang from an excess of re- 
ligious zeal and under colour of purifying belief, no 
one dreamed of opposing dogma; on the contrary, 
it was explained and in all sorts of ways. The 

is "Ad secundum dicendum quod haec scientia accipere potest 
aliquid a philosophicis disciplinis, non quod ex necessitate eis indi- 
geat, sed ad majorem manifestationem eorum quae in hac scientia 
tiaduntur." Summa TheoL, 1&, q. I, art. 5. 

n This distinction between "auctoritates et rationes," appears as 
early as Peter of Poitiers. Of. Grabmann, Gesch. d. schoL Methode, 
I, 38. 



164 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

wisest, following the traditions of Anselm and of 
the Victorines, posited a domain of mystery re- 
served to the advantage of theology. Thomas 
Aquinas does not admit the philosophical demon- 
stration of mystery itself; he allows philosophy to 
prove only that mystery contains nothing irra- 
tional. Duns Scotus goes further; from fear of 
actual conflict, he withdraws every theological 
question from the empire of reason. But others 
difl not follow these wise examples. Raymond 
Lully wished to support all the contents of revela- 
tion by the syllogism as formerly Abaelard had 
done; and Roger Bacon even confused philosophy 
with apologetics. Mediaeval rationalism, in itb 
scholastic form, vindicates for reason the power of 
demonstrating dogma in every way; and in this it 
is in striking contrast with the modern rationalism 
which would deny dogma in the name of reason. 

Where could the profoundly religious spirit of 
mediaeval speculation appear more luminously than 
in these rash attempts? It was religious to the 
point of folly. There is no better word to charac- 
terize the attitude of the Latin Averroists, who 
stirred so deeply the University of Paris in the thir- 
teenth and fourteenth centuries. Not wishing to 
deny either the Catholic faith or the compact mass 
of philosophical doctrines which were in flagrant 
contradiction with this faith, they hit upon an inge- 
nious device; this was the astonishing doctrine of 
the twofold truth: "What is true in philosophy," 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 165 

they said, "may be false in theology, and vice 



irersa." 15 



Whatever these different attitudes may have 
been, and the religious concern which inspired 
them they had a very important effect on the rela- 
tion of philosophy and theology. For, the theolo- 
gian was wont to enter into a great number of phi- 
losophical questions for the purpose of his apolo- 
getics. Since no science bears more than does phi- 
losophy the impress of him who treats it, each the- 
ologian thus retained and developed his own philo- 
sophic attitude. Moreover he might feel again the 
attraction of certain philosophic problems, or he 
might refresh the memory of his hearers "prop- 
ter imperitos" says Henry of Ghent; in both cases 
he made deep and prolonged incursions into the 
ground reserved for philosophy. The result was 
that philosophy became employed in both the Fac- 
ulty of Arts and the Faculty of Theology, defi- 
nitely disinterested in the former and frankly apol- 
ogetic in the latter. 

This is the simple explanation of that pedagogi- 
cal phenomenon, peculiar to the Middle Ages, 
which has perplexed historians so much the mix- 
ture of matters philosophical and theological in the 
Summae, the Quodlibeta, the Quaestiones Dispu- 
tatae, and in almost all mediaeval works. To con- 
sider only the title of Summa Theologica given to 
their chief works by Alexander of Hales, Thomas 

IB Cf. ch. XIII, iv. 



166 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

Aquinas, Henry of Ghent and others, one would 
think they are great works in which philosophy has 
no place. But let there be no deception. Genuine 
philosophical treatises are contained in these vast 
productions. It will suffice to refer to a part of 
the great Summa of Thomas Aquinas, wherein are 
to be found integral treatises on psychology and 
ethics and law. 10 

The religious mentality of the time created also 
a third class of ties, existing not between philos- 
ophy and theology but between the subjective in- 
tentions of philosophers and the objective end to 
which they subordinated all their studies, which 
was no other than that of obtaining happiness. The 
eye of all was fixed on the future life. On the mar- 
gin of the Summa Contra Gentiles, in the rough 
draft by Thomas himself, we find various pious in- 
vocations (ave, ave Maria). 17 As Dante wrote the 
Divine Comedy "to snatch the living from the state 
of wretchedness and to lead them to the state of 
happiness," so also the intellectuals of the thir- 
teenth century refer their researches, whatever they 
are astronomy, mathematics, the science of obser- 
vation, and philosophy also to their personal striv- 
ing for Christian happiness. There was here no 
difference between them and the painters or sculp- 
tors or architects, who also worked for the glory of 



ie See Summa Theol, 1% qq. LXXV-XC; Ugae, qq . I-XXV; 
qq. XC-XCVII. 

17 Summa contra Gentiles, ad codices manuscriptos praesertim 
sancti Doctoris exacta, Romae, 1918, Praefatio, p. VIII. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 167 

God and their own salvation, or even princes and 
kings, who were all moved by the desire to avoid 
hell and to merit heaven, and who did not conceal 
this in their official acts. But the intention was a 
matter of moral consciousness; it changed in no re- 
spect either the politics of kings or the beauty of 
works of art or the value of philosophical systems. 
Scholastics would have applied to their case the 
famous distinction of "finis operis" (the work it- 
self) and "finis operantis" (the intention with 
which it was done). 

To sum up: Neither the social superiority of 
theologians nor the constitution of theological apol- 
ogetics nor the religious tendency of thinkers was 
an obstacle to the independence of philosophy. 
However, these three facts make perfectly plain 
just how philosophy also in the thirteenth century 
was bathed in a general atmosphere of religion 
which pervaded everything else. 

V 

But, since we have raised in general terms the 
question of the relations between philosophy and 
religion in the thirteenth century, there is a last 
class of ties of which it remains to speak, and which 
touch very closely philosophic doctrine itself 
the prohibitive or negative subordination of phi- 
losophy to theology. Profoundly convinced that 
Catholic dogma is the expression of the infallible 
word of God; convinced, on the other hand, that the 
truth cannot overthrow the truth, without over- 



168 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

throwing the principle of contradiction and involv- 
ing all certainty in this ruin, the scholastics drew 
this conclusion: that philosophical doctrine cannot 
in reality contradict theological doctrine, there 
fore it is prohibited from doing so. 

To understand the precise meaning of this pro- 
hibition we must note three points: First, that it is 
based on the principle of the solidarity of truth; 
second, that it involves the denial of contradiction, 
and not the assertion of positive proof; and, third, 
that it affects philosophy in part only, namely, so 
far as its domain belongs at the same time (but 
from another point of view) to theology. Let us 
consider each of these in turn. 

Truth cannot contradict truth. Music, writes 
Thomas Aquinas, depends on the application of 
mathematical principles, which it cannot, therefore, 
contravene; but it is not concerned with their foun- 
dation, that is not its affair. Assuming the fact 
of a revelation and in the heart of the Middle 
Ages no one doubted it the attitude of the schol- 
astics is logical. Henry of Ghent puts the matter 
concisely, when he says: "If we admit (supposito) 
that theological doctrines are true, we cannot ad- 
mit that other doctrines can contradict them." 18 

" "Supposito quod huic scientiae non subjacet nisi verum . . . 
supposito quod quaecumque vera sunt judicio et auctoritate hujus 
scientiae ... his inquam suppositis, cum ex eis manifestum sit quod 
tarn auctoritas hujus scientiae quam ratio . . . veritati innititur et 
verum vero contrarium esse non potest, absolute dicendum quod 
auctoritati hujus scripturae ratio nullo modo potest esse contraria." 
Summa. TheoL, X, 3, No. 4. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 169 

That the prohibition is solely negative in char- 
acter, appears from a statute of the Faculty of 
Arts of 1272. This statute simply enjoins the 
"artists" (artistae) from "determinare contra 
fidem"; but it does not instruct them "determinare 
pro fide" 19 No one followed this simple precept 
with greater breadth of mind than did Thomas 
Aquinas; and his famous position regarding the 
eternity of the world is ample evidence of this fact. 
Thus, the Bible teaches that God created the world 
in time. To avoid contradicting this dogma, 
Thomas eliminates the thesis that the world is 
eternal. But he does maintain that the idea of 
eternal creation is not contradictory, because the 
eternity of the world would not be in opposition to 
its contingency. 20 

Finally, as regards its limited effect on philos- 
ophy, this prohibition applies only to matters ex- 
pounded by both philosophy and theology. The in- 
terdiction has no force unless both domains are in- 
volved; therefore philosophy was affected only to 
a very limited extent. 

With this understanding of the scholastic con- 
ception before us, we might seek to estimate the 
truth of their view concerning the relation of phi- 
is Chartularium Univers. Parisiensis, ed. Denifle et Chatelain, I, 499. 
20 Mundum non semper fuisse sola fide tenetur et demonstrative 
probari non potest. . . . Demonstrari non potest quod homo aut 
caelum aut lapis non semper fuit . . . unde non est impossible quod 
homo generetur ab homine in infinitum. Summa TheoL, 1% q. 
XLVI, art. 3. 



170 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

losophy to theology. The result would of course 
vary, according to the acceptance or rejection of 
Christianity and the particular meaning given to 
the idea of revelation. But we are here concerned 
with an historical problem. Certainly, from that 
point of view, there can he no doubt concerning the 
position in fact taken by the scholastics of the thir- 
teenth century. 

VI 

We are now in position to evaluate the commonly 
accepted view of scholastic philosophy, which was 
given at the outset of this lecture. The definition 
which was then quoted, accepted by most his- 
torians of mediaeval philosophy conceives of 
scholastic philosophy as essentially religious. 

Of course, one can say of scholastic philosophy 
that it is largely inspired by religion. However, 
this is true in so general a sense that the fact turns 
out to be irrelevant for purposes of definition. 
Their philosophy evolved in a social atmosphere in 
which religion was dominant. Under the spell of 
this mentality theological studies enjoyed a pres- 
tige superior to that which was granted to philo- 
sophical studies. The proximity of the faculties of 
theology and philosophy introduced a kind of pas- 
sion for combining (but not confusing) philosophi- 
cal and theological questions in the same work. 
Finally, as regards the realm of morals, philosophy 
was regarded by the intellectuals of the Middle 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 171 

Ages as a preliminary step in aspiring to happi- 
ness. But this religious inspiration affects all the 
other activities that make up the civilization of the 
thirteenth century politics, art, morals, family, 
work. The religious inspiration is a relational 
characteristic along with many others; but precisely 
because this characteristic belongs to the civiliza- 
tion, it belongs to all its factors and is not peculiar 
to philosophy, which is only one factor. Hence it 
is as inadequate to the definition of their philosophy 
as would be, for example, the description of the oak 
by reference merely to the nature of the soil, which 
its roots share with those of the elm and the beech 
and the other trees of the forest. One can under- 
stand why historians who study expressly the civi- 
lization of the Middle Ages, 21 should single out for 
criticism the dominant preoccupation with salva- 
tion, in the thirteenth century scholasticism, and 
should regard this as sufficiently characteristic. 
But it seems incredible that works which treat 
solely of the historical exposition of philosophical 
doctrines should be content with such a superficial 
judgment; and the procedure seems to me inadmis- 
sible. 

In addition to the general criticism which we 
have just made of this definition, on the ground of 
insufficiency, some special criticisms may be con- 
sidered on the basis of our preceding study. 

21 As does, for example, H. O. Taylor in his remarkable work, 
The Mediaeval Mind, vol. II, ch. XXXV. 



172 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

Scholasticism, others say, is philosophy placed in 
the service of doctrine already established by the 
Church. Not at all. To place philosophy in the 
service of theology is to use apologetic; and apolo- 
getic, which proposes to show the rational character 
of dogmas fixed beforehand, comes from scholastic 
theology and not from scholastic philosophy. To 
define, according to the explicit procedure of Aris- 
totle, is to say what a thing is, and not only what 
it is not. 

Is scholasticism, then, placed in such dependence 
on theology as to follow it without any contradic- 
tion whatever? The reply to this question is in the 
affirmative, provided the ground is a common one. 
But the question is whether this dependence is 
enough to constitute a complete definition, and one 
must reply in the negative. In the first place, be- 
cause this dependence simply places boundaries or 
limits beyond which one cannot pass. It does not 
treat of what is beyond, or of numerous philosophi- 
cal doctrines in which theology is not interested, 
but in which our definition should be interested. 
Scholastic philosophy includes vast domains which 
are not in conflict with the realm of theology, 22 

22 Even Mr. Taylor (op. cit.) recognizes that scholastic philoso- 
phers are devoted to the pursuit of knowledge for itself. Beside the 
joy of working for their salvation, they have the joy of study. Men 
like Roger Bacon, Albertus Magnus, and Thomas Aquinas, could 
not have done what they did, says he, without the love of knowledge 
in their souls. Similarly, it has been shown by Male, that in addi- 
tion to the symbolic sculpture, which is based on religious doctrine. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 178 

Now definition involves not merely the outlining of 
limits, but also the penetrating of the field itself. 
We object further, because this dependence does 
not establish any doctrinal content, but simply for- 
bids contradiction. It can therefore only establish 
a negative that is to say, an imperfect definition 
of philosophical doctrine, which is the thing itself 
to be defined. 

VII 

We conclude then that need of universal order, 
cosmopolitan value, optimism, impersonality, and 
religious spirit are so many harmonious relations 
which exist between scholastic philosophy and all 
the other spheres of the civilization in which it ap- 
pears. 

But in addition to these harmonious relations, 
which reveals this civilization rather in its static 
aspect, there are also relations which are distinctly 
dynamic. For, scholasticism had a very profound 
influence within the various departments of psy- 
chical life; and from this angle of its efficacy it 
acquires a new value for our consideration. 

What has been said concerning mediaeval apolo- 
getics constitutes an example of the penetration of 
philosophic doctrine within the domain of theology. 
In the same way one can show that this doctrine re- 
acted in the spheres of canon law and of civil law 

there are many sculptural designs and motives in the Gothic cathe- 
drals which are introduced solely for the sake of artistic beauty. 
See E. Male: L'art religieux du 18'e s. en France, pp. 70 ft. 



174 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

and of political economy and of mysticism. More- 
over, like a musical sound in its harmonic scale, the 
same doctrine reverberates throughout the forms of 
artistic and common life. And it could be pointed 
out readily how the literature of the period is per- 
meated with it, how the Roman de la Rose read 
in the feudal castles; how great didactic poems such 
as the Bataille des Septs Arts of Henri d'Andeli, 
the Renart Contrefdt, the Manage des Septs Arts 
et des Septs Vertus; how Chaucer's Parlement of 
Foules or his Canterbury Tales are filled with 
philosophical theories borrowed from Alan of Lille, 
Avicenna, Thomas Aquinas, Thomas Bradwardine 
and others. 23 The same may be said of the Canzone 
of Guido Cavalcante 24 and of the poems of Dante. 

Thus, for example, Dante's De Monarchia draws 
its inspiration from the theory of the four causes; 
it invokes the scholastic theory of the proprium, in 
order to justify its claim that man's good consists 
in the development of his intelligence; 25 it takes as 
its authority Gilbert de la Porree, "magister sex 
principiorum" \ it constructs "polysyllogisms in the 
second figure"; 20 it sets forth at length the theory 
of liberty for which it employs a definition which 

2 For instance, Chaucer's Nun's Priest's Tale reproduces the theo- 
logical determinism of Thomas Bradwardine. 

a* For instance, Canzone, p. 123, ed. Ercole Rivalta: La Rime di 
Guido Cavalcante, Florence, 1902. 

25 Pars Prima. 

z"Iste polysyllogismus currit per secundam figuram." 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 175 

expresses the feudal mentality (suimet et non al- 
terius est) ; it observes that it is easier to teach phi- 
losophy to one who is utterly innocent of knowledge 
about it than to those who are replete with erron- 
eous opinions; it rests at one point, on the precept 
which expresses so admirably the unifying tendency 
of the time : "quod potest fieri per unum melius est 
fieri per unum quam per plura"; 21 it likens the rela- 
tion of petty prince and monarch to that of the 
practical and the speculative intellect, inasmuch as 
directions for conduct pass to the former from the 
latter. As for the Divine Comedy, it is full of phi- 
losophy, notwithstanding the poetical transforma- 
tion which suffuses the thought with its magical 
charm. While Dante is no systematic philosopher, 
nevertheless he is eclectic and the influence of 
philosophical systems is everywhere evident in his 
thought ; in hands so expert the work of art receives 
every doctrinal impression like soft and pliable wax. 
One could show how the statues of the cathedral 
churches of Chartres or of Laon or of Paris, for ex- 
ample, and the frescoes and miniatures of the thir- 
teenth century generally, reflect in design and in 
colour the philosophical thought of the period; how 
the great painters from the fourteenth century to 
the seventeenth century owe much of their artistic 
inspiration to scholastic themes; how the termin- 
ology of that same philosophy makes no small con- 
tribution to the ever increasing modern vocabulary, 

27 See above, p. 110. 



176 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

especially in philosophy; 28 how scholastic definitions 
have entered into English literature and French 
literature; how some of the thirteenth century hagi- 

28 The scholastic terms become "current coin," as Saintsbury ob- 
serves; and he adds: "Even the logical fribble, even the logical 
jargonist was bound to be exact. Now exactness was the very thing 
which languages, mostly young hi actual age . . . wanted most of 
all." Periods of European Literature, vol. II (The Flourishing of 
Romance and the Rise of Allegory), p. 16, cf. pp. 30, 21. Cf. Brune- 
tiere: "Les definitions de la scholastique n'ont rien de scientifique 
au sens veritable du mot; mais elles n'en ont pas moins discipline* 
1'esprit fran^ais en lui imposant ce besoin de clarte*, de precision et 
de justesse qui ne laissera pas de contribuer pour sa part a la 
fortune de notre prose ... A coup stir, nous ne pourrons pas ne pas 
lui &tre reconnaissants de nous avoir appris a composer; et la, 
comme on salt, dans cet equilibre de la composition, dans cette 
subordination du detail a Tid^e de I'ensemble, dans cette juste pro- 
portion de parties, la sera Tun des traits minents et caractlris- 
tiques de la literature francaise." Manuel de I'histoire de la lit- 
terature frangaise, Paris, 1898, pp. 94-95. 

Shakespeare is acquainted with scholastic doctrines. For example, 
the ."quiddities" of Hamlet (Act V, sc. i, "Where be his quiddities 
now?") -is a scholastic term; it means "realities" and not "subtilities" 
(common glossary). Again Hamlet (Act I, sc. v) speaks of "table 
of my memory" and 

"All forms, all pressures past 
That youth and observation copied there." 

This is an allusion to the "formde et species impressae." And again, 
he is using scholastic thought when he says: 

"Sense sure you have, 

Else could you not have motion." (Act III, sc. iv) 
recalling the doctrine that movement presupposes sense-perception. 
That "godlike" reason differentiates man from beast (Act. IV, sc. iv) 
is also scholastic doctrine. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 177 

ographers make use of the methods of division and 
the technical terms of scholasticism; and how en- 
tire doctrines drawn from scholasticism are con- 
densed in the terse sayings of popular speech. In- 
deed, these influences are so far reaching and so di- 
verse that no student of history or of political and 
social science or of art or of literature in the Mid- 
dle Ages can safely ignore the philosophy of that 
period. 

But however important and interesting these in- 
fluences (the dynamic relations) may be, they are 
not more significant for our proper understanding 
of the scholastic philosophy than is the harmonious 
equilibrium (the static relations) considered in the 
preceding chapters. And hence, to comprehend 
fully and to estimate that philosophy aright we 
must proceed to consider what belongs to it in its 
own constitution. To that end we shall enter into 
its doctrinal content. 

It will be impossible of course to consider all of 
the manifold and extensive doctrinal realms which 
scholastic philosophy covers. We shall therefore 
limit ourselves to those doctrinal realms which are 
most intimately connected with the civilization. 
Namely, intellectualism because it permeates the 
entire life of the century, although it belongs prop- 
erly to psychology (Chapter VIII) ; metaphysics, 
because it is the foundation of the whole scholastic 
philosophy (Chapter IX) ; social philosophy be- 
cause it is intimately bound up with the political 



178 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

and religious life (Chapters X and XI) ; and, 
finally, the conception of human progress, because 
for them as for all energetic humanity it is the 
mainspring of life (Chapter XII). 



CHAPTER EIGHT 

INTELLECTUALISM 

i. Intellectualism in ideology, ii. In epistemology. iii. 
In psychology (free volition), iv. More generally (psychol- 
ogy, logic, metaphysics, ethics, aesthetics), v. In other forms 
of culture. 



INTELLECTUALISM is a doctrine which places all the 
nobility, all the intensity, the whole value of psychi- 
cal life in the act of knowing. No philosophy is 
more "intellectualistic" than mediaeval scholasti- 
cism. It is a doctrine of light. Long before Des- 
cartes, but from another point of view Thomas 
Aquinas and Duns Scotus emphasized the impor- 
tance of clear intellectual insight. The scholastic 
conception of clear knowledge is not only promi- 
nent in their psychology; it also penetrates all the 
other departments of their philosophy, so that intel- 
lectualism is at the same time a doctrine and a 
method. 

Considered in its ideological aspect, scholastic in- 
tellectualism is a brilliant form of idealism, 1 and 
places the philosophers of the Middle Ages in the 
family of Plato, Plotinus, Descartes, Leibnitz, and 

iWith the term, idealism, I refer to the ideological conception 
which establishes a difference in kind between sense perception and 
intellectual knowledge. 



180 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

Kant. ' This will appear from a simple example. I 
look at two black horses drawing a carriage. All 
that my senses perceive in these external data re- 
ceives a particular dress, which is temporal and spa- 
tial. 2 But I possess another power of representing 
to myself the real. The intellect draws out of this 
sensible content the ideas of motion, of muscular 
force, of horse, of life, of being. It does away with 
the concrete conditions which, in the sensible per- 
ception, bind the real to a particular state; it "ab- 
stracts" the "quod quid est" the what of a thing. 

One might multiply examples at will; but they 
would only bring out the more clearly that we have 
abstract ideas without number, ideas, for ex- 
ample, of qualities and forms and quantities and 
action and passions and so on. Indeed one pos- 
sesses a very treasure of these abstract ideas; they 
are as manifold as the kinds of reality implied in 
the complex data of sense perception, out of 
which the abstract idea is always drawn. Nihil est 
in intellectu quod non prius fuerit in sensu. For, 
in the scholastic view, to abstract is the law of the 
intellect; its function of abstraction is as normal 
as is the bodily process of digestion. The moment 
the intellect enters into contact with reality, it re- 
acts upon that reality, its food, as it were by as- 
similating it to itself and therefore by divesting it 
of every particularized condition. 

zSensus non est cognoscitivus nisi particularium. Thomas Aqui- 
nas, Summa Contra Gentiles, lib. II, cap. LXVI. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 181 

The question naturally arises, just how does the 
intellect form these abstract ideas through contact 
with concrete objects of sense? The scholastic 
would reply by reference to his theory of the intel- 
lectus agens. But this would take us too far afield 
for our purposes here. 8 Their conclusion alone is 
significant for our present study; namely, abstract 
knowledge differs from sense perception not in de- 
gree but in kind. For, the content of our abstract 
ideas, the motion and force and life of our horses 
and carriages, in the above illustration is quite in- 
dependent of the particular ties of time and space, 
and of all material conditions in which reality as 
perceived by the senses is involved. Consequently, 
abstract knowledge is superior to sense perception ; 
abstraction is the royal privilege of man. This 
superiority of intellect is as much a matter of grate- 
ful pride to the scholastics as it was to Plato and 
to Aristotle. 

II 

Intellectualism furnishes also a solution in the 
field of epistemology, the problem of the value of 
knowledge; for it establishes truth on a firm foun- 
dation, while at the same time it fixes the limits of 
reason. Truth is something which pertains to the 
intellect. "For truth consists in saying that a being 
is when it is, or that it is not when it is not." 4 Con- 

s For detailed account of this conception see D. Mercier, Ptychol- 
ogie, Louvain, 1919, vol. II, pp. 39 ff. 
Thomas Aquinas, Perihermeneicu, I, 8. 



182 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

sequently certitude, which is nothing but a firm 
assent to truth, is a possession of understanding and 
reason; it does not depend on will or on sentiment 
or on pragmatical efficiency. Here is one of the 
basic differences between scholastic philosophy and 
an important contemporary tendency in epistemol- 
ogy, which insists on some "non-intellectualistic" 
criterion of certitude. 5 

The intellect grasps "being" ; it can somehow as- 
similate all that is: intellectus potest quodammodo 
omnia fieri. Moreover, when it grasps being, it is 
infallible. "In the figure of Ezekiel," writes Meis- 
ter Eckhart, who with his wonderful power for 
imagery expresses splendidly this particular idea, 
"the intellect is that mighty eagle, with wide reach 
of wing, which descended upon Lebanon and seized 
the cedar's marrow as its prey, that is to say, the 
constitution of the thing and plucked the topmost 
bloom of foliage." 6 There is no error in the under- 
standing itself; it is always true as regards being, 
its object proper. 7 Error lies only in the judge- 

B For fuller details see my Histoire de la Philosophic Mtdttvale, 
p. 246. 

Intellectus enim est in figura aquila ilia grandis Eze. 17 longo 
membrorum ductu, que venit ad Lybanum et tulit medullam cedri, 
id est, principia rei, et summitatem frondium ejus avulsit. Edit. 
Denifle (Archiv fur Litteratur und Kir chenges chichi e des Mittel- 
alterf, 1886, p. 566). 

f Intellectus circa proprium objectum semper verus est ; unde et 
seipso numquam decipitur; sed omnis deceptio accidit in intellect!! 
et aliquo inferiori, puta phantasia vel aliquo hujusmodi. Thomas 
Aquinas, Summa Theol, l m , q. XCIV, art. 4. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 183 

ment, when we combine two concepts and declare 
that their contents coincide, although in reality they 
are in disagreement. It follows from this that 
reason in our life has genuine worth; it is not a way- 
ward will-o'-the-wisp which leads him astray who 
trusts to it, it is a torch which illumines. 

But that which the intellect understands is only 
a small measure of reality ; therefore, one must un- 
derstand the limits of reason. Intellectual knowl- 
edge is imperfect and inadequate. First, because 
our ideas are derived from the content of sense-per- 
ception, from which follows that we cannot know 
properly more than the realities of sense; accord- 
ingly, the supersensible can be known only by an- 
alogy. From this point of view, the human intelli- 
gence is no longer the powerful eagle, but the 
winged creature of night, the bat (noctua), which 
faces with difficulty the full light of the sun, the 
supersensible realm. Moreover, even the corporeal 
reality is apprehended by imperfect processes. We 
know only the general determinations of being, no- 
tions of what is common, for instance, to live or to 
move in various living or moving beings. The na- 
ture of the individual as such escapes us, even 
though, with Duns Scotus, we derive a kind of con- 
fused intuition of the concrete and singular. Fur- 
thermore, these general notions do not even mani- 
fest what is specific in the essences which are 
known; indeed, we employ the same common notion 
of life for plants and animals and men, and we are 



184 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

condemned to ignorance of the innermost reality 
peculiar to the life in each class of these living be- 
ings. On all sides, therefore, reality surpasses 
knowledge; the unknowable encompasses us round 
about. 

Ill 

Yet this very same reason, at once so glorified 
and humbled, is the queen of conscious life. It 
rules the appetitive life, by restraining the passions 
and lower appetites. Reason shines as a torch 
which lights and directs the will, necessary or free. 
We will only what we know as good nihil volitum 
nisi cognitum and already this precedence of in- 
tellect over will establishes a dependence of the will 
on the intellect, 

It is because we are reasonable beings that free 
volitions are psychologically possible. Thomas 
Aquinas, and Duns Scotus too 8 so long regarded 
as holding here a different view gives a remark- 
able intellectual explanation of liberty which is not 
found in any preceding system. 

We are drawn to the good. This means that we 
are inclined to will. whatever reality is presented as 
capable of satisfying a certain indwelling tendency, 
our tendency, namely, toward what is considered 
to be suitable to us. Just as the intellect conceives 

s See P. Minges, 1st Duns Scotus Indeterminist? Battmker's- 
Boitr&ge, 1905, V, 4. Of. my Histoire de la Philosophic Mtdifoale, 
p. 460. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 185 

being in the abstract, as integral being, so it con- 
ceives the good as such, the general good. For 
when the intellect acts, it obeys the law of its activi- 
ty; and in doing so it abstracts the good as such, 
and sees in this (or any) being the good which it 
contains. Only the complete good can draw us ir- 
resistibly, because it alone satisfies this intellectual 
tendency of our nature. 9 It is then impossible for 
the will not to will it. If the Infinite Good should 
manifest Himself, the soul would be drawn towards 
it, as iron is attracted by the magnet. The attrac- 
tions which the martyrs felt for the benefits of this 
life, at the very moment when they preferred to die, 
remarks Duns Scotus, is the sign and effect of this 
necessary tendency toward the good, the good as a 
totality. 

But during our earthly life the good never ap- 
pears to us unadulterated; for every good is limited. 
The moment we reflect, the limitation is perceived; 
every good is good only under certain aspects; it 
contains deficiencies. Then the intellect places me 
before two intellectual judgements. For example, 
it is good for me to undertake a journey; not to un- 
dertake it contains also some good. Behold, I am 
called upon to judge my own judgements. Which 
judgement shall I choose? The will must decide, 
and it decides freely, for neither judgement enjoins 

a Objectum autem voluntatis quae est appetitus humanus, est uni- 
versale bonum, sirut objectum intellects est universale verum. 
Thomas Aquinas. Summa Theol, Ia2ae, q. IT, art. 8. 



186 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

a necessary adhesion. We will freely the good 
which we choose, not because it is the greater good, 
but because it is some good. In a sense we may 
say that our choice stops with the good which we 
consider the best. But, in the last analysis, this is 
true only if we add, that the will freely intervenes 
in the decision. In other words, it is under the in- 
fluence of the will that the practical intellect makes 
its judgement, that the one or the other course of ac- 
tion is the better. The will can in reality give its 
preference to either of the alternatives. At the 
moment of definite choice, deliberation ceases and 
gives place to decision. So Thomas and Duns 
Scotus avoided the psychological determinism 
which puzzled other scholastics, such as Godfrey 
of Fontaines and John Buridan. 

Thus, liberty resides in the will, but it has its 
roots in the judgement. Consequently, a free act is 
a deliberate act, and entirely reflective. An act of 
this kind is not a common thing. Indeed, whole 
days pass during which we do not make intellectual 
decisions, that is, in the scholastic meaning of the 
word. 

IV 

Scholastic intellectualism is quite evident, not 
only in the remaining branches of psychology, but 
also in logic, in metaphysics, in aesthetics, and in 
morals. 

Abstraction, which is the fundamental operation 



IN THE MIDDLE AOES 187 

of the intellect, establishes the spirituality of the 
soul; for a being capable of producing thoughts, the 
content of which is free from the chains of matter, 
is itself above matter. 10 It justifies the natural 
union of soul and body, because the normal func- 
tion of the organism cannot be dissociated from the 
act of thinking. It furnishes an argument in fa- 
vour of a new union of the soul with the body in 
the resurrection, because the body is the indispen- 
sable instrument of intellectual activity. 

Is it necessary to observe that every theory of 
science, or scientific logic, is incomprehensible with- 
out intellectualism ? Scientific judgements are 
necessary judgements, laws; and they are not of 
necessity without abstraction and generalization. 
On abstraction is based the theory of the syllogism, 
the value of first principles, of definitions, of di- 
visions, and of everything which enters into con- 
structive procedure. Before Henry Poincare, the 
scholastics had said, "Science will be intellectual or 
it will cease to be." 

The perception of a work of art, and of its beauty, 
is also an act of the intellect. Beauty ought to be 
resplendent, claritas pulchri, it ought to reveal, and 
in a striking way, the internal order that governs 
beauty. It speaks to the faculty of knowing, and 
above all to the intellect. 

What is true of the perception of a work of art 
is true also of its production. Man's artistic fac- 

10 Thomas Aquinas, De Anima, lib. Ill, lect. vii. 



188 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

ulty, by virtue of which the carpenter and the 
sculptor achieve their results consists in a right 
use of reason; for the reason alone can subordi- 
nate the means to the end. Ars nihil diud est quam 
ratio recta aliquorum operum fadendorum. The 
"virtue of art," virtus artis, for the humble artisan 
as for the gifted artist consists far more in a per- 
fection of the spirit than in any virtuosity or muscu- 
lar dexterity. 10 * 

A like sovereignty obtains in the moral realm. 
Reason teaches us our duties and guides our con- 
science. Reason gives a characteristic significance 
to destiny and happiness. To be happy is above 
all to know, because happiness consists in the high- 
est activities of our highest psychical power, which 
is understanding. 11 Even in this life, knowledge is 
a great consolation. Beatitude, or the perfect 
goodness destined for man, that alone which phi- 
losophy considers would be a "happiness of ab- 
stractions," a goodness founded on abstract knowl- 
edge of the laws and the being of the sensible world, 

io#t0mma Theol, l2ae, q. LVII, art. 8: Utrum habitus intel- 
lectualis qui est ars, sit virtus. Read all of arts. 3, 4, and 5, for in- 
teresting suggestions on the intellectualistic theory of art. Cf. my 
study, L'Oeuvre d'art et la Beaut 6, Louvain, 1920, ch. VI. 

11 Oportet quod (beatitudo) sit optima operatic hominis. Optima 
autem operatic hominis est quae est optimae potentiae respectu 
optimi objecti. Optima autem potentia est intellects, etc. Summa 
Theol, 1*2", q. Ill, art. 5. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 189 

a knowledge and love of the Creator in His works. 12 
The supremacy of reason appears also in meta- 
physics, where it explains the fundamental order 
of things, which rests entirely on Divine Reason. 
It manifests itself in the immutability of natural as 
well as moral law, which God could not change, 
without contradicting Eternal Reason, that is to 
say, without destroying Himself. No will, not 
even the will of God, can change the nature of 
truth ; and truth can no more contradict truth than 
a circle can be quadrate. 

Finally, this same supremacy of reason is appar- 
ent in their whole theory of the state, where gov- 
ernment is conceived as being properly a govern- 
ment of insight; from whose laws everything arbi- 
trary ought to be excluded; where the elective sys- 
tem is justified because it favours the exercise of 
reason. 12 " 1 

12 Compare the following excerpt from an unedited text of the 
thirteenth century (as in Grabmann, "Forschungen ttber die latein- 
ischen Aristoteles-Uebersetzenigen d. XIII Jhr.," p. 76 in Baiim- 
ker's-Beitrage, 1916, XVII, 5-6): "Cum omne desiderii com- 
pos et maxime creatura rationalis appetat suam perfectionem, sum- 
ma vero et finalis perfectio hominis sit in cognitione unius intellec- 
tualis veri et in amore unius incomniutabilis boni, quod est nosse 
et amare suum creatorem, et medium praecipue inducens ad cog- 
noscendum et amandum creatorem sit cogpitio consideratione operum 
creatoris, etc." 

i2" See Ch. XL 



190 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

V 

But this clear-cut intellectualism and love of pre- 
cision, appears also in other forms of culture of the 
thirteenth century. It inspires even the smallest 
detail of that doctrinal structure elaborated by the 
doctors of theology, giving to each element of be- 
lief an apologetic and rational interpretation. It 
is found in the works of canonists, who reason out 
the ecclesiastical law, just as jurists reason out the 
Roman law. Intellectualism is found also in the 
explanation of rites and symbols, the manifold 
meanings of which such a man as William of Mende 
endeavoured to unfold in his Rationale Divinorum. 
It is further found in the Roman de la Rose of the 
poet Jean de Meung, where Reason is personified 
and fills the poem with long discourses, as she filled 
with her dictates the lives of mediaeval men. 13 

The same intellectualism and the same clearness 
appears also in the Gothic architecture and sculp- 

is It is, then, not surprising that Dante, educated in scholastic 
circles, wrote these words in his De Monarchia (lib. 1): "Reason is 
to the individual what the father is to the family, or what the mayor 
is to the city. It is master. In all matters reason makes its voice 
heard." The Banquet, or Convito, addresses itself to those who 
hunger for knowledge, and contemplates making all humanity par- 
ticipate in knowledge, that "good desired of all," that supreme 
form of happiness. In the Divine Comedy Dante exalts the man who 
sacrifices his life in the promotion of knowledge. Virgil represents 
human knowledge, which the soul must acquire in its plenitude be- 
fore being admitted to the divine mysteries. And in the Paradiso, 
each of the elect enjoys to the full that beatitude "which he can 
conceive." 



IN THE MIDDLE AOE8 191 

ture, where everything is reasoned and rational. 
Has it not been said with justice that Gothic archi- 
tecture is an application of logic in poems in stone, 
that it speaks as forcibly and clearly to the mind as 
to the eye? It is nothing more than the most logi- 
cal application of the laws of gravitation. The 
pointed arch windows and the double arched vaults 
express their function admirably, as do also the sup- 
ports and the buttresses. Everywhere we find 
beauty rationalized; no superfluous ornaments, 
nothing of that fantastic decoration which spoiled 
the Gothic idea in the fifteenth century. In those 
lines of clearness and purity which we see in the 
naves of the cathedral of Rheims, Paris, Amiens, 
and Chartres all is sober and reasonable. The walls 
have let themselves be cleft in order to admit the 
light, the light filled first, however, with those 
dreams imparted by the glass; and the felt need of 
light issued finally in creating churches that are 
transparent, as it were, where all is subordinated to 
the idea of illumination. 

Nor is it otherwise with the sculpture of the thir- 
teenth century, the form of which is vivified by clear 
and severe concepts. "The iconography of the 
thirteenth century," writes M. Male, "aims to speak 
to the intelligence and not to the feelings. It is 
doctrinal and theological, that is to say, logical and 
rational; but there is nothing pathetic or tender 
about it. The great religious compositions speak 
to the mind, and not to the heart. Consider, for 



192 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

instance, how the artists of the thirteenth century 
conceive the Nativity: Mary reclines on a couch 
with head averted; the Child is not in a crib, but 
upon an altar; a lamp is suspended over His head 
between parted curtains." 14 Every point directs 
the mind to dogma and to doctrine. Human emo- 
tion is silent before such a conception, and the same 
is true when the tranquil Virgin bears in her arms, 
or upon her knees, the Infant Saviour; or when 
she assists, in her grief, but without weakness, at 
the crucifixion of her Son. It is only after the 
fourteenth century that art becomes tender, that 
the Virgin smiles and weeps, and "the symbolic 
apple which the serious Virgin of the thirteenth 
holds in her hand to remind us that she is the sec- 
ond Eve, becomes a plaything to prevent the child 
Jesus from crying." 15 

Society is also intellectualized, in its entirety, in 
the sense that the whole age craves for order. Of 
course the thirteenth century is filled with quarrels 
and revolts, and hostilities break out everywhere; 
this signifies only that it was no more possible to 
realize fully a social ideal in that age than in any 
other. But the ideal existed none the less and it 
was efficacious. The relations of vassals and suze- 
rains and of the subjects and kings, the participa- 
tion of the feudal classes in the prerogatives of gov- 
ernment, the establishment of national parliaments, 

14 MAle, L'art religieux du 13'e tilde en France, 1910, p. 201. 
IB Ibid., p. 239. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 198 

the codification of civil and canon law, the organi- 
zation of crafts and guilds, the absolute and inter- 
national hierarchy of the Church, the subordination 
of states to the moral authority of the Pope, all 
of these were regarded by the intellectual classes as 
the best means of establishing things in their proper 
places. Order, said Thomas Aquinas, reveals in 
every case the intervention of mind. "Intellects 
solius est ordinare" 1 * Only the mind is able to set 
things in order. Naturally, therefore, intellectual- 
ism makes its appearance in everything. 

ifl In Ethic, ad Nicomach., Lect. I, 7. 



CHAPTER NINE 
A PLUEALISTIC CONCEPTION or THE WORLD 

i. What metaphysics is. ii. Static aspects of reality, iii. 
Dynamic aspects; the central doctrine of act and potency, 
iv. Application to substance and accident ; to matter and form, 
v. The problem of indivi dilation, vi. Human personality, 
vii. God: as pure existence. 



To inquire into the conception of the world of- 
fered by the scholastics is to enter into the realm 
of their metaphysics. Real beings exist outside of 
us. We know them first by means of sense-per- 
ception. Then the intellect divests the realities of- 
fered by sense-perception of their individualizing 
and particular features, so that the object is laid 
hold of as abstract and permits generalization. 
Metaphysical inquiry is thus based upon abstract 
knowledge both of what lies at the heart of cor- 
poreal beings and of determinations which belong 
to all being. 

What is reality? To make clear the scholastic 
answer to this question, I propose to consider re- 
ality successively under two aspects : first, the static 
aspect, or reality in the state of repose; second, the 
dynamic aspect, or reality in the state of change. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 195 

I use these technical expressions provisionally; they 
will become clearer as we proceed. 

II 

Let us suppose for the moment an impossibility ; 
namely, that the whirling universe in the midst of 
which we live should stop suddenly, and that in this 
state of universal repose we could take a snap-shot 
of this static universe. In this state, of what would 
the real world consist? Scholasticism would reply: 
of an indefinite number of beings, independent, in 
their existence, each from the other. Each man, 
each animal, each plant, each mono-cellular organ- 
ism, each particle of matter exists by itself, in its 
impenetrable individuality. The individiial alone 
eacists. Such is the fundamental doctrine of schol- 
astic metaphysics and it was inherited from the 
twelfth century. It belongs to natural science, and 
not to philosophy, to tell us what that individual is. 
Is it the atom, the ion, the electron? Scholastic 
metaphysics would follow modern science to the 
innermost division of reality. Whatever it may be, 
it is only the individual that exists. 

Thus, scholasticism is a pluralistic philosophy, 
and the sworn enemy of monism, which teaches the 
fusion of all realities in one. Accordingly, Thomas 
Aquinas speaks of the Fons Vitae of Avicebron, an 
apologetic of Neo-Platonic and Arabian panthe- 
ism, as being a poisoned well rather than a fountain 
of life. 



196 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

Let us consider more closely one of these myriad 
individual realities, which surround us on all sides, 
for example, that oak-tree planted yonder. The 
individuality here presented includes many ele- 
ments: it has a determinable thickness and height, 
a cylindrical form of trunk, a roughness of bark, 
a somber color of foliage, a place which it occupies 
in the forest, a certain action of its foliage upon 
the ambient air, a specific subjection to influence as 
it absorbs the nourishing sap from the ground. 
These are all so many determinations of being or, 
to use the scholastic language, so many classes, 
categories, categories of quantity, quality, action, 
passion, time, space and relation. 

Now, all of these classes, or categories, presup- 
pose a yet more fundamental one. Can you con- 
ceive, asks Aristotle, the reality of walking with- 
out some one who walks? Can you conceive quan- 
tity, thickness, and the rest, without something, 
our oak-tree above which possesses it? Neither 
the action of walking nor the extension of quantity 
can be conceived apart from a subject in which they 
exist. And it is such a subject which Aristotle and 
the scholastics call substance, the fundamental 
category, as distinguished from the other classes, 
which they call accidents (accidentid) . 

Not only do we conceive corporeal realities in 
terms of substance and accidents, and no philos- 
ophy denies the existence in our minds of these two 
concepts but also the substance and the accidents 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 197 

exist independently and outside of our minds. In 
the order of existence, as in the order of our 
thought, substance and accident are relative to each 
other. One who succeeds in proving the external 
existence of the accident 1 (for instance, the thick- 
ness of the tree), also proves the existence of the 
substance (that is, the tree) . If the act of walking 
is not an illusion but something real, the same must 
be equally true of the substantial being who walks, 
without whom there would be no act of walk- 
ing. The substance, or subject, exists in and by it- 
self; it is self-sufficient. But it is also the support 
of all the rest, which therefore are called accidentia 
(id quod acddit alicui rei) . 

As for my own substance, the substance of my- 
self as a human being, that is personality there 
is the witness of consciousness, by its several ac- 
tivities, to the existence of just such a substantial 
Ego. In thinking and speaking, and so on, I at- 
tain to my own existing substance. The scholastics 
were essentially familiar with the cogito ergo sum. 
Without permanence of personality, memory would 
be inexplicable. If I were only a collection of 
ephemeral activities, what Taine calls a collection 
of sky-rockets of consciousness ("gerbes lumineu- 
ses") 9 how could one sky-rocket remember an- 

i Scholasticism proves the objectivity of our external . sense-per- 
ception by the mark of passivity (of which we are conscious) and 
by the principle of causality: quidquid movetur ab alto movetur. 
We are conscious of being passive in external sensation; conse- 
quently we do not create it, therefore it must come from a non-ego. 



198 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

other? How could I then remember in maturity 
the acts of my boyhood? But, not only do I re- 
member such acts, I am also conscious of being the 
same personality; my acts disappear, my body 
changes, but I remain a subject independent of 
these acts and changes. 

The frequent misunderstanding of the scholastic 
theory of substance rests upon two misconcep- 
tions of what that theory involved: first, that one 
knows wherein one substance differs from another; 
second, that substance is something underlying ac- 
cidental realities. Now, as regards the former, 
scholastic philosophy never pretended to know 
wherein one substance differed from another in the 
external world. It thought of substance as an idea 
resulting from reasoning, which does not instruct 
regarding what is specific in each of the substances ; 2 
one knows that they are and must be, but never 
what they are. Indeed, the idea of substance is es- 
sentially thin. And the same may be said of the 
Ego, as the substance best known to each individual 
person; consciousness witnesses to its existence, but 
never to its nature, as Descartes erroneously sup- 
posed. A proof that consciousness alone does not 
instruct us regarding our own nature, says scholas- 
ticism, is the discussion among philosophers on 
the nature of the soul. The second misconception 
above mentioned, may be readily disposed of. To 
imagine that something lies behind or underneath 
the accidents, as the door underlies the painted 

2 See above, p. 184. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 199 

colour, is simply a misinterpretation of the scholastic 
theory. Locke especially was here in error; of 
course he had no difficulty in criticizing this concep- 
tion as ridiculous. But this interpretation is totally 
wrong. In the scholastic view, substance and ac- 
cidents are really one and the same concrete exist- 
ing thing. Indeed, substance is that which confers 
individuality upon the particular determinations, or 
accidents. It is therefore the substance of the oak- 
tree which constitutes the foundation of its individ- 
uality, and which thus confers individuality upon 
its qualities, the dimensions of the oak and all the 
train of accidental determinations which belong to 
its concrete individuality. 

This "tout ensemble" of substance and accidental 
determinations, both taken together, exists by vir- 
tue of one existence alone, the existence of the con- 
crete oak-tree which we have considered as fixed 
and motionless in the static instant above described. 

Ill 

But such a picture of the world is not a possible 
picture; for nothing is motionless. Reality is in- 
volved in change and in evolution. Chemical bod- 
ies are in constant change, in all stages of their ex- 
istence, be it liquid or gaseous or solid; living or- 
ganisms are changing; our globe as a whole is 
ceaselessly borne along in a twofold movement ; the 
sun with its train of planets is subject to the law of 
change, and the same is true of the stars scattered 



200 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

throughout the immensity of space. Substance 
and accident: all is becoming. The oak springs 
from the acorn, it becomes tall and massive, its 
vital activities are forever changing, and the tree 
itself will disappear. In order to understand the 
full meaning of metaphysics, it is necessary to 
throw being into the melting pot of change. 

Thus the static point of view, or the world con- 
sidered in the state of repose, must be supple- 
mented by the dynamic point of view, or that of 
the world drawn into becoming. Here appears a 
further scholastic conception; namely, the well- 
known theory of act and potency, which forms, in 
my opinion, the key-stone in the vault of the meta- 
physical structure. This theory is a general analy- 
sis of what change implies. The scholastics get it 
from Aristotle, but give to it a breadth and exten- 
sion unknown to the Greek philosopher. What 
is change, any change? It is the real passage from 
one state to another. Now, they observe, when one 
being* passes from state A to state B, it must al- 
ready possess in A the germs of its future determi- 
nation in B. It has the power, the potency, to be- 
come B before it actually does so. This is 
demanded by the principle of sufficient reason an 
absolute principle to which all that is must be obed- 
ient, under penalty of not being at all. To deny 
this sort of preexistence is equivalent to denying 
change from one state to another, the evolution of 
reality. What we call change would then be a series 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 201 

of instantaneous appearances and disappearances 
of substances, having no internal connections what- 
ever, each with duration infinitesimally small. The 
oak is potentially in the acorn; if it were not there 
potentially, how could it ever issue from it? On 
the other hand, the oak is not potentially in a peb- 
ble, rolled about by the sea, and which outwardly 
might present a close resemblance to the acorn. 
Act or actuality (the AreAcx*" 1 of Aristotle, the actus 
of the scholastics) is any present sum-total of per- 
fection. Potency (8iW/u* potentia of the scholas- 
tics) is the aptitude to become that perfection. It 
is imperfection and non-being, if you will; but it is 
not mere nothing, because non-being considered in 
an already existing subject is endowed with the 
germ of future actualization. 

The coupling of act and potency therefore pene- 
trates reality in its inmost depths. It explains all 
the great conceptions of scholastic metaphysics. 
Especially does it explain those two great doctrines, 
in which we shall follow the play of act and po- 
tency, namely, the doctrine of substance and ac- 
cident, and the doctrine of matter and form. 

IV 

The doctrine of substance and accident is thus 
rounded out and clarified by the coupling of act 
and potency; indeed, an adequate understanding 
of the former requires the latter. Thus, to say that 
a being already constituted in its substantial de- 



202 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

termination is changing, means that it is actually 
realizing its potentialities. A child is already po- 
tentially the powerful athlete he will some day be- 
come. If he is destined to become a mathematician, 
then already in the cradle he possesses this power, 
or predisposition, whereas another infant is de- 
prived of it. Quantitative and qualitative change, 
change in the activities brought about by actual 
being and in the activity undergone, all of this 
was able to be before being in fact. 

Considered in the light of this theory, the doc- 
trine of substance and accident loses its naive and 
false significance. A growing oak, a living man, 
a chemical individuality of any kind, each of the 
myriad individual beings, is indeed an individual 
substance becoming, because its quantity, qualities, 
activities, relations are the becoming of its poten- 
tialities. Leibnitz was really following this thomis- 
tic doctrine when he said: "The present is preg- 
nant with the future." But more than this. While 
Leibnitz also taught the eternity and the immuta- 
bility of substances, which he called monads, 
Thomas and the scholastics go further into the 
heart of change. It is not only the accidents 
which change when, for example, the oak grows, 
or its wood becomes tougher, or its place changes 
when it is transplanted, or its activities are re- 
newed as it develops ; but the very substances them- 
selves are carried into the maelstrom of change, 
and nature makes us witness to the unceasing spec- 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 203 

tacle of their transformations. The oak dies; and 
from the slow work of its decomposition are born 
chemical bodies of most diverse kinds. An electric 
current traverses the molecule of water; and behold 
hydrogen and oxygen arise. 

All of this is essentially scholastic doctrine. 
When one substance changes into another, each 
has a quite different specificity. Substances differ 
not in degree but in kind. An oak never change^ 
into another oak, nor a particle of water into an- 
other particle of water. But out of a dying oak, or 
a decomposed particle of water, are born chemical 
bodies, which appear with quite different activities, 
quantities, relations, and so on. 8 The differences 
of all these activities, quantities, and the rest, are 
for us the only means of knowing the substances of 
things, because the activity of a thing gives its 
measure of perfection and springs out of it: "agere 
sequitur esse." And hence corresponding to irre- 
ducible activities and qualities there must be irre- 
ducible substances. Of course, the scholastics were 
unable to observe, as we can, the chemical activities 
of corporeal bodies. But this is simply a matter of 
application and the principle remains. The sub- 
stance of hydrogen is quite different from that of 
water; this is what I have called the specificity of 

3 "There is not the slightest parity between the passive and the 
active powers of the water and those of the oxygen and the hydrogen 
which have given rise to it," says Huxley in Lay Sermons, ("The 
Physical Basis of Life")* New York, 1874, p. 136. 



204 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

objects. A corporeal substance cannot be more nor 
less than what it is. Water is plainly water 
or it is something quite different; it cannot have 
degrees of being water. Just as a person cannot 
be more or less man than another man. "Essentia 
non suscipit plus vel minus" Accordingly, the 
world offers the greatest diversity of irreducible 
substantial perfections. 

But let us consider more closely this phenome- 
non of basic change, from one substance into an- 
other or into several other substances, for in- 
stance, water becoming hydrogen and oxygen. If 
Thomas had been invited to interpret this phenome- 
non, he would have said: that the substance of the 
water transformed itself into new substances, hy- 
drogen and oxygen, and that the hydrogen was in 
the water potentially, or in promise. But then, he 
would add, every substance that comes into being 
consists at bottom of two constituent elements; on 
the one hand, there must be something common to 
the old state and to the new, and on the other hand 
there must be a specific principle. That which is 
common to the two stages of the process is an in- 
determination found equally in the water and in 
the hydrogen-oxygen. OthetrWise the one could 
not change into the other; no transformation of 
water into its component parts would occur, but 
instead there would be annihilation (of the water) 
followed by creation (of the hydrogen-oxygen). 
As for the specific principle, this must exist at each 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 205 

stage of the process as a peculiar and proper factor 
whereby the water as such differs from the hydro- 
gen-oxygen as such. 

With this we come to the theory of primary 
matter and substantial form, so often misunder- 
stood. This is really nothing but an application of 
the theory of act and potency to the problem of the 
transformation of bodies. Primary matter is 
the common indeterminate element or substratum, 
capable of receiving successively contrary deter- 
minations. The substantial form determines this 
unformed and potential fundament, and fixes the 
being altogether in its individuality and in its spe- 
cific mode of existence. Each man, each lion, each 
oak, each chemical individual, possesses its form; 
that is, its principle of proper perfection. And 
the principle of perfection, or of the form which 
is immanent in the oak, is not reducible to that 
which belongs to the man, or to the molecule of 
hydrogen. 

All that belongs to the perfection of a being (its 
existence, its unity, its activities) is more closely 
related to the form, while all that belongs to its 
imperfect state (its indetermination) is more close- 
ly related to the matter, and especially is this true 
of the quantitative extension of corporeal being. 
To be extended in space, in divisible quantity, is 
an imperfection; and no really distinct beings could 
exist, were it not for the unifying function of 
form assembling the scattered elements of extend- 



206 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

ed matter. No doctrine really better explains the 
mixture of perfection and imperfection, of good 
and evil, which are rooted in the depths of all 
corporeal being. 

Thus the corporeal world mounts stage by stage 
from one species to another, nature passes from one 
step to another, from one species to another, fol- 
lowing a certain definite order. Nature changes 
water into hydrogen and oxygen, but it does not 
change a pebble into a lion; nor can one make a saw 
out of wool. It evolves bodies according to affini- 
ties and successive progressions, the deciphering of 
which is the mission of the particular sciences, which 
we can know only by patient observation. If there 
are any saltations in nature, they are never capri- 
cious. In every corporeal substance, at every stage 
and at every instant, the germs of the substantial 
states are found which are to be born out of it. 
This is the meaning of the formula repeated by the 
scholastics, "that primary matter contains poten- 
tially, or in promise, the series of forms in which it 
must dress and redress itself, in the course of its 
becoming." To ask, as some do, where the forms 
are before their appearance and after their disap- 
pearance, is to reveal a complete misunderstanding 
of the scholastic system. One has no right to re- 
quire of a doctrine a solution which it does not pre- 
tend to give. We simply know, by reasoning, that 
there must be matter and form, : just as we know 
that there must be substances and accidents. In 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 207 

their explanation of facts, the scholastics taught 
that a given thing must be; but they did not always 
teach what that thing is. 

This doctrine represents a definitely teleological 
interpretation of the universe. For, the successive 
stages of change in each of the becoming sub- 
stances, and the recurrence of the same transfor- 
mations in the corporeal world, require the inclina- 
tion on the part of each being to follow a definite 
order in its activity. 3 * Such inclination in each sub- 
stance is immanent finality. 

To sum up. Two kinds of change suffice to ex- 
plain the corporeal world. First the becoming of 
constituted substance; thus, an oak is in process of 
becoming, in its activities, its quantity, its qualities, 
its relations, but it retains the same substance. 
Second, a change of one substance into another (or 
into many other substances) ; such as the change 
of an oak into a collection of chemical bodies, when, 
under external influences, the disposition of the 
primary matter requires a new substantial becom- 
ing of the whole. 

V 

It is impossible here to give a detailed survey of 
such an interpretation of the corporeal world. Let 
us merely apply this conception of the world to 
the famous scholastic problem of "individuation," 

3" The term natura is used to signify the individual substance as 
far as it possesses such definite inclination. 



208 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

and show how all of these doctrines are employed 
for an explanation of humanity. 

The problem of individuation (individuatio) in 
the scholastic philosophy has a peculiar but re- 
stricted significance. The problem is: How can 
so many distinct individualities of the same sub- 
stantial perfection, and therefore of the same kind, 
exist? Why are there millions and millions of oaks, 
and not only one oak, one forma querci? Why 
should there be millions and millions of human be- 
ings, and not only one man? Why myriads of 
molecules of water, and not only one molecule of 
water? Why not one molecule or ion -or electron of 
each kind? If this were in fact the case, the world 
would still represent a scale of perfection, differing 
degree by degree; but there would be no two cor- 
poreal beings of the same kind. One thing would 
differ from another, as the number three differs 
from the number four. 

The monads of Leibnitz realize in some aspects 
such a conception of the world. But the thomistic 
solution is more profound and lies in this thesis: 
That extended matter, materia signata, is the prin- 
ciple of individuation. In other words, without ex- 
tension, and extended matter, there would be no 
reason why several individuals of the same kind 
should exist. 

Indeed, a substantial form as such, is foreign to 
and indifferent to reduplication; and, as long as one 
considers form, one cannot find any reason why 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 209 

there should be two identical forms, why one form 
should limit itself, instead of retaining within itself 
all the capacity of realization. Forma irrecepta est 
illimitata. But the question takes on a new aspect 
when this form must unite with matter, in order to 
exist, and so take on extended existence. My body 
has the limitation of extension, and therefore there 
is place for your body and for millions of bodies be- 
sides yours and mine. An oak has a limited exten- 
sion in space, and at the point where it ceases to fill 
space there is also place for many more. And the 
same may be said of all corporeal beings in the end- 
less species within the cosmos. 

There is an important consequence, which fol- 
lows directly from this philosophy. If there eatist 
some limited beings which are not corporeal beings, 
and therefore are pure perfections, pure forms, 
(pure Intelligences for instance), then no redupli- 
cation is possible in that realm of being. They dif- 
fer from one another as the oak-form differs from 
the beech-form or the hydrogen-form. 

This last consideration explains why the problem 
of individuation is different from the problem of 
individuality. Each existing being is an individual- 
ity; and therefore a pure Intelligence, if existent, 
is an individuality. 4 But individuation means a 

* This theory is all too frequently misunderstood. Thus Henry 
Adams erroneously writes as follows: "Thomas admitted that the 
angels were universals" (Mont St. Michel and Chartres, p. 364). 
This is of course a misunderstanding; incorporeal beings are not 



210 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

special restriction of individuality, that is to say a 
reduplication of several identical forms in one 
group, hence called specific groups, species. 

VI 

All the doctrines which we have sought to explain 
are to be applied to human beings or human per- 
sonalities. We are impenetrable and incommuni- 
cable substances, or personalities. No philosophy 
ever insisted more than did the scholastic philos- 
ophy upon this independence, and upon the dignity 
and value of human life, by virtue of this doctrine 
of personality. All kinds of relations exist between 
men; for instance, the family and political rela- 
tions. But, as we shall see, 5 they do not touch di- 
rectly our innermost substance, which with Leib- 
nitz we may call "ferociously independent." 

A human personality is composed of body and 
soul, and the most inward unity of man results from 
this combination; the body is primary matter, 
the soul is substantial form, and each completes and 
permeates the other. Therefore, our soul is not at 
all in an unnatural state, when united to our body. 
The soul is not to be compared, as does Plato in 
the Republic, to the sea-god Glaucus, as impossible 

deprived of individuality because they are without matter. Thomas 
Aquinas seems to have written the following in direct contradiction: 
"Non est verum quod substantia separata non sit singularis et indi- 
viduum aliquod; alioquin non haberet aliquam operationem." See 
his De unitate intellect contra Averroistas, edit. Parme, 1865, vol. 
XVI, p. 221. 
Ch. X, v. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 211 

to recognize under the grimy accretions of the sea- 
shells and creeping things. On the contrary the 
union of soul and body is such that the former re- 
quires aid from the latter in all her activities. 

The becoming of human beings, and their indi- 
viduation in mankind, must also be explained by 
the doctrines already exposited. The generation of 
a child is the becoming of a new substance; but it 
includes several stages of a specific kind, each more 
perfect than the preceding. The soul is united to 
the embryo only when the dispositions of the new 
organism are sufficiently perfect to require union 
with a human soul. Thus, in the scholastic phi- 
losophy, it is really the human body, as a product 
of human generation, which is the principle of indi- 
viduation; it is indeed the precise reason why such 
and such a soul, with its greater or lesser 
treasure of potentialities, is united to such and such 
a body. And although the spiritual and immortal 
soul is not a product of generation, nevertheless 
the parents as givers of the body to the child assume 
the responsibility of fixing the potentialities of the 
whole being. The soul may be compared to the 
wine which varies in quantity according to the size 
of the cup. 

There is, however, one very important difference 
between the human soul and the form of other be- 
ings in the corporeal world. For reasons which 
we cannot develop here, founded especially upon 
the superiority of human knowledge, the human 



212 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

soul is of a spiritual nature, that is, it is superior to 
corporeal things and therefore immortal. Accord- 
ingly, a human soul, although it constitutes a whole 
with the body, is not the result of the chemical, 
physical, and biological activities which explain or- 
ganic generation, Aristotle had said that the in- 
tellect came from without (MpaOcv). Thomas adds: 
the soul is created by God. 

VII 

We shall now consider, in conclusion, the place 
given to the idea of God in the scholastic meta- 
physics. Their natural theology, or theodicy, is 
closely connected with their conception of the world. 
It is drawn from the theory of change, which has 
been explained above. It is intimately connected 
with their whole idea of change, but especially 
with the doctrine of efficient causality. 

Change, as we have seen, is the passage from 
one state to another, a sort of oscillation by which 
the real in potency becomes the real actually, and 
so obtains a new perfection. Now the principle of 
efficient causality says: No being which changes 
can give to itself, without some foreign influence 
coming from without, this complement of reality, 
by virtue of which it passes from one state into 
another. Quidquid movetur ab olio movetur. The 
principle of contradiction requires this; and the 
principle of contradiction, according to which a 
thing cannot in the same aspect both be and not be. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 213 

is a law of mental life, as well as a law of reality. 
For, if a thing could change its own state (whether 
substantial or accidental) unaided from without, it 
would possess before acquiring, it would already 
be what is not yet. This is of course absurd. The 
water is in potency of changing into oxygen; but 
without the electric current, without the interven- 
tion of something else the water could not, by it- 
self, give to itself new determinations. This other 
thing by which water changes into oxygen and 
hydrogen is called the efficient cause. 

However, this active cause is itself carried into 
the nexus of becoming. The electrical energy could 
not appear without undergoing, in its turn, the 
action of other efficient causes. The whole process 
expands, very much as when a stone is thrown into 
still water the waves spread out from the centre, 
each acting upon the next in succession. Moreover, 
the process becomes complicated, for every action 
of a being A on a being B is doubled by a reaction 
of B on A. Nature is an inextricable tissue of effi- 
cient causes, of becomings, of passages from po- 
tency to act. Newton's law of gravitation, the law 
of the equilibrium of forces, the law of the conser- 
vation of energy, these are all so many formulas 
which state in precise form the influence of one be- 
ing upon another. 

But, and there is of course a but we cannot 
continue the process to infinity. For, in that case, 
change would be an illusion, and this would involve 



214 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

denying the very evidence itself. The initial 
motion demands a starting point, an original im- 
petus. This absolute beginning is possible only 
on the condition that a Being exists who is beyond 
all change, in whom nothing can become, and 
who is therefore immutable. That being is God. 
Now, God cannot set in motion the series of 
changes, constituted of act and potency, except by 
an impulse which leaves free and undisturbed His 
own impassibility. For, however slight the modi- 
fication which one supposes this act (of changing 
others) to cause in Him, it would still be a change, 
and hence something new and requiring explana- 
tion afresh, by recourse to the intervention of a 
still higher being. Thus the process would be end- 
less, unless God is the "prime mover unmoved." 

Let us suppose that one decides to build a house, 
and that one wants it to be supported solidly. To 
this end he lays deep the foundations which must 
support the building. Deep he digs, and still 
deeper, and ever deeper, in order to obtain a base 
of absolute fixity. But he must finally call a halt 
in this work of excavation, under penalty of not 
ever beginning the work of building. Thus we 
must conclude, from the very existence of the house, 
that the builder did in fact halt at some point in 
the earth, there to set his first stone. 

Just so with the scholastic argument which we 
are considering. Change exists as a fact even as 
the house exists as a fact. The fact is there; it 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 215 

stares us in the face; it fills the universe. If there 
were not a halting place in the chain of efficient 
causation, the change itself could not exist. One 
is in no position to choose whether the world shall 
evolve or not; for evolution is the law of the uni- 
verse itself. To conceive that one may make an 
endless regressus in the causal nexus, would be like 
conceiving that he might suspend a weight to the 
one end of a chain whose other end requires the 
ceaseless adding of link upon link, to lengthen out 
the chain to infinity! 

It all comes then to this: if any fact is real, the 
totality of things, without which the reality of that 
fact would be compromised, is no less real. It fol- 
lows, therefore, that scholastic philosophy dem- 
onstrates God's existence by making His existence 
a necessary condition of the explanation of reality. 
Accordingly, from the standpoint of metaphysics, 
He exists only for the world. Hence God is not, 
as one might suppose, a further mystery requiring 
explanation, in addition to the general mystery of 
the world. The scholastic argument for the exis- 
tence of God has just the value of the principles of 
contradiction and of efficient causation. The first 
is a point of support; the second is a lever which 
thought employs to lift the things which change to 
the plane of the Being who changes not. Remove 
the point of support or destroy the lever, and 
thought falls impotent before the world's enigma. 

God, adds Thomas Aquinas, having in Himself 



216 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

no potentiality, is infinitude, absolute perfection; 
and at this point his mind is suddenly lifted and 
borne upwards, and it attains to the most penetrat- 
ing insight concerning divinity. In order to bring 
this home to our full realization, I shall avail my- 
self of a simile, although in such matters com- 
parison is inadequate. 

Imagine a series of vessels, with different capa- 
cities, which are to be filled with water; let there be 
tiny vessels, and vessels that will contain gallons, 
and great receptacles which are to serve as reser- 
voirs. Clearly the volume of water, which may be 
stored in each vessel, must be limited by the capa- 
city of the vessel itself. Once a vessel is filled, not 
a drop can be added to its content; were the very 
ocean itself to flow over it, the contents of the ves- 
sel would not increase. 

Now existence in a finite being may be likened to 
the water, in our simile; for emstence too is limited 
by the capacity of every recipient being. This ca- 
pacity is the sum total of the potentialities which 
from moment to moment become actual reali- 
ties, by being invested with existence. That oak 
of the forest which is invested with the most beauti- 
ful qualities of its species, and with the most per- 
fect vital forces; that man of genius who is endowed 
with the most precious gifts of mind and body, 
these possess the maximum of emstence that can 
possibly be found in the species of oak and of man. 
But, be it remembered, the capacity for existence 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 217 

in each of these is limited and circumscribed by the 
very fact of the apportioned potentiality, or "es- 
sence." In this beautiful conception of Thomas, a 
vigorous oak has a larger measure of existence than 
a stunted one; a man of genius possesses existence 
in a larger sense than a man of inferior mind, 
because the great man and the vigorous oak posses^ 
a larger measure of powers and activities, and be- 
cause these powers and activities exist. But, once 
more, there is a limit even to their existence. 

On the other hand, to return to our simile, let us 
picture to ourselves an existence indefinitely uncir- 
cumscribed, say the ocean, without shore to confine 
or to limit it. Such existence, pure and unqualified, 
is that of God. God is existence; He is nothing but 
the plenitude of existence ; He is the one who is, 
Ego sum qui sum whose very essence is His ex- 
istence. All other beings receive some degree of 
existence, the degree increasing in measure with 
their increasing capacity. But they receive, in each 
instance, this degree of existence from God. The 
created agents, or secondary causes, determine the 
capacity of the vessel, and the size varies unceas- 
ingly; God alone fills it to the full capacity of ex- 
istence. 

It is God who is the direct dispenser of exis- 
tence, from that of pure spirits to that of atoms. 
It is He who sustains everything, that is anything, 
short of pure nothing. It is He who directs the 
world toward the goal, which is known to Him 



218 



PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 



alone; and presumptuous, nay rash, would it be 
for men to seek to penetrate the mystery. In short, 
God is existence; other beings receive existence an 
existence distinct from His own just in propor- 
tion as they have the power to receive it. No one 
can say what Infinity implies. "The highest knowl- 
edge which we can have of God in this life," writes 
Thomas Aquinas, "is to know that He is above all 
that we can think concerning Him." 

Scholastic metaphysics thus finds its culmina- 
tions in theodicy. Starting out from the study of 
the changing corporeal world, it rises to the Being 
without whom change would be inexplicable. But 
its main object is none the less a study of the cor- 
poreal beings which surround us. Hence one may 
say that it is based on observation and anchored to 
the very rock of reality. 7 

De Veritate, q. II, art. 8. 

7 The following schema may aid in clarifying the metaphysical 
doctrines and the relations explained in this chapter: 

Prime matter (materia prima) 



Essence 
(essentia) 



Existence 
(we) 



Substance 
(substantia) 



Accidents 
(accidentia) 



Substantial form (forma sub- 
stantiate) 

Qualities, for instance: shape, 

power, habit (habitus) 
Quantity 
Action 
Passion 
Relation 
Time 
Space 

Posture (ie habere) 
State 



CHAPTER TEN 

INDIVIDUALISM AND SOCIAL INDUSTRY 

i. Social theory the last addition to scholastic philosophy, 
ii. Fundamental principle: the group exists for its members, 
and not conversely, iii. Ethical foundation of this principle, 
iv. The idea of the group in the teaching of canonists and 
jurists, v. Metaphysical basis: the group not an entity out- 
side of its members, vi. Comparison of the group with the 
human body, vii, Conclusion. 



SOCIAL philosophy is the last addition to the edifice 
which the scholastic thinkers reared. In point 
of fact, it is unhistorical to speak of a social phi- 
losophy before 1260, the year in which William 
of Moerbeke's translation of the Politics of Aris- 
totle came into circulation among scholars. Prior 
to that time we find, to be sure, discussions on iso- 
lated questions, such as natural law or the divine 
origin and the moral function of political authority. 
But these questions were not combined in any phil- 
osophical system, although they received remark- 
able elaboration in the works of Manegold of Lau- 
tenbach and of John of Salisbury especially (in his 
Polycraticus, 1159). 

However, in saying that social philosophy is 
one of the last additions to the scholastic edifice, 



220 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

some explanation is necessary, in order to make 
valid this temporal comparison. A philosophy does 
not grow as a house, to which a wing is added from 
time to time, nor as a landed estate to which one 
adds gradually adjoining fields. For, new doc- 
trines that are introduced in philosophy must not 
destroy those which have been already adopted; on 
the contrary, they must be suited to form with the 
doctrines adopted a coherent whole, and to this end 
.each and every addition must be carefully re- 
thought. 

The systematic character of scholastic social 
philosophy is striking in the works of Thomas 
Aquinas. He is the first to succeed in constructing, 
out of the new material, a doctrine in which every- 
thing holds together, and which is entirely impreg- 
nated with the social mentality of the thirteenth 
century. This doctrine appears in his Summa The- 
ologica and in his commentary on the Politics of 
Aristotle; we know that he also intended to write 
a treatise De Regimme Principum, for the educa- 
tion of a ruling prince, Hugh II of Lusignan, king 
of Cyprus. 1 Other philosophers followed his ex- 
ample and his teachings; they addressed their 

i See Summa TheoL, la $ae, qq. XCIII-CV. Thomas himself com- 
mentated only Books I and II and III (part only chs. 1-6) of Aris- 
totle's Politics. This is now clear from an ancient MS cited by 
Grabmann (See "Welchen Teil der Aristotelischen Politik hat der 
hi. Thomas selbst Kommentirt?" in Philos. Jahrbuch, 1915, pp. 
373-5). As for the De Regimine Principum, only Book I and part 
of Book II (chs. 1-4) were written by Thomas. The authenticity of 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 221 

works to princes and kings, in order to enlighten 
them regarding both their rights and their duties. 
Thus, for instance, the Franciscan Gilbert of 
Tournai wrote, at the request of Louis IX of 
France, a treatise Eruditio Begum et Principum, 
which has been recently published; 2 and Grilles of 
Rome composed a similar work for the king's son. 

II 

As preliminary to a discussion of the more im- 
portant questions with which scholastic social 
philosophy concerned itself a subject which we 
reserve for the next chapter I wish here to ex- 
amine its basic principle. This principle consti- 
tutes the broad foundation of political and so- 
cial theory, and upon it the superstructure of the 
state was laid, very much as the stories of a house 
are made to rest upon the main floor. The principle 
may be briefly stated as follows: The State exists 
for the good of the citizen, or obversely, it is not the 
citizen who is for the good of the state. This state- 
ment is susceptible of enlargement. Any group 

even so much has been doubted by J. A. Endres ("De regimine prln- 
cipum des hi. Thomas von Aquin," in Baiimker's Bcitrage, Fest- 
schrift, 1913, pp. 261-267). However, his reasoning is not at all con- 
clusive; and the oldest and best catalogues attribute this portion to 
Thomas himself. It is my own opinion that Thomas was the author 
of the beginning of the work (Bks. I and II, chs. 1-4), and that the 
remainder was inspired by his doctrine. 

2 A. De Poorter, in the series: Les Philotophes Beiges, collection 
de textes et deludes, vol. IX, Louvain, 191'4. 



222 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

whatever, be it family, village, city, province, 
kingdom, empire, abbey, parish church, bishopric, 
or even the Catholic Church justifies itself in the 
good which it accomplishes for its members. In 
other words, the members do not exist for the good 
of the group. The question is the more interesting 
because the professors of Roman law at Bologne 
and the other jurists, who argued on behalf of the 
sovereigns (the Hohenstaufen, and the kings of 
England and France), and the canonists, follow- 
ing the Decretum of Gratian, had touched upon 
these delicate questions; but the philosophers at- 
tained to a clearness and precision which had been 
denied to experts in law on the same questions. 

In very fact, this principle that the state exists 
only for the good of the citizen, or obversely, that 
it is not the citizen who exists for the good of the 
state is closely connected with the whole scholastic 
system. While it is a foundation for the doctrine of 
the state, this principle itself rests upon an ethical 
ground. In its turn, this ethical ground rests upon 
the deeper lying basis of metaphysical doctrine. 
Thus, social philosophy in reality rests upon a 
twofold basis, the ethical and the metaphysical. 
Let us consider briefly the part played by each of 
these bases. 

Ill 

First, the ethical foundations of the principle. 
Why should the group, in particular the state, be 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 228 

subordinated to the good of the citizens? Is not 
the citizen an instrument for the good of the state? 
Scholastic ethics replies: because every human be- 
ing has a certain sacred value, an inviolable indi- 
viduality, and as such he has a personal destiny, a 
happiness, which the state must aid him to realize. 
Let us see more fully what this means. 

Each man seeks in his life to attain some end. 
Our activities would lack even ordinary meaning, if 
they did not reach forward to a goal, if they did 
not aim consciously or unconsciously to realize 
the good, that is to say the perfection of the indi- 
vidual who is the source of the activities involved. 
This is true not only for man, but for all created 
things. Human finality is simply an application of 
universal finality; and therefore the scholastics re- 
peat with Aristotle: "That is good which each 
thing seeks" (Bonum est quod omnia appetunt). 
Man's possession of his good means human happi- 
ness. 

As a matter of fact, men seek the good in the 
most diverse objects, and they frequently deceive 
themselves; but that is only a question of applica- 
tion, which does not affect the main thesis. Even 
the man who hangs himself is yielding to inclina- 
tions which he believes will issue in his benefit. But 
this illustration only shows that one should pursue 
one's good according to rational judgements, and 
follow where they lead him, without letting himself 
be deceived by appearances. Man, indeed, is dis- 



224 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

tinguished from the stone which falls, or from the 
wild beast which follows its instincts, by the fact 
that he has the privilege of reflecting on his ways* 
and choosing them freely; he has the power of mis- 
taken choice. Man's counsels lie in his own hands. 
The philosophers of the thirteenth century have no 
difficulty in proving, that neither riches nor honour, 
nor glory, nor power, nor sensual indulgence can 
satisfy the demands of the good, the summum bo- 
num for men; there he is free to seek or not to 
seek them as the chief end of life. 8 

Moreover, every destiny is necessarily personal; 
the good is my good. If, for example, I make it 
to consist in pleasure, it is quite evident that the 
pleasure is my pleasure. A fortiori must destiny 
be personal for the scholastic ethics which maintains 
that happiness results from the employment of that 
which is the noblest and the highest in human life, 
namely, knowledge and love. Nothing is more per- 
sonal than knowing and loving. Happiness is so 
personal a matter, that the good of another only 
enters into it incidentally, and not essentially. It 
takes a noble soul to include the destinies of others 
within the domain of his own preoccupations. 

Now, the individual left quite to himself, as a 
solitary being, is not sufficient to attain to his proper 
end. He will find himself deprived of material 
means, of intellectual directions, of moral support. 
This impotence of the solitary individual, says 

s See above, p. 186. 



IK THE MIDDLE AGES 225 

Thomas Aquinas, is the sole reason for the ex- 
istence of society. "Man is called by nature," he 
writes, 4 "to live in society; for he needs many things 
which are necessary to his life, and which by him- 
self he cannot procure for himself. Whence it fol- 
lows that man naturally becomes part of a group 
(pars multitudinis) , to procure him the means of 
living well. He needs this assistance for two rea- 
sons. First, in order that he may obtain the ele- 
mentary necessities of life; this he does in the do- 
mestic circle of which he is a part. Every man re- 
ceives from his parents life and nourishment and 
education; and the reciprocal aid of the family 
members facilitates the mutual provision of the ne- 
cessities of life. But there is a second reason why 
the individual is helped by the group, of which he 
is a part, and in which alone he finds his adequate 
well being. And this is, that he may not only live 
but live the good life, which is enabled by the op- 
portunities of social intercourse. Thus civil society 
aids the individual in obtaining the material neces- 
sities, by uniting in the same city a great number 
of crafts, which could not be so united in the same 
family. And civil society also assists him in the 
moral life." 

The scholastic philosophers of the thirteenth cen- 
tury unanimously agree with Aristotle and Augus- 
tine that it is a natural necessity for man to live in 
society, natural** necessitas. This social life in- 

* Comment in Ethic. Nicom., lib. I. 



226 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

volves degrees. There are groups, more or less ex- 
tensive, which are logically and chronologically an- 
terior to the state. Man is of necessity born into a 
family (domus). Several families grouped under 
a chief constitute a village community, vicus, 
whose raison d'etre, says Dante, 6 is to facilitate an 
exchange of services between men and things. The 
city (civitas), continues Dante, is a wider organi- 
zation, which allows one to live with moral and ma- 
terial sufficiency, bene sufficienterque vivere. But, 
whereas Aristotle had stopped with the city, 
Thomas considers (in the De Regimine Principum) 
a wider group, the province, which corresponds to 
Dante's kingdom (regnum). Perhaps we may see 
in the province those large feudal fiefs, which were 
important units, such as the Duchy of Normandy 
or the Duchy of Brabant, with which Thomas was 
actually acquainted. As regards states, some were 
growing up under his very eyes, notably in Italy, 
where the princes of the house of Anjou were gov- 
erning the Two Sicilies, while the main European 
states, France, England, Spain, and Germany were 
taking on their various characteristic features. A 
kingdom (regnum particulare) , writes Dante, pro- 
vides the same advantages as the city, but gives a 
greater feeling of security, cum majori fiduda suae 
tranqmllitatis. In this Dante repeats the thomistic 

Monarchia, lib. I. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 227 

thought that the kingdom, better than the city, re- 
sponds to the needs of war, when it is attacked by 



enemies. 6 



Now, since the group exists only for the benefit 
of its individuals, the good of the group mil not be 
of any other kind than that of the individuals. 
Thus Thomas says: "The end of the group is 
necessarily the end of each individual who com- 
poses the group," oportet ewndem finem ease mul- 
titudirds humanae qui est hominis unius? And 
Dante, in a similar vein, writes: "Citizens are not 
for consuls or kings, but kings and consuls are for 
citizens," non enim cives propter consules nee 
gens propter regem, sed e converso* The group 
would be an absurdity, if the roles were reversed, 
and the state or any other group should pursue a 
course, which no longer coincided with the happi- 
ness of each of its subjects; and if the individual be 
treated as a worn-out machine, which one scraps 
when it has become useless. 

This conception is at once new and mediaeval. 
For, while the city or the state appears in Aristotle 
as an end in itself, to which the individuals are sub- 
ordinated, the scholastic philosophy, on the con- 
trary, conceived of the states as subordinated to the 
good of the individuals. For Aristotle the prime 
duty is to be a good citizen, and to increase one's 

D* Regimine Principum, lib. I, cap. 1. De Monarchia, lib. I. 
i De Regimine Principum, lib. I, cap. 14. 
*De Monarchic lib. I. 



228 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

civic virtue. But for the scholastic philosopher the 
prime duty is to give to life a human value, to be a 
good man, and the state should help each of its 
members to become such. 

It follows from this teaching that as against the 
state the individual should hold himself erect, con- 
scious of his crown of rights, which the state can- 
not infringe upon, because their validity is derived 
from the worth of personality itself. These are 
"the rights of man." Their foundation is the law 
of nature, that is to say, the essence of man and the 
eternal law, the eternal relations which regulate 
the order of beings in conformity with the decrees 
of uncreated wisdom. These are the right to pre- 
serve his life, the right to marry and to rear chil- 
dren, the right to develop his intellect, the right to 
be instructed, the right to truth, the right to live in 
society. These are some of the prerogatives of the 
individual which appear in the thirteenth century 
declaration of the rights of man. 9 

Thus, scholastic philosophy justifies from an 
ethical point of view the conception of the worth of 
the individual, as against the central power. But 
we see at once how it also conforms to the feudal 
temperament. For, knight and baron and vassal 
and citizen had all been consumed for two centu- 
ries past with the idea of living each his own life. 

Thomas Aquinas, Summa TheoL, I^M, q. XCIV, art. 9. 



IK THE MIDDLE AGES 229 

IV 

But, in its turn, the ethical doctrine rests upon a 
metaphysical foundation. Why, indeed, does the 
human person possess the right to realize his happi- 
ness, of which no state can deprive him? Meta- 
physics replies: because human personality alone 
is a genuine substantial reality. On the other 
hand, any group whatever, the state included, is 
not a real being ; it is simply a group of human per- 
sons (multitude hominum). 

This doctrine interested the jurists and the can- 
onists as much as it did the philosophers. Since its 
nature is such as to throw light upon the political 
mentality of the period, let us consider briefly the 
conceptions of the jurists and theorists in civil and 
canon law. This will be a helpful preliminary to 
dispose of, before passing to the conclusions of the 
philosophers. 

The legalistic theorists simply took over from 
Roman law the concept of the corporation (uni- 
versitas) and applied it, as civil theorists to the 
state, and as canonists to the Church. Now, the 
Roman corporation (universitas) is nothing but an 
association of individuals. To be sure, it is the 
seat of private rights, and it can possess and acquire 
property; but, as Savigny has emphasized, it is not 
a real person, and in consequence it has no squl, no 
intelligence, no will. The Roman jurists were too 
realistic, too amenable to common sense logic, to 
conceive of a collective soul, a reality distinct 



280 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

from the individuals in these associations, whose 
purposes were plainly commercial and industrial. 

Similarly, the parish churches and the monasteries 
ai}d the universal Church had not been regarded by 
the canonists as real entities, as beings distinct from 
the members who compose them. Innocent IV, 
who had the name of being an eminent jurist, is the 
first who would have spoken of the corporation as 
a "persona ficta" a fictitious person an excellent 
formula, which is not found in the Digest of Jus- 
tinian, but which expresses admirably the thought 
of the thirteenth century. Gierke calls him the 
"father of the fictitious person theory." 10 There- 
after the corporation is definitely no thing-in-itself , 
no living organism, in the real sense of the word, 
since it has neither intelligence nor will. The can- 
onists, indeed, declare that it cannot commit crime 
or misdemeanour of any kind; hence a political 
group as such need not fear hell or wrath to come. 

Nor do the mediaeval lawyers conceive otherwise 
of the state-corporation. In the same manner they 
explain the artificial personality of the kingdom or 
of the empire. The state (universitas) is the col- 
lective mass of individual men, who constitute the 
populus; and its functions, says the author of a 
treatise De Aequitate which is ascribed to Irnerius, 

10 Otto von Gierke, Die Stoats- und Korporationslehre des Alter- 
turns und des Mittelalten und Hire Aufnahme in Deutschland, Ber- 
lin, 1881, p. 979, n. 109: "cum collegium in causa universitatis flnga- 
tur una persona 9 ' (Innocent IV). 



IX THE MIDDLE AGES 281 

is to care for the individual men who are its 
members. 11 Likewise, the society of states is con- 
sidered by Dante as a grouping of individuals, a 
respublica humana rather than as a group of gov- 
ernments. The universal monarch is the servant of 
all, minister omnium, precisely as the Pope is the 
servant of the servants of God. He wills the wel- 
fare of each man; he is nearer to each citizen than 
is any particular sovereign. 12 And in the four- 
teenth century Baldus writes: "Imperium non 
habet animum, ergo non hdbet velle nee nolle quia 
animi sunt" 

Does this conception of the state (as being no 
entity outside of the members who constitute it) 
really represent a failure 14 of the mediaeval jurists 
and canonists? Is it not rather the triumph of 
good sense and healthy thinking of men who were 
seeking loyally for truth and not for originality? 
Personally I do not believe that the state is a real 
being, a real substance outside of its citizens, and 
I agree with Paul Bourget in one of his latest novels 
(Le Sens de la Mort) , when he places in the mouth 

11 Irnerius, De Aequttate, $: universitas, id est populus, hoc habet 
officium, singulis scilicet hominibus quasi membris providere. Cf. 
Carlyle, op. cit., vol. II, p. 57. 

i* De Monarchia, I. Cf. above, ch. V, 111. 

is Cited by Gierke, Political Theories of the Middle Ages, (English 
translation by Maitland), Cambridge, 1900, p. 70. This translation is 
only a small part of Gierke's work cited above. 

14 Gierke, Ibid. 



282 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

of Doctor Msrsal these suggestive words: "To die 
for France is not to die for a collective entity, but 
for all Frenchmen present and to come. To climb 
the ladder and go over the top, is to mount the 
scaffold. They did it. For whom? For France. 
But France is the sum total of all those who are 
destined to be Frenchmen. It is our very selves, 
you and I, we Frenchmen, I repeat." 10 



The underlying reason for this doctrine, that 
the state large or small is not a "thing-in-itself," an 
entity distinct from the citizens who compose it is 
furnished by the scholastic philosophy itself, and 
we have already seen what it is. For scholastic 
philosophy the world is pluralistic, the only real 
beings existing are individual beings, for instance, 
such and such oak, such and such bee, such and such 
man. 16 And since unity follows being (ens et unum 
convertwntur) , individuals alone have a physical 
and internal unity. A forest of oaks, a hive of 
bees, a team of horses, a steamboat, a house, an 
army, a parish, a city, a state, none of these desig- 
nate real, physical beings; in consequence they have 
not the unity that belongs to a real substance. 



de la tranche^, sur P6chelle, c'est monter a I'&hafaud. 
Ils y montent. Pour qui? Pour la France. Mais la France, c'est 
la somme dcs destinies fran^aises. C'est nous, je vous r&pete. 
p. 173, edit. 1915, Paris, Plon. 
ic See ch. IX, ii. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 288 

In what then does this unity of the group con- 
sist? The metaphysics of Thomas Aquinas give 
us light on this subtle question. After having 
shown why the individual must become a member 
of a family and of a civic community, he writes: 
"Now we ought to know that this totality, of the 
civil or the domestic group, possesses only the unity 
of (external) order, and consequently it is not en- 
dowed with the unity that belongs to a natural sub- 
stance. This is the reason why a portion of this 
totality can carry on activities which are not the 
act of the group. A soldier, for example, carries 
out actions which do not belong to the army; but 
such actions of the soldier do not prevent the group 
from carrying on its activities, activities which 
do not belong to each part but to the whole. Thus, 
a battle is the activity of the whole army; the tow- 
ing of a barge is the activity of the totality of the 
men who pull on the rope." 17 

There is then a profound difference between the 

17 "Sciendum est autem quod hoc totum, quod est civilis multitude 
vel domesticia familia, habet solara unitatem ordinis, secundum quam 
non est aliquid simpliciter unum. Et ideo pars ejus totius potest 
habere operationem quae non est operatio totius, sicut miles in exer- 
cihi habet operationem quae non est totius exercitus. Habet nihil- 
ominus et ipsum totum aliquam operationem, quae non est propria 
alicujus partium, puta conflictus totius exercitus. Et tractus navis 
est operatio multitudo trahentium navem." In Ethic. Nicom,, L. I. 
I understand "unita* ordinte" to mean the unity resulting from a 
combination of independent beings, realizing an external order, as dis- 
tinguished from the physical unity which results from internal order, 
in a being where there is a plurality of elements. 



234 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

unity of the individual, the organic and internal 
"indivision" (unum simpliciter) which belongs to 
the human person and the external unity which 
is the outcome of social grouping among a certain 
number of individuals. Internal unity introduces 
coherence within the individual substance, so that 
all of its constituent parts or elements have neither 
independent value nor existence of their own. 
Hence there is a contradiction in the very idea of a 
collective-person. Either the members who are 
supposed to compose such a collective person, re- 
main substantially independent, in which case 
there is no one person but a collection of persons 
or they are dependent of the whole, and then each 
member loses his individuality. It is quite different 
in the case of the external unity that appears in a 
group of persons, since this unity does not affect 
the individuality that belongs to each member. 

You will ask then: Is the family or the state a 
mere nothing? To make such an assertion would 
be to overstate the doctrine. For, the unity of the 
group, of which Thomas speaks, is functional in 
character and rests on performing in common cer- 
tain human activities, of which each member con- 
tributes his share. Such activities are endowed with 
reality, but a reality different from the incommuni- 
cable and inalienable substantial being which each 
member preserves. In towing a barge, the muscu- 
lar activities of the men who tow are directed in 
common; in a game or a club or any friendly asso- 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 285 

elation, each member places a portion of his activi- 
ties at the disposal of the common life, and in all 
of these cases withdrawal is always possible. 

But in the family or the community, on the con- 
trary, this mutual pooling of activities is imposed 
by nature; there can be no such withdrawal, for 
certain basic activities of the individual are ab- 
sorbed by the community. Jndeed, in certain crises, 
for the common good and the common safety, the 
family or the state can demand the entire activity 
of its members. But even so, the man who gives all 
his activities nevertheless preserves his individual- 
ity. The individual man never surrenders the 
sovereignty of his own personality. 

This doctrine could not have been stated more 
clearly than it was by Thomas Aquinas in these 
fine words : "The law should take account of many 
things as to persons, as to affairs, and as to times. 
For, the community of the state is composed of 
many persons, and its good is procured by varied 
activities." 1 * 

Accordingly, from the point of view of scholastic 
metaphysics, there is no difference between the 
unity of a group of men towing a barge and the 
unity of the family or of the state or even of a whole 

is Bonum autem commune constat ex multis, et ideo oportet quod 
lex ad multa respiciat et secundum personas et secundum , negotia 
et secundum tempora. Constituitur enixn communitas civitatis ex 
multis personis et ejus bonum per multiples actiones procurator. 
Summa TheoL, l2ae, q. XCVI, art 1. 



286 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILISATION 

civilization. The only question of difference is that 
which attaches to the excellence of the activities 
displayed. The proper functioning of the state de- 
pends upon the diversity of activities, and a state 
becomes more perfect, as does a whole civilization, 
in proportion as these activities are more com- 
plete, more varied, and more intense. The bonum 
commune, the commonwealth which the state has 
to provide, results from the sum total of activities 
performed to unite and to harmonize. 

These considerations make clear how one can 
speak at the same time of the unity of the civiliza- 
tion of the thirteenth century and of the pluralism 
which is so basic in their thought. The unity of a 
civilization is the result of common aspirations, 
common beliefs, common sentiments both moral 
and artistic, common language, common organiza- 
tion of life; and such a unity is no more than a com- 
munity of activities. At the same time, unity of 
substance, or physical unity, belongs to each of the 
numerous personalities which are the agents of this 
civilization, and to them only. 19 

i Through failure to perceive this distinction between the unity 
of order and the physical unity, many historians deny individualism 
in the Middle Ages, and misconceive that fundamental teaching of 
thirteenth-century metaphysics, "itftti est praeter individtwm." 
Thus, struck by the unitary character of the civilization, Mr. E. Bar- 
ker writes: "We can hardly say that the Middle Ages have any con- 
ception of the state. The notion of the state involves plurality, but 
plurality is ex kypothesi not to be found." See, "Unity in the 
Middle Ages," in The Unity of Wteter* Civilization, p. 119, ed. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 237 

In this thomistic and scholastic view, the group 
life acquires dynamic meaning. It rests upon a 
sharing of activities for the good of all. Possessing 
all a similar human nature, with its train of inalien- 
able rights, the individuals present the greatest di- 
versity in their talents, their faculties, and the ac- 
tivities which result from them. Equal in human 
nature, men are unequal in capacity for action; 20 
such is the metaphysical law which governs the 
play of the social group, in all of its degrees. 

VI 

After this precise and substantial argument, to 
which the whole body of scholastic philosophers of 
the thirteenth century subscribe, it is easy to give 
just value to a certain favourite comparison of that 
age, a comparison to which publicists, canonists, 
legalists, theologians, and even poets, frequently 
recur, for the purpose of explaining the problem 
of the individual in relation to the group. It is 
the comparison of the state with the human body. 
John of Salisbury works out the comparison in de- 
tail, and he likens each member of the human body 

Marvin, Oxford, 1915. This statement is preceded by this other 
erroneous assertion: "The prevalence of Realism, which marks 
mediaeval metaphysics down to the end of the thirteenth century, 
is another Platonic inheritance, and another impulse to unity. The 
universal is and is a veritable thing in which the particular shares 
and acquires its substance by its degree of sharing. 9 * Nothing is 
more contrary to scholastic philosophy of the thirteenth century. 
20 Cf. ch. IX, iv and vii. 



288 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

to some part of the state. The prince is the head; 
the senate is the heart; officers and judges are the 
eyes, ears, and tongue; officials are the hands; the 
peasants and the workers are the feet of the state, 
so that, remarks this English writer, the state has 
more feet than a centipede or a scolopendra. The 
function of protecting the people becomes the 
"footwear" of the state. Indeed, there is no reason 
why one might not continue this little game of 
anthropomorphic comparison without end. 21 

The idea is no discovery of John of Salisbury's. 
He himself refers it to a letter written by Plutarch 
to Trajan (falsely so far as we yet know). The 
comparison is repeated in the thirteenth century, 
but it has lost its literal value. Each state, each 
church, each city, even each guild, is compared to 
a natural body. But the philosophers of that cen- 
tury are not misled by its purely figurative value, 
and Engelbert of Volkersdorf, abbot of Admont, 
who writes about 1290 a treatise concerning the 
rule of Princes, speaks of a moral and political 
body, in contrast with the body of nature. 22 Fur- 
ther, when Thomas Aquinas calls the collectivity 
of the citizens a public person, persona publica 
there is no doubt possible about his true meaning. 

Reduced to the role of an imaginative instru- 
ment, the comparison is not wanting in elegance; 

21 Polycraticug, lib. V, cap. 1 and 2. 

22 Gierke, op. tit., p. $4. 

28 Summa ThtoL lagae, q. XC, art. 3. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 289 

it shows in a striking way that, in a political or ec- 
clesiastical organism, the members do not occupy 
the same place; that there are diversities of func- 
tions; that there are intermediate articulations; 
that a healthy organ can help or supply a weak or 
defective organ. The comparison is well suited to 
the mediaeval mind with its delight in symbols, and 
to an age which speaks of the mystical marriage of 
Christ with the Church and of the bishop with his 
diocesan church, and which likens to daughters the 
various abbeys which have grown out of the mother 
abbey. Such symbols, and many more, deceived 
no one. Nor do we today take literally Tennyson's 
comparison of "the million-footed mob," 2 * or the 
expression "adopted towns," which was given to 
certain cities crushed during the war, or "mother- 
towns" as the name proudly assumed by certain 
other cities which undertook the adoption. The 
philosophers of the thirteenth century did not mis- 
take the straw of words for the grain of ideas. The 
organic theory, made fashionable today by certain 
German philosophers is contrary to the genius of 
scholastic philosophy, as it is opposed to the juri- 
dical doctrine of the thirteenth century; both would 
have regarded it as a seductive mirage. 

VII 

A short time before the war, I made a brief stay 
at Strasbourg. In visiting its magnificent cathe- 

24 The Fleet. 



240 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

dral, I observed that a crack had appeared in one 
of the walls of the finished tower, and that it had 
been necessary to erect a support, in order to pre- 
vent the tower from collapsing. A friend ex- 
plained to me that the architects of the thirteenth 
century had erected the cathedral on a foundation 
of strong oak piles, which had lasted for centuries 
because they were driven into marshy ground, but 
that the recent drainage works in the city had 
brought about the unforeseen consequence of drying 
out these ancient water-soaked timbers, and so un- 
dermining the cathedral. Invisible and under- 
ground, up to that time they had sustained the 
facade of this marvelous Gothic gem, without any- 
one realizing how fundamental was their presence 
and their function. 

So it is with the metaphysical doctrine, which 
may be called the invisible and underlying support 
of the social philosophy of the thirteenth century. 
Upon this foundation reposed morals, as upon mor- 
als is based the guiding principle that the state is 
made for the citizens, the group for its members. 
If the metaphysics of the scholastics should settle 
or fall, then in turn their ethics would be compro- 
mised, and an ominous cleft would appear in their 
social philosophy. This close interdependence of 
doctrines furnishes a striking example of the co- 
herence and unity of the scholastic system, which 
we have above pointed out. 25 

a Sec ch. V, i. 



CHAPTER ELEVEN 

THE THEOHY OF THE STATE 

i. Sovereignty from God. ii. It is a function; morality of 
governors not different from that of the governed; what the 
function implies, iii. Sovereignty resides in the people who 
delegate it. iv. The best form of government according to 
'the philosophy of Thomas Aquinas, v. Making of laws the 
essential attribute of sovereignty; natural law and human 
law. vi. This form of government compared with the Euro- 
pean states of the thirteenth century ; with the modern nation- 
alities; with the theories of preceding centuries. 



THE state exists for the good of the individuals, 
and not conversely. It is in the light of this prin- 
ciple that all the problems, which the study of state 
organization raises, are solved; and, as thinkers are 
agreed on the principle, so they will be agreed also 
upon the majority of solutions which issue from it, 
by way of application or of corollary. These prob- 
lems can all be arranged under some aspect of the 
notion of sovereignty or power. No social life is 
possible, whether in the family, the village com- 
munity, the state, the monastery, the parish, the 
diocese, the universal Church unless there exists 
an authority to which the members owe obedience. 



242 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

What then is the source of sovereignty, in what 
does it consist, to whom does it belong, what are its 
attributes? These are some of the specific problems 
in the philosophical discussion of political life. 

Whence comes sovereignty, this superiority of 
one man, who rules over his fellow men? Like their 
predecessors of the preceding centuries, the thir- 
teenth-century philosophers answer: All power 
comes from God. And their reasoning is as fol- 
lows. The entire universe is under a providential 
plan; it is governed by an eternal law (lea: 
aeterna) 9 which is nothing but the order of things, 
the sum of relations which result from the nature 
of beings. 1 To realize his end as a rational being, 
and to attain to his happiness, is man's unique part 
in cooperating with the universal cosmic finality, 
ordained by God, Now, the rationale of governing 
others, ratio gubernationis, is instituted to make 
easy for each person the realization of his end. It 
must therefore be, in the final analysis, a divine 
delegation, a command according to which the rul- 
ers carry out those necessary functions which will 
enable the individual members to occupy their as- 
signed places in the divine economy. 2 

Accordingly, rulers hold divine power by dele- 

1 See below, v of this chapter. 

2 "Cum ergo lex aeterna sit ratio gubernationis in supremo guber- 
nante, necesse est quod omnes rationes gubernationis quae sunt in 
inferloribus gubernantibus a lege aeterna deriventur." Thomas 
Aquinas, Bumma TheoL, l^ae, q. XCIII, a. 3. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 248 

gation. This theory is independent of the further 
question: In what way does this power, divine in 
its essence, come to those who hold it, and to whom 
is it given? Let the rulers hold this power from 
God directly, as the legalists and the De Monarchia 
teach, or let the delegation of temporal power pass 
through the Papal channel, as the partisans of 
mediate divine power maintain; let sovereignty be 
in the hands of a monarch or a representative re- 
public, in any case, it always derives back to God 
as its source. The demands of metaphysics link it 
up with God. 

II 

The raison d'etre of sovereignty therefore fixes 
its nature. And this brings us to our second ques- 
tion: In what does sovereignty consist? Legal- 
ists and canonists and philosophers all agree in the 
reply. Sovereignty is a utility, a function, an of- 
fidum; it is dedicated to the well-being of all. The 
applications of the leading principle, already ex- 
plained, are easy to understand. Since the state is 
made for the individual, sovereignty in the state can 
be only an advantage for its members. Princes of 
the earth, according to Thomas Aquinas, are insti- 
tuted by God, not for their own advantage, but in 
order that they may serve the common good. 8 The 
kingdom, says Ptolemy of Lucques, is not made 

8 De Regimin* Principum, I, c. 1-8. 



244 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

for the king, but the king for the kingdom/ Even 
under the theocratic papal rule, the idea persisted 
of an offidum, duty, fused with that of power. 
The Pope is the servant of the servants of God, 
serous servorum Dei. It is just because the state 
is an association of individuals, and instituted for 
their welfare, that there is no difference between 
the morality of the governors and that of the gov- 
erned. For instance, fidelity to treaties and obser- 
vance of the precepts of loyalty are required; they 
constitute the very foundation of the jus gentium. 
Or, again, war of conquest is forbidden, because it 
prevents the state from watching over the welfare 
of individuals. 

But how will the government fulfill its function? 
How will it aid the individual to attain his end, 
which is above all a certain moral happiness, re- 
sulting from the facultas contemplandi veritatem?* 
The answer is this: By realizing the unitas multi- 
tudinis, a unity which is accidental and external, 
by realizing a bonum commune, which results from 
the harmonious and convergent activities expended 
by the citizen, activities which the De Regimine 
is so careful to distinguish from the unitas hominis 
of each individual. 6 



* Regnum non propter regem, sed rex propter regnum. D* 
mine Principum, III, c. 11. 

See Thomas Aquinas, Comment in Ethic. Nicom., X, 11. 

Ipsa tamen hominis unitas per naturam causatur; multitudinis 
autem unitas quae pax dicitur, per regentis industriam est pro- 
curanda. De Regimine Principum, lib. I, cap. 15. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 245 

Government is charged with a threefold partici- 
pation in the affairs of our common life. 7 First, it 
must establish (instituere] the common weal by 
guarding the peace within its bounds, sometimes 
referred to as convenientia voluntatum? by inciting 
the citizens to lead a moral life, and by providing 
for a sufficient abundance (sufficiens copia) of the 
necessities of life. The public weal once estab- 
lished, the next duty is to conserve it. This is ac- 
complished by assuring a recruitment of the agents 
of administration; by repressing disorder; by en- 
couraging morality through a system of rewards 
and punishments; and by protecting the state 
against the attacks of enemies from without. Fi- 
nally, the government is charged with a third mis- 
sion, more vague, more elastic; to improve (ut sit 
de promotione soUdtus), to rectify abuses, to make 
up for defects, to work for progress. 

The bonum commune to be established and main- 
tained by the government is based upon a splendid 
conception of" solidarity : every good and virtuous 
act performed by the individual man is capable of 
benefitting the community, the community in 
which he has membership, as a part of the whole. 
Hence it follows that, in the state, the individual 
good can be referred always to the common wel- 
fare: the scholar who studies and teaches, the monk 
who prays and preaches, these render service to the 

f De Rtgimine Principum, lib. I, cap. 15. 
8 Thomas Aquinas, In Ethic. Nicom., Ill, 8. 



246 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

community as much as do the artisan and the 
farmer and the common laborer. Thomas Aquinas 
expressly teaches that every virtuous action (in the 
realm of nature or of grace) can enter into the con- 
stitution of general or legal justice (justitia gener- 
alis vel legalis) ; for virtue here adjusts, with an 
eye to the common welfare, the relations of order 
maintaining in the conduct of the various members 
of the community. 8 " 

This conception assumes special significance, a 
significance characteristic of the social order in the 
thirteenth century when one reflects upon the 
Prince as charged with making effectual this virtue 
in the justitia legalis. It is he who possesses the 
virtue of justice by right of headship (architect- 
onice), and in an eminent manner, whereas his 
subordinate possesses it only in administrative de- 

s* Sec Sumrna Theol., 2a9, q. LVIII, art. 5, for the important 
text in this connection. "Manifestum est autem quod omnes qui sub 
communitate aliqua continentur, comparantur ad communitatem 
sicut partes ad totum; pars autem id quod est, totius est; unde et 
quodlibet bonum partis est ordinabile in bonum totius. Secundum 
hoc ergo bonum cujuslibet virtutis, sive ordinantis aliquem hominem 
ad seipsum, sive ordinantis ipsum ad aliquas alias personas singu- 
lares, est rcferibile ad bonum commune, ad quod ordinat justitia. 
Et secundum hoc actus omnium virtutum possunt ad justitiam perti- 
nere, secundum quod ordinant hominem ad bonum commune. Et 
quantum ad hoc justitia dicitur virtus generalis. Et quia ad legem 
pertinet ordinare ad bonum commune, . . . inde est quod tails 
justitia praedicto modo generalis dicitur justitia legalis, quia scilicet 
per earn homo concordat legi ordinanti actus omnium virtutum in 
bonum commune." 



IX THE MIDDLE AGES 247 

pendence and secondarily. 811 The Prince is custos 
justi, the guardian of what is just; he is justum ani- 
matum, the personification of what is just. 8 " He is 
the peace-maker of society. By virtue of this title 
he is qualified to direct the activities of his subordi- 
nates, to bid men to pray or to battle or to build or 
to farm, always for the greatest common good. 8 ' 

If, nevertheless, he who governs fails to be in- 
spired with this sense of the public good and aban- 
dons himself to a selfish and capricious use of 
power, then he must be regarded as a tyrant. 

Every treatise, written for the use of princes and 
future kings, exhibits a dread of the tyrant who 
allows his own personal advantage to override the 
good of the group. Dante reserves a special place 
in his hell for tyrants, by the side of brigands and 
assassins. 

Each establishes an entire system of guarantees 
to preserve the state against tyranny, which is so 
opposed to its nature. Some of these guarantees 
are preventive. Thus, Thomas in the De Regi- 
mine Principum, would have the people, for the 

**Ibid., art. 6. "Et sic est (justitia legalis) in principe prin- 
cipaliter et quasi architcctonice ; in subditis autem secundario et 
quasi administrative." 

s c /6iU, art. 1, ad quintum. 

8* The same principle was invoked by ecclesiastical authority in 
laying upon the Prince the duty of suppressing heresy. The bonum 
commune, as it was understood in the thirteenth century, required 
that man's end in the divine economy should be safeguarded and 
that therefore the Prince should rigorously check any error which 
might lead astray the members of the community. 



248 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

thirteenth century, be it remembered, maintains the 
thesis of the sovereign people at the moment of 
the choice of their rulers, inquire into their char- 
acter, and find out whether they have a despotic 
temperament. "Look out for your king," he says 
(providendum de rege). 9 Some of these guaran- 
tees are intended to last throughout the period of 
their rule; for his power must be controlled and 
balanced by others, wheels within wheels, as we 
shall show later. Finally, some of these guarantees 
are repressive. Resistance is not only permitted 
to unjust orders of the tyrant, but it is enjoined; 
and in extreme cases the people who have chosen 
can depose. While John of Salisbury considers 
tyrannicide as lidtum, aequum and justum 
Thomas Aquinas expressly condemns tyrannicide. 
He desires that that people should do their best to 
endure an unjust ruler; but if the government be- 
comes quite unendurable, he allows the right of de- 
posing an unworthy ruler, which indeed is the nec- 
essary corollary of the power of choosing him. 11 

While it is clear that the philosophers of the 
thirteenth century were keenly sensitive to the pic- 
tures of tyrants, which they found in the Politics 
of Aristotle, it is no less clear that the public life 
of their own age afforded them actual illustrations 
of tyranny, which helped to provide an inspiration 

Lib. I, cap. 6. Of. his Comment PoUt. lib. Ill, lectio 14. 

10 Polycraticus, III, 15. 

11 De Regimine Prine., lib. I, cap. 6. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 249 

for their theory. Ptolemy of Lucques, who com- 
pleted the De Begimine Principium begun by 
Thomas, poured contempt on the tyrants of the 
minor Italian republics of his day (hodie in Italia) , 
who exploited the state for their own personal bene- 
fit. Perhaps he had in mind the Podestas, who 
were called from abroad to carry on the administra- 
tion of the Italian republics, and who, once they 
had secured the position, thought only of advanc- 
ing their own interests. Thomas Aquinas must 
surely have known cases of feudal tyrants, sover- 
eigns who abused their power. The thirteenth cen- 
tury witnessed more than one royal deposition. It 
suffices to recall how the barons of John Lackland 
declared against him. 

Ill 

But their doctrine is self -consistent, no matter 
who is entrusted with authority. And this brings 
us to the third question, which is the most interest- 
ing of all. Where does sovereignty reside, this 
sovereignty which has its origin in divine delega- 
tion and its raison d'etre, its delimitation, in the so- 
cial good? 

While the jurists and canonists are occupied only 
with the Roman Empire, the existing monarchies, 
and the Papacy, 12 the philosophers take a more 
general view. The most striking is Thomas Aqui- 

12 Cf. Gierke, op. dt. (Maitland's transl.), pp. 30 and 70, notes 
131 and 174. 



250 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

nas, who gave to the droit social of the thirteenth 
century a remarkable consistency, which he im- 
posed on his contemporaries and his successors. It 
was Thomas who also influenced his friend, Wil- 
liam of Moerbeke, to translate into Latin the Poli- 
tics of Aristotle. 

To understand the political system of Thomas, 
we must distinguish two distinct aspects of the 
problem. On the one hand, in any state, what- 
ever its degree of perfection there is the question 
of the seat of sovereignty. On the other hand, 
there is the question of this same sovereignty in 
the state which he believes to be the most perfect. 

As regards the first question. In any state 
sovereignty arises from collectivity and belongs to 
all the people, that is to say, to the masses made 
up of individuals. Since it is the people who con- 
stitute the state, and it is for the good of all the 
citizens that sovereignty should be exercised, it is 
logical to conclude that God has entrusted to the 
collectivity itself the power of ruling and legislat- 
ing. Thus the doctrine of the "sovereignty of the 
people" is not a modern discovery at all ; it is in di- 
rect harmony with the leading idea of the scholas- 
tic political philosophy, that individuals are the only 
social realities, and that therefore, the state is not 
an entity outside of them. By a new link, then, this 
doctrine binds the droit social to metaphysics and 
ethics. 

But the body of citizens is too numerous, too un- 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 251 

formed, too fickle, to exercise by itself the power 
which has been assigned to it by divine decree. Ac- 
cordingly, it in turn, delegates this power. Usu- 
ally they commit it to a monarch; but not neces- 
sarily, for the people may also delegate it to an 
aristocratic or to a republican form of government. 
If the people delegate it to a monarch and that 
is the common mediaeval illustration he repre- 
sents the group and holds power for the group; 
ordinare autem aliquid in bonum commune est vel 
totius multitudinis, vel alicujus gerentis vicem to- 
tius multituftims 

The monarch, therefore, is only a vice-regent. 
This is so literally true that (as we have already 
seen in the De Regimine Principum) precautions 
were usually recommended, when a vice-regent was 
to be selected. Indeed, as Thomas says," "among 
a free people who can make laws for themselves, 
the consent given popularly to certain practices, 
constantly made clear by custom, has more weight 
than the authority of the prince; for the latter holds 
the power of legislating only so far as he represents 
the will of the people." So, the power is transmit- 
ted, by this successive delegation from God to the 
people and from the people to the monarch. It is 
the entire collectivity which is the original subject 
of the power. The people possess it by a certain 
natural title, which nothing can destroy; but the 



is Summa TheoL, la^ae, q. XC, art. 3. 
, q. XCVII, art. 3, ad ttrtium. 



252 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

king holds it subject to the will of the people, which 
of course may change. 

There is, then, at the source of the delegation 
made by the people to the king, a contract; in the 
less developed states this is a rudimentary or im- 
plicit will, but in states which have arrived at a 
high degree of organization the will is explicit. 
This will can give expression to itself, in a thousand 
different ways, each one of them sufficient to render 
legitimate the holding of power. 

This mediaeval principle of the acquisition of 
power by contract is in admirable agreement with 
the metaphysical doctrine that the individual alone 
is a real substance. Since the state is not an en- 
tity, the will of a state is nothing but the result of 
the will of all its members; and the state cannot 
exist without the mutual trust of the members and 
those who are appointed to direct them. Again the 
principle is in admirable agreement with feudal so- 
ciety and feudal monarchy, which rests entirely 
upon the pact, pactum; upon the oath of fealty 
which is the religious guarantee of fidelity to the 
given word. Are not the pacts between kings and 
burgesses, barons and prelates, foundation princi- 
ples of the institutions which envelop and assist in 
constructing the feudal monarchy? When one of 
the contracting parties breaks his agreement, the 
other at once withdraws his part in the bargain and 
resists. The history of the relations between the 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 258 

kings and their feudatories and towns is full of in- 
stances of such resistance. 

In principle, as we have said, the delegation of 
sovereignty by the people is of the same nature, 
whether it be made to a monarch, or to an aristoc- 
racy, or to a republic. In a monarchy, there is the 
advantage that the power is concentrated; and, as 
Thomas points out, the absence of diffusion is more 
efficacious (for both good and evil purposes) : Vir- 
tus unitiva magis est efficax quam dispersa et di- 
visa. But, he goes on to say, circumstances them- 
selves must decide, at any given moment in the po- 
litical life of a people, which is the best form of 
government; and this supplementary statement 
gives to his theory that elasticity which renders it 
adaptable to any set of conditions. 

IV 

Thomas himself, however, shows very marked 
preference for a composite form of government, 
which he considers the most perfect realization of 
this popular delegation, and we have already con- 
sidered that form in general. This mixed system 
is that in which the sovereignty belongs to the peo- 
ple, but at the same time it is combined with both 
an elective monarchy and also an oligarchy to cur- 
tail the exercise of power by the monarch. The 
general plan of his system is outlined from this 
classic text: "Whereas these (that is, the various 

15 D0 Regimine Principum, lib. I, cap. 3. 



254 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

forms of government) differ in kind . . . neverthe- 
less the first place is held by the 'kingdom,' where 
the power of government is vested in one, an 'aris- 
tocracy,' which signifies government by the best, 
where the power of government is vested in a few. 
Accordingly, the best form of government is in a 
state or kingdom, wherein one is given the power 
to preside over all; while under him are others hav- 
ing governing powers. And yet a government of 
this kind is shared by all, both because all are eligi- 
ble to govern, and because the rulers are chosen by 
all. For this is the best form of polity, being partly 
kingdom, since there is one at the head of all; partly 
aristocracy, in so far as a number of persons are set 
in authority; partly democracy, i.e., government by 
the people, in so far as the rulers can be chosen 
from the people, and the people have the right to 
choose their rulers." 10 

In this passage, written about 1250, the follow- 
ing political principles are affirmed: universal suf- 
frage, the right of the humblest citizen to be raised 
to the highest power, the consecration of personal 
worth and virtue, a representative and elective 
monarchy, and the right of the people to delegate, 
to those who are most worthy of it, that sacred gift 
of God called power. 

This pregnant text contains in a condensed form, 



Theol. la^ae, q. CV, art 1. English translation (Domi- 
nicans), Part II (First Part), Third Number, p. 250, Bensinger, 
1915, New York. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 255 

in "latin lapidaire" a considerable number of prob- 
lems, of which we shall consider only a few. 

First, since the state must serve the good of the 
individual, it is necessary that those whom the 
popular will places at the head shall have intelli- 
gence, and sufficient moral integrity, to see and un- 
derstand the public interest and to promote it. 
Thus, government by insight is necessary. Reason, 
which is given such a high place in the economy of 
individual life, 17 is also the sovereign guide in social 
life. The system of delegated power will be the 
more perfect in proportion as it sees to it that 
power shall be placed in the hands of the most de- 
serving, or, rather, the most virtuous, to use the 
mediaeval phrase. Again, men of action ought to 
be under the direction of men of insight; for, "in 
the direction of human affairs, excess arises from 
the fact that the man at the head really has no head. 
Those who excel in powers of understanding are 
natural leaders," in regimine humano inordinatio 
provenit esc eo quod non propter intellectus prae- 
eminentiam aliquis praeest. 1 * 

This is why the most perfect form of delegation 
of power is the elective system; for as Thomas 
writes in his commentary on the Politics of Aris- 
totle, election is a work of reason and the means 

IT See above ch. VIII, Hi and iv. 

is Contra Gentiles, lib. Ill, cap. 78. Tlli qui intellect!! praeeminent 
naturaliter dominantur. 

J Electio per sc cst appetitus ratione determimitus. Com. in Politic., 
lib. Ill, lectio 14. 



256 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

of choosing the most worthy. Such election applies 
to the monarch, and also to his ministers in the gov- 
ernment, whom Thomas includes in his composite 
form of government without defining their func- 
tions. 

Finally, Thomas lays down a condition for the 
exercise of popular election: it is necessary that the 
people be sufficiently informed on the issues at 
stake, and in consequence they must undergo a 
political education, an education in citizenship. 
Thus, in agreement with Augustine, he says: "If 
the people have a sense of moderation and respon- 
sibility, and are most careful guardians of the com- 
mon weal, it is right to enact a law allowing such a 
people to choose their own magistrates for the gov- 
ernment of the commonwealth. But if, as time 
goes on, the same people became so corrupt as to 
sell their votes, and entrust the government to 
scoundrels and criminals, then the right of appoint- 
ing their public officials is properly forfeited by 
such a people, and the choice devolves upon a few 
good men." 20 We see here again, as always, how 
our fundamental principle comes into play: popu- 
lar suffrage must contribute to the realization in 
the state of the good of all. If popular suffrage 
itself is detrimental, its exercise must be sus- 
pended. 

Theol, lag**, q. XCVII, art. 1. 



IX THE MIDDLE AGES 257 

- V 

How does the sovereign power, whatever it be, 
carry out its functions? According to scholastic 
philosophy, the essential attribute, which enables a 
government to fulfil its mission, is the power to 
establish laws. To establish laws for others is, in- 
deed, the most natural form of order. 

The theory of human law, in the page of Thomas 
Aquinas, is intimately bound up with his psychol- 
ogy and ethics and metaphysics ; and it forms part 
of an original whole which can be called briefly 
"the system of laws." 21 Human or positive law, 
lex humana sen positiva, has a twofold aspect; 
namely, the jus gentium, which belongs to all peo- 
ples alike, and the jus civile, civil law, which be- 
longs properly to a single state as such. In either 
case, this human law is simply a derivative from 
natural law; and natural law in turn is only the 
application to man as a natural creature of the 
eternal decree of the uncreated wisdom, leoc aeterna. 

With regard to the question now before us, it 
will be sufficient to say that the law of nature, or 
natural human right, is that totality of regulations 
which rests upon the fundamental perfection of the 
human being; this does not change and eannot 
change, because it abides in the mutual relationship 
between the essence of God (the solitary support 
of all reality) and His creatures, Thomistic phi- 

Summa TheoL, l*2ae, qq. XC-C. 



258 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILISATION 

losophy sums it all up in this formula: the natural 
law is a participation in the eternal law, lex nat- 
uralis est participatio quaedam legis aeternae. It 
follows, then, that each human individual bears in 
himself a totality of rights and of duties, which are 
the expression of his nature, that is to say, of his 
status as a reasonable being. It also follows that 
the natural precepts of this law, the principles of 
social order, are the same for all men and for all 
time, and that to destroy them would mean the de- 
struction of man himself. Positive, or human, law 
cannot violate them. For, as Thomas says, in so 
far as human law disagrees with the law of nature, 
it is no longer a law, but a corruption of the law; 28 
it is placed outside the scope of human legislation. 

The human law, indeed, draws its strength, its 
raison d'etre, only from natural law, of which it 
is the echo, so to speak, the lengthening out, the ful- 
filling. Direct applications, evident corollaries of 
the social nature of man, belong to the jus gentium, 
(that which is right for all nations) such as "justice 
in buying and selling and other similar things, with- 
out which social life would be impossible." 24 

But there are less obvious and more remote con- 
sequences of the natural law; and there are appli- 
cations which vary, according to the concrete cir- 
cumstances peculiar to each state. It rests with 

22 /&*<*., q. XCI, art. 3. 
23 Ibid., q. XCV, art. 2. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 259 

the government of particular groups, to determine 
these; and this is done under the form of positive 
law. For example, the natural law demands that 
the malefactor be punished; but it does not indicate 
the method or form of punishment, whether he 
ought to be punished by fine or by prison or by 
death. 25 It is left to the wisdom of human law to 
set right the implications of natural law. 

Thus, securely linked with the law of nature, all 
human law is bound up with reason, which is the 
basis of being human. "Human law is an ordi- 
nance of reason for the common good, made by him 
who has care of the community, and promulgated." 2 * 

VI 

To be sure, the state described by Thomas Aqui- 
nas is an ideal, or theoretical conception. As such 
of course it could not be realized in practice in any 
complete sense; for real societies are too complex 
to conform to any set or uniform scheme. But with 
this reservation, it seems fair to say that the great 
European states, which were all then in process of 
formation, attempted from their several angles to 
realize in fact some such system of "limited mon- 
archy" as Thomas outlines. For example, the 
France of Louis IX, in which the transmission of 
power, resting upon the popular will, was modify- 



zeQuaedam rationls ordinatlo ad bonum commune et ab eo qu* 
curam communitatis habet, promulgata. Ibid., q. XC, art 4. 



260 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

ing the growing power of the king by a certain sys- 
tem of control, the England of the thirteenth cen- 
tury and a little later, was bringing its kings face 
to face with national parliaments; about the same 
time Spain also achieves its Cortes, a popular as- 
sembly raised up in the midst of the centralized 
government of Castile and Aragon. 2T Everywhere, 
the supreme prerogative of sovereignty lay in the 
exercise of the judicial power, which was nothing 
but the logical consequence of the power to give 
orders and to enforce them. Everywhere were 
manifest those efforts towards a more perfect con- 
sistency. But on the other hand, these efforts never 
attained to that form of administrative centraliza- 
tion which we have come to know in the modern 
state. 

Then again it is important to note that the Tho- 
mistic doctrines applied to states and not to na- 
tions. The sentiment of love for fatherland, which 
appeared in the Chanson de Roland where la 
douce terre de France is spoken of found its place 
in the moral system of Thomas Aquinas. He 
speaks of the pietas which we owe to our natal soil, 

27 Concerning the historical origin of the divers political functions 
in Capetian France (the notion of the royal officium, the role of 
justtoier played by the sovereign, the oath of fidelity from subjects, 
the importance of the elections and of the "sacre" and coronation, 
the detignatio of the heir apparent before Louis VII), see Luchaire, 
Hittoirt dts institutions monarchies sous Us premier* capttiens 
(987-1180), vol. I, Paris, 1891. Of. ZeiUer, L'idt* d* I'Btat dans 
St. Thomas, Paris, 1910. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 261 

in qua nati et nutriti sumus; and he considers the 
citizen to be a debtor to his fatherland, "debitor 
patriae" 26 

But nation means more than state and father- 
land. In our modern conception, a nation presup- 
poses a strongly organized state, with an accumu- 
lation of traditions behind it, with institutions, 
rights and feelings, with victories and sufferings, 
and with a certain type of mind (religious, moral, 
and artistic). These are its elements.* The result 
is that the bond which unites the nation is above all 
psychical in character (intellectual and moral), 
rather than territorial or racial. 

Now the European nations, thus defined, did not 
exist in the thirteenth century: they were in process 
of formation. The monarchical states were to be- 
come the nuclei of the nations of modern times. 
War was not then a contest between two nations, 
but a struggle between two members of a single 
family, or two kings, or two vassals, or between the 
vassal and the lord. It retained the character of a 
private feud; and the same is true of the quarrels 
between towns and between classes in the same 
town. Hence, in his philosophical doctrine of war, 
Thomas Aquinas insists that a war, to be just, must 
be declared by the legitimate authority. 

It was just because the states of the thirteenth 
century were not formed into clearly defined na- 
tions, that they had more traits in common than 

**Summa Theol, 9$M, q. CXXII, art 5; q. CI, art. 1. 



262 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

those of today. But they were on the point of be- 
coming diversified. The thirteenth century was 
like a central plateau, and the streams which flowed 
from it, cut their beds in different directions. 

The Thomistic theory of the state represents the 
crystallization of the political experiences of the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries; but it also repre- 
sents conformity with the feudal and civil and 
canon law, which was making no little progress 
during this time. Consequently the three systems 
of legislation (feudal, civil, canon) are at one on 
so many important points, such as the divine 
origin of power, the subordination of the king to 
law, the king's character as servitor of justice, the 
force of custom, the intervention of the community 
in the delegation of power to the prince, and the 
participation of the people in government. In the 
same way natural law is for the legists and canon- 
ists an ideal to which positive (human) legislation 
must approach ; and the prescription of the natural 
law must be adopted in so far as it is possible in 
existing circumstances. 20 

Finally, the thirteenth-century theory of the 
state takes up and completes various philosophic 
doctrines which had found credit among former 
philosophers such as Manegold of Lautenbach, and 

2C/. Carlyle, op. cit. For the civilian lawyers, vol. II, pp. 07, 
49, 75; for the canonists, ibid., pp. 110, 145, cf. VIII, and p. 43; 
for the feudal lawyers, vol. Ill, pp. 32, 34, 44, 51, 100, 106, 116, 
195, 137, 147, 169, and the conclusion. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 268 

John of Salisbury. But it has become a social phi- 
losophy, and it dresses all in a synthesis which is 
found neither among the feudal theorists nor among 
the legists, nor among the canonists, nor among the 
philosophers of the preceding centuries. It co- 
ordinates all, and attaches the doctrines which it 
establishes to a system of psychology, of morals, of 
logic, and of metaphysics. It is a kind of democ- 
racy, conceived in moderation, and based upon the 
pluralistic conception of the world and of life. 



CHAPTER TWELVE 



THE CONCEPTION OF HUMAN PROGRESS 

i. The constant and the permanent, ii. Progress in science, 
in morals, in social and political justice, in civilization. 



Is there a place in the scholasticism of the thir- 
teenth century for a theory of progress? The ques- 
tion concerns not only the system of human laws; 
it is a general problem, and therefore, it must he 
solved according to general principles. Let us ob- 
serve briefly how scholasticism succeeded in recon- 
ciling the constant and the variable, and in what 
degree it admits the possibility of change for the 
better. 

We have already seen 1 what a capital role the 
stable and the permanent played in the thirteenth- 
century conception of the world. Essences are un- 
changeable, and by them the natural species are 
fixed; they are imitations of the essence of God; 
and the degree of imitability does not change. 
From this it follows that what constitutes man, his 
quiddity as they then said, is everywhere and al- 

i Ch. IX, iv. 



1 IN THE MIDDLE AGES 265 

ways the same. One is either a man or not a man. 
Essentia non susdpit plus vel minus. Similarly, 
the first principles of reason that is to say, the 
judgements which express the fundamental relations 
of all being, the prerequisites of whatever reality 
may come into actual existence are stable and per- 
manent; their necessity and their universality are 
absolute. Take, for example, the principle of con- 
tradiction: "that which is cannot not be," or the 
principle of causality: quidquid movetur ab olio 
movetur. The scholastics referred to these princi- 
ples as per se notae, knowable of themselves; for, 
merely by understanding the subject and predicate 
one can grasp the absolute necessity of the relation 
which unites them, independently of all experience, 
and in consequence independently of all existence. 
The first principles of mathematics, although less 
general in that they have to do only with quantity, 
express in the same way invariable relations. 

Nor is it otherwise with the principles of moral 
and social order. That good must be done and 
wrong avoided, that the state is for the good of 
individuals, are principles necessary and fixed; and 
we have seen that there exist rights derived from 
nature, which no human legislation can violate. 
However, the necessity of these moral and social 
principles is of a different kind from that of mathe- 
matical propositions, and of the principles of rea- 
son. These moral principles imply a condition; 
namely, the existence of humanity in its actual 



266 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

state, the fact of creation. The same also holds 
true concerning the principles of the natural sci- 
ences. Hence, such principles are not knowable by 
mere analysis and comparison of their subject and 
their predicate (per se notae) ; they manifestly rest 
on observation and on experience ( per aliud nota) * 

II 

On the other hand, the world of limited existence 
involves change, and scholasticism studied with 
care the problem of change. The doctrine of act 
and potency, the actuality and potentiality in 
each changing being is nothing but their solution 
of this problem. 8 Change appears everywhere in 
the physical world. But change itself follows cer- 
tain uniformities; it is dominated by finality. The 
unvarying return of the seasons, the movements of 
the planets, the cycle of physical and chemical laws, 
the recurrence of vital phenomena in plants and 
animals, all of these exhibit the striking regular- 
ity which is inherent in the realm of change. In so 
far as one considers inorganic beings, the vegetable 
and animal world, this same recurrence admits of 
no exception. It is not only the species which are 
fixed; the activities exhibited by the most diverse 

2 On the scholastic distinction between judgements per se nota and 
per aliud nota (aliud here means observation and experience), see 
Mercier, Logique, Louvain, 1919, pp. 135 ff. Cf. Thomas Aquinas, De 
anima, II, 14. 

8 See above ch. IX, iii. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 267 

individuals beings do not vary. In regard to evolu- 
tion, as we understand it today, the dynamic meta- 
physics of scholasticism neither includes nor ex- 
cludes the change of one species into another. The 
problem did not present itself in the thirteenth 
century. Neither the theory of transformism nor 
the theory of mutation is irreconcilable with the 
scholastic theory of the world. Indeed, as we have 
seen above, a substance transforms itself always 
into another species of substance, it does not mat- 
ter how. 

But human acts, are they bound by the same uni- 
formities, or, on the contrary, is human progress 
really possible? The question is the more interest- 
ing because the thirteenth century believed that it 
had realized a state of stable equilibrium, and be- 
cause their extraordinary optimism lead them to 
believe that they had arrived at a state close to 
perfection. Accordingly it is necessary to explain 
how they conceived of humanity as having tra- 
versed the lower stages in order to arrive at this 
degree of perfection. 

A precise formulation is furnished by their meta- 
physical psychology. Human nature is the same in 
all men, and whatever rests on this nature is stable 
and uniform. But the faculties, the direct source 
of activities differ from man to man, in power and 
in flexibility. The intelligence and the will are 
energetic in a greater or a less degree; they are sus- 
ceptible of being perfected by education, and this 



268 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

perfecting itself is indefinite. The repetition of 
activities engenders permanent dispositions (habi- 
tus), which intensify effort. So it is that there is 
a place for progress in science. That which men 
have not been able to discover up to any given time, 
may some day be discovered by a genius more pene- 
trating. Thomas Aquinas applies this to the geo- 
centric hypothesis of which he foresees the possible 
supplanting. 4 Science, moreover, is regarded as a 
collective treasure, which is unceasingly increased 
by the contributions of succeeding generations. 5 

In the domain of morals and of social-justice, the 
place accorded to change (of course change for the 
better) is much more important. The concern here 
is not with the increase of moral or social judge- 
ments, as was the case with science; but real trans- 
formation, and adaptation, is involved, and the un- 
derlying reason for this is found in human liberty. 
Aside from the immutable principles (the point of 
departure and the standard of morality), scholasti- 
cism recognizes that there are applications of these 
principles more or less distinct, and more or less 
variable. 8 These principles govern 'the majority 
of cases, but they admit of exceptions. Reason has 
to weigh the value of all the circumstances which 
envelop a concrete and practical application of a 
moral law. The more numerous these circum- 

*<?/. above, p. 113. 
'C/. above, pp. 189 ff. 
* Cf. above, p. 059. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 2.69 

stances become, the greater is the elasticity of the 
law. The matter is well and clearly put by Thomas 
Aquinas 7 as follows: "As to the proper conclu- 
sions of the practical reason, neither is the truth or 
rectitude the same for all, nor, where it is the same, 
is it equally known by all. Thus it is right and true 
for all to act according to reason, and from this 
principle it follows as a proper conclusion, that 
goods entrusted to another should be restored to 
their owner. Now this is true for the majority of 
cases; but it may happen in a particular case that 
it would be injurious, and therefore unreasonable 
to restore goods held in trust; for instance, if they 
are claimed for the purpose of fighting against 
one's country. And this principle will be found to 
fail the more, according as we descend further into 
detail, e.g., if one were to say that goods held in 
trust should be restored with such and such a guar- 
antee, or in such and such a way; because the 
greater the number of conditions added, the greater 
the number of ways in which the principle may fail, 
so that it be not right to restore or not to restore." 
The fundamental inclination towards good abides 
in the depths of human conscience; it can be dark- 
ened, obtenebrari, but not extinguished. In the 
worst men, human nature remains good and retains 
the indelible imprint of the eternal law. 8 

As for social truths and social laws, these are 



7 Summa Theol., lagae, q. XCIV, art. 4. Dominican trans., p. 48. 
Blbid., q. XCVI, art. 6. 



270 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

even more subject to the conditions of temper a, of 
negotia, of personae than are the laws of the moral 
individual. 9 They vary with them; they are not en- 
dowed with infallibilities Hence progress in hu- 
man legislation is possible. It is certain that the 
system of limited monarchy, to which Thomas 
Aquinas gives his preference, constituted in his 
eyes a step forward from the primitive forms of 
government which he enumerates. In the follow- 
ing fine passage Thomas shows how law, as well as 
science, is capable of progress. "Thus there may be 
two causes for the just change of human law: one 
on the part of reason; the other on the part of man 
whose acts are regulated by law. The cause on the 
part of reason is that it seems natural to human 
reason to advance gradually from the imperfect to 
the perfect. Hence, in speculative sciences, we see 
that the teaching of the early philosophers was im- 
perfect, and that it was afterwards perfected by 
those who succeeded them. So also in practical 
matters : for those who first endeavoured to discover 
something useful for the human community, not 
being able by themselves to take everything into 
consideration, set up certain institutions which 
were deficient in many ways; and these were 
changed by subsequent lawgivers who made insti- 
tutions that might prove less frequently deficient in 

Ibid., la<2ae, q . XCVI, art. 1. Cf. the whole of q. XCVI1 ("De 
mutatione legum"). 
10 Ibid., q. XCI, art. 3, ad tertium. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 271 

respect of the common weal. On the part of man, 
whose acts are regulated by law, the law can be 
rightly changed on account of the changed condi- 
tion of man, to whom different things are expe- 
dient according to the difference of his condition." 11 

Thus the Thomistic theory opens the way for 
progress in human legislation; and since legislation 
is the attribute of sovereignty, it opens the way 
likewise for progress in the government of states. 
But forthwith Thomas adds this counsel of wis- 
dom : not without good reasons, should human law 
be changed. For, any change in the law is made at 
the expense of the power and majesty that reside in 
the legislative power, quando lex mutatur, dimi- 
nuitur vis constructiva legist 

On the basis of Thomistic principles, it is there- 
fore possible to justify a series of progressive 
measures. The thirteenth century could of course 
not envisage them; but they are in the logic of its 
system. For, whatever the government may be, it 
must look ever towards betterment (ut sit de pro- 
motione solicitus) ; it must put at the disposal of 
individuals the means of perfecting their person- 
ality. It must assure, for example, all that con- 
cerns education of the physical faculties, of the in- 
telligence, and of the moral will; it must organize 
the conditions of production and of work. 18 A like 



, q. XCVIT, art. 1. Dominican trans., p. 77. 
12 n>W M q. XCVTT, art. 2. 
18 CY. above, p. 246. 



272 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

mission belongs to the social authority, whatever 
may be the form of this authority. Following the 
fine and judicious distinction of Thomas, one must 
determine in varying circumstances, just what form 
of government is most propitious to the realization 
of its social mission. 

Finally, like the state and the collective life, hu- 
man civilization in its entirety is capable of. prog- 
ress; for it is the result of human activities which 
are always perfectible. Education, heredity, the 
influence of authority, can all act on the develop- 
ment of the artistic faculties, of scientific labours, of 
customs, of religious practice. 

To sum up, then. Fixity of essences and essen- 
tial relations; act and potency; perfectibility of 
faculties; liberty and adaptability of the collective 
life to circumstances and needs, these are the 
principles by which scholasticism solved the prob- 
lem of progress. They did so by answering in their 
way the ancient Greek query: How reconcile the 
fixed and the changing? 



CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

PHILOSOPHY AND NATIONAL TEMPERAMENT 
IN THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY 

i. Scholastic philosophy reflected in the temperament of 
the peoples who created it. ii. Three main doctrines: the 
value of the individual; intellectualism ; moderation, iii. 
Scholastic philosophy the product of Neo-Latin and Anglo- 
Celtic minds; Germanic contribution virtually negligible, iv. 
Latin Averroism in the thirteenth century, v. The lure of Neo- 
Platonism to the German, vi. The chief doctrines opposed 
to the scholastic tendencies: lack of clearness; inclination to 
pantheism; deductive method a outrance; absence of moder- 4 
ation. 



SCHOLASTIC philosophy is the dominant philosophy 
of the thirteenth century. Such is the outstanding 
fact, the significance of which we have attempted 
to estimate by correlating it with the other factors 
of that civilization. 

This philosophy is the result of a slow and pro- 
gressive development, and it follows the general 
trend of western civilization. The doctrinal fer- 
mentation, rather slow in its beginning, becomes in- 
tensified in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, as 
the social and political structure is taking its feudal 



274 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

form; and it reaches its most fruitful period just 
as the distinctly mediaeval mode of life and of 
thought and of feeling is revealing itself clearly 
in every department of human activity. This great 
philosophical system reflects the unifying tenden- 
cies of the time; its influence is cosmopolitan; its 
optimism, its impersonality, and its religious ten- 
dencies place it in accord with the entire civiliza- 
tion; and its doctrines exert a profound influence 
on art and on literature and on social habits. 

As scholastic philosophy is the work of western 
races, it is likewise an original product. In it the 
western peoples reproduce, to be sure, the prob- 
lems of the Greek and the Oriental worlds. But 
the solutions of these problems are cast in a new 
mould, they are imbued with a new mentality. 
Herein lies the secret of the wonderful growth and 
expansion of the scholastic philosophy in the West. 

Seeing that the peoples of the West were con- 
stantly preoccupied with it, there is little wonder 
that this philosophy should have played a part in 
moulding philosophical temperament; that it should 
have given them an intellectual bent, a specific turn 
of mind. We need not be surprised then to find, 
in that unique period of history when the minds of 
the various European peoples were taking on their 
several casts, the development of certain general 
characteristics, whose influence survived in philos- 
ophy after the thirteenth century, and even the 
whole Middle Ages. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 275 

Economic forms, political organization, structure 
of social classes, artistic culture, these all disap- 
pear, or are transformed; indeed, by the end of the 
fourteenth century, these elements of the civiliza- 
tion have lost their distinctly mediaeval signifi- 
cance. But moral and philosophical temperaments 
endure, because they belong to the deeper lying 
emanations of human spirit. In the individual 
man, the bodily temperament, which depends upon 
physiological conditions, persists throughout his en- 
tire life. Similarly, in a group of individuals the 
mental temperament, which finds its support in 
common ideals, both intellectual and moral, sur- 
vives in the race. Thus, the habits of honour arid 
courtesy, under the combined influence of Church 
and feudal society, were transmitted through suc- 
ceeding generations as staple realities, which we 
find even today in our modern conscience. In like 
manlier, the philosophical temperament of the 
thirteenth century, I mean the setting in opera- 
tion of certain methods and doctrines entered into 
the modern epoch and even now directs our mode 
of thought. Indeed, scholastic philosophy set in 
operation three main doctrines, which may also be 
called methods which have become our common 
approach to problems and their solutions. 

II 

The first of these doctrines lays emphasis upon 
the worth of the individual, or person, as the only 



276 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

human reality. Scholastic philosophy, being a 
pluralistic conception of the world, makes of each 
man an autonomous agent, having a body and an 
intelligence and a will and a liberty all his own. 
Each human individual possesses abilities which 
give to him as a representative of the race a purely 
personal power of action; and this inequality of 
faculties explains the several capacities of various 
individuals for artistic or scientific or professional 
or public life. The human individual has a right 
to personal happiness and is called after death to 
enjoy personal blessedness. He is protected 
against the state, or the group, by a whole system 
of intangible rights. 1 Accordingly, the philosophy 
of the thirteenth century is opposed to everything 
that resembles the subjugation of one man to an- 
other. For the same reason, it exhibits a profound 
dislike for monism and pantheism; it was at great 
pains, and this cannot be too strongly emphasized, 
to eliminate every pantheistic tendency from its 
teaching. Indeed it developed a horror for any 
doctrine which fuses in one sole being some or all 
beings, in particular, which makes all men parts 
or becomings of a great whole, of one Being, and 
which therefore suppresses their individuality. 

This doctrine, that the individual alone is sub- 
stantial reality, and alone has real value in the uni- 
verse, is of course Aristotelian in origin. It is 
written on the first page of his Metaphysics, that 

i Of. chs. IX and X. 



IX THE MIDDLE AGES 277 

splendid book of common-sense which has nour- 
ished the thought of men for two thousand years. 
But with their special concern for the natural 
equality of human beings, the scholastics went 
much further than did Aristotle, While he stated 
that men are naturally unlike, and that nature 
made freemen of some and slaves of others, the 
scholastics regarded slavery and serfdom as con- 
ventional, not as natural. And we may be sure 
that if this turn of thought a turn toward en- 
hanced value of the individual had not been in 
accord with the deepest aspirations of the mediaeval 
civilization (in the peoples who were its supreme 
representatives), it would never have found en- 
trance into their marrow, and into their blood. 
For, the western minds took only what suited them, 
whether from Aristotle or Plato or Augustine or 
Avicenna or Averroes and they took it because it 
suited them. 

Nothing is more false than the judgement, which 
finds credit among so many historians, that one 
must await the Renaissance to see human person- 
ality appraised at its true worth. There are few 
philosophers who have accentuated the metaphysi- 
cal, the psychological, the moral, and the social 
value of the individual so much as did the schol- 
astics. And just as the thirteenth century is a 
century of striking personalities, it is also a cen- 
tury of discussions on all the problems which the 
question of personality raises. 



278 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

There is a second doctrine which also involves 
the philosophical mentality, and which is closely 
connected with that which we have just exposited. 
This is intellectualism, or the royal rule of reason 
in man, and in all that concerns human life. It 
introduces the supremacy of reason into all depart- 
ments of human activity. 2 Thomas Aquinas and 
Duns Scotus are its striking representatives; but 
it is also found though in a lesser degree, in all of 
the scholastic philosophers. 

It is because the dominant philosophy of the 
thirteenth century was an intellectual philosophy, 
that it promoted a love of clearness and precision; 
that it struggled against the perplexing vagueness 
of Arabian mysticism; that it introduced into dis- 
cussions an atmosphere of precision and exactness 
which exercised on the formation of the developing 
minds the most beneficent influence. It is to this 
mental discipline that the philosophical Latin of 
the masters owes its pliability, and to the same 
source the modern languages are indebted for large 
portions of their vocabularies. 2 * We have already 
seen how this intellectualism and love of clarity are 
revealed in the most important forms of thirteenth- 
century culture. 2 * 

But, in addition to individualism and intellec- 
tualism, there is a third deep lying character which 
2cy. ch. viu. 

a<7/. above,?. 176. 
b See ch. VII, v. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 270 

enters into the temperament of those who framed 
and developed scholastic philosophy. And this is 
their spirit of moderation, a moderation revealed 
in considered choice. Their philosophy is the via 
media between the views of Plato and of Aristotle; 
it tempers the naturalism of the latter with the 
idealism of the former. Thus the equilibrium which 
appears in all the social forces of that age manifests 
itself in their dominant philosophy. 

We have seen 8 how scholastic metaphysics is a 
dynamic philosophy; but its dynamic character is 
moderate, because the form or the principle of 
any given perfection, that may reside in each be- 
ing, unfolds in matter. It gives the corporeal 
world an evolutionary interpretation; but this is a 
mitigated evolution, since it does not apply to the 
essences themselves. Thus, for example, their con- 
ception of evolution combines efficient causality 
and finality; it furnishes a moderate realistic solu- 
tion, by reconciling the individual nature of ex- 
ternal realities with the abstract character of our 
corresponding concepts/ 

Scholastic psychology is a moderate form of 
idealism, since abstract ideas arise in sense-percep- 
tion, 5 and man is regarded as a unitary combination 
of both soul and body. Similarly, this moderation 
finds expression in their ethics, which explains the 

See ch. IX, lii and iv. 

* See above, pp. 59 and 181. 
5C/. ch. VIII, i. 



280 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

compatibility of duty with pleasure, and of varia- 
ble moral laws with its unchangeable principles. 6 
The same is true of their aesthetics, since the beau- 
tiful is at once subjective and objective. And again 
in their logic this same spirit appears, as they estab- 
lish the right of both deduction and induction. 
This moderation appears also in their social phi- 
losophy; for sovereignty in the state belongs both 
to the people and to those who receive power, by 
delegation from the people. 1 Moderation is like- 
wise found in their theory of progress and culture, 
which takes account of both that which is fixed in 
human nature and that which is changeable and 
perfectible. 8 

Thus, in all of its reflection scholasticism seeks 
the golden mean and avoids extremes; it delights in 
the solution that mediates between opposing views. 
For all these reasons it is a profoundly human phi- 
losophy, that is, a philosophy which is fitted for 
beings bound by corporeal conditions and yet also 
participating in the spiritual realm. 

The importance of personality, the supremacy 
of reason and of clear ideas, a sense of measure and 
of moderation in the doctrines which constitute it; 
these three characteristics of scholastic philosophy 
are in perfect accord with the western civilization 
of the thirteenth century. 

e Cf. ch. XII, ii. 
T Cf. ch. XII. 
C/. ch. XI, iii. 



IX THE MIDDLE AGES 281 

III 

And now we must consider a further fact one 
of central importance. This civilization is above 
all the product of French influence; France is the 
centre from which it casts its light everywhere. 9 
From this angle, it is interesting to note how the 
masters of scholastic philosophy, those who brought 
it to its full development and who affixed to it the 
imprint of their genius, were all educated in France, 
whether French or Italian or English or Flem- 
ish, or Walloon. Thomas Aquinas and Bonaven- 
ture belong to great Italian families; Alexander of 
Hales, Duns Scotus, William of Occam, and many 
more, are Anglo-Celts; Gerard of Abbeville, Wil- 
liam of Auvergne, William of Auxerre belong to 
France; Henry of Ghent, Siger of Courtrai are 
natives of Flanders; Godfrey of Fontaines is of 
the nobility of Liege. All of these masters met in 
Paris, where they resided and taught; and they are 
therefore French by education. Scholastic philos- 
ophy in the thirteenth century is even more a sys- 
tem of Gallicae Sententiae than it was in the time 
of AdelardofBath* 

On the other hand, the role of the Germans is 
surprisingly negligible. The only personality of 
note that comes from beyond the Rhine is Swabian, 
Albert the Great, Count of Bollstadt. His contri- 
bution to scholastic philosophy is deserving of the 

See chs. II, il; III, i; IV, ii, ill; V, iv. 
10 Of. above, p. 41. 



282 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

closest attention; but his services are of a very spe- 
cial kind. Albert the Great was an indefatigable 
compiler of texts, a tireless commentator, an ob- 
server of facts, an excellent encyclopedist; but he 
was not a profound philosopher. 11 

I do not mean, of course, that the Germans had 
no share in the philosophy of the thirteenth cen- 
tury; for they produced some men whose thought 
is of the greatest significance in respect to 
civilization. But their philosophy is not scholastic 
philosophy, as we have been at pains to outline it 
in these pages. Their system of thought contained 
seeds which were foreign to the scholastic genius; 
and therein are found the beginnings of their later 
deepest aspirations. 

This contrast between the two types of mind is 
both striking and instructive. We may therefore 
profitably consider it more closely in concluding 
our study. 

IV 

What is this philosophy to which the Germans so 
generally gave preference? To understand the full 
significance of this question, it is necessary to con- 
sider the non-scholastic philosophies of the thir- 
teenth century. 

iiC/. Schneider, "Beitrfige zur Psychologic Alberts des Grossen," 
Battmker's-Bittrajr*, IV, 5, 1908. Albert in de animalibus is fond 
of distinguishing the German! and the Galli. Cf.H. J. Stadler, Al- 
bertus Magnus de animalibus L. XXVI. Baiimker's-B<nt?%e, XV- 
XVI, 1916 and 1991. Incices, verbis Galli, Germania, German!. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 288 

It should be stated at once that we must disre- 
gard the unusual; for our study is one of general 
tendencies. In that century, which was so rich in 
important personalities there were certain isolated 
but brilliant thinkers, who swept the philosophic 
sky in meteor-like fashion, leaving little trace of 
real influence on their environment. Roger Bacon 
is perhaps the most fascinating of these men. But 
while he was far beyond his day in all matters 
touching mathematics and natural science, he fell 
just as far behind in his view of philosophy itself,- 
as mere apologetics in furthering religion. Thus 
he represents a twofold anachronism, not only in 
science, but in philosophy as well! Hence, how- 
ever interesting this personality of the thirteenth 
century may be, he remains none the less an ex- 
ception, and deserves only a secondary place in our 
study. 

Aside from scholastic philosophy, two principal 
currents of thought manifest themselves, namely, 
Latin Averroism and Neo-Platonism. These are all 
the more marked by the upheaval which they occa- 
sioned; nevertheless, in contrast with the great 
river of scholasticism, they are really mere rivulets. 
The first emerges suddenly; but it disappears grad- 
ually from view, in the fifteenth century, like a 
stream which sinks into some subterranean channel. 
The second, on the other hand, arose slowly, but it 
widened its channel and deepened its current; and, 



284 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

as it did so, it carried with it the German genius. 
Let us consider each of these in turn. 

Latin Averroism differs from scholastic philos- 
ophy as the Gothic cathedral differs from the Ara- 
bian mosque, and not as the Cathedral of Amiens 
differs from that of Chartres. The conflict be- 
tween the one and the other presents two distinct 
conceptions of the world and of life, two systems 
of metaphysics and of psychology. 

The researches of Mandonnet have served to en- 
rich our acquaintance with the origin and nature of 
these Averroistic doctrines. 12 That they appeared 
at Paris about 1256, and that between 1260 and 
1270 they were the source of much disturbance to 
the Faculty of Arts of the University, are now 
clearly established facts. In the philosophic duel 
which then was waged between scholasticism and 
Latin Averroism, there appeared Thomas Aquinas 
as the champion of the former, and Siger of Bra- 
bant, a Fleming who championed the latter and 
gathered about him a small number of admiring 
followers. To combat the Averroistic doctrines, 
all the scholastics united in an alliance, both of- 
fensive and defensive, including also such men as 
Roger Bacon." 

i* Sec P. Mandonnet, "Siger de Brabant et I'Averroisme latin 
au XIII"" s." in Lea Philoaophes Beiges, vol. VI (1911) and VII 
(1908), Louvain. 

IB Thomas Aquinas wrote a special treatise entitled De unitate in- 
tellectus contra Averroistas. Duns Scotus speaks of Averroes as 
"maledictut We Averroes" (Oxon. IV, d. 43, q. 3, no. 5). 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 285 

In this contest we may confine our attention to 
two principal doctrines, which the scholastics never 
tired of attacking, namely, the theory of one 
single soul for all mankind, and the theory of the 
twofold truth. The former has to do with an im- 
portant aspect of psychology, and it has signifi- 
cant bearings on religion; the latter involves the 
relation of philosophy and theology. We shall 
treat briefly of each. 

This theory of the single intelligence in men 
teaches, that all human thoughts occur by virtue of 
a single intelligence, which belongs to the race, 
and, as substance, remains in a state of isolation 
from the individual human beings. Our personal 
thoughts arise, when our individual sense percep- 
tions and imaginations are illuminated by this 
single intelligence, by virtue of its momentary ac- 
tion in union with the sensitive soul (anima sensi- 
bilis) in each of us. Furthermore and as a con- 
sequence of this the soul of mankind is alone en- 
dowed with immortality, and the soul or form that 
is individual in each of us passes away at death. 
Men die; the soul of the race is immortal. 

Such a doctrine runs counter to any deep sense 
of human personality, by minimizing the individ- 
ual aspects of thinking and of religious experience, 
and by eliminating personal immortality. The 
bitter struggle of the scholastics against this doc- 
trine is therefore readily intelligible as a register- 
ing of their profound yearning for, and emphasis 



286 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

upon, the value of human personality. Traini's 14 
portrayal of the defeat of Averroes (and the other 
productions inspired by Traini's great work) re- 
flect also this same sense of personal worth em- 
bedded in the wider complex of that civilization, 
society at large, of which philosophy is a part. 

The theory of the twofold truth 15 asserts, that a 
doctrine may be true in philosophy but false in 
theology, and conversely. This pragmatic doctrine 
enabled the harmonizing with Catholic dogma of 
ideas which were utterly foreign to its spirit and 
subversion of its teachings. Setting truth over 
against itself, it contravenes the principle of contra* 
diction, indispensable not only to the preserva- 
tion of theology, but also to the principles of moral 
and social order. The deepest lying tendencies of 
that civilization and the fundamental doctrines of 
their logic and theology are alike incompatible with 
the theory of the twofold truth. It was just this 
incompatibility which lead to its formal condemna- 
tion in 1277 (as is clear from the beginning of that 
interesting document) ; 16 and the same is evident 
in the work of Thomas against the Averroists. 
Hence one can understand the intensity of the 
struggle which the doctrine aroused in the schools. 

Latin Averroism is not a product of occidental 
thought, but an exotic importation. Its protagon- 

i* Cf. above, pp. 84 and 154. 

iC/. above, p. 105. 

ie Denifle-Chatelain, Chartul. Unwert. Paris. Vol. I, p. 543. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 28? 

ists proclaimed the philosophical infallibility of 
Averroes, and it was their constant concern to 
avoid betraying him. The motives which prompted 
this occidental affiliation with the oriental interpre- 
tation of Aristotelian naturalism remain a matter 
of conjecture. It may have been sincerity or con- 
viction; or, it may have been the desire to justify 
the relaxation of faith and of morals, as Mandonnet 
believes. But, in any event, it is certain that Latin 
Averroism did not penetrate the mass of the intel- 
lectuals. At Paris it was the creed of a small 
group ; and when the condemnation of 1277 checked 
the professional career of Siger of Brabant, its ex- 
pansion was arrested, though it did not entirely 
disappear. Indeed, at the court of Frederic II, 
Bang of The Sicilies, Averroism scored a local 
triumph. But that court reflected the spirit of the 
Orient far more than it did that of the Occident; 
Frederic II being an Oriental prince both in caste 
and in manners. 

If Averroism did not penetrate the spirit of men 
of learning in the western world, still less did it 
penetrate into the channels of ordinary life. 17 Be- 
ing, as a whole, alien to occidental civilization, it is 
necessary to seek elsewhere the influence of the 
Averroistic doctrines upon the civilization which 
we have studied. First of all, it kindled an atmo- 
sphere of conflict; and thus it obliged scholastic 

IT Alphand^ry, "Y-a-t-il eu un Averroisme populaire aux XIII* 
et XIV" s.?" (Revue d* Vhistoire des religions, 1901, p. 894.) 



288 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

philosophy to formulate its position with greater 
precision, and it united on fundamentals, those 
who otherwise were divided. Furthermore, a few 
detached theories of Averroism, by virtue of their 
inherent force, continued their influence, an in- 
fluence which increased during the centuries that 
followed. For instance, the doctrine of the twofold 
truth gradually undermined the Catholic faith; and 
certain Averroists of the fourteenth century lent 
their support to the legists, who were engaged in 
subordinating the Papacy to the State. Finally, 
certain elements of Averroism contributed to rein- 
force another current of ideas born in the thir- 
teenth century, the Neo-Platonic current which we 
must now consider. 



Occidental Neo-Platonism could no more com- 
pete in influence with the scholastic philosophy of 
the thirteenth century than could Latin Averroism. 
The doctrines of emanation and the vaporous mys- 
ticism of Proclus, especially as contained in the 
Liber de Cairns were in direct opposition to the 
temper of scholasticism. But Neo-Platonism suc- 
ceeded in alluring a group of German philosophers; 
and in view of its contribution to the tendencies 
which developed in Germany, especially during the 
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, its study is of 
the greatest historical interest. It is not within the 
scope of the present work to examine in detail the 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 289 

Neo-Platonic movement of the thirteenth century, 
which would involve a separate study; we shall 
therefore touch upon it only, and give in outline 
certain general results. 

The first translators of Neo-Platonic works 
such as Robert Grosseteste, Alfredus Anglicus, 
and William of Moerbeke had no sympathy with 
Neo-Platonism, other than the special fondness 
which every translator of that age felt for the work 
which he translated. And the same may be said 
of Albert the Great as commentator, for, in com- 
mentating Aristotle and Neo-Platonic writings, re- 
spectively, he inclines toward each in turn. 

But in the second half of the thirteenth century a 
group of German philosophers turn deliberatively 
to certain Neo-Platonic theses. These men are 
contemporaries of, or immediate successors to, 
Albert the Great; and several of them, like Albert 
himself, are dignitaries of the Dominican order in 
Germany. I refer to Ulric of Strasburg, the im- 
mediate disciple of Albert, to the Silesian Witelo, 
to Thierry of Freiburg (in Germany), to Berthold 
of Mosburg, perhaps a disciple of Albert, and to 
Meister Eckhart, the most celebrated of all. These 
thinkers succeed in coordinating the whole of their 
doctrines, in organic unity, on the basis of Neo- 
Platonic thought. In different degrees, their works 
combine the emanational view of reality, the ten- 
dency to make knowledge arise in the soul indepen- 



290 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

dent of the external world, and the mystic impulse 
toward the infinite. 

VI 

Now, if we confine our enquiry to Thierry of 
Freiburg and Meister Eckhart the striking per- 
sonalities of the group it is very remarkable that 
these men (whose works are now published or well 
known) 18 part deliberately with the scholastic phi- 
losophy, the philosophy which dominates the 
minds of Neo-Latins and the Anglo-Celts, and with 
which the German thinkers are thoroughly familiar. 
Thus, Thierry of Freiburg says expressly, that he 
wished to separate himself from those who taught 
the common philosophy, from the communiter Zo- 
quentes and he boasts of it. 19 The same sense of 

is I here give the works of these men. The bibliography, at the 
end of these lectures, may be consulted for details. Ulric 
of Strasbourg is the author of a treatise entitled De Summo Bono, 
of which brief fragments have been published (cf. Ueberweg-Baum- 
gartner, op. tit., p. 462). Witelo wrote a work on Optics (De Per- 
tpectiva), and he is probably the author of the treatise De Intelli- 
gent iis. The works of Thierry of Freiburg have been published by 
Krebs. Berthold of Mosburg wrote a commentary on the Element a 
Theologica of Proclus. According to Dyroff ("Ueber Heinrich und 
Dietrich von Freiburg," Philos. Jhrb. f 1915, pp. 55-63), the Henry of 
Freiburg ("de Uriberch"), who probably belonged to the same 
family as Thierry of Freiburg, and lived at the same time translated 
into German verse the mystical and Nee-Platonic discourses of 
Thierry of Freiburg. The German works of Eckhart have been 
published by Pfeiffer (185T), and fragments of his Latin works by 
Denifle (Archiv f. Litt. u. Kirchengesch. d. Mittelalt., 1886). 

10 See above, Sententia communis, p. 83. Cf. E. Krebs, "Meister 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 291 

difference appears in Eckhart, who says concerning 
some of his own doctrines: primo aspectu monstruo- 
sa, dubia aut falsa apparebunt, secus autem si sol- 
lerter et studOotius pertrcutiantur" Both of these 
thinkers take over certain characteristics and ten- 
dencies which are diametrically opposed to the ten- 
dency of thought of the Neo-Latins and the Anglo- 
Celts, which we have pointed out. 

The first character is a lack of clearness in 
thought and of precision in language. Although 
he uses the fixed terminology of the scholastics, the 
celebrated Eckhart is an obscure thinker, "Ein 
unklarer Denker" said Denifle, 21 his best historian 
and himself a German. To the clear ideas and pre- 
cise expressions of scholastic philosophy, Neo- 
Platonic Germans oppose ambiguous theories and 
misleading comparisons. Their thoughts do not 
seek the clear light, and they are satisfied with ap- 
proximations. Their imaginations delight in an- 
alogies, notably in the comparison of emanation 
with radiation or flowing, by which they represent 
creation as a stream of water which flows from the 
divine source and as a light which shines forth from 
the luminous hearth of the Divinity. Thierry 
speaks of the creative act by which God produces 
Intelligences, as an tbullitio, an interior transfusion 

Dietrich, s. Leben, s. Werke, s. Wissenschaft," Batixnker's-B*ftrty, 
V, 5-6, 1906, pp. 150, 151. 

20 Denifle, M titter Eckharts lateinische Schrifttn, p. 585. 
Denifle, p. 459. 



292 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

by which His nature, sovereignly blessed and fer- 
tile, pours itself out. 22 

This brings us to a second characteristic, very 
much more important, in which the philosophy of 
the Germans of the thirteenth century is opposed 
to scholastic philosophy. This is the leaning to- 
wards pantheism, which unites men with God even 
to the point of fusion; the carrying of the soul for 
commerce with the Divinity, a mystic communion 
so intimate that every distinction between God and 
the soul disappears. In the whole group of Ger- 
man thinkers of the thirteenth century it is Eck- 
hart who shows this tendency most strongly, and 
it is also he who exerts the greatest influence upon 
the German mind. He boldly teaches that the ex- 
istence of God is also the very existence of crea- 
tures. 28 In this he differs totally with the schol- 
astic philosophy, which gives to each person (as 
to each individual being) not only his own essence, 
but an existence distinct from the existence of every 
other being, and also from that of God. 24 He thus 
maintains a fusion of God and His creatures, since 
the same single existence envelops them both. One 
understands, therefore, how he can say that God is 
like an infinite sphere, whose centre is everywhere 

22 Edit., Krebs, pp. 129 and 133. 

28 Ens tantum unum et Deus est. Extra prhnam causam nichil 
est; quod enim est extra causam primam, deum scilicet, est extra esse, 
quia deus est esse. Edit., Denifle, p. 549. 

2 See above, pp. 195, 18. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 293 

and whose circumference is nowhere, 25 and that 
every creature has a lasting hunger and thirst for 
God: qw edimt me adhuc esuriunt. The animals, 
he writes, cease to nourish their young as soon as 
these have their fill; but beings are insatiable of 
God, for they exist in Him. 26 

On the basis of this metaphysics, Eckhart elabo- 
rates a mysticism wherein the soul contracts a union 
with God which would bridge the gulf between in- 
finite and finite. The description which he makes 
of this mystic union makes one tremble. That 
which God loves in us is Himself, His very own 
existence; the soul is the sanctuary of God where 
He finds Himself! But God does not enter into 
the sanctuary unless the soul is prepared, it must 
have renounced everything, not only all external 
things, but also its very self, its knowledge, its will, 
its feelings, its strivings, its personality. In short, 
God enters in only if the soul is in a state of abso- 
lute renunciation, of complete passivity, (dbge- 
schiedenheit) * 7 And then the miracle takes place; 
God discloses the unity and the infinity of His na- 
ture. The soul is transported into the silent desert 
where there is neither effort, nor doubt, nor faith: 
where, in order to know, there is no further need 
of images, of similitudes, of interpretation, qf writ- 
ing, or of dogma. God is found in me; Ha is not 



p. 571. 
a Ibid., p. 689. 
27 Edit., Pfeiffer, pp. 650 ff. 



294 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

complete without my soul. 28 As I am immanent in 
the being of God, He accomplishes all His works 
by me. God is made man in order that man may 
become God. This is the mystic deification; it is 
the return of man into the infinite, and with man 
the return into God of all creation, the "<"/*></"? of 
Proclus. 29 

It is indeed difficult to clear such a doctrine of 
the charge of pantheism, however Eckhart may 
protest against such interpretation of his doctrine. 
But here again, as in another connection, 80 we must 
bear in mind that the intention of a man rests with 
his conscience ; it has nothing to do with his doctrine 
as expressed, which is what it is. 

Thierry of Freiburg writes against the panthe- 
ism of the Liber de Causis and the Elementa The- 
ologica of Proclus. But he shares that deductive 
method a entrance, which was borrowed from Neo- 
Platonism, in common with Eckhart and Ulric of 
Strasburg and Witelo and the whole German 
group. This leads us to a further characteristic 
of the trend of thought which we are studying: the 

28 Ibid., pp. 880, 458, passim. 

29 In contrast with the above, the truth of Henry Adams' state- 
ment appears, when he says of the mystics of St Victor in the 
twelfth century: "The French mystics showed in their mysticism 
the same French reasonableness; the sense of measure, of logic, of 
science; the allegiance to form; the transparency of thought, which 
the French mind has always shown on its surface like a shell of 
nacre." Op. tit., p. 304. 

so See above, p. 167. 



IN THE MIDDLE AGES 295 

philosophy of the Germans in the thirteenth cen- 
tury lacks the moderation and equilibrium which is 
so beautiful a triumph of scholastic philosophy. In 
proof of this one example will suffice. Thus, schol- 
astic method starts with facts, with observation of 
the senses and the testimony of consciousness, 
in order to discover the role of general notions 
and the operation of principles or laws. It is only 
after this work of analysis that it authorizes its de- 
duction of all reality as dependent on God. 81 The 
German Neo-Platonism of the thirteenth century 
takes the opposite course. It does not begin with 
facts. It begins with the notion of God, or even 
with that of being in general, and traces out the 
emanation of all, step by step. Here again Eck- 
hart represents best the spirit of the group. No 
person takes more delight than he in the majestic 
tranquillity and impenetrable mystery of the Di- 
vinity; in the obscure and fathomless abyss of its 
reality; in the effusion of the soul, passive and 
stripped of self, in that ocean of reality. Eckhart 
does not pause, as does Bonaventure, to mark the 
lower stages of the journey of the soul to God; his 
thought leaps to God Himself, towards the Being 
which alone is of interest to him. Thus, in the 
speculation of Eckhart we have the prototype of 
that strain of metaphysics which hurls speculation 
with dizzy speed into the abyss, without imposing 
on itself the restraint of actual experience. 

si Cf. Ch. IX, vii. 



296 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

This lack of moderation, which affects the philo- 
sophical method of the Germans, affects also each 
of their metaphysical, psychological, and moral doc* 
trines. Moreover, it is extended by Eckhart to 
the facts of religious experience and the interpre- 
tation of dogma. His scorn for the external act, 
his exaggeration of the internal aspect of religious 
experience, the small place which he gives to the 
authority of Scripture, all of this prepares the 
way for the Reformation, to be sure; but it 
stands in great contrast with the dogmatic and 
mystical and moral theology of Thomas of Aquin. 

To sum up. Endowment of the personal worth 
of the individual with metaphysical support; devo- 
tion to clear ideas and their correct expression; 
moderation in doctrine and observance of a just 
mean between extremes; the combination of ex- 
perience and deduction, these are the characteris- 
tics, or, if you will, the tendencies, of the scholastic 
philosophy as it was elaborated by Neo-Latins and 
Anglo-Celts. But, in the Neo-Platonic group of 
German thinkers in the thirteenth century, all of 
this is replaced by very different characteristics, 
fascination for monism and pantheism; mystic com- 
munion of the soul with Deity; craving for extreme 
deduction; predilection for the study of Being, and 
of its descending steps; aversion to clarified intel- 
lectualism; delight in examples and metaphors, 
which are misleading and equivocal; and above all 
the want of balanced equilibrium, in exaggerating 
certain aspects and doctrines regardless of all else. 



CHAPTER FOURTEEN 



EPILOGUE 

i. Influence of thirteenth-century philosophical systems on 
later thought in the West. ii. Pedagogical value of scholastic- 
ism for the history of modern philosophy. 



THE unifying ideas of the thirteenth century had 
disappeared by the middle of the fourteenth cen- 
tury. As the European states advanced in stabil- 
ity, the spirit of nationalism became increasingly 
diversified. The University of Paris lost its cos- 
mopolitan character, as a centre of learning, and 
became simply a national institution. Further- 
more, the authority of the Popes declined in the 
domain of politics. Thus, in the quickened and 
complicating course of events, certain specific char- 
acteristics of the mediaeval civilization passed out 
of existence. 

But the philosophical systems of the Middle 
Ages had left their imprint on the western minds, 
The contrasts between the philosophers of Neo- 
Latin and Anglo-Celtic extraction, on the one 
hand, and the philosophers within the Germanic 
group, on the other hand, survived the thirteenth 



298 PHILOSOPHY AND CIVILIZATION 

. century. Descartes and Locke are much more in- 
debted to scholasticism than is commonly sup- 
posed; 1 and the Germans have good reason for re- 
garding Meister Eckhart as the first philosopher in 
their line. 

This takes us back, then to our point of depar- 
ture. For, it justifies our view of the thirteenth 
century as the watershed of European genius in its 
diverging flow. 

II 

If our reflections in these lectures have been cor- 
rect, the study of the philosophic systems of the 
Middle Ages, and of scholasticism in particular, 
must take on new meaning and value for all those 
who prize the western mode of thought. 

Even as the study of Greek and Latin classics is 
an indispensable preliminary to our literary cul- 
ture; and as the study of antique statuary and me- 
diaeval architecture and the painting of the Renais- 
sance possesses inestimable power in forming the 
minds of our future sculptors, architects, and paint- 
ers, and conditions the very flight of originality, 
just so the study of modern philosophy must lean 
not alone upon Greek philosophy, but equally on 

iFor recent works on the indebtedness of later thinkers to 
mediaeval thought, see, for example: . Gilson, La libertt ch*% 
Descartes it la thfologit, Paris, 1913. E. Krakowski, Let Sourcti 
imtdMvafos de la philosophic de Locke, Paris, 1915 P. Ramsay, Lea 
doctrines mtdit voles chez Jean Donne, le poete-mttaphysicien 
d'Anoleterre, Oxford, 1916. 



IX THE MIDDLE AGES 299 

the conceptions of the world and of life which 
formed the temperaments of our very own ances- 
tors. We are closer to them than we are to the 
Greeks; and, in the light of history, the study of 
their philosophy appears as a necessary stage in our 
philosophical education. 2 Thus, it seems contrary to 
all reason to ignore that age, as has hitherto been 
done all too often. We must really "traverse 
the scholastic philosophy of the Middle Ages," if 
we are to criticize or to go beyond it. 

2 My friend and colleague, Professor Horace C. Longwell of 
Princeton University, has worked out these ideas in detail, inde- 
pendently and some years ago; he intends to publish the paper. 



SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 

ADAMS, H. Mont St. Michel and Chartres, Boston, 1913. 

ALTAMIEA, R. Historia de Espana y de la civilisacion 
espanola, torn. I, Madrid, 1913. 

ASHLEY, W. J. An Introduction to English Economic 
History and Theory, Part I, (The Middle Ages), Lon- 
don, 1906. 

BAEUMXEE-BEITEAGE. Beitrage zur Geschichte der Phi- 
losophic des Mittelalters, Minister, 1891 ff. 

BAEUMXEE, C. Witdo. Ein Philosoph und Naturforscher 
des XIH'ten Jahrhunderts, Baiimker-Beitrage, Bd. 
Ill, Heft 2, Minister, 1908. 

. Die ChristUche Philosophic des Mittelalters, 

Leipzig, 1918 (in Die Kultur der Gegenwart, Teil I, 
Abt. v, 2>te Ausg., Teubner). 

Der Platonismus im Mittelalter. Konigl. 
Akad. d. Wissenschaften, Miinchen, 1916, pp. 49. 

BAEKEE, E. Unity in the Middle Ages, Oxford, 1915, 
See Marvin, F. S. 

BATJE, L. Dominicus Gundissalinus, De Divisione Phi- 
losdphiae, Baiimker-Beitrage, Bd. IV, H. 2-3, Minister, 
1903. 

BEDIEE, J. Les legendes epiques. Recherches sur la for- 
mation des Chansons de Geste, Paris, 1909-13. 

BEELIEEE, DOM. L'ordre monastique des origines au XII* 
s. Paris, 1921. 

BRANTS, V. Les theories Sconomiques aux XIII* et XIV* 
sifecles, Louvain, 1895. 

BEEHIEE, L. L'art chretien. Son developpement icono- 
graphique des origines k nos jours, Paris, 1918. 

BEYCE, J. The Holy Roman Empire, London, 1904. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 801 

BUDINSZKY. Die Universitat Paris und die Freniden an 
derselben im Mittelalter, Berlin, 1876. 

CAKLYLE, A. J. and R. W. A History of Mediaeval 
Political Theory in the West, Vol. II (The Political 
Theory of the Roman Lawyers and the Canonists from 
the Xth to the XIHth Century), New York, 1909; 
Vol. Ill (Political Theory from the Xth to the XHIth 
Century), New York, 1916. 

CABLYLE, A. J. Progress in the Middle Ages, Oxford, 
1916, See Marvin, F. S. 

CLEBVAL, A. Les ecoles de Chartres au moyen age du 
V'e au XVPe s., Chartres, 1895 (M&noires de la So- 
ciete Arch^ologique d' Eure et Loir, XI). 

CRAM, R. A. The substance of Gothic, Boston, 1915. 

DANTE, A. De Monarchia, edited with translation and 
notes by A. Henry, Boston, 1904. 

. The Divine Comedy, English translation by 

H. Johnson, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1916. 

DENIFLE, H. (and CHATELAIN). Chartularium Universi- 
tatis Parisiensis, Vol. MI, Paris, 1889-1891. 

DENIFLE, H. Die Universitaten des Mittelalters bis 1400, 
Berlin, 1885. 

. Meister Eckhart's Lateinische Schriften (in 

Archiv fur Litteratur und Kirchengeschichte des Mit- 
telalters, 1886). 

DE POORTEE, M. Le trait Eruditio regum et principum 
de Guibert de Tournai, in Les Philosophes Beiges, Lou- 
vain, Tome IX, 1914, 

DE WULP, M. Histoire de la philosophie medierale, 4'e 
ed., Louvain, 1912. 

' History of Mediaeval Philosophy, English 

translation by P. Coffey (from 2'nd French ed.) as 
3rd edition of the above, London, Longmans, 1909. 

Le trait des formes de Gilles de Lessines, 
Louvain, 1901. 



802 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

DE WULF, M. Etudes sur la vie les oeuvres, et ^influence 
de Godefroid de Fontaines, Louvain, 1904. 

- . Etudes sur Henri de Gand, Bruxelles, 1895. 

- . Scholasticism Old and New, English transla- 
tion by P. Coffey, Dublin, 1907. 

Histoire de la philosophie en Belgique, Lou- 
vain, 1910. 

Mediaeval Philosophy, illustrated from the 
System of Thomas Aquinas, Harvard University Press, 



DUHEM, P. Le systfeme du monde. Histoire des doc- 

trines cosmologiques de Platon a Copernic, Vol. DUV, 

Paris, 1914-'16. 
ENLART, C. Manuel d' archeologie fran9aise depuis les 

temps merovingiens jusqu* a la renaissance, Vol. I-III, 

Paris, 1902-16. 
FIGGIS, J. N. The divine Right of Kings, Cambridge, 

1914. (First three Chapters.) 
GEYEK, B. Abaelards unedierte philosophische Werke, 

Baiimker-Beitrage, Bd. XXI, H. 1, Miinster, 1919. 

- . Die Stellung Abaelards in der Universalien- 
frage nach neuen handschriftlichen Texten, Baiimker- 
Beitrage, Supplementband, pp. 101-127, Miinster, 1918. 

VON GIERKE, O. Die Staats-und Eorporationslehre des 
Altertums und des Mittelalters und ihre Aufnahme in 
Deutschland. (Bd. Ill of Das Deutsche Genossen- 
schaft), Berlin, 1881. 

- . Political Theories of the Middle Ages, Eng- 
lish translation by F. W. Maitland, Cambridge, 1900 
(Part of preceding work). 

GILLET, L. Histoire artistique des ordres mendiants, 

Paris, 1912. 
GILSON, E. La Iibert6 chez Descartes et la theologie, 

Paris, Alcan, 1918. 

- . Le Thoinisme. Introduction au systime de 
Thomas d'Aquin, Strasbourg, 1920. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 808 

GRABMANN, M. Die Geschichte der scholastischen Me- 
thode (nach den gedruckten und ungedruckten Quellen 
dargestellt), Bd. MI, Freiburg Br., 1909-11. 

. Forschungen iiber die lateinischen Aristoteles 

iibersetzungen des XIII. Jahrhunderts, Baumker- 
Beitrage, Bd. XVII, H. 5-6, Minister, 1916. 

HAUVETTE. Dante. Introduction a 1'etude de la Divine 
Comedie, Paris, 1911. 

HARRISON, F. The Meaning of History, Ch. V (A Sur- 
vey of the Thirteenth Century), New York, 1904. 

HAVET. Lettres de Gerbert, 988-991 Paris, 1889. 

HENRICUS GANDAVENSIS. Summa Theologica, Art. I-IV. 

JANET, P. Histoire de la science politique dans ses rap- 
ports avec la morale, torn. I, Paris, 1887. 

JENKS, E. Law and politics in the Middle Ages. Lon- 
don, 1913. 

JOHANNES SARESBUEIENSIS. Polycraticus, ed. Webb, 2 
vol., Oxford, 1909. 

KREBS, E. Meister Dietrich (Theodoricus Teutonicus de 
Vriberg), sein Leben, seine Werke, seine Wissenschaft, 
Baiimker-Beitrage, Bd. V, H. 5-6, Minister, 1906. 

. Le trait6 de ente et essentia de Thierry de Fri- 

bourg, in Revue No-Scolastique de Philosophic, 191 1 
pp. 519-586. 

KURTH, G. Les origines de la civilisation moderne. Brux- 
elles, 1903. 

LAMPRECHT, K. Deutsche Geschichte, Bde II-III, Ber- 
lin, 1892-8. 

LANGLOIS, C. La vie en France au moyen age d'apr&s 
quelques moralistes du temps. 

. La socit6 franfaise au XIIFe s. d'aprfcs dix 

romans d'aventure. 

La connaissance de la nature et du monde au 
moyen age d'aprfes quelques ecrits fran9ais d Pusage des 
laics, Paris, 1911. 



804 BIBUOQBAPHY 

LEMAIEE, R. La logique de Part gothique. Revue Neo- 

scolastique de Philosophie XVII, p. 234. 
LUCHAIRE, A. Histoire des institutions monarchiques de 

la France sous les premiers Captiens (987-1180), 

torn. I, Paris, 1891. 
. Louis VII, Philippe-Auguste, Louis VIII, torn. 

Ill, Histoire de France, Paris, Lavisse, 1902. 
MAITKE, L. Les ecoles episcopates et monacales de 1'occi- 

dent depuis Charlemagne jusqu' & Philippe- Auguste, 

Paris, 1866. 
MALE, E. L'art religieux du XIH'e s. en France, Etude 

sur 1'iconographie du moyen age et sur ses sources d' 

inspiration, Paris, 1910. 
. L'art allemand et Part fran9ais du moyen &ge, 

Paris, 1917. 
MANDONNET, P. Siger de Brabant et Paverroisme latin 

au XHIme sifecle, in Les Philosophes Beiges, Louvain, 

Tome VI (Etude critique), 1911, tome VII (Textes 

incites), 1908. 
MABVIN, F. S. The Living Past. A Sketch of Western 

Progress. Oxford, 1913. 
. The Unity of Western Civilization, Essays 

edited by, Ch. IV (Unity in the Middle Ages) by E. 

Barker, Oxford, 1915. 

Progress and History, Essays edited by, Ch. 

IV (Progress in the Middle Ages) by A. J. Carlyle, 

Oxford, 1916. 
MICHAEL, Geschichte des deutschen Volkes seit dem 

XHI'ten Jahrhundert bis zum Ausgang des Mittelal- 

ters, Bd. II, Freiburg Br., 1899. 
PAETOW, L. J. The Battle of the Seven Arts, a French 

Poem by Henri d'Andeli, Berkeley, University of Cali- 
fornia Press, 1914. 
PFEIFFER, F. Deutsche Mystiker des vierzehnten Jahr- 

hunderts. Meister Eckhart. Bd. II, Leipzig, 1857. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 305 

PICAVET, F. Essais sur 1'histoire gnrale et compare des 
theologies et des philosophies medi^vales, Paris, 1913. 

POOLE, R. L. Illustrations of the History of Mediaeval 
Thought and Learning, London, 2d ed. 1980. 

RASHDALL, H. The Universities of Europe in the Mid- 
dle Ages, Vol. Mil, Oxford, 1895. 

REYNAUD, L. Les origines de 1'influence fra^aise en 
Allemagne. Etude sur 1'histoire compare de la civili- 
sation en France et en Allemagne pendant la periode 
precourtoise (950-1150). Tome I (L'offensive poli- 
tique et sociale de la France), Paris, 1913. 

ROCQUAIN. La papaute au moyen age, Paris, 1881. 

. La cour de Rome et Pesprit de r^forme avant 

Luther. Tome I (La theocratic, apogee du pouvoir 
pontifical), Paris, 1893. 

ROUSSELOT, P. L'intellectualisme de Saint Thomas, 
Paris, 1908. 

SAINTSBTTEY, G. Periods of European Literature, Vol. II 
(The Flourishing of Romance and the Rise of Alle- 
gory), London, 1897. 

SANDYS, J. S. English Scholars of Paris and Franciscans 
of Oxford, in The Cambridge History of English Lit- 
erature, Vol. I, Cambridge. 

SMITH, A. L. Church and State in the Middle Ages, 
Oxford, 1918. 

STEINHAUSEN, Geschichte der deutschen Kultur, Bd. I, 
Leipzig, 1913. 

TAYLOE, H. O. The Mediaeval Mind, 2 vol., 3rd ed., 
New York, 1919. 

THOMAS AQUINAS. Summa Theologica, English transla- 
tion by Fathers of the English Dominican Province, 
London, 1911 ff. See especially Pars Pa, QQ. 75-90 
(Theory of Knowledge); Pars Pa 'ae, QQ. 1-85 
(Ethics); and QQ. 90-97 (Law); Pars 2'a 'ae, QQ. 
57-61 (Justice), 



806 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

THOMAS AQUINAS. Summa contra Gentiles. Partly trans- 
lated by S. Rickaby under the title: of God and His 

Creatures, London, 1905. 

. Commentaria in Ethicorum lib. 10. 

. Commentaria in Politicorum lib. 

. De anima ; de regimine principum ; de unitate 

intellectus contra averroistas. 
THUBOT, C. De 1'organisation de I'enseignement dans 

Puniversit de Paris, Paris, 1850. 
TBAILL. Social England. A record of the progress of 

the people. Vol. MI. London, 1901. 
TRIBBECHOVIUS, A. De doctoribus scolasticis et corrupta 

per eos divinarum humanarumque rerum seientia, Jena, 

1719. 
TBOELTSCH, E. Die Sociallehren der christlichen Kirchen 

und Gruppen. Tubingen 1918. Ch. II, Der mittd- 

alterliche Eatholicismus. 

TBUC, CT. Le retour a la scolastique, Paris, 1920. 
UEBERWEG-BAUMGARTNER. Grundriss der Geschichte der 

Philosophie II. Die mittlere oder die patristische und 

scholastische Zeit, 10'te Aufg, Berlin, 1915. 
VACANDARD, E. Vie de St. Bernard, Abbe de Clairvaux, 

2 vol., 3'e ed., Paris, 1902. 
WALSH, J. The Thirteenth Greatest of Centuries, New 

York, 1912. 
WEBB, C. J. Studies in the History of Natural Theology, 

Oxford, 1915. 
WICKSTEED, PH. H. The Reactions between Dogma and 

Philosophy illustrated from the works of S. Thomas 

Aquinas, London, 1920. 
ZEILLER, L'idle de PEtat dans St. Thomas d'Aquin, Paris, 

1910. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 807 

BY THE SAME AUTHOR 

Histoire de la Philosophie scolastique dang les Pays-Bag 
et la Principaute de Liege (Louvain, et Alcan, Paris, 
1895). Mem. couronne par PAcadfanie de Belgique, 
404 p. Epuise. 

* Etudes sur Henri de Gand (Louvain, et Alcan, Paris, 

1 895 ) . Ext rait du precedent. 
*Le trait e des formes de Gittes de Lessines. (Texte inedit 

et 6tude.) 1901. xvi, 182, 108 p., gr. in-j&us, dit. 

de luxe. 
Introduction ti la philosophic nto-scolastique. 1904. xvi, 

850 pages. Epuis. 
Scholasticism old and new. Translated by P. Corey, 

(Dublin, 1907), 828 pages. 
*Etude sur la vie, les oeuvres et Vinfluence de Godefroid 

de Fontaines (Memoire couronn par 1'Academie de 

Belgique). 1904. 
*Les quatre premiers quodlibets de G. de Fontaines (en 

collaborat. avec A. Pelzer). 864 pages, grand in- 

jesus. Edit, de luxe. 

* Histoire de la Philosophie en Belgique. (Louvain, et Al- 

can, Paris, 1910) xii, 378 p., 18 gravures hors texte. 

* Histoire de la Philosophie mtdMvale (Louvain, 1912). 
*Les Quodlibets V-VII de Godefroid de Fontaines. (Tex- 

tes indits). En collaboration avec J. Hoffmans). 

(Louvain, 1914). 
*L*oeu'vre d 9 art et la beaut 6; Conferences philosophiques 

faites & Poitiers (Louvain, 1920). 
Mediaeval Philosophy illustrated from the System of 

Thomas Aquinas (Harvard University Press, 1922). 

* For books so marked apply at Institut de Philosophie, 
1 rue des flamands, Louvain, Belgium. 



INDEX OF NAMES* 



Abaelard, 1, 83, 40, 44, 48, 52, 53; 
.Glossulae super Porphyrium, 58, 

59; apologetic method of, 162; 

autobiography of, 140; and He- 

loise, 35; on revelation; 164; on 

universals, 58-59. 
Absalon of St. Victor, 59. 
Accursius, 107. 
Adam of St Victor, 85. 
Adams, Henry, 35, 104, 210, 294. 
Adelard of Bath, 40, 41, 47, 57, 

142, 281. 
Agricola, 7. 

Alan of Lille, '40, 52, 142, 174. 
Alberic of Rheims, 45. 
Albert the Great, 1, 73, 76, 173, 

282, 289. 

Alcher of Clairvaux, 143. 
Alexander III (Rolando Bandinel- 

li), 44, 121. 
Alexander of Hales, 1, 64, 73, 76, 

82, 109, 130, 166, 281. 
Alexander Neckham, 42. 
Alfarabi, 79. 
Alfred Anglicus (of Seres ch el), 73, 

288. 

Alphande'ry, P., 287. 
Alphonso, X, 101. 
Altamira, R., 102. 
Anselm of Canterbury, 1, 3, 44, 48, 

52, 141, 164. 
Anselm of Laon, '40, 85. 
Ampere, 187. 
Antolin, 41. 

Aptoninus of Florence, 122. 
Aristotle, 2, 11, 97 sq., 128, 141, 



153 sq., 181, 212, 279, de Anima, 
78; Metaphysics, 78, 139; Or- 
ganon, 45, 47, 70; Physics, 78; 
Politics, 219 sq., 248, 250, 255; 
actuality and potentiality, 200 
sq., astronomy, 112; and city 
state, 226 sq., definition of good, 
223, divisions of philosophy, in, 
91; on slavery, 278; on state and 
society, 226 sqq., substance, 196. 

Augustine (St.), 11, 141, 250, 277; 
De Civitate Dei, 115, sq., 126; 
Confessions, 140; on society, 226. 

Augustus, 127. 

Averroes, 79, 84, 139, 277, 287. 

Avicebron, 79, 195. 

Avicenna, 79, 174, 277. 

Bacon, Francis, 3. 

Bacon, Roger, 1, 64, 78, 77, 83, 129; 
Opus Majus, 139; apologetics 
of, 164, 283; astrology of, 113; 
and Averroism, 284, character of, 
78, and natural science, 283. 

Baker, E., 104. 

Baiimker's-Beitrage, 58, 128, 184, 
189, 221, 282, 291. 

Baldus, 231. 

Bandinelli Rolando, see Alexander 
III. 

Barker, E., 286. 

Bartholomew Anglicus, 106. 

Baur, L., 96, 128. 

Baumgartner, M., 150. 

Bede the Venerable, 141. 

Benedict (St.), 24 sq., 1*47. 



* I want to express my thanks to my pupil, Mr. J. L. Zimmerman, 
who made this index. 



INDEX OF NAMES 



309 



Bernard of Auvergne, 74. 
Bernard of Chartres, 45. 
Bernard (St.), 31, 85. 
Berthold of Mosburg, 989 sq. 
Binder, 155. 
Boethius, 57, 78, 90. 
Boethius the Dacian, 73. 
Bonaventure, 1, 64, 78, 89 sq., 109, 

129 sq., 981, 995. 
Bourget, Paul, 931. 
Bradwardine, Thomas, 174. 
BreTiier, L., 49, 
Brunetiere, 176. 
Brunschvigg, 140. 
Buridan, John, 186. 
Burleigh, Walter, 73. 
Busse, 155. 

Caesar of Heisterbach, 156. 
Can Grande della Scala, 158. 
Carlyle, A J., 56, 969. 
Catherine of Pisa, 154. 
Cavalcante, Guido, 174. 
Chambon, F., 161. 
Charlemagne, 99, 117, 119, 191 sq. 
Chatelain (see Denifle-Chatelain). 
Chaucer, 87, 174. 
Cicero, 47, 146. 
Clerval, 47. 

Comte, Auguste, 98, 197. 
Constantine of Carthage, 44. 

Dante, 114, 191 sq.; Divine Comedy, 
9, 105 sq., 187, 166, 175, 190; 
Epistolae, 158; Inferno, 94; 
Paradise, 190; de Monarchia, 115 
sqq., 199, 146, 174, 996 sq., 981, 
941; on Aristotle, 97; on beauty. 
94; and Can Grande della Scala, 
158; on the divisions of philoso- 
phy, 199; on peace, 119; principle 
of parsimony in, 110; theory of 
the state of, 115 sqq., 996, 931, 
947; on tyranny, 947; on war, 
227. 

d'Andeli, Henri, 174. 

Denifle, 65, 161, 189, 290 sq. 

Denifle-Chatelain, 67, 169, 986. 



de Meung, Jean, 190. 

De Poorter, A., 921. 

Descartes, 11, 154, 198, 298. 

Dionysius the Areopagite, 77. 

Dominic, (St.), 74 

Donatus, 46, 93. 

Dover, Richard, 49. 

Duhem, P., 113. 

Duns Scotus, 1, 73, 82 sq., 109 sq., 
129 sq., 144, 281, 284. Grammati- 
ca Speculative, 98; on freedom, 
184; the good and martyrdom, 
185; intuition in, 183; on philos- 
ophy and theology, 164; principle 
of parsimony in, 110; avoids psy- 
chological determinism, 186. 

Dyroff, A., 290. 

Eckhart (Meister), 182, 289 sqq.; 

292 sqq.; 295 sqq. 
Edward I, 100, 102, 107, 157. 
Eleanor of Aquitaine, 20. 
Endres, J. A., 221 
Engelbert of Volkersdorf, 238. 
Etienne of Tournai, S3. 
Euclid, 47, 146. 

F&ielon, 8. 

Ferdinand III, 100, 102. 

Ferdinand of Castile, 157. 

Fra Angelico, 76. 

Francis (St.), 9, 11, 64, 74 sq., 187. 

Frederic Barbarossa, 103, 191. 

Frederic II, 100, 103, 129, 157, 987. 

Fulbert, 45. 

Gauthier of Bruges, 73. 

Gauthier of Mortagne, 45. 

Gerard of Abbeville, 981. 

Gerbert, 48. 

Geyer, B., 58 sq. 

Gierke, O. (von) 190, 930 sq., 988, 

249. 
Gilbert de la Porrfe, 39, 41, 59 sq., 

58 sq., 175, 189. 
Gilbert of Tournai, 991. 
Gilles of Leuines, 118. 
Gilles of Rome, 73, 991. 



810 



INDEX OF NAMES 



Gillct, 84. 

Gilson, ., 298. 

Giotto, 158. 

Giuliani, G., 158. 

Godfrey of Fontaines, 71 sqq., 96, 

186, 981. 
Goethe, 8 sq. 
GoMoli, 84. 
Grabmann, M, 49, 51, 58, 79, 198, 

168, 189, 220. 
Gratian, 107, 999. 
Gregory VII (Hildebrand) 16, 99, 

191, 198. 
Grosseteste, Robert, 74, 199, 151, 

OAO 
iFOy. 

Gui of Hainaut, Count, 199. 
Gundissalinus, Dominicus, 96, 198, 
143, 151. 

Harrison, F., 101. 

Masking, C. H., 49, 79. 

Heloise, 85. 

Henry II, 20 sq., 139. 

Henry IV, 99 sq., 121. 

Henry Bate of Malines, 199. 

Henry of Ghent, 73, 86, 180, 144, 

152, 165 sq., 168, 281. 
Herrad of Landsberg, 49. 
Hobbes, 3. 
Horace, 47. 
Hugh of Cluny, 30. 
Hugh II, of Lusignan, 220. 
Hugh of Noyers, 39. 
Hugo of St. Victor, 1, 40, 49, 52 

sq., 197, 151, 169. 
Hume, 186. 
Huxley, 90S. 

Innocent III, 38, 44, 103, 121 sqq. 
Innocent IV, 114, 119, 230. 
Irnerius of Bologna, 47, 231. 
Isaac of Stella, 42. 
Isidore of Seville, 90, 141. 

Jacopo de Voragine, 106. 
James I (of Aragon) 107. 
James of Vlterbo, 73. 
Janet, P., 195. 



Johannes Andreae, 119 sq. 
John of La Rochelle, 74. 
John of Salisbury, 1, '49, 48, 52, 

141, 237, 263; Metalogicus, 57; 

Polycraticus 59 sq., 219, 238, 248; 

state compared to human body, 

in, 239; on tyrannicide, 939. 
John Scotus Eriugena, 1, 50. 

Kant, 154. 

Kilwardby, Robert, 7$, 198. 

Krakowski, 298. 

Krebs, E., 292. 

1 Lackland, John, 101, 249. 
Lamprecht, 30, 37. 
Lan franc, 44. 
Langlois, 72. 

Leibnitz, 11, 902, 208, 210. 
Lippi, Filippino, 84. 
Little, A. G., 79. 
Locke, 199, 298. 
Louis VII, 20, 129, 132. 
Louis IX, 35, 100 sqq., 221, 259. 
Louis XIV, 127. 
Luchaire, A., 20 sq., 33, 101, 157. 

960. 
Lully, Raymond, 64, 73, 130, 164. 

Maitland, F. W., 120. 

Male, E., 49, 132, 173, 191 sq. 

Mandonnet, P., 79, 984, 287. 

Manegold of Lautenbach, 219, 962. 

Map, Walter, 42. 

Marchesi, 79. 

Marius Victorinus, 47. 

Marvin, F. S., 937. 

Mathew of Lorraine, 39. 

Maurice of Sully, 33. 

Mendenez y Pelayo, 79. 

Mentellini, 106. 

Mercier, D., 181, 966. 

Michael Scot, 73, 198. 

Michael of Corbeil, 51. 

Migne, 96. 

Mill, John Stuart, 150. 

Minges, P., 184. 

Montesquieu, 8. 



INDEX OF NAMES 



311 



Newton, 914. 

Nicholas of Autrecourt, 136. 
Nicholas of Oresmes, 113. 
Nizolius, 7. 

Odon of Tournai, 45. 

Otloh of St. Emmeram, 43, 51. 

Otto I, 99. 

Otto III, 43. 

Otto of Freising, 43. 

Pascal, 140. 

Peckham, John, 77. 

Pelzer, A., 79, 110, 143. 

Peter Damien, 51 sq. 

Peter Lombard, '44, 59 sq. 

Peter of Blois, 49, 51. 

Peter of Capua, 44. 

Peter of Corbeil, 33. 

Peter of Poitiers, 163. 

Peter of Spain, 78. 

Peter of Tarantaise, 73. 

Peter the Venerable, 96, 55, 58. 

Petrus Petri, 147. 

Pfeiffer, F., 990, 993. 

Philip Augustus, 64, 100 sq., 107, 

195, 139, 157. 
Philip the Fair, 91. 
Philo, 169. 
Plato, 9, 11, 97 sq., 118, 141, 154, 

910, 977, 979. 
Plutarch, 938. 
Poppo of Stavelot, 94. 
Porphyry, 58. 
Porter, A. K., 49. 
Praepositinus of Cremona, 44. 
Priscian, 47, 98. 
Proclus, 78, 988, 990, 994. 
Ptolemy of Lucques, 943, 249. 

Quintilian, 47. 

Rabelais, 155. 
Radulfus Ardens, 197. 
Ramsay, P., 998. 
RashdaU, H., 65. 
Raymond of Toledo, 81. 
Remi of Auxerre, 47. 



Reynaud, 94. 
Rhabanus Maurus, 90. 
Richard of Middleton, 73. 
Richard of St. Victor, 40, 49. 
Rivalta, Ercole, 174. 
Robert of Sorbonne, 161. 
Rocquain, 193 sq., 196. 
Rose, 79. 
Rudolph of Habsburg, 157. 

Sandys, 49. 

Savigny, 229. 

Saintsbury, 37, 176. 

Schneider, 989. 

Seneca, '47. 

Shakespeare, 176 sq. 

Siger of Brabant, 1, 73, 199, 984, 

287. 

Siger of Courtrai, 93, 981. 
Simon of Bucy, 79. 
Simon of Montfort, 157. 
Spencer, Herbert, 98, 197. 
Stadler, H. J., 282. 
Steinhausen, 37, 43. 
Stephen Langton, 73. 
Stephen of Tournai, 51. 

Taine, 97, 198. 

Taylor, H. O., 171, 173. 

Tennyson, 239. 

Theodoric of Chartres, 41. 

Thierry of Chartres, 45, 48. 

Thierry of Freiburg, 1, 73, 989, sqq., 
994. 

Thomas Aquinas (St.), 1, 3, 64, 
73, 81 sqq., 109, 114, 130, 144 sq., 
155, 195, 910, 941, 955, 960, 971, 
sqq., 977, 981, 984, and passim. 
De Anima, 187, 266; De Coelo, 
113; Contra Gentiles, 86, 110, 143, 
166, 955; Ethica Nichom., 94, 
193, 995, 933, 944 sq.; Metaphys- 
ica, 91, 139; Perihermeneias 189; 
In Politic, comm., 948, 955 ; de Re- 
gimine Principum, 290, 226 sq., 
243 sqq., 247, 949, 951, 953; de 
imitate inteUectus, 140, de veri- 
tate, 217; aesthetics of, 187 sq., 



812 



INDEX OF NAMES 



artes liberates and artes mechan- 
icae, 95; astronomy, 119 sq., 968; 
on authority, 149; and Meister 
Eckhart, 996; epistemology, 189 
sqq., ethics, 98 sq., on eternity of 
the world, 169; God, 915 sqq., 
law in, 199, 935, 947 sqq., 949, 
970 sq., and Leibnitz, 909; logic, 
93; and Monte Cassino, 44; on 
music, 168; on order, 193; po- 
litical philosophy, 93, 941 sqq., 
theory of progress, 965 sqq., 970 
sq., psychology, 187 sq., and 
science, 86, 96, 187, social philoso- 
phy, 990 sqq., on sovereignty, 943, 
948, 953; on the soul, 911; on 
substance, 904; theology and 
philosophy, 95, 159 sq., on war, 
961; divisions of philosophy, 91; 
theory of justice, 946 sqq., on 
tyrannicide, 948. 

Thorburn, W. M., 110. 

Traini, 84, 154, 986. 

Trajan, 938. 

Tribbechovius, 155. 

Ueberweg-Baumgartner, 150, 991. 
Ulric of Strasburg, 73, 989 sq., 994. 
Urban, II, 98. 

Vacandart, 39. 



Vacant, 79. 

Vincent of Beauvais, 74, 90, 106. 

Virgil, 47, 190. 

Vives, L., 7. 

Walter of Mortagne, 57. 
Walter of St. Victor, 59. 
William of Aquitaine, 94. 
William of Auvergne, 64, 74> 89, 

143, 981. 

William of Auxerre, 74, 
William of Champeaux, 40 sq., 45, 

65. 

William of Conches, 41. 
William of Meliton, 73. 
William of Mende, 106, 158,* 190. 
William of Moerbeke, 919, 950, 

989. 
William of Occam, 1, 8, 78, 110, 

981. 

William of St. Amour, 74. 
William the Conqueror, 91. 
Witelo, 74, 989 sq., 994. 
Wolff, 91. 
Wttstenfeld, F., 79. 

Ximines, Rodriguez (Cardinal), 78, 
81. 

Zeiller, 960. 
Zurbaran, 84. 



