THE  BOOK  WAS 
DRENCHED 


00  a: 

OU   160432  >m 


V.  SADANAND 


UP—43—  30-1-71—  5,000 

OSMANIA  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 

Call  No.  Accession  No,      P^T 


This  book  should  be  returned  on  or  before  the  date  last  marked  below. 


PLATO 

THE  MAN  AND 
HIS  WORK 


By  the  same  author 
* 

THE   ELEMENTS   OF  METAPHYSICS 
PLATO:    TIM^EUS   AND   CRIT1AS 

(a  translation) 


A.   E.  TAYLOR 

Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy,  University  of  Edinburgh 


PLATO 

THE  MAN  AND 
HIS  WORK 


.rest  Graduate  Library 

ollf.gf.  of  Arts  &  Commerce.  0.  U. 


METHUEN  &  CO.  LTD,  LONDON 
36  Essex  Street,  Strand,   WC2 


First  published  October  a8th  1926 

Second  Edition  June  if)2j 

Third  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged,  October  1929 

lonrth  Edition,  Revised,  October  iyj? 

Fifth  Edition  July  1048 

Sixth  Edition  June  1949 

Reprinted  1952  and  1955 


6-3 
CATALOGUE    NO.    3657/U 


PRINTED    IN    GREAT   BRITAIN    BY    BUTLER    AND   TANNER    LTD, 
FROMK   AND    LONDON,   AND   BOUND   BY  THE   FISHER   BOOKBINDING   CO.    LTD,   LONDON 


TO 

ALL  TRUE  LOVERS   OF  PLATO,  QUICK  AND  DEAD, 

AND   IN   PARTICULAR   TO 

PROFESSOR  CONSTANTIN  RITTER 

Vagliami  il  lungo  studio  e  7  grande  amore 


PREFACE 

I  HOPE  two  classes  of  readers  may  find  their  account  in  this 
book — "Honours  students "  in  our  Universities,  and  readers 
with  philosophical  interests,  but  no  great  store  of  Greek 
scholarship.  What  both  classes  most  need  in  a  work  about  Plato 
is  to  be  told  just  what  Plato  has  to  say  about  the  problems  of 
thought  and  life,  and  how  he  says  it.  What  neither  needs  is  to  be 
told  what  some  contemporary  thinks  Plato  should  have  said.  The 
sense  of  the  greatest  thinker  of  the  ancient  world  ought  not  to  be 
trimmed  to  suit  the  tastes  of  a  modern  neo-Kantian,  neo-Hegelian, 
or  neo-realist.  Again,  to  understand  Plato's  thought  we  must  see 
it  in  the  right  historical  perspective.  The  standing  background  of 
the  picture  must  be  the  social,  political,  and  economic  life  of  the 
age  of  Socrates,  or,  for  the  Laws,  of  the  age  of  Plato.  These  con- 
siderations have  determined  the  form  of  the  present  volume.  It 
offers  an  analysis  of  the  dialogues,  not  a  systematization  of  their 
contents  under  a  set  of  subject-headings.  Plato  himself  hated 
nothing  more  than  system-making.  If  he  had  a  system,  he  has 
refused  to  tell  us  what  it  was,  and  if  we  attempt  to  force  a  system 
on  a  mind  which  was  always  growing,  we  are  sure  to  end  by  mis- 
representation. This  is  why  I  have  tried  to  tell  the  reader  just 
what  Plato  says,  and  made  no  attempt  to  force  a  "  system  "  on  the 
Platonic  text.  My  own  comments  are  intended  to  supply  exegesis, 
based  as  closely  as  may  be  on  Plato's  own  words,  not  to  applaud 
nor  to  denounce.  The  result,  I  hope,  is  a  picture  which  may  claim 
the  merit  of  historical  fidelity.  For  the  same  reason  I  have  been 
unusually  careful  to  determine  the  date  and  historical  setting 
assumed  for  each  dialogue.  We  cannot  really  understand  the 
Republic  or  the  Gorgias  if  we  forget  that  the  Athens  of  these  con- 
versations is  meant  to  be  the  Athens  of  Nicias  or  Cleon,  not  the 
very  different  Athens  of  Plato's  own  manhood,  or  if  we  find  polemic 
against  Isocrates,  in  talk  supposed  to  have  passed  at  a  time  when 
Isocrates  was  a  mere  boy.  If  it  were  not  that  the  remark  might 
sound  immodest,  I  would  say  that  the  model  I  have  had  before  me 
is  Grote's  great  work  on  the  Companions  of  Socrates.  Enjoying 

vii 


viii  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

neither  Crete's  superb  scholarship  nor  his  freedom  from  limitations 
of  space,  I  have  perhaps  the  compensation  of  freedom  from  the 
prejudices  of  a  party.  Whatever  bias  I  may  have  in  metaphysics 
or  in  politics,  I  have  tried  to  keep  it  out  of  my  treatment  of  Plato. 

I  must  apologize  for  some  unavoidable  omissions.  I  have  been 
unable  to  include  a  chapter  on  the  Academy  in  the  generation 
after  Plato  and  Aristotle's  criticisms  of  it ;  I  have  had  to  exclude 
from  consideration  the  minor  dubia  and  the  spuria  of  the  Platonic 
corpus  ;  I  have  passed  very  lightly  over  much  of  the  biology  of  the 
Timaeus.  These  omissions  have  been  forced  on  me  by  the  necessity 
of  saying  what  I  have  to  say  in  one  volume  of  moderate  compass. 
For  the  same  reason  I  have  had  to  make  my  concluding  chapter 
little  more  than  a  series  of  hints.  This  omission  will,  I  trust,  be 
remedied  by  the  publication  of  a  study,  "Forms  and  Numbers,"  which 
will,  in  part,  appear  in  Mind  simultaneously  with  the  issue  of  this 
volume.  The  details  of  the  Timaeus  are  fully  dealt  with  in  a 
Commentary  now  in  course  of  printing  at  the  Clarendon  Press.  A 
brief  account — better  than  none — of  the  transmission  of  the  Platonic 
tradition  will  be  found  in  my  little  book,  Platonism  and  its  Influence 
(1924 ;  Marshall  Jones  Co.,  Boston,  U.S.A.  ;  British  Agents, 
Harrap  &  Son). 

Want  of  space  has  sometimes  forced  me  to  state  a  conclusion 
without  a  review  of  the  evidence,  but  I  hope  I  have  usually  indicated 
the  quarters  where  the  evidence  may  be  sought.  May  I  say,  once 
for  all,  that  this  book  is  no  "  compilation  "  ?  I  have  tried  to  form 
a  judgment  on  all  questions,  great  and  small,  for  myself,  and  mention 
of  any  work,  ancient  or  modern,  means,  with  the  rarest  of  exceptions, 
that  I  have  studied  it  from  one  end  to  the  other. 

There  remains  the  grateful  duty  of  acknowledging  obligations. 
I  am  a  debtor  to  many  besides  those  whom  I  actually  quote,  and  I 
hope  I  have  not  learned  least  from  many  whose  views  I  feel  bound 
to  reject.  In  some  cases  I  have  echoed  a  well-known  phrase  or 
accepted  a  well-established  result  without  express  and  formal 
acknowledgment.  It  must  be  understood  that  such  things  are 
mere  consequences  of  the  impossibility  ol  excessive  multiplication 
of  footnotes,  and  that  I  here,  once  for  all,  request  any  one  from 
whom  I  may  have  made  such  a  loan  to  accept  my  thanks.  The 
recommendations  at  the  ends  of  chapters  are  not  meant  to  be 
exhaustive  nor  necessarily  to  imply  agreement  with  all  that  is  said 
in  the  work  or  chapter  recommended.  The  last  thing  I  should  wish 
is  that  my  readers  should  see  Plato  through  my  spectacles.  I  wish 
here  to  make  general  mention  of  obligation  to  a  host  of  scholars  of 
our  own  time,  such  as  Professors  Apelt,  Parmentier,  Robin,  Dr. 


PREFACE  ix 

Adolfo  Levi,  the  late  Dr.  James  Adam,  and  others,  besides  those 
whose  names  recur  more  frequently  in  my  pages.  The  immense 
debt  of  my  own  generation  to  scholars  of  an  earlier  date,  such  as 
Grote,  Zeller,  Diels,  Baeumker,  Bonitz,  is  too  obvious  to  need  more 
than  this  simple  reference. 

To  two  living  scholars  I  must  make  very  special  acknowledgment. 
How  much  I  owe  to  the  published  writings  of  my  friend  and  colleague 
in  Scotland,  Professor  Burnet,  will  be  apparent  on  almost  every  page 
of  my  book  ;  I  owe  even  more  to  suggestions  of  every  kind  received 
during  a  personal  intercourse  of  many  years.  I  owe  no  less  to 
Professor  C.  Ritter  of  Tubingen,  who  has  given  us,  as  part  of  the 
work  of  a  life  devoted  to  Platonic  researches,  the  best  existing 
commentary  on  the  Laws  and  the  finest  existing  full-length  study 
of  Plato  and  his  philosophy  as  a  whole.  One  cannot  despair  of 
one's  kind  when  one  remembers  that  such  a  work  was  brought  to 
completion  in  the  darkest  years  Europe  has  known  since  1648.  It 
is  a  great  honour  to  me  that  Dr.  Rittnr  has  allowed  me  to  associate 
his  name  with  this  poor  volume.  Finally,  I  thank  the  publishers 
for  their  kindness  in  allowing  the  book  to  run  to  such  a  length. 

A.  E.  TAYLOR 
EDINBURGH,  July  1926 


NOTE   TO    SECOND    EDITION 

THIS  Second  Edition  only  differs   from   the   first  by  the 
correction    of    misprints,    the    addition    of    one    or    two 
references  and  the  modification  of  a  few  words  in  two  or 
three  of  the  footnotes. 

A.  E.  TAYLOR 
EDINBURGH,  March  1927 


NOTE  TO  THIRD  EDITION 

APART  from  minor  corrections  and  some  additions  to  the 
references  appended  to  various  chapters,  this  edition  only 
differs  from  its  precursors  by  the  presence  of  a  Chronological 
Table  of  Dates  and  an  Appendix,  dealing  briefly  with  the  dubia 
and  spuria  of  the  Platonic  tradition.     (I  have,  for  convenience* 
sake,  included  in  this  a  short  account  of  a  number  of  Platonic 
epistles  which  I  myself  believe  to  be  neither  dubious  nor  spurious, 
but  have  not  had  occasion  to  cite  in  the  body  of  the  book.)     I 
should  explain  that  this  essay  was  substantially  written  in  1926, 
though  it  has  been  revised  since. 

1  take  this  opportunity  of  mentioning  the  following  recent  works, 
to  which  I  should  have  been  glad  to  give  more  specific  references 
in  the  text,  had  they  come  into  my  hands  a  little  sooner.  All  will 
be  found  valuable  by  the  serious  student  of  Plato. 

STENZEL,  J. — Platon  der  Erzieher.     (Leipzig,   1928.) 

SOLMSEN,    F. — Der    Entwichlung    der    Aristotelischen    Logik   und 

Rhetorik.     (Berlin,   1929.) 
WALZER,    R. — Magna  Moralia   und   Aristotelische   Ethik.     (Berlin, 

1929.) 
TOEPLITZ,  O. — Das    Verhdltnis  von  Mathematik  und  Ideenlehre  bei 

Plato,  in  Quellen  und  Studien  zur  Geschichte  der  Mathematik  I.  i. 

(Berlin,   1929.) 
ROBIN,  L. — Greek  Thought  and  the  Origins  of  the  Scientific  Spirit. 

(E.  Tr.  from  the  revised  edition  of  the  author's  La  Pense'e 

Grecque,  London,   1928.) 

A.  E.  TAYLOR. 
EDINBURGH,  July,  1929 

NOTE  TO  FOURTH  EDITION 

I  HAVE  made  few  changes  in  this  new  edition  of   the  text, 
though  I  have  been  led   to  rewrite  one  or  two  paragraphs  in 
the  chapter  on  the  Timaeus  by  study  of  Professor  Cornford's 
valuable  commentary  on  his  translation  of  the  dialogue.     I  have 
tried  to  remove  misprints  and  detected  errors  throughout.     Among 
works  important  for  the  student  of  Plato  published  since  the  earlier 
editions  of  this  book  I  could  mention  in  particular  the  following  : 

FRUTIGER,  P. — Les  Mythes  de  Platon.     (Paris,  1930.) 
SHOREY,  P.— What  Plato  Said.     (Chicago,  1933.) 
NOVOTNY,  F. — Platonis  Epistulae.     (Brno,   1930.) 
HARWARD,  J. — The  Platonic  Epistles.     (E.  Tr.  Cambridge,  1932.) 
FIELD,  G.  C. — Plato  and  His  Contemporaries.     (London,  1930.) 
CORNFORD,  F.  M. — Plato's  Cosmology,  the  Timaeus  of  Plato  trans- 
lated with  a  running  commentary.     (London,   1937.) 
SCHULL,  P.  M. — Essai  sur  la  Formation  de  la  Pense'e  Grecque.     (Paris, 

1934) 

A.  E.  TAYLOR. 

X 


CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PAGE 

I.  THE  LIFE  OF  PLATO.          ......  i 

II.  THE  PLATONIC  WRITINGS    ......  10 

III.  MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  :  HIPPIAS  MAJOR,  HIPPIAS  MINOR, 

ION,  MENEXENUS            .           .           .            .           .  23 

IV.  MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  :  CHARMIDES,  L  ACHES  t  LYSIS      .  46 
V.  MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  :  CRATYLUS,  EUTHYDEMUS          .  75 

VI.  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  :  CORGI  AS,  MENO    ....  103 

VII.  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  :  EUTHYPHRO,  APOLOGY,  CRITO   *           ,  146 

VIII.  PHAEDO           •           .           .           •           .           »           .           *  174 

IX.  SYMPOSIUM      .                      ......  209 

X.  PROTAGORAS     ........  235 

XI.  REPUBLIC        ........  263 

XII.  PHAEDRUS       ........  299 

XIII.  THBABTETUS  ........  320 

XIV.  PARMENIDBS    ........  349 

XV.    SOPHISTES-TOLITICUS                 .               .               .               .               .               •  371 

XVI.  PHILEBUS         ........  40^ 

XVII.     TlMARUS   AND    CRITIAS             ,                 .                .                 .                •                 •  «3.6 

XVIII.  LAWS  AND  EPIKOMIS           ......  463 

XIX.  PLATO  IN  THE  ACADEMY — FORMS  AND  NUMBERS         .            .  503 

ADDENDA         .           .           .           .           .            .           .           .  517 

CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE        .           .           .           .            .           •  519 

APPENDIX — THE  PLATONIC  APOCRYPHA    .  .  -521 

INDEXES — 

I.  INDEX  OF  PROPER  NAMES            .            .                        .  557 

II.  INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS  .  .  .  .  .561 

xi 


THE  following  abbreviations  have  occasionally  been  used : 

E.G.Ph*  =  BURNET,  Early  Greek  Philosophy  (yd  edition), 

1920. 
E.R.E.  =  HASTINGS,  Encyclopaedia  of  Religion  and  Ethics, 

1908-1921. 

R.P.  =  RITTER  AND  PREFER,  Histona  Philosophiae  Graccae 
(9th  edition),  1913. 


xu 


PLATO 

THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

CHAPTER   I 
THE   LIFE  OF  PLATO1 

PLATO,  son  of  Ariston  and  Perictione,  was  born  in  the  month 
Thargelion  (May-June)  of  the  first  year  of  the  eighty-eighth 
Olympiad  by  the  reckoning  of  the  scholars  of  Alexandria, 
428-7  B.C.  of  our  own  era,  and  died  at  the  age  of  eighty  or  eighty- 
one  in  Ol.  108.1  (348-7  B.C.).  These  dates  rest  apparently  on  the 
authority  of  the  great  Alexandrian  chronologist  Eratosthenes  and 
may  be  accepted  as  certain.  Plato's  birth  thus  falls  in  the  fourth 
year  of  the  Archidamian  war,  in  the  year  following  the  death 
of  Pericles,  and  his  death  only  ten  years  before  the  battle  of  Chae- 
ronea,  which  finally  secured  to  Philip  of  Macedon  the  hegemony 
of  the  Hellenic  world.  His  family  was,  on  both  sides,  one  of  the 
most  distinguished  in  the  Athens  of  the  Periclean  age.  On  the 
father's  side  the  pedigree  was  traditionally  believed  to  go  back  to 
the  old  kings  of  Athens,  and  through  them  to  the  god  Posidon.  On 
the  mother's  side  the  descent  is  equally  illustrious  and  more  his- 

1  The  chief  extant  lives  are  :  (a)  Apuleius,  de  Platone,  \.  1-4  ;  (6)  Diogenes 
Laertius,  iii.  i  (critical  edition,  Basle,  1907)  ;  (c)  Olympiodorus  (Platonis  Opera, 
ed.  Hermann,  vi.  190-195).  The  least  bad  of  these  is  (6),  which  appears 
to  have  been  originally  composed  for  a  lady  amateur  of  Platonic  philosophy 
((/uXoTrXaruw  W  COL  StKa/wj  virapxov<ry ,  §47),  not  before  the  latter  part 
of  the  first  century  of  our  era.  The  one  or  two  references  to  the  scholar 
Favorinus  of  Aries  may  possibly  be  later  marginal  annotations  by  an  owner 
or  copier  of  the  text.  If  they  are  original,  they  would  bring  down  the  date 
of  the  Life  to  the  latter  part  of  the  second  century  A.D.  In  the  main  Diogenes 
Laertius  appears  to  give  the  version  of  Plato's  life  accepted  by  the  literati 
of  Alexandria.  But  we  can  see  from  what  we  know  of  the  work  of  Alex- 
andrians like  Sotion,  Satyrus,  and  Hermippus,  that  biographies  were  already 
being  ruined  by  the  craze  for  romantic  or  piquant  anecdote  before  the  end 
of  the  third  century  B.C.  In  Plato's  case  there  is  a  peculiar  reason  for 
suspicion  of  Alexandrian  narratives.  The  writers  were  largely  dependent 
on  the  assertions  of  Aristoxenus  of  Tarentum,  a  scholar  of  Aristotle  who 
had  known  the  latest  generation  of  the  fourth  century  Pythagoreans.  Aris- 
toxenus has  long  been  recognized  as  a  singularly  mendacious  person,  and 
he  had  motives  for  misrepresenting  both  Socrates  and  Plato.  See  Burnet, 
Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  p.  153. 


2  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

torically  certain,  and  is  incidentally  recorded  for  us  by  Plato  himself 
in  the  Timaeus.  Perictione  was  sister  of  Charmides  and  cousin  of 
Critias,  both  prominent  figures  in  the  brief  "  oligarchic  "  anarchy 
which  followed  on  the  collapse  of  Athens  at  the  end  of  the  Pelopon- 
nesian  war  (404-3  B.C.).  The  grandfather  of  this  Critias,  Plato's 
maternal  great-grandfather,  was  another  Critias,  introduced  in  the 
Timaeus,  whose  own  great-grandfather  Dropides  was  a  "  friend  and 
kinsman  "  of  Solon,  the  great  Attic  legislator.  The  father  of  this 
Dropides,  also  called  Dropides,  the  first  member  of  the  house  who 
figures  in  authentic  history,  was  the  archon  of  the  year  644  B.C. 
Besides  Plato  himself,  Ariston  and  Perictione  had  at  least  three 
other  children.  These  were  two  older  sons,  Adimantus  and  Glaucon, 
who  appear  as  young  men  in  Plato's  Republic,  and  a  daughter 
Potone.  Ariston  appears  to  have  died  in  Plato's  childhood  ;  his 
widow  then  married  her  uncle  Pyrilampes,  whom  we  know  from  the 
allusions  of  the  comic  poets  to  have  been  a  personal  intimate  of 
Pericles  as  well  as  a  prominent  supporter  of  his  policy.  Pyrilampes 
was  already  by  a  former  marriage  the  father  of  the  handsome 
Demus,  the  great  "  beauty  "  of  the  time  of  the  Archidamian  war  ; 
by  Perictione  he  had  a  younger  son  Antiphon  who  appears  in  Plato's 
Parmenides,  where  we  learn  that  he  had  given  up  philosophy  for 
horses.1 

These  facts  are  of  considerable  importance  for  the  student  of 
Plato's  subsequent  career.  Nothing  is  more  characteristic  of  him 
than  his  lifelong  conviction  that  it  is  the  imperative  duty  of  the 
philosopher,  whose  highest  personal  happiness  would  be  found  in 
the  life  of  serene  contemplation  of  truth,  to  make  the  supreme 
sacrifice  of  devoting  the  best  of  his  manhood  to  the  service  of  his 
fellows  as  a  statesman  and  legislator,  if  the  opportunity  offers. 
Plato  was  not  content  to  preach  this  doctrine  in  the  Republic ;  he 
practised  it,  as  we  shall  see,  in  his  own  life.  The  emphasis  he  lays 
on  it  is  largely  explained  when  we  remember  that  from  the  first  he 
grew  up  in  a  family  with  traditions  of  Solon  and  accustomed  through 
several  generations  to  play  a  prominent  part  in  the  public  life  of 
the  State.  Something  of  Plato's  remarkable  insight  into  the  realities 
of  political  life  must,  no  doubt,  be  set  down  to  early  upbringing  in 
a  household  of  "  public  men."  So,  too,  it  is  important  to  remember, 
though  it  is  too  often  forgotten,  that  the  most  receptive  years  of 
Plato's  early  life  must  have  been  spent  in  the  household  of  his  step- 
father, a  prominent  figure  of  the  Periclean  regime.  Plato  has  often 
been  accused  of  a  bias  against  "  democracy."  If  he  had  such  a 
bias,  it  is  not  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  influence  of  early  sur- 
roundings. He  must  have  been  originally  indoctrinated  with 
"  Periclean  "  politics  ;  his  dislike  of  them  in  later  life,  so  far  as  it 

1  See  the  family  tree  in  Burnet,  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I.,  Appendix  I.,  p.  357. 
For  Pyrilampes,  cf.  Charmides,  1580,  and  for  Demus,  Gorgias,  48 id  5,  Aristo- 
phanes, Wasps,  98.  According  to  Ep.  xiii.  3610,  Perictione  was  still  alive 
at  the  date  of  writing  (i.e.  about  366),  but  her  death  was  expected,  as 
Plato  speaks  of  the  expense  of  the  funeral  as  one  which  he  will  shortly  have  to 
meet.  Nothing  is  known  of  Pyrilampes  after  the  battle  of  Delium  (424  B.C.). 


THE  LIFE  OF  PLATO  8 

is  real  at  all,  is  best  intelligible  as  a  consequence  of  having  been 
"  behind  the  scenes."  If  he  really  disliked  democracy,  it  was  not 
with  the  dislike  of  ignorance  but  with  that  of  the  man  who  has 
known  too  much. 

The  actual  history  of  Plato's  life  up  to  his  sixtieth  year  is  almost 
a  blank.  In  his  own  dialogues  he  makes  a  practice  of  silence  about 
himself,  only  broken  once  in  the  Apology,  where  he  names  himself  as 
one  of  the  friends  who  urged  Socrates  to  increase  the  amount  of  the 
fine  he  proposed  on  himself  from  one  mina  to  thirty  and  offered 
to  give  security  for  the  payment,  and  again  in  the  Phaedo,  where 
he  mentions  an  illness  as  the  explanation  of  his  absence  from  the 
death-scene.1  Aristotle  adds  the  one  further  detail  that  Plato  had 
been  "  in  his  youth  familiar  with  "  the  Heraclitean  Cratylus,  though 
we  cannot  be  absolutely  sure  that  this  is  more  than  a  conjecture  of 
Aristotle's  own.  The  later  writers  of  the  extant  Lives  of  Plato  add 
some  details,  but  these  are  mainly  of  a  purely  anecdotal  kind  and 
not  to  be  implicitly  trusted.  In  any  case  their  scraps  of  anecdote 
throw  no  light  on  Plato's  life  or  character  and  we  may  safely 
neglect  them  here.  All  we  can  be  sure  of,  down  to  Plato's  twenty- 
sixth  year,  is  that  the  influence  of  friendship  with  Socrates  must 
have  been  the  most  potent  force  in  the  moulding  of  his  mind.  (We 
may  add  that  if  Aristotle's  statement  about  Cratylus2  really  is 
more  than  an  inference,  the  Heraclitean  doctrine,  learned  from 
Cratylus,  that  the  world  disclosed  to  us  by  our  senses  is  a  scene  of 
incessant  and  incalculable  mutability  and  variation,  was  one  which 
Plato  never  forgot.  He  drew,  says  Aristotle,  the  conclusion  that 
since  there  is  genuine  science,  that  of  which  science  treats  must  be 
something  other  than  this  unresting  "  flux  "  of  sense-appearances.) 

The  gossiping  Alexandrian  biographers  represented  Plato  as 
*  hearing  "  Socrates  at  the  age  of  eighteen  or  twenty.  This  cannot 
mean  that  his  first  introduction  to  Socrates  took  place  at  that  age. 
We  know  from  Plato  himself  that  Socrates  had  made  the  close 
acquaintance  of  Plato's  uncle  Charmides  in  the  year  431,  and  was 
even  then  familiar  with  Critias.8  Presumably  Plato's  acquaintance 
with  Socrates,  then,  went  back  as  far  as  he  could  remember.  The 
Alexandrian  tales  will  only  mean  that  Plato  became  a  "  disciple  " 
of  Socrates  as  soon  as  he  was  an  tyyfios  or  "  adolescent,"  a  period 
of  life  currently  reckoned  as  beginning  at  eighteen  and  ending  at 
twenty.  Even  with  this  explanation  the  story  is  probably  not 
accurate.  Both  Plato  and  Isocrates,  his  older  contemporary, 
emphatically  deny  that  Socrates  ever  had  any  actual  "  disciples  " 
whom  he  "  instructed,"  and  Plato  himself,  in  a  letter  written  nearly 
at  the  end  of  his  life,  puts  the  matter  in  a  truer  light.  He  tells  us 
there  that  at  the  time  of  the  "  oligarchical  "  usurpation  of  404-3, 
being  still  a  very  young  man,  he  was  looking  forward  to  a  political 
career  and  was  urged  by  relatives  who  were  among  the  revolu- 
tionaries (no  doubt,  Critias  and  Charmides)  to  enter  public  life 

1  Apology,  386  6,  Phaedo,  596  10.  •  Aristotle,  Met.  98  ;a  32. 

1  See  the  opening  pages  of  the  Charmides. 


4  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

under  their  auspices,  but  waited  to  see  first  what  their  policy  would 
be.  He  was  horrified  to  find  that  they  soon  showed  signs  of  lawless 
violence,  and  finally  disgusted  when  they  attempted  to  make  his 
"  elderly  friend  Socrates/'  the  best  man  of  his  time,  an  accomplice 
in  the  illegal  arrest  and  execution  of  a  fellow-citizen  whose  property 
they  intended  to  confiscate.  The  leaders  of  restored  democracy 
did  worse,  for  they  actually  put  Socrates  to  death  on  an  absurd 
charge  of  impiety.  This,  Plato  says,  put  an  end  to  his  own  political 
aspirations.  For  in  politics  nothing  can  be  achieved  without  a 
party,  and  the  treatment  of  Socrates  by  both  the  Athenian  factions 
proved  that  there  was  no  party  at  Athens  with  whom  an  honourable 
man  could  work.  The  suggestion  clearly  made  here  is  that  Plato 
did  not  regard  Socrates  as,  properly  speaking,  a  master.  He  loved 
him  personally  as  a  young  man  loves  a  revered  elder  friend,  and  he 
thought  of  him  as  a  martyr.  But  it  was  not  until  the  actual  execu- 
tion of  Socrates  opened  his  eyes  once  for  all  that  he  gave  up  his 
original  intention  of  taking  up  active  political  life  as  his  career. 
His  original  aspirations  had  been  those  of  the  social  and  legislative 
reformer,  not  those  of  the  thinker  or  man  of  science.1 

Hermodorus,2  an  original  member  of  Plato's  Academy,  stated 
that  for  the  moment  the  friends  of  Socrates  felt  themselves  in 
danger  just  after  his  death,  and  that  Plato  in  particular,  with 
others,  withdrew  for  a  while  to  the  neighbouring  city  of  Megara 
under  the  protection  of  Euclides  of  that  city,  a  philosopher  who  was 
among  the  foreign  friends  present  at  the  death  of  Socrates  and 
combined  certain  Socratic  tenets  with  the  Eleaticism  of  Parmenides. 
This  temporary  concentration  at  Megara  presumably  would  only 
last  until  the  feelings  aroused  in  connexion  with  the  cause  celebre 
had  had  time  to  blow  over.  The  biographers  narrate  that  it  was 
followed  by  some  years  of  travel  to  Cyrene,  Italy,  and  Egypt,  and 
that  the  Academy  was  then  founded  on  Plato's  return  to  Athens. 
How  much  of  this  story — none  of  it  rests,  like  the  mention  of  the 
sojourn  in  Megara,  on  the  evidence  of  Hermodorus — may  be  true,  is 
very  doubtful  Plato  himself,  in  the  letter  already  alluded  to, 
merely  says  that  he  visited  Italy  and  Sicily  at  the  age  of  forty  and 
was  repelled  by  the  sensual  luxury  of  the  life  led  there  by  the  well- 
to-do.  His  language  on  the  whole  implies  that  most  of  the  time 
between  this  journey  and  the  death  of  Socrates  had  been  spent  at 
Athens,  watching  the  public  conduct  of  the  city  and  drawing  the 
conclusion  that  good  government  can  only  be  expected  when 
"  either  true  and  genuine  philosophers  find  their  way  to  political 
authority  or  powerful  politicians  by  the  favour  of  Providence  take 
to  true  philosophy."  He  says  nothing  of  travels  in  Africa  or 
Egypt,  though  some  of  the  observations  made  in  the  Laws  about 
the  art  and  music,  the  arithmetic  and  the  games  of  the  Egyptian 
children  have  the  appearance  of  being  first-hand.  The  one 
fateful  result  of  Plato's  "  travels,"  in  any  case,  is  that  he  won 
the  whole-hearted  devotion  of  a  young  man  of  ability  and 
1  See  the  full  explanation  of  all  this  at  Ep.  vii.  3246  8-3266  4.  «  D.L.,  iii.  6. 


THE  LIFE  OF  PLATO  5 

promise,  Dion,  son-in-law  of  the  reigning  "  tyrant  "  of  Syracuse, 
Dionysius  I.1 

The  founding  of  the  Academy  is  the  turning-point  in  Plato's 
life,  and  in  some  ways  the  most  memorable  event  in  the  history  of 
Western  European  science.  For  Plato  it  meant  that,  after  long 
waiting,  he  had  found  his  true  work  in  life.  He  was  henceforth  to 
be  the  first  president  of  a  permanent  institution  for  the  prosecution 
of  science  by  original  research.  In  one  way  the  career  was  not  a 
wholly  unprecedented  one.  Plato's  rather  older  contemporary 
Isocrates  presided  in  the  same  way  over  an  establishment  for  higher 
education,  and  it  is  likely  that  his  school  was  rather  the  older  of  the 
two.  The  novel  thing  about  the  Platonic  Academy  was  that  it 
was  an  institution  for  the  prosecution  of  scientific  study.  Isocrates, 
like  Plato,  believed  in  training  young  men  for  public  life.  But  unlike 
Plato  he  held  the  opinion  of  the  "  man  in  the  street  "  about  the 
uselessness  of  science.  It  was  his  boast  that  the  education  he  had 
to  offer  was  not  founded  on  hard  and  abstract  science  with  no 
visible  humanistic  interest  about  it  ;  he  professed  to  teach 
"  opinions,"  as  we  should  say,  to  provide  the  ambitious  aspirant 
to  public  life  with  "  points  of  view/1  and  to  train  him  to  express  his 
"  point  of  view  "  with  the  maximum  of  polish  and  persuasiveness. 
This  is  just  the  aim  of  "  journalism  "  in  its  best  forms,  and  Isocrates 
is  the  spiritual  father  of  all  the  "  essayists/1  from  his  own  day  to 
ours,  who  practise  the  agreeable  and  sometimes  beneficial  art  of 
saying  nothing,  or  saying  the  commonplace,  in  a  perfect  style.  He 
would  be  the  "  Greek  Addison  "  but  for  the  fact  that  personally 
he  was  a  man  of  real  discernment  in  political  matters  and,  unlike 
Addison,  really  had  something  to  say.  But  it  is  needless  to  remark 
that  an  education  in  humanistic  commonplace  has  never  really 
proved  the  right  kind  of  training  to  turn  out  great  men  of  action. 
Plato's  rival  scheme  meant  the  practical  application  to  education 
of  the  conviction  which  had  become  permanent  with  him  that  the 
hope  of  the  world  depends  on  the  union  of  political  power  and 
genuine  science.  This  is  why  the  pure  mathematics — the  one 
department  of  sheer  hard  thinking  which  had  attained  any  serious 
development  in  the  fourth  century  B.C. — formed  the  backbone  of 
the  curriculum,  and  why  in  the  latter  part  of  the  century  the  two 
types  of  men  who  were  successfully  turned  out  in  the  Academy 
were  original  mathematicians  and  skilled  legislators  and  admini- 

1  T  have  said  nothing  of  the  story  related,  e.g.,  in  D.L.,  iii.,  18-21,  that 
Dionysius  I  had  Plato  kidnapped  and  handed  over  to  a  Spartan  admiral  who 
exposed  him  for  sale  at  Aegina,  where  he  was  ransomed  by  an  acquaintance 
from  Gyrene.  The  story,  though  quite  possible,  seems  not  too  probable,  and 
looks  to  be  no  more  than  an  anecdote  intended  to  blacken  the  character  of 
Dionysius,  who  in  fact,  though  masterful  enough,  was  neither  brute  nor  fool. 
In  spite  of  the  counter-assertion  of  Diels,  it  is  pretty  certainly  not  referred  to  in 
Aristotle,  Physics,  B  iggb  13.  Simplicius  seems  clearly  right  in  supposing  that 
Aristotle's  allusion  is  to  some  situation  in  a  comedy.  The  statement  that 
Dionysius  attempted  to  kidnap  Plato  is  made  earlier  by  Cornelius  Nepos, 
Dion,  c.  2,  and  perhaps  comes  from  the  Sicilian  historian  Timaeus. 


6  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

strators,  a  point  on  which  we  shall  have  a  word  or  two  to  say  in 
the  sequel.  It  is  this,  too,  which  makes  the  Academy  the  direct 
progenitor  of  the  mediaeval  and  modern  university :  a  university 
which  aims  at  supplying  the  State  with  legislators  and  administrators 
whose  intellects  have  been  developed  in  the  first  instance  by  the 
disinterested  pursuit  of  truth  for  its  own  sake  is  still  undertaking, 
under  changed  conditions,  the  very  task  Plato  describes  as  the 
education  of  the  "  philosopher  king."  The  immediate  and  percep- 
tible outward  sign  of  the  new  order  of  things  in  the  Greek  world  is 
that  whereas  in  the  age  of  Plato's  birth  aspiring  young  Athenians 
had  to  depend  for  their  "  higher  education  "  on  the  lectures  of  a 
peripatetic  foreign  "  sophist/'  in  the  Athens  of  fifty  years  later 
aspiring  young  men  from  all  quarters  flocked  to  Athens  to  learn 
from  Isocrates  or  Plato  or  both.  The  travelling  lecturer  was 
replaced  by  the  university  or  college  with  a  fixed  domicile  and 
a  constitution. 

Unfortunately  the  exact  date  of  the  foundation  of  the  Academy 
is  unknown.  From  the  obvious  connexion  between  its  programme 
and  the  conviction  Plato  speaks  of  having  definitely  reached  at 
the  time  when  he  visited  Italy  and  Sicily  at  the  age  of  forty,  we 
should  naturally  suppose  that  the  foundation  took  place  about  this 
time  (388-7  B.C.)  ;  and  it  is  easier  to  suppose  that  the  visit  to  Sicily 
preceded  it,  as  the  later  biographical  statements  assume,  than  that 
it  followed  directly  on  its  inception.  If  there  is  any  truth  in  the 
statement  that  the  real  object  of  Plato's  journey  was  to  visit  the 
Pythagoreans,  who  were  beginning  to  be  formed  into  a  school  again 
under  Archytas  of  Tarentum,  we  may  suppose  that  it  was  precisely 
the  purpose  of  founding  the  Academy  which  led  Plato  just  at  this 
juncture  to  the  very  quarter  where  he  might  expect  to  pick  up 
useful  hints  and  suggestions  for  his  guidance ;  but  this  can  be  no 
more  than  a  conjecture. 

We  have  to  think  of  Plato  for  the  next  twenty  years  as  mainly 
occupied  with  the  onerous  work  of  organizing  and  maintaining  his 
school.  "  Lecturing  "  would  be  part  of  this  work,  and  we.  know 
from  Aristotle  that  Plato  did  actually  "  lecture  "  without  a  manu- 
script at  a  much  later  date.  But  the  delivery  of  these  lectures 
would  be  only  a  small  part  of  the  work  to  be  done.  It  was  one  of 
Plato's  firmest  convictions  that  nothing  really  worth  knowing  can 
be  learned  by  merely  listening  to  "  instruction  "  ;  the  only  true 
method  of  "learning  "  science  is  that  of  being  actually  engaged,  in 
company  with  a  more  advanced  mind,  in  the  discovery  of  scientific 
truth.1  Very  little  in  the  way  of  actual  "  new  theorems  "  is  ascribed 
to  Plato  by  the  later  writers  on  the  history  of  mathematical  science, 
but  the  men  trained  in  his  school  or  closely  associated  with  it  made 
all  the  great  advances  achieved  in  the  interval  between  the  downfall 
of  the  original  Pythagorean  order  about  the  middle  of  the  fifth 
century  and  the  rise  of  the  specialist  schools  of  Alexandria  in  the 

1  £/>,  vii.  341^-0.  See  the  comments  on  this  passage  in  Burnet,  Greek 
Philosophy,  Part  I.,  220-222. 


THE  LIFE  OF  PLATO  7 

third.  In  estimating  Plato's  work  for  science  it  is  necessary  to 
take  account  first  and  foremost  of  the  part  he  must  have  played 
as  the  organizer  and  director  of  the  studies  of  this  whole  brilliant 
group.  It  was,  no  doubt,  this  which  induced  the  first  mathematician 
of  the  time,  Eudoxus  of  Cnidus,  to  transport  himself  and  his  scholars 
bodily  from  Cyzicus  to  Athens  to  make  common  cause  with  the 
Academy.  Probably  we  are  not  to  think  of  Plato  as  writing  much 
during  these  twenty  years.  He  would  be  too  busy  otherwise,  and, 
as  we  shall  see,  there  is  the  strongest  reason  for  thinking  that  most 
of  his  dialogues,  including  all  those  which  are  most  generally  known 
to-day,  were  all  composed  by  his  fortieth  year,  or  soon  after,  while 
the  important  half-dozen  or  so  which  must  be  assigned  to  a  later 
date  most  probably  belong  definitely  to  his  old  age. 

In  the  year  367  something  happened  which  provided  Plato, 
now  a  man  of  sixty,  with  the  great  adventure  of  his  life.  Dionysius  I 
of  Syracuse,  who  had  long  governed  his  native  city  nominally  as 
annually  elected  generalissimo,  really  as  autocrat  or  "  tyrant/'  died. 
He  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Dionysius  II,  a  man  of  thirty  whose 
education  had  been  neglected  and  had  left  him  totally  unfitted  to 
take  up  his  father's  great  task  of  checking  the  expansion  of  the 
Carthaginians,  which  was  threatening  the  very  existence  of  Greek 
civilization  in  Western  Sicily.  The  strong  man  of  Syracuse  at  the 
moment  was  Dion,  brother-in-law  of  the  new  "  tyrant,"  the  same 
who  had  been  so  powerfully  attached  to  Plato  twenty  years  before. 
Dion,  a  thorough  believer  in  Plato's  views  about  the  union  of 
political  power  with  science,  conceived  the  idea  of  fetching  Plato 
personally  to  Syracuse  to  attempt  the  education  of  his  brother-in- 
law.  Plato  felt  that  the  prospect  of  success  was  not  promising, 
but  the  Carthaginian  danger  was  very  real,  if  the  new  ruler  of 
Syracuse  should  prove  unequal  to  his  work,  and  it  would  be  an 
everlasting  dishonour  to  the  Academy  if  no  attempt  were  made  to 
put  its  theory  into  practice  when  the  opportunity  offered  at  such  a 
critical  juncture.  Accordingly  Plato,  though  with  a  great  deal  of 
misgiving,  made  up  his  mind  to  accept  Dion's  invitation. 

If  the  Epistles  ascribed  in  our  Plato  MSS.  to  Plato  are  genuine 
(as  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  great  bulk  of  them  are),  they  throw 
a  sudden  flood  of  light  on  Plato's  life  for  the  next  few  years.  To 
understand  the  situation  we  must  bear  two  things  in  mind.  Plato's 
object  was  not,  as  has  been  fancied,  the  ridiculous  one  of  setting  up 
in  the  most  luxurious  of  Greek  cities  a  pinchbeck  imitation  of  the 
imaginary  city  of  the  Republic.  It  was  the  practical  and  statesman- 
like object  of  trying  to  fit  the  young  Dionysius  for  the  immediate 
practical  duty  of  checking  the  Carthaginians  1  and,  if  possible,  ex- 
pelling them  from  Sicily,  by  making  Syracuse  the  centre  of  a  strong 
constitutional  monarchy  to  embrace  the  whole  body  of  Greek  com- 
munities in  the  west  of  the  island.  Also,  Plato's  belief  in  the  value 
of  a  hard  scientific  education  for  a  ruler  of  men,  wise  or  not,  was 
absolutely  genuine.  Accordingly  he  at  once  set  about  the  task 
1  Ep.  vii.  3330  i,  viii.  353**. 


8  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

from  the  beginning  and  made  Dionysius  enter  on  a  serious  course  of 
geometry.  For  a  little  while  things  looked  promising.  Dionysius 
became  attached  to  Plato  and  geometry  the  "  fashion  "  at  his  court. 
But  the  scheme  wrecked  on  a  double  obstacle.  Dionysius  was  too 
feeble  of  character  and  his  education  had  been  left  neglected  too 
long,  and  his  personal  jealousies  of  his  stronger  and  older  relative 
were  easily  awakened.  In  a  few  months  the  situation  became 
strained.  Dion  had  to  go  into  what  was  virtually  banishment  and 
Plato  returned  to  Athens.  Relations,  however,  were  not  broken  off. 
Dionysius  kept  up  a  personal  correspondence  with  Plato  about  his 
studies  and  projects,  and  Plato  endeavoured  to  reconcile  Dionysius 
and  Dion.  This  proved  not  feasible  when  Dionysius  not  only 
confiscated  Dion's  revenues  but  forced  his  wife,  for  dynastic 
reasons,  to  marry  another  man.  Yet  Plato  made  another  voyage 
to  Syracuse  and  spent  nearly  a  year  there  (361-360)  in  the  hope  of 
remedying  the  situation.  On  this  occasion  something  was  really 
done  on  the  task  of  drafting  the  preliminaries  to  a  constitution  for 
the  proposed  federation  of  the  Greek  cities,  but  the  influence  of  the 
partisans  of  the  old  regime  proved  too  strong.  Plato  seems  at  one 
time  to  have  been  in  real  personal  danger  from  the  hostility  of 
Dionysius'  barbarian  body-guards,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  and  only 
by  the  mediation  of  Archytas  of  Tarentum  that  he  finally  obtained 
leave  to  return  to  Athens  (360  B.C.). 

At  this  point  Plato's  personal  intervention  in  Sicilian  politics 
ceases.  The  quarrel  between  Dion  and  Dionysius  naturally  went 
on,  and  Dion,  whose  one  great  fault,  as  Plato  tells  him,  was  want  of 
"  adaptability  "  and  savoir-faire,  made  up  his  mind  to  recover  his 
rights  with  the  strong  hand.  Enlistment  went  on  in  the  Peloponnese 
and  elsewhere,  with  the  active  concurrence  of  many  of  the  younger 
members  of  the  Academy,  and  in  the  summer  of  357  Dion  made  a 
sudden  and  successful  dash  across  the  water,  captured  Syracuse,  and 
proclaimed  its  "  freedom."  Plato  wrote  him  a  letter  of  congratula- 
tion on  the  success,  but  warned  him  of  his  propensity  to  carry  things 
with  too  high  a  hand  and  reminded  him  that  the  world  would  expect 
the  "  You-know-who's  "  (the  Academy)  1  to  set  a  model  of  good 
behaviour.  Unfortunately  Dion  was  too  good  and  too  bad  at  once 
for  the  situation.  Like  Plato  himself,  he  believed  in  strong  though 
law-abiding  personal  rule  and  disgusted  the  Syracusan  mob  by 
not  restoring  "  democratic  "  licence  ;  he  had  not  the  tact  to  manage 
disappointed  associates,  quarrelled  with  his  admiral  Heraclides 
and  at  last  made  away  with  him,  or  connived  at  his  being  made 
away  with.  Dion  was  in  turn  murdered  with  great  treachery  by 
another  of  his  subordinates,  Callippus,  who  is  said  by  later  writers 
to  have  been  a  member  of  the  Academy,  though  this  seems  hard  to 
reconcile  with  Plato's  own  statement  that  the  link  of  association 
between  the  two  was  not  "  philosophy  "  but  the  mere  accident  of 
having  been  initiated  together  into  certain  "  mysteries."  Plato 
still  believed  strongly  in  the  fundamental  honesty  and  sanity  of 

1  Ep.  iv.  320  c-e,  and  for  Dion's  want  of  "  tact,"  ibid.  3216,  vii.  3286. 


THE  LIFE  OF  PLATO  9 

Dion's  political  aims  and  wrote  two  letters  to  the  remnants  of  his 
party,  justifying  the  common  policy  of  Dion  and  himself  and  calling 
on  them  to  be  faithful  to  it,  and  making  suggestions  for  conciliation 
of  parties  which  were,  of  course,  not  accepted.  As  he  said  in  one  of 
these  letters,  the  fatal  disunion  of  parties  seerr-ed  likely  to  leave 
Sicily  a  prey  either  to  the  Carthaginians  or  to  the  Oscans  of  South 
Italy.1 

It  is  not  necessary  to  follow  the  miserable  story  of  events  in 
Syracuse  beyond  the  point  where  Plato's  concern  with  them  ends. 
But  it  is  worth  while  to  remark  that  Plato's  forecast  of  events  was 
fully  justified.  The  "  unification  of  Sicily,"  when  it  came  at  last, 
came  as  a  fruit  of  the  success  of  the  Romans  in  the  first  two  Punic 
wars ;  and,  as  Professor  Burnet  has  said,  this  was  the  beginning  of  the 
long  series  of  events  which  has  made  the  cleavage  between  Eastern 
Europe,  deriving  what  civilization  it  has  direct  from  Constantinople, 
and  Western  Europe  with  its  latinized  Hellenism.  If  Plato  had 
succeeded  at  Syracuse,  there  might  have  been  no  "  schism  of  the 
churches  "  and  no  "  Eastern  problem  "  to-day. 

Nothing  is  known,  beyond  an  anecdote  or  two  not  worth  re- 
cording, of  Plato's  latest  years.  All  that  we  can  say  is  that  he  must 
still  have  gone  on  from  time  to  time  lecturing  to  his  associates  in 
the  Academy,  since  Aristotle,  who  only  entered  the  Academy  in 
367,  was  one  of  his  hearers,  and  that  the  years  between  360  and  his 
death  must  have  been  busily  occupied  with  the  composition  of  his 
longest  and  ripest  contribution  to  the  literature  of  moral  and 
political  philosophy,  the  Laws.  Probably  also,  all  the  rest  of  the 
dialogues  which  manifestly  belong  to  the  later  part  of  Plato's 
life  must  be  supposed  to  have  been  written  after  his  final  return  from 
Sicily.  A  complete  suspension  of  composition  for  several  years 
will  best  explain  the  remarkable  difference  in  style  between  all  of 
them  and  even  the  maturest  of  those  which  preceded.  It  may  be 
useful  to  remember  that  of  the  years  mentioned  as  marking  im- 
portant events  in  Plato's  life,  the  year  388  is  that  of  the  capture  of 
Rome  by  the  Gauls,  367  the  traditional  date  of  the  "  Licinian 
rogations  "  and  the  defeat  of  the  Gauls  at  Alba  by  Camillas,  361 
that  of  the  penetration  of  the  Gauls  into  Campania. 
See  further : 

BURNET,  J. — Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  Chapters  xii.,  xv. 

BURNET,  J. — Platonism  (1928). 

FRIEDLANDER,  P. — Platon :  Eidos,  Paideia,  Dialogos  (1928). 

GROTE,  G. — Plato  and  the  other  Companions  cf  Socrates,  Chapter  v. 

RITTER,  C. — Platon,  i.,  Chapters  i.-v.     (Munich,  1914.) 

WILAMOWITZ-MOELLENDORFF,  U.  v. — Platon.     (Ed.  2.     Berlin, 
1920.) 

SIENZEL,  J. — Platon  der  Erzieher.     (Leipzig,   1928.) 

The  general  historical  background  of  Plato's  life  may  be  studied 
in  any  good  history  of  Greece.     Specially  excellent  is 

MEYER,   E. — Geschichte  des  Altertums,   vol.  v.   (Stuttgart  and 
Berlin,  1902.) 

ROBIN,  L. — Platon,  pp.  1-8. 


CHAPTER    II 
THE  PLATONIC  WRITINGS 


PLATO  is  the  one  voluminous  author  of  classical  antiquity 
whose  works  seem  to  have  come  down  to  us  whole  and  entire. 
Nowhere  in  later  antiquity  do  we  come  on  any  reference  to  a 
Platonic  work  which  we  do  not  still  possess.  It  is  true  that  we 
know  nothing  of  the  contents  of  Plato's  lectures  except  from  a  few 
scanty  notices  in  Aristotle  or  quotations  preserved  from  con- 
temporaries of  Aristotle  by  the  Aristotelian  commentators.  But 
the  explanation  of  this  seems  to  be  that  Plato  habitually  lectured 
without  any  kind  of  manuscript.  This  explains  why  Aristotle 
speaks  of  certain  doctrines  as  taught  in  the  "  unwritten  teaching  " 
(ay/oa</>a  Soy/xara)  of  his  master,  and  why  at  least  five  of  the  auditors 
of  a  particularly  famous  lecture  (that  on  "  The  Good  "),  including 
both  Aristotle  and  Xenocrates,  published  their  own  recollections  of 
it.  We  must  suppose  that  Plato's  written  dialogues  were  meant  to 
appeal  to  the  "  educated  "  at  large  and  interest  them  in  philosophy  ; 
the  teaching  given  to  Plato's  personal  associates  depended  for  its 
due  appreciation  on  the  actual  contact  of  mind  with  mind  within 
the  school  and  was  therefore  not  committed  to  writing  at  all.  As 
we  shall  see  later  on,  this  has  had  the  (for  us)  unfortunate  result 
that  we  are  left  to  learn  Plato's  inmost  ultimate  convictions  on  the 
most  important  questions,  the  very  thing  we  most  want  to  know, 
from  references  in  Aristotle,  polemical  in  object,  always  brief,  and 
often  puzzling  in  the  highest  degree. 

When  we  turn  to  the  contents  of  our  manuscripts,  the  first 
problem  which  awaits  us  is  that  of  weeding  out  from  the  whole 
collection  what  is  dubious  or  certainly  spurious.  We  may  start 
with  the  fact  that  certain  insignificant  items  of  the  collection  were 
already  recognized  as  spurious  when  the  arrangement  of  the  dialogues 
which  we  find  in  our  oldest  Plato  MSS.  was  made.  By  counting 
each  dialogue  great  or  small  as  a  unit,  and  reckoning  the  collection 
of  Epistles  also  as  one  dialogue,  a  list  of  thirty-six  works  was  drawn 
up,  arranged  in  "  tetralogies  "  or  groups  of  four.  It  is  not  abso- 
lutely certain  by  whom  or  when  this  arrangement  was  made,  though 
it  certainly  goes  back  almost  to  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era 
and  perhaps  earlier.  It  is  commonly  ascribed  by  later  writers  to 
a  certain  Thrasylus  or  to  Thrasylus  and  Dercylides.  The  date  of 


THE  PLATONIC  WRITINGS  11 

neither  of  these  scholars  is  known  with  certainty.  Thrasylus  has 
been  usually  identified  with  a  rhetorician  of  that  name  living  under 
Augustus  and  Tiberius.  But  it  is  notable  that  Cicero's  contem- 
porary, the  antiquary  M.  Terentius  Varro,  refers  l  to  a  passage  of 
the  Phaedo  as  occurring  in  the  "  fourth  roll  "  of  Plato,  and  the 
Phaedo  actually  happens  to  be  the  fourth  dialogue  of  the  first 
"  tetralogy. "  Hence  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  arrangement 
is  older  than  Varro.  If  this  is  correct,  it  will  follow  that  either 
Thrasylus  has  been  wrongly  identified  or  the  arrangement  was  merely 
adopted,  not  originated,  by  him.  On  the  other  hand,  this  grouping 
cannot  be  earlier  than  the  first  or  second  century  B.C.  For  Diogenes 
Laertius  2  informs  us  that  an  earlier  arrangement  of  the  dialogues  in 
"  trilogies  "  had  been-  attempted,  though  not  carried  completely 
through,  by  the  famous  third-century  scholar  Aristophanes  of 
Byzantium.  There  is  no  hint  anywhere  that  the  "  tetralogies  "  of 
Thrasylus  admitted  any  work  not  regarded  as  Platonic  by  Aristo- 
phanes or  excluded  any  which  he  had  admitted.  We  may  fairly 
conclude  that  the  thirty-six  "  dialogues  "  were  currently  regarded  as 
genuine  by  the  librarians  and  scholars  of  the  third  century  B.C. 
As  far  as  the  extant  dialogues  omitted  from  the  "  tetralogies  "  go, 
there  is  no  question  that  they  are  one  and  all  spurious,  and  no  one 
proposes  to  reverse  the  judgment  of  antiquity  on  any  of  them. 
The  same  thing  is  true  of  the  collection  of  "  definitions  "  also 
preserved  in  Plato  MSS.  There  is  no  doubt  that  in  the  main  the 
definitions  of  the  collection  are  genuinely  ancient  and  Academic. 
Some  of  them  are  actually  extracted  from  the  Platonic  dialogues  ; 
others  are  shown  to  be  Academic  by  their  coincidence  with  Academic 
definitions  used  or  commented  on  by  Aristotle  in  his  Topics.  But 
since  some  of  them  can  be  pretty  clearly  identified  with  definitions 
we  can  prove  to  be  characteristic  of  Plato's  immediate  successors, 
Speusippus  and  Xenocrates,  we  cannot  regard  the  collection  as  the 
work  of  Plato.  Our  only  real  problem  is  whether  the  list  of  the 
thirty-six  dialogues  must  not  be  further  reduced  by  the  elimination 
of  spurious  items.  Even  in  antiquity  there  were  doubts  about  one 
or  two  dialogues.  The  Alcibiades  II  3  was  thought  to  be  unauthen- 
tic  by  some,  and  the  Neoplatonist  Proclus  wished  to  reject  the 
Epinomis.  In  modern  times  doubt  has  been  carried  much  farther. 
In  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  especially  in  Germany,  the 
"  athetizing  "  of  Platonic  dialogues  became  a  fashionable  amuse- 
ment for  scholars  ;  the  Laws  was  pronounced  spurious  by  Ast  and, 
at  one  time,  by  Zeller,  the  Parmenides,  Sophistes,  and  Politicus  by 
Ueberweg  and  others;  extremists  wished  to  limit  the  number  of 
genuine  dialogues  to  nine.  Fortunately  the  tide  has  turned,  since  the 
elaborate  proof  of  the  genuineness  of  the  Sophistes  and  Politicus 
by  Lewis  Campbell.  There  is  now  a  general  agreement  that 
every  dialogue  of  any  length  and  interest  in  the  list  of  the  thirty- 

1  Varro,  de  lingua  Latina,  vii.  88.  *  D.  L.,  iii.  61-62. 

«  Athenaeus  (5060)   records  an  opinion  which  ascribed  the  dialogue  to 
Xenophon. 


12  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

six  is  Platonic,  and  an  equally  general  agreement  about  the  spurious- 
ness  of  a  number  of  the  smaller  and  less  interesting,  though  there 
still  remain  one  or  two  works  about  which  opinion  is  divided.  Thus 
there  is  little  doubt  of  the  un-Platonic  character  of  the  following 
works  :  Alcibiades  II,  Hipparchus,  Amatores  (or  Rivales),  Theages, 
Clitophon,  Minos.  Opinion  may  be  said  to  be  divided  about  Alci- 
biades I,  Ion,  Menexenus,  Hippias  Major,  Epinomis,  Epistles. 
The  scope  of  the  present  work  allows  me  only  to  make  one  or  two 
very  brief  remarks  on  the  subject. 

As  to  the  now  generally  rejected  dialogues  it  may  be  observed 
that  they  are  all  brief  and  of  no  great  moment.  Our  conception 
of  Plato  as  a  thinker  and  a  writer  is  not  seriously  affected  by  the 
rejection  of  any  of  them.  If  it  were  possible  to  put  in  a  word  on 
behalf  of  any  of  these  items,  I  should  like  personally  to  plead  for 
the  short  sketch  called  the  Clitophon,  which  seems  to  be  in  any  case 
a  mere  unfinished  fragment,  the  main  purport  of  which  can  only  be 
conjectured.  The  style  and  verve  are  not  unworthy  of  Plato,  and 
I  believe  I  could  make  out  a  case  for  the  view  that  the  point  to  which 
the  writer  is  working  up  is  also  Platonic,  as  well  as  important.  Yet 
there  is  the  difficulty  that  the  little  work  appears  on  the  face  of  it 
to  be  in  form  a  criticism  of  the  parts  played  by  Socrates  and  Thrasy- 
machus  in  Republic  I,  and  it  is  hard  to  think  of  Plato  as  thus  playing 
the  critic  to  one  of  his  own  writings. 

About  all  these  dialogues  we  may  say  at  least  two  things. 
There  is  only  one  of  them  (the  Alcibiades  II)  which  does  not  seem 
to  be  proved  by  considerations  of  style  and  language  to  be  real 
fourth-century  work.  And  again,  there  is  no  reason  to  regard  any 
of  them  as  "  spurious  "  in  the  sense  of  being  intended  to  pass  falsely 
for  the  work  of  Plato.  They  are  anonymous  and  inferior  work  of 
the  same  kind  as  the  lighter  Platonic  dialogues,  and  probably,  in 
most  cases,  contemporary  with  them  or  nearly  so,  not  deliberate 
"  forgeries.11  Hence  this  material  may  rightly  be  used  with  caution 
as  contributing  to  our  knowledge  of  the  conception  of  Socrates 
current  in  the  fourth  century.  Alcibiades  II  is  probably  an  excep- 
tion. It  is  the  one  dialogue  in  the  list  which  exhibits  anything 
very  suspicious  on  linguistic  grounds,  and  it  appears  also  to  allude 
to  a  characteristic  Stoic  paradox.1  But,  even  in  this  case,  there  is 
no  ground  to  suppose  that  the  unknown  writer  intended  his  work 
to  pass  current  as  Plato's.  A  little  more  must  be  said  of  the 
dialogues  which  are  still  rejected  by  some  scholars,  but  defended 
by  others.  The  Alcibiades  I  has  nothing  in  its  language  which 
requires  a  date  later  than  the  death  of  Plato,  and  nothing  in  its 

1  There  seems  to  be  a  definite  polemic  running  through  the  dialogue 
against  the  Stoic  thesis  that  every  one  but  the  Stoic  "  sage  "  is  insane.  Cf. 
in  particular  Ale.  II,  1390-140^.  (Personally  I  regard  the  attack  on  this 
paradox  as  the  main  object  of  the  work.)  Hence  it  cannot  date  from  any 
period  of  the  Academy  before  the  presidency  of  Arcesilaus  (276-241  B.C.),  with 
whom  anti-Stoic  polemic  became  the  main  public  interest  of  the  school 
For  a  discussion  of  the  question  see  Appendix,  pp.  528-9, 


THE  PLATONIC  WRITINGS  13 

contents  which  is  not  thoroughly  Platonic.  In  fact,  it  forms,  as 
the  Neoplatonic  commentators  saw,  an  excellent  introduction  to 
the  whole  Platonic  ethical  and  political  philosophy.  It  is  just  this 
character  which  is  really  the  most  suspicious  thing  about  the 
dialogue.  It  is  far  too  methodical  not  to  suggest  that  it  is  meant 
as  a  kind  of  "  textbook,"  the  sort  of  thing  Plato  declared  he  would 
never  write.  And  the  character-drawing  is  far  too  vague  and 
shadowy  for  Plato  even  in  his  latest  and  least  dramatic  phase.  In 
the  interlocutors,  though  they  bear  the  names  Socrates  and  Alci- 
biades,  there  is  no  trace  of  any  genuine  individuality — far  less  than 
there  is  even  in  the  anonymous  speakers  in  the  Laws.  It  is  a 
further  difficulty  that  on  grounds  of  style  and  manner  the  dialogue, 
if  genuine,  would  have  to  be  assigned  to  a  late  period  in  Plato's  life 
when  he  is  hardly  likely  to  have  been  composing  such  work.  On 
the  whole,  it  seems  probable  that  Alcibiades  I  is  the  work  of  an 
immediate  disciple,  probably  written  within  a  generation  or  so  of 
Plato's  death  and  possibly  even  before  that  event. 

The  Ion,  so  far  as  can  be  seen,  has  in  its  few  pages  nothing 
either  to  establish  its  authenticity  or  to  arouse  suspicion.  It 
may  reasonably  be  allowed  to  pass  as  genuine  until  some  good 
reason  for  rejecting  it  is  produced. 

The  Menexenus  offers  a  difficult  problem.  It  is  referred  to 
expressly  by  Aristotle  in  a  way  in  which  he  never  seems  to  quote 
any  dialogues  but  those  of  Plato,  and  it  seems  clear  that  he  regarded 
it  as  Platonic.1  On  the  other  hand,  the  contents  of  the  work  are 
singular.  It  is  mainly  given  up  to  the  recital  by  Socrates  of  a 
"  funeral  discourse  "  on  the  Athenians  who  fell  in  the  Corinthian 
war.  Socrates  pretends  to  have  heard  the  discourse  from  Aspasia 
and  to  admire  it  greatly.  Apparently  the  intention  is  to  produce 
a  gravely  ironical  satire  on  the  curious  jumble  of  real  and  spurious 
patriotism  characteristic  of  the  Xoyot  cVira^tot,  which  are  being 
quietly  burlesqued.  The  standing  mystery  for  commentators  is, 
of  course,  the  audacious  anachronism  by  which  Socrates  (and,  what 
is  even  worse,  Aspasia)  is  made  to  give  a  narrative  of  events  belonging 
to  the  years  after  Socrates1  own  death.  To  me  it  seems  clear  that 
this  violation  of  chronological  possibility,  since  it  must  have  been 
committed  at  a  time  when  the  facts  could  not  be  unknown,  must  be 
intentional,  however  hard  it  is  to  divine  its  precise  point,  and  that 
Plato  is  more  likely  than  any  disciple  in  the  Academy  to  have 
ventured  on  it.  (As  the  second  part  of  the  Parmenides  proves, 
Plato  had  a  certain  "  freakish  "  humour  in  him  which  could  find 
strange  outlets.)  And  I  find  it  very  hard  to  suppose  that  Aristotle 
was  deceived  on  a  question  of  Platonic  authorship.  Hence  it  seems 
best  to  accept  the  traditional  ascription  of  the  Menexenus,  however 
hard  we  may  think  it  to  account  for  its  character. 

The  Hippias  Major,  though  not  cited  by  name  anywhere  in 
Aristotle,  is  tacitly  quoted  or  alluded  to  several  times  in  the  Topics 
in  a  way  which  convinces  me  that  Aristotle  regarded  it  as  a  Platonic 
1  Aristot.  Rhetoric,  14156  30. 


14  PLATO :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

work.1  As  the  "  athetizers  "  have  really  nothing  to  urge  on  the  other 
side  except  that  the  dialogue  is  not  Plato  at  his  best,  and  that  there 
are  an  unusual  word  or  two  to  be  found  in  it  (as  there  are  in  many 
Platonic  dialogues),  I  think  Aristotle's  allusions  should  decide  the 
question  of  genuineness  favourably. 

The  Epinomis  and  Epistles  are  much  more  important.  If  the 
Epinomis  is  spurious,  we  must  deny  the  authenticity  of  the  most 
important  pronouncement  on  the  philosophy  of  arithmetic  to  be 
found  in  the  whole  Platonic  corpus.  If  the  Epistles  are  spurious, 
we  lose  our  one  direct  source  of  information  for  any  part  of  Plato's 
biography,  and  also  the  source  of  most  of  our  knowledge  of  Sicilian 
affairs  from  367  to  354.  (As  E.  Meyer  says,  the  historians  who  reject 
the  Epistles  disguise  the  state  of  the  case  by  alleging  Plutarch's 
Life  of  Dion  as  their  authority,  while  the  statements  in  this  Life 
are  openly  drawn  for  the  most  part  from  the  Epistles.)  Documents 
like  these  ought  not  to  be  surrendered  to  the  "  athetizer  "  except 
for  very  weighty  reasons. 

As  to  the  Epinomis  the  case  stands  thus.  It  was  certainly  known 
in  antiquity  generally  and  regarded  as  genuine.  Cicero,  for  example, 
quotes  it  as  "  Plato."  On  the  other  hand,  the  Neoplatonic 
philosopher  Proclus  (410-485  A.D.)  wished  to  reject  it  as  spurious 
because  of  an  astronomical  discrepancy  with  the  Timaeus.  Dio- 
genes Laertius  also  tells  us  that  Plato's  Laws  were  "  copied  out  from 
the  wax  "  by  the  Academic  astronomer  Philippus  of  Opus,  adding 
"  and  his  too,  as  they  say,  is  the  Epinomis/'  It  has  become  common 
in  recent  times  to  assert,  on  the  strength  of  this  remark,  that  the 
Epinomis  is  an  appendix  to  the  Laws  composed  by  Philippus.  It 
ought,  however,  to  be  noted  that  Proclus  was  apparently  unaware 
that  any  doubt  had  been  felt  about  the  Epinomis  before  his  own  time, 
since  he  based  his  rejection  wholly  on  argument,  not  on  testimony. 
His  argument  is,  moreover,  a  bad  one,  since  the  "  discrepancy  with 
the  Timaeus  "  of  which  he  complained  is  found  as  much  in  the 
Laws  as  in  the  Epinomis.  The  internal  evidence  of  style  seems  to 
reveal  no  difference  whatever  between  the  two  works.  And  it 
may  be  urged  that  since  the  state  of  the  text  of  the  Laws  shows  that 
the  work  must  have  been  left  at  Plato's  death  without  the  author's 
final  revision  and  then  circulated  without  even  the  small  verbal 
corrections  which  the  editor  of  a  posthumous  work  commonly  has  to 
make  in  the  interests  of  grammar,  it  is  most  unlikely  that  disciples  who 
treated  the  ipsissima  verba  of  a  dead  master  with  such  scrupulous 
veneration  would  have  ventured  on  adding  a  "  part  the  last  "  to 
the  work  on  their  own  account.  Hence  it  seems  to  me  that  Hans 
Raeder  is  right  in  insisting  on  the  genuineness  of  the  Epinomis, 
and  that  the  remark  of  Diogenes  about  Philippus  of  Opus  only  means 

1  Twice  for  the  unsatisfactory  definition  of  rd  Ka\6v  as  r&  irptirov  (Topics, 
AS.  IO2«  6,  £5.  1350  13)  ;  once  for  the  still  worse  definition  of  Ka\6v  as 
rb  St  fycw  $  <Uor?s  7)86  (Topics,  Z6.  1460  22).  That  both  these  bad  attempts 
at  definition  occur  in  the  dialogue  seems  to  make  it  clear  that  Aristotle  is 
alluding  to  it  and  not  to  any  other  source. 


THE  PLATONIC  WRITINGS  15 

that  he  did  for  this  work  was  also  transcribed  by,  or  perhaps 
dictated  to,  him,  (The  now  customary  disparagement  of  the 
Epinomis  seems  to  me  due  to  mere  inability  to  follow  the  mathe- 
matics of  the  dialogue.1) 

Professor  Werner  Jaeger  2  has  incidentally  done  a  service  to 
the  student  of  the  Epinomis  in  his  recent  work  on  the  development 
of  Aristotle's  thought  by  showing  that  there  is  an  intimate  connexion 
between  the  Laws  and  Epinomis  and  Aristotle's  work  nepl  <£iAoo-o<£ui$, 
of  which  only  fragments  are  now  extant.  In  particular,  as  he  shows, 
there  is  an  immediate  connexion  between  the  "  fifth  "  or  "  etherial  " 
bodily  region  of  the  Epinomis  and  Aristotle's  famous  "  celestial 
matter  "  of  which  the  "  heavens  "  are  assumed  to  be  made  (the 
essentia  quinta  or  materia  coelcslis).  Professor  Jaeger  interprets  the 
connexion  thus.  We  have  first  the  Laws  circulated  promptly  after 
Plato's  death,  then  Aristotle's  proposals  for  modifications  of  Platonic 
doctrine  in  the  TTC/K  <£iA.oo-o<£tas,  finally  (all  in  the  course  of  a  year 
or  two),  the  Epinomis,  rejoining  to  Aristotle,  and  composed  by 
Philippus.  While  I  regard  Professor  Jaeger's  proof  of  the  intimate 
relation  between  Epinomis  and  ircpl  <£tAoo-o<£ias  as  important,  I 
think  it  more  natural  to  interpret  the  facts  rather  differently  by 
supposing  the  Laws  and  Epinomis  together  to  have  been  tran- 
scribed and  circulated  shortly  after  the  death  of  Plato,  and  then 
followed  by  Aristotle's  criticism  of  Platonic  doctrine  in  the  -repl 
c^iAocro^tW  This  at  least  leaves  Aristotle  more  leisure  than  Professor 
Jaeger's  hypothesis  for  the  composition  of  a  work  which,  as  we 
know  it  ran  to  three  "  books,"  must  have  been  of  considerable 
compass.  Whatever  the  truth  about  the  Epinomis  may  be,  I  am 
at  least  sure  that  it  is  premature  to  assume  that  it  is  known  not  to 
be  Plato's. 

As  for  the  Epistles,  it  is  not  necessary  now  to  argue  the  case  for 
their  genuineness  as  elaborately  as  one  would  have  had  to  do  some 
years  ago.  Since  Wilamowitz  in  his  Platon  declared  for  the  genuine- 
ness of  the  very  important  trio  VI,  VII,  VIII,  those  who  depend  on 
11  authority  "  for  their  opinions  have  been  in  a  hurry  to  protest 
that  these  three  at  least  must  be  accepted.  But  the  acceptance  of 
the  three  logically  carries  with  it  recognition  of  the  correspondence 
between  Plato  and  Dionysius  (II,  III,  XIII)  and  the  letter  of  con- 
gratulation and  good  advice  to  Dion  (IV)  ;  and  when  these  are 
accepted  as  Platonic,  there  remains  no  good  ground  for  rejecting 
any  of  the  thirteen  letters  of  our  MSS.  except  the  first,  which  is 
written  in  a  style  wholly  unlike  the  others,  and  by  some  one 
whose  circumstances,  as  stated  by  himself,  show  that  he  can  be 
neither  Plato  nor  Dion,  nor  have  any  intention  of  passing  for  either. 
Presumably  this  letter  got  into  the  correspondence  by  some  mistake 
at  a  very  early  date.  The  twelfth  letter  (a  mere  note  of  half  a 
dozen  lines)  was  apparently  suspected  in  later  antiquity,  since  our 

1  For  a  good  recent  defence  of  the  dialogue  see  the  discussion  in  H.  Raeder, 
Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung,  413  ff.  and  cf.  infra,  pp.  497-8. 
*  Jaeger,  Aristoteles,  c.  3. 


16  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

best  MSS.  have  a  note  to  that  effect.  No  grounds  have  ever  been 
produced  for  questioning  the  authenticity  of  any  of  the  rest  which 
will  bear  examination.  Most  of  the  difficulties  raised  in  modern 
times,  especially  those  alleged  in  connexion  with  II  and  XIII, 
rest  on  mere  misunderstandings.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  the  present 
tendency  to  accept  only  VI,  VII,  VIII  is  a  consequence  of  mere 
servile  deference  to  the  name  of  Wilamowitz.  None  of  these 
documents  should  have  needed  the  imprimatur  of  a  professor  as  a 
recommendation  ;  their  acceptance  is  bound  to  lead  logically  to 
that  of  the  rest  with  the  exception  of  I  and  possibly  XII.  As  far 
as  external  testimony  goes,  it  is  enough  to  say  that  Aristophanes 
of  Byzantium  included  in  his  "  trilogies  "  Epistles  (pretty  obviously 
our  thirteen,  or  we  should  have  heard  more  about  the  matter),  and 
that  Cicero  quotes  IV,  IX,  and  especially  VII  (nobilissima  ilia 
epistula,  as  he  calls  it)  as  familiar  Platonic  material.  This,  taken 
together  with  the  thoroughly  Platonic  style  of  the  letters,  disposes 
of  the  notion  that  they  can  be  "  forgeries/1  The  art  of  writing 
such  prose  was  already  dead  in  half  a  century  after  Plato's  death, 
and  the  revival  of  "  Atticism/1  which  might  make  such  a  production 
barely  conceivable,  belongs  to  a  time  some  generations  later  than 
Cicero.1 

II 

To  understand  a  great  thinker  is,  of  course,  impossible  unless 
we  know  something  of  the  relative  order  of  his  works,  and  of  the 
actual  period  of  his  life  to  which  they  belong.  What,  for  example, 
could  we  make  of  Kant  if  we  did  not  know  whether  the  Critique  of 
Pure  Reason  was  the  work  of  ambitious  youth  or  of  ripe  middle  age, 
whether  it  was  written  before  or  after  the  discourse  on  the  Only  Pos- 
sible Demonstration  of  the  Being  of  a  God  or  the  Dreams  of  a  Ghost-seer  ? 
We  cannot,  then,  even  make  a  beginning  with  the  study  of  Plato 
until  we  have  found  some  trustworthy  indication  of  the  order  in 
which  his  works,  or  at  least  the  most  significant  of  them,  were 
written.  Even  when  we  have  fixed  this  order,  if  it  can  be  fixed,  we 
need,  for  a  completer  understanding,  to  be  able  also  to  say  at  what 
precise  period  of  life  the  most  important  dialogues  were  written, 

1  The  reader  will  find  an  elaborate  collection  of  linguistic  and  other 
arguments  against  the  Epistles  in  the  section  devoted  to  them  in  H.  Richards' 
Platonica,  254-298,  and,  as  regards  most  of  the  series,  in  C.  Ritter,  Neue  Unter- 
suchungen  uebev  Platon,  327-424.  Most  of  the  alleged  objections  appear 
frivolous,  or  at  best  based  on  misreading  of  the  Syracusan  situation.  Why 
the  German  critics  in  general  think  that  it  is  in  some  way  "  unworthy  "  of  Plato 
to  have  had  a  "  business  settlement"  with  Dionysius  such  as  that  to  which 
Ep.  xiii.  relates  is  to  me  as  unintelligible  as  Wilamowitz's  assertion  that  the 
statements  of  the  same  letter  about  the  great  age  of  Plato's  mother  and  the 
existence  of  four  nieces  for  whom  he  may  have  to  provide  must  be  fiction. 
Old  ladies  do  sometimes  live  to  over  ninety,  and  any  man  of  sixty  may  quite 
well  have  four  nieces.  The  names  of  Bentley,  Cobet,  Crote,  Blass,  E.  Meyer, 
are  enough  to  show  that  there  is  plenty  of  good  "  authority  "  for  belief  in  the 
Epistles.  See  Appendix,  pp.  541-544,  for  further  discussion. 


THE  PLATONIC  WRITINGS  17 

whether  in  early'manhood,  injmid  life,  or  in  old  age,  and  again  whether 
they  are  an  unbroken  series  of  compositions  or  whether  there  is 
evidence  of  a  considerable  gap  or  gaps  in  Plato's  literary  activity. 
These  are  the  questions  which  we  have  now  to  face. 

The  external  evidence  supplied  by  trustworthy  testimony  only 
assures  us  on  one  point.  Aristotle  tells  us  (Pol.  12646  26),  what 
could  in  any  case  never  have  been  doubted,  that  the  Laws  is  later  than 
the  Republic.  There  was  also  an  ancient  tradition,  mentioned  by 
Proclus  and  implied  in  the  statement  of  Diogenes  Laertius  about 
Philippus  of  Opus,  that  the  Laws  was  left  by  Plato  "  in  the  wax/' 
and  the  "  fair  copy  "  for  circulation  made  after  his  death.  The 
statement  is  borne  out  by  the  frequency  in  the  dialogue  of  small 
grammatical  difficulties  which  cannot  reasonably  be  ascribed  to 
later  "  corruption/'  but  are  natural  in  a  faithfully  copied  first  text 
which  has  never  received  the  author's  finishing  touches.  Trust- 
worthy testimony  takes  us  no  farther  than  this.  Comparison 
of  certain  Platonic  dialogues  with  one  another  yields  one  or  two 
other  results.  Thus  the  Republic  must  be  earlier  than  the  Timaeus, 
where  it  is  referred  to  and  the  argument  of  its  first  five  books  briefly 
recapitulated.  The  Politicus  must  be  not  earlier  than  the  Sophistes, 
to  which  it  is  the  professed  sequel ;  and  the  Sophistes,  for  the  same 
reason,  later  than  the  Theaetetus.  These  are  all  the  certain  indica- 
tions furnished  by  the  matter  of  the  dialogues  themselves.  There 
may  be  an  allusion  in  the  Phaedo  to  a  point  more  fully  explained  in 
the  Meno,  and  the  Republic  has  been  supposed  to  allude  to  both. 
Both  the  Theaetetus  and  the  Sophistes  refer  to  a  meeting  between 
Socrates,  then  extremely  young,  and  the  great  Parmenides ;  and 
there  must  be  some  connexion  between  these  references  and  the 
fact  that  the  Parmenides  professes  ostensibly  to  describe  this 
encounter.  But  we  cannot  say  that  the  allusions  enable  us  to 
determine  with  certainty  whether  the  Parmenides  is  earlier  than 
both  the  others,  later  than  both,  or  intermediate  between  the  two. 
Raeder  has  tried  to  show  at  length  that  the  Phaedrus  contains 
allusions  which  would  only  be  intelligible  to  readers  who  already 
knew  the  Republic]  but  there  are  gaps  in  his  argument,  and  it 
has  not  completely  convinced  some  prominent  Platonic  scholars. 
Clearly,  if  we  are  to  arrive  at  results  of  any  value,  we  need  a  clue 
to  the  order  of  composition  of  the  dialogues  which  will  take  us 
much  farther  than  the  few  certain  indications  we  have  so  far  found. 

In  the  earlier  part  of  the  nineteenth  century  more  than  one 
unsatisfactory  attempt  was  made  to  provide  such  a  clue.  Thus 
it  was  at  one  time  held  that  we  can  detect  signs  of  comparative 
youth  in  the  gorgeous  rhetoric  of  certain  dialogues,  and  the  Phaedrus 
in  particular  was  often  assumed  to  be  the  earliest  of  the  dialogues 
on  this  ground.  But  it  is  obvious  that  reasoning  of  this  kind  is 
inherently  untrustworthy,  especially  in  dealing  with  the  work  of  a 
great  dramatic  artist.  Inferences  from  the  manner  of  the  Phaedrus 
are,  for  example,  to  be  discounted  partly  on  the  ground  that  its 
rhetoric  is  largely  parody  of  the  rhetoricians,  partly  because  so 


18  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

much  of  its  content  is  imaginative  myth  which  lends  itself  naturally 
to  a  high-flown  diction.  The  assumption  that  works  in  which  there 
is  a  large  element  of  semi-poetical  myth  must  be  "juvenile  "  obviously 
rests  on  another  assumption,  for  which  we  have  no  evidence  at  all, 
that  we  know  independently  what  the  personal  temperament  of  the 
youthful  Plato  was.  We  have  only  to  think  of  the  known  chrono- 
logical order  of  the  works  of  Goethe  to  see  how  unsound  a  method 
must  be  which  would  require  us  to  regard  the  second  part  of  Faust 
or  Wilhelm  Meisters  W under jahre  as  juvenile  productions.  A 
still  more  arbitrary  assumption  underlies  the  attempt  of  E.  Munk 
to  arrange  the  dialogues  in  order  on  the  assumption  that  the  age 
ascribed  to  Socrates  in  a  dialogue  is  an  indication  of  its  date.  On 
the  theory  that  dialogues  which  represent  Socrates  as  a  young  man 
must  be  early,  those  which  represent  him  as  old,  late,  we  should 
have  to  put  the  Parmenides,  where  Socrates  is  "  very  young/'  at  the 
opening  of  the  series,  the  Theaetetus,  which  narrates  a  conversation 
held  just  before  his  trial,  at  the  other  end,  though  the  allusion  in 
the  one  dialogue  to  the  meeting  which  provides  the  setting  for  the 
other  shows  that  they  are  probably  not  to  be  separated  by  too  long 
an  interval. 

The  serious  scientific  investigation  of  the  internal  evidence  for 
the  order  of  composition  of  the  dialogues  really  begins  in  1867  with 
Lewis  Campbell's  philological  proof  of  the  genuineness  of  the 
Sophistes  and  PolMcus.  It  has  been  further  developed,  sometimes 
with  too  much  confidence  in  its  results,  by  a  whole  host  of  writers, 
notably  Dittenberger  and  C.  Ritter  in  Germany,  and  W.  Lutoslawski 
in  this  country.  The  underlying  and  sound  principle  of  the  method 
may  be  simply  stated  thus.  If  we  start  with  two  works  which  are 
known  to  be  separated  by  a  considerable  interval  and  exhibit  a 
marked  difference  in  style,  it  may  be  possible  to  trace  the  transition 
from  the  writer's  earlier  to  his  later  manner  in  detail,  to  see  the 
later  manner  steadily  more  and  more  replacing  the  earlier,  and  this 
should  enable  us  to  arrive  at  some  definite  conclusions  about  the 
order  of  the  works  which  occupy  the  interval.  The  conclusion  will 
be  strengthened  if  we  take  for  study  a  number  of  distinct  and  inde- 
pendent peculiarities  and  find  a  general  coincidence  in  the  order  in 
which  the  various  peculiarities  seem  to  become  more  and  more 
settled  mannerisms.  The  opportunity  for  applying  this  method  to 
the  work  of  Plato  is  afforded  by  the  well-authenticated  fact  that  the 
Laws  is  a  composition  of  old  age,  while  the  Republic  is  one  of  an 
earlier  period,  and  forms  with  certain  other  great  dialogues,  such  as 
the  Protagoras,  Phaedo,  Symposium,  a  group  distinguished  by  a 
marked  common  style  and  a  common  vigour  of  dramatic  representa- 
tion which  experience  shows  we  cannot  expect  from  a  writer  who  is 
not  in  the  prime  of  his  powers.  Growing  resemblance  to  the  manner 
of  the  Laws,  if  made  out  on  several  independent  but  consilient  lines 
of  inquiry,  may  thus  enable  us  to  discover  which  of  the  Platonic 
dialogues  must  be  intermediate  between  the  Laws  and  the  Republic. 
There  are  several  different  peculiarities  we  may  obviously  select  for 


THE  PLATONIC  WRITINGS  19 

study.  Thus  one  obvious  contrast  between  Republic  and  Laws  is 
to  be  found  in  the  marked  decline  of  dramatic  power.  A  second  is 
that  the  Laws  conforms  carefully  to  a  whole  number  of  the  graces  of 
style  introduced  into  Attic  prose  by  Isocrates,  the  Republic  and  the 
other  great  dramatic  dialogues  neglect  these  elegancies.  A  third 
line  of  study  which  has  been  very  minutely  pursued,  especially  by 
Lutoslawski,  is  the  examination  of  special  uses  of  connecting 
particles  throughout  the  dialogues.  Without  going  into  detail,  it 
is  enough  to  say  here  that  the  result  of  these  converging  lines  of 
study  has  been  to  convince  students  of  Platonic  language  and  idiom, 
almost  without  an  exception,  that  we  can  definitely  specify  a 
certain  group  of  very  important  dialogues  as  belonging  to  the  post- 
Republic  period  of  Plato's  life.  The  group  comprises  Theaetetus, 
Parmenides,  Sophistes,  Politicus,  Timaetis,  Philebus,  Laws.  The 
identification  of  this  group  of  "  later  "  dialogues  may  be  taken  as  a 
pretty  assured  and  definite  result,  not  likely  ever  to  be  seriously 
modified. 

It  is  another  question  whether  the  employment  of  the  same 
method  would  enable  us  to  distinguish  more  precisely  between  the 
earlier  and  later  dialogues  belonging  to  either  of  the  two  great  groups, 
so  as  to  say,  e.g.,  whether  the  Philebus  is  earlier  or  later  in  composi- 
tion than  the  Timaeus,  the  Symposium  than  the  Phaedo.  When  two 
works  belong  to  much  the  same  period  of  an  author's  activity,  a 
slight  difference  of  style  between  them  may  easily  be  due  to  acci- 
dental causes.  (Thus  in  dealing  with  the  Symposium  we  should 
have  to  remember  that  a  very  large  part  of  it  is  professed  imitation 
or  parody  of  the  styles  of  others.)  Lutoslawski  in  particular  seems 
to  me  to  have  pushed  a  sound  principle  to  the  pitch  of  absurdity  in 
the  attempt,  by  the  help  of  the  integral  calculus,  to  extract  from 
considerations  of  "  stylometry  "  a  detailed  and  definite  order  of 
composition  for  the  whole  of  the  dialogues.  It  may  fairly  be 
doubted  whether  "  stylometric  "  evidence  can  carry  us  much  beyond 
the  broad  discrimination  between  an  earlier  series  of  dialogues  of 
which  the  Republic  is  the  capital  work  and  a  later  series  composed 
in  the  interval  between  the  completion  of  the  Republic  and  Plato's 
death. 

It  is  possible,  however,  that  some  supplementary  considerations 
may  take  us  a  little  further.  Plato  himself  explains,  in  the  intro- 
ductory conversation  prefixed  to  the  Theaetetus,  that  he  has  avoided 
the  method  of  indirect  narration  of  a  dialogue  for  that  of  direct 
dialogue  in  order  to  avoid  the  wearisomencss  of  keeping  up  the 
formula  of  a  reported  narrative.  Now  the  greatest  dialogues  of 
the  earlier  period,  the  Protagoras,  Symposium,  Phaedo,  Republic, 
are  all  reported  dialogues,  and  one  of  them,  the  Symposium,  is 
actually  reported  at  second-hand.  So  again  is  the  Parmenides, 
where  the  standing  formula,  as  Professor  Burnet  calls  it,  is  the 
cumbrous  "  Antiphon  told  us  that  Pythodorus  said  that  Parmenides 
said.11  The  original  adoption  of  this  method  of  narration  of  a  con- 
versation is  manifestly  due  to  the  desire  for  dramatic  life  and  colour. 


20  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

It  permits  of  the  sort  of  record  of  the  by-play  between  the  personages 
of  the  story  which  contributes  so  much  to  the  charm  of  the  Phaedo. 
But  the  labour  required  to  keep  up  the  "  formula  "  is  so  great  that 
it  is  not  surprising  that  Plato  finally  dropped  it,  and  that  the 
Theaetetm  and  all  the  works  we  find  reason  to  place  later  are  in  the 
form  of  direct  dialogue.  To  me  it  seems  highly  probable,  though 
not  certain,  that  it  was  the  special  complication  of  the  formula 
required  for  the  Parmenides  which  led  to  the  final  abandonment  of 
the  method,  and  that  we  may  plausibly  infer  that  the  Parmenides 
was  written  either  simultaneously  with  the  Theaetetus  or  immedi- 
ately before  it.  Another  inference  which  I  should  draw  with  some 
confidence  is  that,  since  no  young  writer  is  likely  to  have  made  his 
first  prentice  experiments  in  .dialogue  with  so  difficult  a  form,  the 
popular  view  that  the  Protagoras  is  one  of  the  earliest  of  the  Platonic 
dialogues  must  be  erroneous.  The  certainty  and  vigour  of  the 
dramatic  handling  of  the  characters  there  should  prove  that  the 
Protagoras  belongs  as  a  fourth  with  the  Phaedo,  Symposium,  and 
Republic  to  the  period  of  Plato's  supreme  excellence  as  a  dramatist 
and  stylist.  In  particular,  it  must  be  a  considerably  later  work 
than  the  comparatively  undramatic  and  rather  unduly  diffuse 
Gorgias,  a  point  which  has  some  bearing  on  the  interpretation  of  the 
purpose  and  ethical  teaching  of  the  Protagoras. 

We  may  turn  next  to  the  question  whether  it  is  possible  to  fix 
any  definite  date  in  Plato's  life  as  a  terminus  ad  quern  for  the  earlier 
series  of  dialogues,  or  a  terminus  a  quo  for  the  later.  Something,  I 
believe,  may  be  done  to  settle  both  these  questions.  I  have  already 
referred  in  the  last  chapter  to  the  statement  made  by  Plato  in 
Ep.  vii.,  written  after  the  murder  of  Dion  in  the  year  354,  that  he 
came  to  Sicily  in  his  forty-first  year  already  convinced  that  the 
salvation  of  mankind  depends  on  the  union  of  the  philosopher  and 
the  "  ruler  "  in  one  person.  The  actual  words  of  the  letter  are  that 
Plato  had  been  driven  to  say  this  "  in  a  eulogy  on  true  philosophy/' 
and  this  seems  an  unmistakable  allusion  to  the  occurrence  of  the 
same  statement  in  Rep.  499  ff.  It  should  follow  that  this  most  philo- 
sophically advanced  section  of  the  Republic  was  already  written  in 
the  year  388-7,  with  the  consequence  that  the  Republic,  and  by 
consequence  the  earlier  dialogues  in  general,  were  completed  at  least 
soon  after  Plato  was  forty  and  perhaps  before  foundation  of  the 
Academy.  If  we  turn  next  to  the  dialogue  which  seems  to  prelude 
to  the  later  group,  the  Theaetetus,  we  get  another  indication  of  date. 
The  dialogue  mentions  the  severe  and  dangerous  wound  received  by 
the  mathematician  Theaetetus  in  a  battle  fought  under  the  walls  of 
Corinth  which  cannot  well  be  any  but  that  of  the  year  369.  It  is 
assumed  tacitly  all  through  that  Theaetetus  will  not  recover  from 
his  injuries  and  is  clear  that  the  discourse  was  composed  after  his 
death  and  mainly  as  a  graceful  tribute  to  his  memory.  Thus, 
allowing  for  the  time  necessary  for  the  completion  of  so  considerable 
a  work,  we  may  suppose  the  dialogue  to  have  been  written  just 
before  Plato's  first  departure  on  his  important  practical  enterprise 


THE  PLATONIC  WRITINGS  21 

at  Syracuse.  This,  as  Professor  Burnet  has  said,  seems  to  be  the 
explanation  of  the  magnificent  eulogy  of  the  retired  and  contem- 
plative life,  a  passage  confessed  by  Plato  himself  to  be  an  irrele- 
vance so  far  as  the  argument  of  the  dialogue  is  concerned.  Plato 
is  giving  expression  to  the  reluctance  with  which  he  leaves  the 
Academy,  at  the  bidding  of  duty  and  honour,  for  the  turmoil  and 
sordidness  of  the  political  arena. 

Once  more,  the  Sophistes  seems  to  give  us  an  approximate  date. 
It  is  the  first  of  the  series  of  dialogues  in  which  the  deliberate 
adoption  of  the  Isocratean  avoidance  of  hiatus  occurs.  This  would 
naturally  suggest  a  probable  break  of  some  length  in  Plato's  activity 
as  a  writer  just  before  the  composition  of  the  Sophistes.  Now  it  is 
antecedently  probable  that  there  must  have  been  such  an  inter- 
ruption between  367  and  360,  the  year  of  Plato's  last  return  from 
Syracuse.  His  entanglements  with  Dionysius  and  Sicilian  affairs, 
combined  with  his  duties  as  head  of  the  Academy,  are  likely  to  have 
left  him  little  leisure  for  literary  occupation  in  these  years. 

Thus  we  may  say  with  every  appearance  of  probability  that 
there  are  two  distinct  periods  of  literary  activity  to  be  distinguished 
in  Plato's  life.  The  first  cannot  have  begun  before  the  death  of 
Socrates  ;  apart  from  the  absurdity  of  the  conception  of  Plato  as 
"  dramatizing  "  the  sayings  and  doings  of  the  living  man  whom  he 
revered  above  all  others,  it  is  fairly  plain  that  the  original  motive 
for  the  composition  of  "  discourses  of  Socrates  "  by  the  viri  Socratici 
was  to  preserve  the  memory  of  a  living  presence  which  they  had  lost. 
It  apparently  continued  down  to  Plato's  fortieth  or  forty-first 
year  and  the  opening  of  the  Academy,  and  it  includes  all  the  work 
in  which  Plato's  dramatic  art  is  most  fresh  and  vigorous.  The  main 
object  of  this  incessant  activity  seems  to  be  to  immortalize  the 
personality  of  Socrates.  For  twenty  years  after  the  foundation  of 
the  Academy  Plato  seems  to  have  written  nothing,  unless  the 
Phaedrus,  a  difficult  dialogue  to  account  for  on  any  theory,  falls 
early  in  this  period.  This  is  as  it  should  be  :  the  President  of  the 
Academy  would  for  long  enough  after  its  foundation  be  far  too  busy 
to  write.  Then,  probably  on  the  eve  of  the  Sicilian  adventure,  after 
twenty  years  of  work  the  Academy  is  sufficiently  organized  to 
leave  its  head,  now  a  man  of  some  sixty  years,  leisure  to  write  the 
Theaetetus  and  Parmenides;  but  an  opportunity  for  continuous 
writing  does  not  present  itself  until  Plato's  final  withdrawal  from 
active  personal  participation  in  "  world  politics."  The  composition 
of  five  such  works  as  Sophistes,  Politicus,  Timaeus,  Philebus,  Laws, 
is  a  notable  achievement  for  any  man  between  the  ages  of  sixty- 
seven  and  eighty-one.  But  we  must  think  of  this  work  as  being 
executed  simultaneously  with  regular  oral  exposition  of  the  doctrine 
described  by  Aristotle  as  the  "  philosophy  of  Plato."  It  is  an 
entire  misconception  to  relegate  this  last  stage  in  the  development 
of  Plato's  thought,  as  the  textbooks  often  seem  to  do,  to  a  "  senile  " 
year  or  two  subsequent  to  the  close  of  Plato's  activity  as  a  writer. 
It  must  have  been  contemporary  with  the  writing  of  the  whole 


22  PLATO:   THE   MAN   AND   HIS   WORK 

"  later  "  group  of  dialogues,  and  the  man  who  was  still  at  his  death 
labouring  on  the  Laws  can  never  have  sunk  into  "  senility.'1 

See  further : 

BURNET,  J. — Platonism,  Ch.  i,  4. 

CAMPBELL,  L. — "  Sophistes  "  and  "  Politicus  "  of  Plato  (1867), 

General  Introduction. 
HACKFORTH,    R. — The    Authorship    of    the    Platonic    Epistles, 

(Manchester,  1913.) 
RAEDER,    H. — Platons   philosophische    Entwickelung.     (Leipzig, 

1905.) 

LUTOSLAWSKI,  W. — Origin  and  Growth  of  Plato's  Logic.     (1897.) 
PARMENTIER,    L. — La    Chronologie    des    dialogues    de    Platon. 

(Brussels,   1913.) 
RITTER,  C. — Untersuchungen  ueber  Platon.     (Stuttgart,  1882.)  ; 

Neue  Untersuchungen  ueber  Platon.     (Munich,   1910.) 
LEVI,  A. — Sulle  interpretazioni  immanentistiche  della  filosofia  di 

Platone.     (Turin,  N.D.) 

SHOREY,  P. — The  Unity  of  Plato's  Thought.     (Chicago,  1903.) 
SHOREY,  P. — What  Plato  Said,  pp.  58-73. 
ROBIN,  L. — Platon,  pp.  19-48. 
NOVOTNY",  F. — Platonis  Epistulae. 
HARWARD,  J. — The  Platonic  Epistles  (Introduction). 

NOTE. — I  do  not  deny  that  Plato's"  first  period  "  may  have  extended 
into  the  opening  years  of  his  career  in  the  Academy.  On  my  own 
reasoning  this  must  be  so  if  the  Phaedo  should,  after  all,  be  later  than 
the  Republic.  It  has  been  argued  (e.g.  by  M.  Parmentier)  that  the 
Symposium  must  be  later  than  385,  the  year  of  the  death  of  Aristo- 
phanes. I  doubt,  however,  whether  too  much  has  not  been  made  of 
the  supposed  Platonic  rule  not  to  introduce  living  persons  as  speakers. 
Callias  was  alive  and  active  years  after  any  date  to  which  we  can 
reasonably  assign  the  Protagoras.  Euclides,  who  was  alive  and  appar- 
ently well  when  Theaetetus  received  his  wound,  is  more  likely  than 
not  to  have  survived  the  writing  of  the  Theaetetus.  Socrates  "  the 
younger  "  can  hardly  be  taken  to  have  been  dead  when  the  Politicus 
was  written.  Gorgias  may  have  lived  long  enough  to  read  the  Gorgias. 
Simmias,  if  we  may  believe  Plutarch  de  genio  Socratis,  was  alive  and 
active  in  379.  That  the  majority  of  Plato's  personages  are  characters 
already  dead  when  his  dialogues  were  written,  seems  to  me  a  mere 
consequence  of  the  fact  that  the  dialogues  deal  with  Socrates  and  his 
contemporaries . 

[It  might  be  urged  against  the  reasoning  of  the  first  paragraph  of 
p.  20  supra  that  several,  if  not  all,  of  the  dialogues  of  Aeschines  (cer- 
tainly the  Aspasia,  Alcibiadest  Callias,  Axiochus)  were  of  the  "  nar- 
rated "  type.  But  they  were  narrations  of  the  simplest  kind  of  which 
the  Charmides  and  Laches  are  examples,  and  such  evidence  as  we  have 
suggests  that  they  are  all  later  in  date  of  composition  than  the  earliest 
work  of  Plato.] 


CHAPTER    III 

MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  :  H1PPIAS  MAJOR, 
HIPPIAS  MINOR,  ION,  MENEXENUS 

LOVERS  of  great  literature  have  every  reason  to  be  whole- 
heartedly thankful  that  once  in  the  world's  history  a  supreme 
philosophical  thinker  should  also  have  been  a  superb  dramatic 
artist.  But  what  is  to  them  pure  gain  is,  in  some  ways,  gain  at  the 
expense  of  the  average  student  of  "  metaphysics."  For  several 
reasons  it  is  quite  impossible  to  construct  a  neatly  arranged  syste- 
matic handbook  to  the  "  Platonic  philosophy."  In  the  first  place, 
it  is  doubtful  whether  there  ever  was  a  "  Platonic  philosophy  "  at 
all,  in  the  sense  of  a  definite  set  of  formulated  doctrines  about  the 
omne  scibV.e.  Plato  has  done  his  best  to  make  it  quite  clear  that  he 
took  no  great  interest  in  "  system-making."  To  him  philosophy 
meant  no  compact  body  of  "  results  "  to  be  learned,  but  a  life  spent 
in  the  active  personal  pursuit  of  truth  and  goodness  by  the  light  of 
one  or  two  great  passionate  convictions.  It  is  not  likely  that,  even 
at  the  end  of  his  life  of  eighty  years,  he  fancied  himself  to  have 
worked  out  anything  like  a  coherent,  clearly  articulated  "  theory  of 
everything."  Systematization  of  this  kind  commonly  has  to  be 
paid  for  by  intellectual  stagnation  ;  the  vitality  and  progressiveness 
of  Platonism  is  probably  largely  owing  to  the  fact  that,  even  in  the 
mind  of  its  originator,  it  always  remained  largely  tentative  and 
provisional.  If  there  ever  was  a  Platonic  "  system,"  at  least  Plato 
himself  resolutely  refused  to  write  an  exposition  of  it,1  and  we  of 
later  times,  who  do  not  possess  any  record  of  the  oral  teaching 
which  was  clearly  intended  to  be  the  vehicle  of  Plato's  most  personal 
and  intimate  thinking,  are  not  in  a  position  to  make  the  lack  good. 
The  dialogues  will  tell  us  something  of  Plato's  fundamental  life- 

1  Ep.  vii.  34 ic :  "  There  does  not  exist,  and  there  never  shall,  any  treatise 
by  myself  on  these  matters.  The  subject  does  not  admit,  as  the  sciences  in 
general  do,  of  exposition.  It  is  only  after  long  association  in  the  great 
business  itself  and  a  shared  life  that  a  light  breaks  out  in  the  soul,  kindled,  so 
to  say,  by  a  leaping  flame,  and  thereafter  feeds  itself."  Ep.  ii.  314^:  "I  have 
never  myself  written  a  word  on  these  topics,  and  there  neither  is  nor  ever 
shall  be  any  treatise  by  Plato  ;  what  now  bears  the  name  belongs  to  Socrates 
beautified  and  rejuvenated."  That  is,  all  that  a  teacher  can  do  in  philosophy 
is  to  awaken  in  a  younger  mind  the  spirit  of  independent  personal  thinking ; 
the  dialogues  are  meant  not  to  expound  a  "  Platonic  system,"  but  to  preserve 
the  memory  of  Socrates.  One  of  Plato's  grounds  for  dissatisfaction  with 
Dionysius  II  was  that  he  had  circulated  a  work  professing  to  expound  "  Platon- 
ism "  (Ep.  vii.  3416). 


24  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

long  convictions  ;  of  his  "  system/'  if  he  had  one,  they  hardly  tell 
us  anything  at  all.  With  Aristotle  we  are  in  a  very  different  posi- 
tion. We  have  lost  the  "  works  "  in  which  he  recommended  his 
"  views  "  to  the  world  at  large,  and  possess  the  manuscripts  of 
courses  of  lectures  in  which  we  see  him,  for  the  most  part,  feeling  his 
way  to  his  results  through  the  criticism  of  others. 

Further  special  difficulties  are  created  for  us  by  certain  peculiar- 
ities of  Plato's  literary  temperament.  Unlike  Aristotle,  he  does  not 
introducejiimself  and  Msjopinions  into  his  dialogues.__. Hgjs^-in-f  act , 
at  .S^JL^P3-^1-?'  w**h  thelnstinct  of  the  greaQramatist,  to  keep  his 
own^ersonality  comp^tel^jCES^^ckgrourid.  Socrates  isjpresent 
asTone'of  thFspeakers  in  affThe  dialogues  except  the  Laws,  and  in  all 
exceptrth^^wKi^"^Tiave  seen  reaso'nToTegafd  as  written  in  late 
life,  Socrates  is  not  only  the  chief  speaker  but  dominates  the  whole 
dialogue  by  his  vivid  and  strongly  marked  personality.  It  can 
hardly  be  doubted  that  in  the  long  list  of  works  written  before  Plato 
had  found  his  real  vocation  as  head  of  the  Academy,  the  main 
conscious  object  of  the  writer  is  to  preserve  a  faithful  and  living 
portrait  of  the  older  philosopher. 

Even  if  we  accept  the  view  originated  about  the  beginning  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  that  Plato  has  transfigured  the  personality 
and  teaching  of  Socrates  out  of  recognition,  we  are  bound,  I  think, 
to  hold  that  the  transfiguration  has  been  unconscious.  We  cannot 
seriously  ascribe  to  Plato  deliberate  and  pointless  mystification. 
This  means,  of  itself,  that  Plato  carefully  devotes  himself  to  re- 
producing the  life  and  thought  of  a  generation  to  which  he  did  not 
himself  belong,  and  that  whatever  indications  he  may  have  given 
us  of  his  personal  doctrines  have  to  be  given  under  restrictions  im- 
posed by  this  selection  of  a  vanished  age  as  the  background  of  the 
dialogues.  (Thus  we  cannot  read  the  Republic  intelligently  unless 
we  bear  carefully  in'  mind  both  that  the  whole  work  presupposes 
as  its  setting  the  Athens  of  the  Archidamian  war  and  that  this 
setting  had  vanished  into  the  past  by  413,  when  Plato  was  still  no 
more  than  a  boy.  So  to  understand  the  Protagoras  we  have  to 
remember  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  still  earlier  time,  Athens  under 
Pericles  shortly  before  the  outbreak  of  the  great  war,  and  that 
Plato  was  not  even  born  at  the  date  of  the  gathering  of  the  "  wits  " 
in  the  house  of  Callias.)  There  are  only  two  characters  among 
the  host  of  personages  in  Plato's  dialogues  of  whom  one  can  be  cer- 
tain that  they  are  not  actual  historical  figures  of  the  fifth  century, 
the  unnamed  Eleatic  of  the  Sophistes  and  Politicks  and  the  un- 
named Athenian  of  the  Laws.  They  have  been  left  anonymous 
apparently  on  purpose  that  their  creator  may  be  at  liberty  to 
express  thoughts  of  his  own  through  them  with  a  freedom  impossible 
in  the  case  of  figures  who  are  "  kennt  men/1  with  characters  and 
views  of  their  own  which  have  to  be  taken  into  account. 

This  is  generally  admitted  on  all  hands  except  for  the  one  most 
important  figure  of  all,  that  of  Socrates.  Him,  it  is  still  maintained 
in  many  quarters,  though  not  so  confidently  as  it  used  to  be  main- 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  25 

tained  thirty  or  forty  years  ago,  Plato  treated  without  scruple,  to 
the  point  of  putting  into  his  mouth  all  sorts  of  theories  invented  by 
Plato  himself  after  the  death  of  their  ostensible  exponent.  I  cannot 
myself  believe  in  this  extraordinary  exception  to  the  general  rule, 
but  even  if  one  does  believe  in  it,  the  general  situation  is  not  very 
seriously  affected.  Even  those  who  most  freely  credit  Plato  with 
fathering  his  own  views  on  Socrates  commonly  admit  that  some  of 
the  views  ascribed  to  Socrates  in  the  dialogues  (if  only  those  ex- 
pressed in  the  Apology)  are  those  of  the  actual  Socrates,  and  to 
admit  this  means  admitting  at  least  that  we  have  somehow  to 
distinguish  between  those  utterances  of  "  Socrates  "  which  are 
really  deliverances  of  "  Plato  "  and  those  which  are  not,  and  it 
becomes  a  difficult  problem  to  know  on  what  principle  the  distinction 
is  to  be  made.  Finally,  there  is  a  further  difficulty  arising  from  the 
very  life-likeness  of  the  dialogues  of  the  earlier  groups.  In  nearly 
all  of  them  except  the  shortest,  the  conversation  wanders,  as  actual 
talk  does,  over  a  wide  field  of  topics.  Metaphysics,  ethics,  the 
principles  of  government,  of  economics,  of  art-criticism,  of  education, 
may  all  come  under  consideration  in  one  and  the  same  conversation. 
If  we  try  to  isolate  the  topics,  putting  together  under  one  head  all 
Plato  has  to  say  anywhere  about  economics,  under  another  all  his 
utterances  about  religion,  under  a  third  his  views  on  beauty  and  the 
arts,  we  run  the  very  serious  risk  of  confusing  what  may  be  views 
learned  early  in  life,  and  very  largely  taken  over  receptively  from  a 
predecessor,  with  the  very  ripest  fruits  of  a  life  of  intense  personal 
thought.  (Thus  it  would  be  rash  to  confound  in  one  amalgam 
utterances  about  early  education  taken  from  the  Republic,  written 
probably  before  Plato  was  forty  and  at  any  rate  possibly  more 
Socratic  than  Platonic,  with  others  taken  from  the  Laws,  the 
magnum  opus  of  Plato's  old  age,  where  there  is  no  Socrates  in 
question  to  cause  any  difficulty.)  A  work  on  Platonic  philosophy 
composed  on  these  principles  may  be  an  admirably  digested  "  cram- 
book  "  ;  it  is  certain  to  obliterate  every  trace  of  the  development  of 
Plato's  thought.  For  all  these  reasons,  it  seems  the  better  choice 
between  evils,  to  deal  with  the  different  dialogues  seriatim,  even  at 
the  cost  of  some  repetition. 

Accordingly  I  propose  first  to  consider  what  we  may  call  the 
"  Socratic  "  group  among  the  dialogues,  the  series  of  works  cul- 
minating, so  far  as  ripeness  of  thought  and  compass  of  subjects  are 
concealed,  in  the  Republic,  grouping  the  slighter  dialogues  together 
but  dwelling  more  fully  on  the  detail  of  the  greater  and  richer. 
Next  I  propose  to  treat  separately  each  of  the  great  dialogues  of 
Plato's  later  age  in  the  same  way.  In  both  cases  I  must  remind 
my  reader  that  I  do  not  believe  that  many  results  of  anything  like 
certainty  can  be  reached  in  the  determination  of  the  precise  order 
of  composition  of  particular  dialogues.  In  the  case  of  the  earlier 
group,  which  I  call  Socratic  in  the  sense  that  they  are  dominated  by 
the  personality  of  Plato's  Socrates,  I  make  no  assumption  about 
this  order  beyond  the  general  one  that  the  four  great  dialogues  which 


26  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

have  the  widest  range  of  subject-matter  and  are  also  reported  at 
second-hand  are  maturer  work  than  the  slighter  dialogues  which 
have  the  form  of  direct  conversation,  and  presumably  also  than 
shorter  "  indirect "  conversations  like  the  Charmides  and  Euthydemus. 
Beyond  this,  the  order  in  which  I  shall  examine  the  dialogues  has 
no  merit  except  that  of  convenience.  Similarly  the  arrangement 
I  shall  adopt  for  the  dialogues  of  later  life  is  not  meant  to  carry  any 
silent  chronological  implications. 

With  one  or  two  trifling  exceptions  most  of  the  dialogues  we 
shall  have  first  to  review  have  an  ethical  purport.  (Perhaps  the 
only  complete  exception  of  any  importance  is  afforded  by  the 
Cratyhis.)  The  interest  of  many  of  them  is  by  no  means  exclusively 
ethical,  sometimes  (as  in  the  case  of  the  Euthydemus)  not  ostensibly 
primarily  ethical,  but  we  commonly  find  that  the  discussion  either 
begins  with,  or  is  found  as  it  proceeds  to  involve,  the  great  practical 
issue  of  the  right  direction  of  conduct.  It  is  therefore  advisable  to 
begin  at  the  outset  by  formulating  very  briefly  and  in  a  way  which 
brings  out  their  interconnexion,  a  few  simple  principles  which  we 
shall  find  running  through  the  whole  of  Plato's  treatment  of  the 
moral  being  of  man.  Since  we  find  these  principles  taken  for  granted 
in  what  has  every  mark  of  being  Plato's  earliest  work  as  well  as  in 
his  ripest  and  latest,  we  may  fairly  regard  them  as  a  legacy  from 
Socrates ;  and  the  most  characteristic  of  them  are,  in  fact,  specific- 
ally attributed  to  Socrates  by  Aristotle,  though  we  have  no  reason 
to  suppose  that  Aristotle  had  any  reason  for  the  attribution  beyond 
the  fact  that  the  principles  in  question  are  put  into  the  mouth  of 
Socrates  in  the  Platonic  dialogues,  notably  in  the  Protagoras.  The 
most  bald  and  straightforward  statement  of  these  principles  as  a 
whole  in  the  Platonic  corpus  is  perhaps  that  of  the  Alctbiades  I, 
which  has  every  appearance  of  being  intended  as  a  compendium  of 
ethics  composed  by  an  immediate  disciple  and  possibly  during 
Plato's  lifetime.  We  may  reproduce  the  main  line  of  argument 
adopted  there  and  elsewhere  much  as  follows. 

The  one  great  standing  aim  of  men  in  all  they  do  is  to  attain 
happiness  (eudaimonia),  in  other  words  to  make  a  success,  in  the 
best  sense  of  the  word,  of  life.  Every  one  wants  to  make  a  success 
of  his  private  life  ;  if  a  man  is  conscious  of  abilities  and  opportunities 
which  open  the  way  to  prominence  as  a  public  man,  he  is  anxious  to 
make  a  success  of  the  affairs  of  his  "  city,"  to  be  a  successful  states- 
man. This  is  what  we  mean  by  being  a  good  man  ;  the  good  man  is 
the  man  who  "  conducts  his  own  affairs,  those  of  his  household,  those 
of  the  city,  well."  And  the  words  good  and  well  are  not  used  here  in 
a  narrowly  moralistic  sense.  To  conduct  your  business  well  means 
to  make  a  thorough  success  of  it ;  the  good  man  is  the  thoroughly 
effective  man.  But  to  make  a  thorough  success  of  life  means  to 
achieve  and  possess  good.  We  may  say  then  that  all  men  alike 
desire  good  and  nothing  but  good.  A  man  may  conceivably  prefer 
the  appearance  or  reputation  of  some  things  to  their  reality ;  e.g. 
a  man  may  prefer  a  reputation  for  a  virtue  he  does  not  possess  to 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  27 

the  possession  of  the  virtue,  or  he  might  prefer  being  thought  hand- 
some or  witty  to  being  really  so.  But  no  one  ever  prefers  being 
thought  to  enjoy  good  to  the  actual  enjoyment  of  good.  Where 
good  is  concerned,  every  one  wishes  really  to  have  it,  and  not  to 
put  up  with  a  counterfeit.  If  a  man  chooses,  as  many  men  do, 
what  is  not  really  good,  the  reason  must  be  that  he  wrongly  supposes 
it  to  be  good.  No  one  would  ever  knowingly  choose  evil  when  he 
might  choose  good,  or  leave  a  good  he  might  have  had  unchosen. 
This  is  the  meaning  of  the  famous  "  Socratic  "  paradox  that  "  all 
wrongdoing  is  involuntary."  It  is  involuntary  in  the  sense  that  the 
man  who  chooses  what  is  bad  only  chooses  it  because  he  wrongly 
thinks  it  good.  And  so  with  the  other  "  paradox  "  that  no  one  ever 
knows  the  good  without  acting  on  his  knowledge.  It  cannot  be 
true  that  men  "  know  the  good  but  do  the  bad  "  ;  that  would  imply 
choice  of  an  evil  known  to  be  evil,  and  such  a  choice  is  impossible. 
Now  when  we  come  to  consider  the  different  things  which  men 
commonly  call  "  good  "  and  wish  to  have,  we  see  at  once  that  they 
are  of  various  kinds.  Some  of  them  are  material  possessions. 
Many  men  think  that  good  means  just  plenty  of  things  of  this  sort. 
But  we  can  easily  see  that  material  things  are  not  good  except  for  a 
man  who  knows  how  to  use  them.  It  would  be  no  good  to  a  man, 
for  example,  to  have  flutes,  or  musical  instruments  of  any  kind, 
unless  he  knew  how  to  use  them.  Flutes  are  good  —  for  the  man  who 
knows  how  to  play  on  them.  Similarly  it  would  be  no  real  good  to 
you  to  possess  all  the  gold  in  the  world,  unless  you  know  how  to  use 
it.  Again,  men  think  that  bodily  beauty,  strength  and  agility, 
robust  health,  are  very  good  things.  But  health  and  strength 
again  may  be  misused  ;  they  are  good  only  for  the  man  who  knows 
how  to  make  the  proper  use  of  them.  If  a  man  has  not  this  know- 
ledge, but  "  abuses  "  his  physical  advantages,  it  might  be  much 
better  for  him  if  he  had  been  less  robust  and  active.  The  same  thing 
is  true  of  intellectual  "  parts/'  A  man  is  not  really  the  better  for 
parts  and  accomplishments  which  he  does  not  know  how  to  use 
rightly.  In  fact  we  may  say  that  if  health,  wealth,  and  the  recog- 
nized "  good  "  things  are  to  be  really  good,  it  is  first  of  all  necessary 
that  the  user  of  these  things  should  be  good.  Now  that  which  uses 
all  other  things,  even  a  man's  body,  is  his  soul.  The  soul  is  the 
man,  and  everything  else  that  is  his  is  merely  something  he  has  or 
owns.  A  man,  in  fact,  is  a  "  soul  using  a  body  "  (this  is  the  standing 
Academic  definition  of  "  man  ").1  Hence  the  first  condition  of 
enjoying  real  good  and  making  a  real  success  of  life  is  that  a  man's 
soul  should  be  in  a  good  or  healthy  state.  And  the  good  or  healthy 
state  of  the  soul  is  ]ust  the  wisdom  or  knowledge  (sophia,  phronesis) 
which  ensures  that  a  man  shall  make  the  right  use  of  his  body  and 
of  everything  else  which  is  his.  Hence  the  first  duty  of  every  man 
who  means  to  enjoy  good  or  happiness  is  to  "  tend  his  soul,"  "  to 


i  For  this  reasoning  see  Ale.  I  uga-i^d.  Euthydemus,  278^-282^,  288**- 
292*.     For  the  soul  as  the  real  "  man  "  which  "  uses  "  the  body  see  Ale.  I 


28  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

see  to  it  that  his  soul  is  as  good  as  it  possibly  can  be,"  that  is,  to  get 
the  knowledge  or  insight  which  ensures  his  using  everything  rightly. 
And  before  a  man  can  develop  this  quality  of  soul,  he  must  be 
brought  to  "  know  himself,"  that  is,  to  recognize  the  imperative 
need  of  moral  wisdom  and  the  dreadfulness  of  his  present  state  of 
ignorance.1  This  is  why  Socrates  taught  that  "  all  the  virtues  are 
one  thing,"  wisdom  or  moral  insight,  and  why  he  insisted  that  the 
necessary  preparation  for  the  private  man  or  the  statesman  who 
means  to  make  life  a  success  is  the  "  tendance  of  his  own  soul/1 
and  the  first  step  towards  this  "  tendance  "  is  true  self-knowledge. 
The  same  considerations  explain  the  peculiar  character  of  the  mission 
Socrates  believes  himself  to  have  received  from  heaven.  He  does 
not  claim,  like  the  professional  teacher  of  an  "  art  "  such  as 
medicine  or  music,  to  have  ready-made  knowledge  to  impart  to 
anyone,  and  hence  he  denies  that  he  has  ever  had  "  disciples." 
For  he  does  not  profess  to  have  attained  the  wisdom  or  insight  of 
which  he  speaks,  but  only  to  have  attained  to  the  perception  that  it 
is  the  one  thing  needful  for  the  conduct  of  life.  He  claims  only  that 
he  makes  it  the  business  of  his  life  to  "  tend  his  own  soul  "  and 
exhorts  all  his  fellow-citizens,  high  and  low,  old  and  young,  to  do 
the  same,  and  that  he  has  a  certain  power  of  bringing  home  to  others 
by  his  questions  the  grossness  and  danger  of  their  ignorance  of  them- 
selves. His  function  is  simply  to  impress  on  all  and  sundry  the 
misery  of  the  state  of  ignorance  in  which  they  find  themselves  "  by 
nature  "  and  the  importance  of  "  coming  out  of  it."  How  a  man  is 
to  come  out  of  this  state  of  nature  is  not  explained  anywhere,2  but 
in  proportion  as  he  does  come  out  of  it  and  advance  to  true  insight, 
true  knowledge  of  moral  good  and  evil,  all  the  different  "  virtues  " 
or  excellences  of  character  and  conduct  will  automatically  ensue 
from  this  knowledge. 

These  fundamental  elementary  notions  will  suffice  to  explain 
the  general  character  of  most  of  the  earliest  "  Socratic  "  dialogues. 
The  procedure  adopted  is  commonly  this.  Some  term  of  moral 
import  for  the  conduct  of  life,  one  of  those  words  which  everybody 
is  using  as  familiar  expressions  daily  without  much  consideration  of 
their  precise  meaning,  such  as  "  courage,"  "  self-mastery,"  or  even 
"  virtue  "  itself,  is  taken  and  we  ask  the  question  whether  we  can 
say  exactly  what  it  means.  A  number  of  answers  are  suggested  and 
examined,  but  all  are  found  wanting.  None  of  them  will  stand 
careful  scrutiny.  Usually  the  result  arrived  at  is  a  negative  one. 
We  discover  to  our  shame  that  we  do  not  really  know  the  meaning 
of  the  most  familiar  epithets  which  we  use  every  day  of  our  lives  to 
convey  moral  approval  or  censure.  This  revelation  of  our  own 
ignorance  is  painful,  but  it  has  the  advantage  that  we  have  taken  a 

1  This  is  the  message  with  which  Socrates  regarded  himself  as  charged  by 
God  to  his  fellow-citizens  and  mankind  in  general  (Apol.  zgd-e,  360,  41$). 

1  Naturally  not.  An  answer  to  this  question  would  raise  the  issues 
covered  in  Christian  theology  by  the  doctrine  of  "  grace."  We  must  not  look 
for  an  anticipation  of  Augustine  in  Hellenic  moral  philosophy. 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  29 

step  forward.  At  any  rate,  our  knowledge  of  our  own  ignorance 
will  henceforth  prevent  our  fancying  that  we  really  knew  when  we 
were  repeating  some  of  the  formulae  which  our  inquiry  has  con- 
demned. Now  that  we  know  that  we  do  not  know  what  it  is  so 
necessary  for  the  conduct  of  life  to  know,  we  are  at  least  left  with 
a  heightened  sense  of  the  importance  of  "  tendance  of  the  soul  "  ; 
we  shall  not,  like  the  rest  of  mankind,  suppose  ourselves  to  be  in 
spiritual  health  when  we  are  really  inwardly  diseased ;  our  very 
knowledge  of  the  gravity  of  our  spiritual  malady  will  make  us  all 
the  more  unremitting  in  our  determination  to  make  the  attempt 
to  escape  from  our  ignorance  the  great  business  of  life.  This, 
rather  than  anything  more  specific  in  the  way  of  "  positive  results," 
is  the  conclusion  Plato  means  us  to  draw  from  these  "  dialogues  of 
search/'  It  has  been  objected  to  Plato  by  unsympathetic  critics, 
as  he  makes  some  of  his  characters  object  it  to  Socrates,  that  such 
a  conclusion  is  not  satisfactory.  Socrates,  Grote  thinks,  should 
have  exchanged  the  easier  part  of  critic  for  that  of  defender  of  theses 
of  his  own.  He  would  have  found  that  they  could  be  subjected  to  a 
dialectic  like  his  own  with  effects  as  damaging  as  those  produced  on 
his  rivals1  theories  by  himself.  The  objection  misses  the  mark. 
Plato's  object  is  not  to  propound  theorems  in  moral  science  for  our 
instruction,  but  to  rouse  us  to  give  our  own  personal  care  to  the 
conduct  of  our  moral  life  by  convincing  us  of  the  ignorance  we 
usually  disguise  from  ourselves  by  acquiescence  in  uncriticized  half- 
truths  and  the  practical  gravity  of  that  ignorance.  He  wishes  to 
make  us  think  to  the  purpose  about  the  great  concern  of  life,  not  to 
do  our  thinking  for  us.  From  his  point  of  view,  complacent  satis- 
faction with  false  conceptions  of  good  is  the  deadliest  of  all  maladies 
of  the  soul ;  if  he  can  make  us  honestly  dissatisfied  with  our 
customary  loose  thinking,  he  has  produced  exactly  the  effect  he 
designed. 

We  may  now,  bearing  these  few  simple  ideas  in  mind,  consider 
the  arguments  of  some  of  the  early  dialogues. 

The  Greater  Hippias. — The  form  of  the  dialogue  is  the  simplest 
possible ;  it  is  a  direct  colloquy  between  Socrates  and  a  single 
speaker,  the  well-known  polymath  Hippias  of  Elis,  who  figures  also 
in  the  Lesser  Hippias,  the  Protagoras,  and  a  conversation,  perhaps 
suggested  by  the  opening  remarks  of  our  dialogue,  in  the  fourth 
book  of  Xenophon's  Memorabilia.1  The  presence  of  Hippias  at 
Athens  implies  that  the  time  is  one  of  peace,  and,  as  the  first  visit 
of  Gorgias  to  the  city  is  referred  to  as  a  past  event  (2826),  the  sup- 
posed date  must  be  after  427  B.C.,  and  therefore  during  the  years  of 
the  peace  of  Nicias.  Hippias  is  depicted  as  childishly  conceited  on 
the  strength  of  the  great  variety  of  topics  he  is  able  to  expound,  and 
the  brilliant  financial  success  which  attends  him  wherever  he  goes. 
Even  at  Sparta — a  city  where  he  is  often  called  on  matters  of  state — 
though  no  interest  is  taken  in  his  astronomy  and  mathematics,  he 
has  made  a  resounding  success  with  a  more  immediately  practical 
1  Xenophon,  Memor.  iv.  4. 


80          PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

subject,  a  set  homily  put  into  the  mouth  of  Nestor  on  "  the  kind  of 
fine  achievements  by  which  a  young  man  may  win  high  reputation  " 
(2866).  This  remark  leads  on  to  the  main  subject  of  the  dialogue, 
the  question  what  is  really  meant  by  the  word  xaMv,  beautiful, 
which  was  commonly  employed,  like  its  Latin  equivalent  honestum, 
and  our  colloquial  "  fine,"  to  express  both  physical  and  moral  beauty. 
Socrates  professes  to  have  much  trouble  in  satisfying  the  question 
of  a  certain  combative  and  ill-mannered  acquaintance  who  has 
reproached  him  for  constantly  using  the  epithets  Ka\6v  and  ato-^poV, 
"  fine  "  and  "  ugly/'  in  judgments  of  value  without  being  able  to 
explain  their  exact  meaning.  Can  Hippias  help  him  out  of  his  per- 
plexity ?  (It  does  not  call  for  much  perspicacity  to  see  that  the 
imaginary  "  rude  fellow  "  who  insists  on  asking  awkward  questions 
is  no  other  than  Socrates  himself.1)  The  precise  problem  is  this. 
We  call  an  act  of  remarkable  courage  a  "  fine  "act,  and  we  say  the 
same  thing  about  an  act  of  outstanding  and  remarkable  justice. 
The  use  of  the  same  word  "  fine  "  in  both  cases  implies  that  there 
is  a  something  (a  certain  €i8os,  form,  or  character  —  the  word  is 
little  more  than  a  synonym  for  a  "  something  ")  common  to  both 
cases,  or  why  do  we  give  them  the  same  name,  "  fine  "  ?  What  is 
"  the  fine  itself,"  "  the  just  fine  "  (avrb  TO  /caAoi/),  i.e.  what  is  it 
which  is  exactly  and  precisely  named  when  we  use  the  word  "  fine  "  ?2 
Hippias,  like  many  interlocutors  in  Plato,  underrates  the  difficulty 
of  the  problem  because  he  confuses  the  meaning  of  a  term  with  an 
example  of  it.  He  answers  that  a  "  fine  girl  "  is,  of  course,  something 
"  fine  "  (2870).  But  this  clearly  tells  us  nothing  about  the  meaning 
of  "  fine."  There  are  also  "  fine  "  horses,  "  fine  "  musical  instru- 
ments, even  "  fine  "  pots  and  pans,  like  those  made  by  the  masters 
of  Attic  pottery  (288^),  and,  after  all,  the  beauty  of  the  "  fine  girl  " 
is  relative.  She  would  not  be  "  fine  "  by  comparison  with  a  goddess 
(2896).  What  then  is  "  the  just  fine,"  the  character  which  all  "  fine  " 
things  exhibit  ?  (289^).  Here  again  Hippias  makes  an  elementary 
blunder.  Anything,  he  says,  is  made  "  fine,"  if  it  is  gilded,  and  so 
"  that  which  by  its  presence  makes  a  thing  fine  "  may  be  said  to 
be  just  gold  (2890). 

But  then  the  objection  occurs  that  Phidias  notoriously  did  not 
gild  the  features  of  his  famous  chryselephantine  Athena,  and  surely 
Phidias  may  be  presumed  to  have  known  his  own  business  as  an 
artist  (2906).  This  leads,  at  last,  to  a  real  attempt  to  define  "  the 
fine."  ^The  "  fine  "  is  "  the  becoming  "  or  "  fitting  "  or  "  appro- 
priate "  (TO  TT/ocVov,  2900).  It  would  follow  from  this  at  once  that 
a  soup-spoon  of  wood,  because  more  "  fitting,"  is  more  beautiful  or 
"  fine  "  than  a  golden  spoon  (2910).  Note  that  Socrates  does  not 

1  See  2&Sdt  where  Socrates  humorously  describes  his  pertinacious  ques- 
tioner as  "  no  wit,  one  of  the  canaille  who  cares  nothing  for  anything  but 
the  truth,"  and  2986  n,  where  he  as  good  as  identifies  him  with  "  the  son  of 
Sophroniscus." 

•The  characteristic  phrases  ai5rd  rb  Ka\6v  and  eWoi  are  introduced  at 
289^  without  explanation,  as  something  quite  familiar.  They  bear  the  same 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  81 

positively  assert  this  conclusion,  as  he  is  represented  as  doing  by 
interpreters  who  are  determined  to  see  nothing  in  him  but  a  common- 
place utilitarian.  He  obviously  intends  to  raise  a  difficulty.  It 
seemed  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  procedure  of  Phidias  to 
say  that  a  statue  with  a  gilded  face  would  not  be  "  beautiful  " 
because  the  gilding  would  not  be  "  befitting."  Yet,  though  a  com- 
mon wooden  spoon  would  be  more  "  in  place  "  where  one  is  eating 
soup  than  a  golden  one,  it  is  a  paradox  to  say  that  because  the  wooden 
spoon  is  "  in  place,"  it  is  a  thing  of  beauty.  Whatever  may  be  the 
true  answer  to  the  question  what  "  beauty  "  is,  the  identification 
of  the  aesthetically  "  fine  "  with  the  "  befitting  "  is  far  too  crude  a 
solution. 

Hippias  evidently  feels  the  difficulty,  and  is  made  to  fall  back 
again  on  an  illustration,  this  time  from  the  moral  sphere.  It  is 
eminently  "  fine  "  to  live  in  health,  wealth,  and  honours,  to  bury 
your  parents  splendidly,  and  to  receive  in  the  fullness  of  days  a 
splendid  funeral  from  your  descendants  (291^).  But  this,  again,  is 
manifestly  no  true  definition.  A  definition  must  be  rigidly  uni- 
versal. But  every  one  will  admit  that  Heracles  and  Achilles  and 
others  who  preferred  a  short  and  glorious  to  a  long  and  inglorious 
life,  and  so  died  young  and  left  their  parents  to  survive  them,  made 
a  "  fine  "  choice  (292^-293^).  The  illustration  has  thus  led  nowhere, 
and  we  have  still  to  discuss  the  definition  of  the  "  fine  "  as  the 
"  fitting  "  or  "  becoming  "  on  its  own  merits.  When  a  thing  has 
the  character  of  being  "  becoming,"  does  this  make  it  "  fine,"  or 
does  it  only  make  the  thing  seem  "  fine  "  ?  Hippias  prefers  the 
second  alternative,  since  even  a  scarecrow  of  a  man  can  be  made  to 
look  "finer"  if  he  is  "becomingly"  dressed.  But,  obviously,  if 
"  propriety  "  makes  things  seem  finer  than  they  really  are,  "  the 
appropriate  "  and  the  "  fine  "  cannot  be  the  same  thing  (2946). 
And  we  cannot  get  out  of  the  difficulty,  as  Hippias  would  like  to  do, 
by  saying  the  "  appropriateness  "  both  makes  things  "  fine  "  and 
makes  them  seem  "  fine."  If  that  were  so,  what  really  is  "  fine  " 
would  always  seem  fine  too.  Yet  it  is  notorious  that  communities 
and  individuals  differ  about  nothing  more  than  about  the  question 
what  sort  of  conduct  is  "  fine  "  (2940-^).  Thus  if  "  appropriate- 
ness "  actually  makes  things  "  fine,"  the  proposed  definition  may 
possibly  be  the  right  one  ;  but  if  it  only  makes  them  "  seem  "  fine — 
(we  have  seen  that  the  alternatives  are  exclusive  of  one  another] — 
the  definition  must  clearly  be  rejected.  And  Hippias  is  satisfied 
that  this  second  alternative  is  the  true  one  (2940).  (Hume's  well- 
known  ethical  theory  affords  a  good  illustration  of  the  point  of  this 
reasoning.  Hume  sets  himself  to  show  that  every  society  thinks 
the  kind  of  conduct  it  "  disinterestedly  "  likes  virtuous  and  the 

meaning  which  they  have  in  dialogues  where  the  so-called  "  ideal  theory  "  is 
expounded.  They  mean  that  which  is  denoted  without  excess  or  defect  by  a 
significant  name,  a  determinate  character.  This  is  a  good  illustration  of  the 
way  in  which  the  "  ideal  theory  "  is  directly  suggested  by  the  everyday  use  of 
language.  It  is  assumed  that  if  several  things  can  each  be  significantly  called 
xt  then  x  has  a  determinate  significance  which  is  the  same  in  all  the  cases. 


32  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

conduct  it  "  disinterestedly  "  dislikes  vicious.  He  then  assumes 
that  he  has  proved  that  these  two  kinds  of  conduct  really  are 
virtuous  and  vicious  respectively,  and  that  because  a  society  knows 
certainly  what  it  likes  and  what  it  dislikes,  it  is  infallible  in  its 
judgments  about  virtue  and  vice.  There  is  manifestly  no  con- 
nexion between  the  premises  of  this  reasoning  and  its  conclusion.) 
Socrates  now  (2950)  throws  out  a  suggestion  of  his  own  for  examina- 
tion. Perhaps  it  may  be  that  the  "  fine  "  is  the  same  as  the 
"  useful."  At  any  rate,  by  "  fine  eyes  "  we  seem  to  mean  eyes 
which  do  their  work  of  seeing  well,  by  a  "  fine  "  or  "  handsome  " 
body  one  which  discharges  its  various  functions  well,  and  the  same 
considerations  seem  to  hold  good  of  "  fine  "  horses,  ships,  imple- 
ments of  all  kinds,  and  "  fine  "  social  institutions.  In  all  these  cases 
we  seem  to  call  "  fine  "  that  which  serves  the  use  to  which  it  is  to 
be  put  well,  and  "  ugly  "  that  which  serves  that  use  badly.  The 
examples,  drawn  from  a  wide  range  of  facts,  thus  suggest  an  obvious 
generalization,  and  the  use  of  them  to  suggest  it  is  an  illustration 
of  what  Aristotle  had  in  mind  when  he  specified  "  inductive  argu- 
ments "  as  one  of  the  contributions  of  Socrates  to  philosophical 
method.1 

If  the  definition  once  given  were  magisterially  proposed  for  our 
acceptance,  Socrates  would  thus  stand  revealed  as  a  pure  utilitarian 
in  moral  and  aesthetic  theory.  But  it  is,  in  fact,  put  forward 
tentatively  as  a  suggestion  for  examination.  The  examination 
is  conducted  in  strict  accord  with  the  requirements  of  the  dialectical 
method  as  described  in  the  Phaedo.*  The  first  step  is  to  see  what 
consequences  follow  from  the  suggested  "  postulate  "  (uTroflco-ts). 
If  the  consequences  are  found  to  be  in  accord  with  known  facts, 
and  thus  so  far  "  verified,"  the  postulate  will  be  regarded  as  so  far 
justified  ;  if  some  of  them  prove  to  be  at  variance  with  fact,  it  must 
be  modified  or  dismissed,  it  cannot  hold  the  field  as  it  stands. 

What  consequences  follow,  then,  from  the  identification  of  the 
"  fine  "  with  the  "  useful  "  ?  There  is  one  at  least  which  must 
give  us  pause.  A  thing  is  useful  for  what  it  can  do,  not  for  what  it 
cannot ;  thus  our  formula  apparently  leads  to  the  identification  of 
TO  KaXov  with  power  to  produce  some  result.  But  results  may  be 
good  or  they  may  be  bad,  and  it  seems  monstrous  to  hold  that 
power  to  produce  evil  is  "  fine."  We  must,  at  the  least,  modify 
our  statement  by  saying  that  the  "  fine  "  is  that  which  can  produce 
good,  i.e.,  whether  the  "  useful  "  is  "  fine  "  or  not  will  depend  on 
the  goodness  or  badness  of  the  end  to  which  it  is  instrumental. 
Now  we  call  that  which  is  instrumental  to  good  "  profitable  " 
(co^cXt/xov)  ;  thus  our  proposed  definition  must  be  made  more 
specific  by  a  further  determination.  We  must  say  "  the  fine  " 

1  Aristot.  Met.  MioySfc  27.  Note  that  neither  Socrates  nor  Aristotle  regards 
the  "induction"  as  a  proof.  The  generalization  rb  Ka\6v=T6  xPWWfo  has 
yet  to  be  tested  and  may  have  to  be  rejected.  The  testing  is  the  work  of 
intellectual  analysis,  or,  as  Socrates  and  Plato  call  it  "  dialectic," 

*  Phaedo,  iooa-6, 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  83 

is  that  which    is  profitable   (instrumental  to  the  production  of 
good)  (2960). 

Even  so,  we  have  a  worse  difficulty  to  face.  We  are  saying  in 
effect  that  the  "  fine  "  =  that  which  causes  good  as  its  result.  But 
a  cause  and  its  effect  are  always  different  (or,  in  modern  language, 
causality  is  always  transitive).  Hence,  if  the  "fine  "  is  the  cause 
of  good,  it  must  follow  that  what  is  "  fine  "  is  never  itself  good,  and 
what  is  good  is  never  itself  "  fine,"  and  this  is  a  monstrous  paradox 
(2970).  It  seems  then  that  the  attempt  to  give  a  utilitarian 
definition  of  TO  KO.\OV  must  be  abandoned. 

Possibly  we  may  succeed  better  with  a  hedonist  theory  of  beauty. 
The  pictures,  statues,  and  the  like  which  we  call  "  fine  "  all  give  us 
pleasure,  and  so  do  music  and  literature.  In  the  one  case  the 
pleasure  is  got  from  sight,  in  the  other  from  hearing.  This  suggests 
the  new  theory  that  the  "  fine  "  is  "  that  which  it  is  pleasant  to  see 
or  hear  "  (2980).  And  we  may  even  get  in  "  moral  beauty  "  under 
the  formula,  for  "  fine  conduct  "  and  "  fine  laws  "  are  things  which 
it  gives  us  pleasure  to  see  or  to  hear.  But  there  is  a  logical  diffi- 
culty to  face.  We  are  trying  to  define  the  "  fine  "  as  "  that  which  it 
is  pleasant  to  see  and  hear."  But,  of  course,  you  do  not  hear  the 
things  which  it  is  pleasant  to  see,  nor  see  the  things  which  it  is 
pleasant  to  hear.  Thus  our  proposed  definition  will  not  be  true  of 
either  of  the  classes  of  things  which  are  "  fine,"  and,  being  true  of 
neither,  it  cannot  be  true  of  both.  We  assumed  that  TO  *a\ov, 
whatever  it  may  be,  must  be  a  character  common  to  all  '  fine  " 
things,  but  "  to  be  seen  and  heard  "  is  not  a  character  either  of  the 
"  pleasures  of  sight  "  or  of  the  "  pleasures  of  hearing  "  (3000,  6). 

Aristotle  comments  on  the  fallacy,  formally  committed  in  this 
argument,  of  confusing  "  and  "  with  or,"  but  the  real  trouble  Ties 
deeper.  When  the  reasoning  has  been  made  formally  sound  by  sub- 
stituting "  or  "  everywhere  for  "  and,"  it  still  remains  the  fact 
that  it  is  hard  to  say  that  the  "  pleasures  of  sight  "  and  those  of 
hearing  have  anything  in  common  but  their  common  character  of 
being  pleasant,  and  it  has  been  the  standing  assumption  of  the 
dialogue  that  all  "  fine  "  things  have  some  one  common  character. 
But  the  conclusion,  which  might  seem  indicated,  that  the  "  fineness  " 
which  all  "  fine  "  things  have  in  common  is  just  "  pleasantness  " 
is  excluded  by  the  firm  conviction  of  both  Plato  and  Aristotle  that 
there  are  "  disgraceful,"  morally  "  ugly  "  pleasures,  e.g.  those  of  the 
sexual  "  pervert."  At  the  same  time,  the  proposed  formula  is  at 
any  rate  suggestive.  There  must  be  some  reason  why  the  two  un- 
mistakably "  aesthetic  "  senses  should  be  just  sight  and  hearing, 
though  the  utilization  of  the  fact  demands  a  much  more  developed 
aesthetic  psychology  than  that  of  our  dialogue.  The  equivocation 
between  "  and  "  and  "  or  "  is,  on  Socrates'  part,  a  conscious  trap 
laid  for  his  antagonist,  as  he  shows  when  he  goes  on  to  remark  that, 
after  all,  it  is  possible  for  "  both  "  to  have  a  character  which  belongs 
to  neither  singly,  since,  e.g.,  Socrates  and  Hippias  are  a  couple,  though 
Socrates  is  not  a  couple,  nor  is  Hippias.  Thus  it  would  be  logically 


84  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

possible  that  "  the  pleasures  of  sight  and  hearing  "  might  collectively 
have  some  character  which  belongs  to  neither  class  separately  ;  but 
the  possibility  is  nothing  to  our  purpose.  For  we  agreed  that  the 
"  fine  "  is  a  character  which  makes  all  "  fine  "  things  "  fine,"  and 
obviously  a  character  which  "  fine  sights  "  do  not  possess,  (though 
the  collection  "fine  sights  and  sounds  "  may  possess  it,)  cannot  be 
what  makes  "  fine  "  sights  fine  (303^).  If  we  look  for  some  common 
character  which  distinguishes  both  pleasures  of  sight  and  pleasures  of 
hearing  from  other  pleasures,  and  so  justifies  our  calling  them  in 
particular  the  "  fine  "  pleasures,  the  only  obvious  character  is  that 
both  are  "  harmless  "  and  therefore  better  than  other  pleasures, 
(indulgence  in  which  may  easily  harm  our  health  or  character  or 
repute).  But  this  brings  us  back  to  our  old  formula  that  the  "  fine  " 
is  the  "  profitable  "  with  the  added  specification  that  it  is  "  profitable 
pleasure  "  (3030).  And  thus  we  are  faced  once  more  with  the  diffi- 
culty that  the  "  fine  "  is  made  productive  of  good,  or  a  cause  of  good, 
with  the  consequence  that  the  "  fine  "  is  not  itself  good  nor  the  good 
itself  "  fine  "  (30401).  Thus  the  result  of  the  whole  discussion  is  nega- 
tive. We  have  only  learned  that  though  we  are  always  talking  about 
"  fine  conduct,"  as  though  we  knew  our  own  meaning,  we  are  really 
in  a  state  of  mental  fog  of  which  we  ought  to  be  ashamed.  We  have 
discovered  our  own  ignorance  of  what  it  is  most  imperative  we  should 
know  and  what  we  fancy  ourselves  to  know  exceptionally  well. 

It  is  in  this  salutary  lesson  and  not  in  any  of  the  proposed 
definitions  of  the  "  fine  "  that  we  must  look  for  the  real  significance 
of  the  dialogue.  But  it  is  also  suggestive  in  other  ways.  The  lesson 
it  gives  in  the  right  method  of  framing  and  testing  a  definition  is 
more  important  than  any  of  the  tentative  definitions  examined. 
Yet  it  is  a  valuable  hint  towards  a  more  developed  aesthetic  theory 
that  sensible  "  beauty  "  is  found  to  be  confined  to  the  perceptions 
of  the  two  senses  of  sight  and  hearing,  and  the  illustration  of  the 
golden  and  wooden  spoons  might  well  serve  as  a  warning  against 
the  dangers  of  an  unduly  "  rationalistic  "  aesthetic  theory.  A 
wooden  porridge-spoon  is  not  necessarily  a  thing  of  beauty  because 
it  may  be  admirably  "  adapted  "  for  the  purposes  of  the  porridge- 
eater.  It  is  a  still  more  important  contribution  to  sound  ethics  to 
have  insisted  on  the  impossibility  of  reducing  moral  excellence 
(the  "  fine  "  in  action)  to  mere  "  efficiency,"  irrespective  of  the  moral 
quality  of  the  results  of  the  "  efficient  "  agent.1  And  the  emphatic 
insistence  on  the  "  transitive  "  character  of  all  causality — a  view 
which  pervades  all  the  best  Greek  metaphysics  from  first  to  last — 
may  be  regarded  as  the  opening  of  a  discussion  which  has  continued 
to  our  own  time  and  has  issues  of  the  most  momentous  kind  for  the 
whole  interpretation  of  existence.2 

1  Mr.  Chesterton  remarks  somewhere  that  Fagin  was  probably  an  excep- 
tionally "  efficient  "  educator  of  boys  ;  the  trouble  was  that  he  was  efficient 
in  teaching  them  the  wrong  things. 

1  E.g.  the  cause  of  Theism  is  bound  up  with  the  position  that  all  genuine 
causality  is  "  transitive,"  and  that  purely  "  immanent "  causality  is  not  caus- 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  85 

The  Lesser  Hippias. — This  short  dialogue,  though  less  ambitious 
in  its  scope,  is  much  more  brilliantly  executed  than  the  Hippias 
Major.  Its  authenticity  is  sufficiently  established  by  the  fact  that 
Aristotle,  though  not  mentioning  the  author,  quotes  the  dialogue  by 
name  as  "  the  Hippias  "  ;  such  explicit  references  never  occur  in 
his  work  to  writings  of  any  "  Socratic  men  "  other  than  Plato.1 
The  conversation  discusses  a  single  ethical  paradox,  and  its  real 
purport  only  emerges  in  the  closing  words  of  Socrates. 

Socrates  opens  the  talk  by  quoting  an  opinion  that  the  Iliad 
is  a  finer  poem  than  the  Odyssey,  as  the  hero  of  the  former, 
Achilles,  is  a  morally  nobler  character  than  Odysseus,  the 
hero  of  the  latter.  The  moralistic  tone  of  this  criticism  is 
characteristically  Athenian,  as  we  can  see  for  ourselves  from 
a  reading  of  the  Frogs  of  Aristophanes,  but  does  not  concern  us 
further.  The  remark  is  a  mere  peg  on  which  to  hang  a  discussion 
of  the  purely  ethical  problem  in  which  Socrates  is  really  interested. 
The  transition  is  effected  by  the  declaration  of  Hippias  that  Achilles 
was  certainly  a  nobler  character  than  Odysseus,  since  Achilles  is 
single-minded,  sincere,  and  truthful,  but  Odysseus  notoriously  ruse 
and  a  past  master  of  deceit.  We  see  this  from  the  famous  lines  in 
the  ninth  book  of  the  Iliad,  where  Achilles  pointedly  tells  the  "  art- 
ful "  Odysseus  that  he  hates  the  man  who  says  one  thing  and  means 
another  "  worse  than  the  gates  of  Hades  "  (365^).  Socrates  replies 
that,  after  all,  Achilles  was  no  more  "  truthful  "  than  Odysseus,  as 
the  context  of  this  very  passage  proves.  He  said  he  would  at  once 
desert  the  expedition,  but,  in  fact,  he  did  nothing  of  the  kind,  and, 
what  is  more,  he  actually  told  his  friend  Aias  a  different  story.  To 
him  he  said  not  that  he  would  sail  home,  but  that  he  would  keep 
out  of  the  fighting  until  the  Trojans  should  drive  the  Achaeans 
back  to  their  ships  (371  b).  (This  is  meant  to  negative  the  suggestion 
of  Hippias  that  Achilles  honestly  meant  what  he  said  when  he 
threatened  to  desert,  but  changed  his  mind  afterwards  because  of 
the  unexpected  straits  to  which  his  comrades-in-arms  were  reduced.) 
It  looks  then  as  though  Homer,  unlike  Hippias,  thought  that  the 
"  truthful  man  "  and  the  "  liar  "  are  not  two,  but  one  and  the  same. 

This  is  the  paradox  which  Socrates  proceeds  to  defend,  and  Hippias, 
in  the  name  of  common  sense,  to  deny.  Or  rather  it  is  the  application 
of  a  still  more  general  paradox  that  the  man  who  "  misses  the 
mark  "  (a/xapram)  on  purpose  (CACW^)  is  "  better  "  than  the  man 
who  does  so  "  unintentionally  "  (aKw).  Popular  morality  rejects 

ality  at  all.     This  becomes  specially  obvious  from  a  study  of  the  famou? 
Aristotelian  argument  for  the  "  unmoved  Mover." 

1  It  is  barely  credible  that  Aristotle  should  not  have  read  the  admired 
"  Socratic  discourses  "  of  Aeschines  of  Sphettus  or  the  Alcibiades  of  Antis- 
thenes,  and  it  is  therefore  significant  that  he  never  mentions  any  of  these 
works.  We  may  take  it  that  a  named  dialogue  introducing  Socrates  always 
means  to  him  a  dialogue  of  Plato,  or  one  regarded  by  the  contemporary 
Academy  as  Plato's.  And  I  cannot  believe  that  the  Academy  itself  can  have 
been  liable  to  error  about  the  Platonic  authorship  of  dialogues  within  a  quarter 
of  a  century  of  Plato's  death. 


56  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

a  view  of  this  kind  as  monstrous.  It  holds  that  we  ought,  as 
Hippias  says,  to  show  o-vyyrtu/x.^  (to  "  make  allowances ")  for 
involuntary  wrong-doing,  but  that  for  deliberate  wrong-doing  there  is 
no  excuse.  The  main  interest  of  the  dialogue  lies  in  the  line  of  argu- 
ment by  which  Socrates  impugns  this  generally  accepted  thesis. 
He  proceeds,  as  usual,  by  an  "  inductive  "  argument,  i.e.  an  appeal 
to  analogy.  In  general,  the  man  who  knows  most  about  a  subject 
is  of  all  men  the  one  who  can  mislead  you  in  his  own  subject  if  he 
chooses  to  do  so.  An  able  mathematician,  like  Hippias,  would  be 
much  better  able  to  impose  a  false  demonstration  on  others  than  a 
non-mathematician,  who  would  only  commit  fallacies  unintentionally 
and  incidentally,  and  thus  be  led  into  visible  self-contradictions. 
And  the  same  thing  holds  good  for  astronomy  (366^-3680).  The 
same  thing  is  true  about  arts  involving  manual  dexterity  (3686- 
3696).  The  man  who  only  fails  when  he  means  to  fail  is  a  much 
better  craftsman  than  the  man  who  fails  unintentionally  from  in- 
competence. It  is  true  also  of  all  forms  of  bodily  dexterity.  The 
runner  who  falls  behind  only  when  he  means  to  do  so,  the  wrestler 
who  is  thrown  when  he  means  to  let  himself  be  thrown,  is  a  better 
runner  or  wrestler  than  the  man  who  falls  behind  his  competitor 
or  is  thrown  against  his  will,  because  he  "  can't  help  it  "  (3730- 
374&).  So  with  physical  "  talents."  The  man  who  only  makes  a 
false  note  when  he  means  to  do  so  is  a  better  singer  than  the  man 
who  can't  help  singing  out  of  tune.  And  in  the  world  of  industry, 
a  tool  with  which  you  can  make  a  bad  stroke  when  you  mean  to  do 
so,  is  a  better  tool  than  one  with  which  you  can't  help  making  false 
strokes.  And  to  come  to  living  "  implements,"  a  horse  or  a  dog 
which  does  its  work  badly  only  when  the  owner  means  that  it  shall, 
has  a  "  better  soul  "  than  one  which  does  the  wrong  thing  when  the 
owner  means  it  to  do  the  right  one  (3746-3750).  The  same  thing 
would  be  true  of  a  servant.  (Bob  Sawyer's  boy,  who  took  the  medi- 
cines to  the  wrong  houses  because  he  was  ordered  to  do  so,  was  much 
more  efficient  than  the  sort  of  boy  who  blunders  about  errands 
because  he  is  too  stupid  to  do  what  he  is  told.)  We  may  argue  by 
analogy  that  our  own  souls  are  better  if  they  "  go  wrong  "  on  pur- 
pose than  if  they  do  so  unintentionally  (375^).  In  fact,  we  may 
condense  the  principle  of  the  argument  thus.  Righteousness  or 
morality  (StKcuoow^)  is  either  "  power  "  (Suva/us),  or  "  knowledge  " 
(eTrioTTfttoy),  or  both.  But  the  man  who  can  do  right  is  better  in 
respect  of  "  power,1'  a  more  "  able  "  man  than  the  man  who 
cannot ;  and  the  man  who  knows  how  to  do  it  has  more  knowledge 
than  the  man  who  does  not.  And  we  have  seen  that  it  takes  more 
ability  and  more  knowledge  to  "  go  wrong  "  when  you  mean  to  do  so, 
than  to  blunder  unintentionally.  And  the  better  man  is  the  man 
who  has  the  better  soul.  Hence  it  seems  to  follow  that  "  the  man 
who  does  wrong  on  purpose,  if  there  is  such  a  person,  is  a  better  man 
than  the  man  who  does  wrong  unintentionally  "  (375^-3766).  Yet 
this  is  such  a  paradox  that  Socrates  hesitates  to  assert  it,  though 
he  does  not  see  how  to  escape  it. 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  8» 

What  is  the  real  point  of  this  curious  argument  ?  It  is  clear, 
of  course,  that  the  main  assumption  on  which  it  is  based  is  the  famous 
Socratic  thesis  that  "  virtue  is  knowledge,"  and  again,  that  the 
method  by  which  the  conclusion  is  reached  is  the  appeal  to  the 
analogy  of  the  arts  and  crafts  so  constantly  employed  by  Socrates. 
It  is  clear  also  that  Plato  does  not  mean  us  to  accept  the  alleged 
inference  ;  he  does  not  seriously  think  that  the  deliberate  "  villain  " 
is  morally  better  than  the  man  who  does  wrong,  in  an  hour  of 
temptation,  against  his  settled  purpose  in  life ;  it  is  the  impossibility 
of  such  a  doctrine  which  leads  Socrates  to  say  that  he  cannot 
commit  himself  consistently  to  the  conclusion.  Yet  we  cannot 
take  the  dialogue  as  intended  to  expose  and  refute  either  the  doctrine 
that  virtue  is  knowledge,  or  the  use  of  the  analogy  from  the  "  arts  " 
as  valuable  in  ethical  reasoning.  That  a  man  who  knows  "  the 
good  "  will,  of  course,  aim  at  it  is  a  standing  doctrine  of  all  Greek 
ethics ;  to  suppose  that  Plato  means  either  to  deny  this  or  to 
reject  reasoning  from  the  "  arts,"  would  be  to  treat  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  Republic,  to  name  no  other  Platonic  dialogues,  as  a 
prolonged  bad  joke.  We  must  therefore  find  some  other  method 'of 
interpretation. 

On  reflection  we  see  that  the  key  to  Plato's  meaning  is  really 
supplied  by  one  clause  in  the  proposition  which  emerges  as  the 
conclusion  of  the  matter  :  "  the  man  who  does  wrong  on  purpose, 
if  there  is  such  a  person,  is  the  good  man."  The  insinuation  plainly 
is  that  there  really  is  no  such  person  as  "  the  man  who  does  wrong 
on  purpose,"  and  that  the  paradox  does  not  arise  simply  because 
there  is  no  such  person.  In  other  words,  we  have  to  understand 
the  Socratic  doctrine  that  virtue  is  knowledge,  and  the  Socratic 
use  of  the  analogy  of  the  "  arts,"  in  the  light  of  the  other  well-known 
Socratic  dictum,  repeated  by  Plato  on  his  own  account  in  the  Laws, 
that  "  all  wrong-doing  is  involuntary."  It  is  this,  and  not  the 
formulated  inference  that  the  man  who  does  wrong  on  purpose  is 
the  good  man,  which  is  the  real  conclusion  to  which  Plato  is  con- 
ducting us.  And  we  need  have  no  difficulty  about  admitting  this 
conclusion,  if  we  bear  in  mind  the  true  and  sensible  remark  of 
Proclus  about  the  Platonic  sense  of  the  word  "  voluntary  "  (IKOV'O-IOV). 
In  Plato,  the  voluntary,  as  Proclus  says,1  means  regularly  what  we 
really  wish  to  have.  Now  no  man  wishes  to  have  what  he  knows  or 
believes  to  be  bad  for  him.  Many  men  wish  for  what,  in  fact,  would 
be  bad  for  them,  but  they  can  only  do  so  because  they  falsely  think 
the  thing  in  question  good.  To  wish  to  have  a  thing  because  you 
know  it  would  be  bad  for  you  would  be  impossible.  As  Aristotle  puts 
it,  "  every  one  wishes  for  what  he  thinks  good."  Many  men  choose 
evil  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  is  evil,  no  one  chooses  it  because  it  is 
evil  and  he  knows  it  to  be  so.  (Of  course  he  may  know  or  believe 
that  he  will  be  sent  to  prison  or  to  hell  for  choosing  as  he  does,  but 
at  heart  he  thinks  that  it  will  be  "  worth  his  while  "  to  take  these 
consequences,  he  will  be  "  better  off  "  even  after  paying  this  price 
1  Proclus,  in  Remp.  ii.  355  (Kroll). 


88  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

for  what  he  desires.1)  Thus  the  proposition  "  all  wrong-doing  is 
involuntary/1  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  question  of  human 
freedom  ;  it  is  merely  the  negative  way  of  stating  that  a  man  who 
really  knows  what  his  highest  good  is,  will  always  act  on  this  know- 
ledge. The  man  who  really  knows  the  good  but  chooses  something 
else  is  as  much  of  a  nonentity  as  a  round  square,  and  it  is  just  because 
"  there  is  no  such  person  "  that  the  wildest  paradoxes  can  be  asserted 
about  him. 

It  follows  that  knowledge  of  the  good  is,  in  one  respect,  different 
from  every  other  kind  of  knowledge,  and  this  difference  affects  the 
employment  of  the  analogy  from  professional  and  technical  know- 
ledge, the  sort  of  thing  the  "  sophists  "  meant  by  "  knowledge/1 
It  is  the  only  knowledge  which  cannot  be  put  to  a  wrong  use  ;  every 
other  kind  of  knowledge  can  be  abused,  and  is  abused  when  it  is 
put  to  a  bad  use,  as,  e.g.,  when  the  medical  man  employs  his  special 
professional  knowledge  to  produce  disease  or  death,  instead  of 
curing  the  one  or  preventing  the  other.  There  is  a  real  analogy 
between  "  goodness  "  and  the  "  arts  "  ;  false  beliefs  about  what  is 
good  or  bad  will  ruin  the  conduct  of  life,  as  surely  as  false  beliefs 
about  what  is  wholesome  will  ruin  a  man's  practical  success  as  a 
medical  man  ;  but  if  you  press  the  analogy  to  the  point  of  arguing 
that  a  man  can  use  his  knowledge  of  good  for  the  deliberate  doing  of 
evil,  as  he  might  use  his  knowledge  of  medicine  to  commit  a  clever 
murder,  you  will  be  led  astray,  a  truth  with  which  Socrates  is  made 
to  show  himself  familiar  in  Book  I.  of  the  Republic,  when  he  urges 
this  very  point  against  Polemarchus ;  that  the  analogy  has  its  limits 
does  not  prevent  it  from  being  a  sound  analogy  within  those  limits ; 
that  it  becomes  unsound  when  you  forget  them  is  no  reason  for 
denying  that  virtue  really  is  knowledge,  though  it  is  not,  like  the 
"  goodness  "  taught  by  the  sophists,  mere  technical  knowledge 
how  to  produce  certain  results,  if  you  happen  to  wish  for  them. 

Ion. — Little  need  be  said  about  this  slight  dialogue  on  the  nature 
of  "  poetic  inspiration."  The  main  ideas  suggested  are  expounded 
much  more  fully  in  those  important  Platonic  works  with  which  we 
shall  have  to  deal  later.  We  may,  however,  make  a  few  remarks 
about  the  current  conceptions  of  poetry  against  which  Socrates  is  made 
to  protest.  It  is  important  to  remember  that  the  whole  conception 
of  "  inspiration,1'  so  familiar  to  ourselves,  is  foreign  to  the  way  of 
thinking  of  poetry  characteristic  of  the  age  of  Pericles  and  Socrates. 
Poets  were  habitually  reckoned,  along  with  physicians,  engineers, 
engravers,  and  others,  as  <ro<£oi,  "wits  "  or  "clever  men."  This 
means  that  what  was  thought  distinctive  of  the  poet  was  not  what 
we  call  "native  genius,"  but  "craftsmanship,"  "workmanship," 
"  technique."  He  was  conceived  as  consciously  producing  a 
beautiful  result  by  the  deft  fitting  together  of  words  and  musical 
sounds,  exactly  as  the  architect  does  the  same  thing  by  the  deft 
putting  together  of  stones.  Of  all  the  great  Greek  poets  Pindar  is 

1  Cf.         "  To  reign  is  worth  ambition  though  in  Hell : 

Better  to  reign  in  Hell,  then  serve  in  Heav'n." 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  8d 

the  only  one  who  pointedly  insists  on  the  superiority  of  </>ua,  "  native 
genius/1  to  the  craftsmanship  (r^xvrj)  which  can  be  taught  and 
learned;  but  to  our  taste  conscious  workmanship,  rather  than 
untaught  "  inspiration/1  is  the  characteristic  quality  of  Pindar 
himself.  We  should  never  dream  of  talking  of  his  "  native  wood- 
notes  wild/'  or  of  comparing  htm  with  a  skylark  pouring  out  its  soul 
in  "  unpremeditated  art/'  Also  it  was  held  commonly  that  the  service 
the  poet  does  us  is  definitely  to  "  teach  "  us  something — how  to  fight 
a  battle,  how  to  choose  a  wife,  to  retain  a  friend,  or  something  of 
that  kind.  This  explains  why,  in  the  Apology,  when  Socrates  is 
speaking  of  his  attempts  to  discover  a  "wiser  man  "  than  himself, 
he  mentions  poets  along  with  statesmen  as  the  two  classes  of  recog- 
nized o-o^ot  to  whom  he  first  turned  his  attention  (Apol.  220). 
Since  he  found  that  the  most  admired  poets  were  quite  helpless 
at  explaining  the  meaning  of  their  own  finest  passages,  he  came  to 
the  conclusion,  which  he  repeatedly  maintains  in  Plato,  that  poets 
are  not  deliberate  "  craftsmen  "  at  all,  (do  not  compose  in  virtue  of 
(ro<£ia,  ibid.  226,)  but  that  poetry  is  a  matter  of "  natural  endowment  " 
(<£uo-is)  and  non-rational' 'inspiration/'  and  thus  became  the  originator 
of  the  conception  of  the  "  poet  "  conventional  among  ourselves. 

Ion,  who  is  represented  as  an  eminent  professional  rhapsode, 
shares  the  current  views  of  the  "  wisdom  "  of  the  poets  ;  it  is  a 
matter  of  "  skill  "  or  "  art  "  (rc^vr;),  and  he  assents  at  once  to 
the  inference  that  the  professional  reciter  of  poetry  absorbs  from 
his  study  of  the  poet's  works  a  special  measure  of  their  author's 
"  skill."  The  interpreter  of  the  poet  to  the  audience  is,  like  the 
poet  himself,  the  possessor  of  a  "  craft  "  or  "  profession."  Yet 
he  has  to  admit  that  his  own  skill  as  an  interpreter  is  confined  to 
the  poetry  of  Homer  ;  he  cannot  succeed  in  declaiming  any  other 
poet  or  explaining  the  "beauties  "  of  his  work;  in  fact,  his  interest 
flags  as  soon  as  any  poet  but  Homer  is  made  the  topic  of  conversa- 
tion. This,  as  Socrates  says,  serves  to  show  that  the  rhapsode's 
accomplishment  is  not  the  result  of  specialist  skill.  All  the  poets, 
as  Ion  admits,  treat  of  much  the  same  topics — the  conduct  of  men  and 
women  in  the  various  occupations  of  life,  the  "  things  in  the  heavens 
and  the  underworld,"  and  the  births  and  doings  of  "gods," 
though  Homer  treats  all  these  topics  better  than  any  one  else, 
Hence  if  the  exposition  of  a  poet  were  a  matter  of  professional 
expert  knowledge,  the  same  knowledge  which  makes  a  man  able 
to  appreciate  and  expound  Homer,  would  equally  make  him  a  good 
critic  and  expositor  of  poetry  in  general.  Consequently,  Socrates 
suggests  that  the  conception  of  the  interpreter  of  the  poet  as  a 
conscious  "  craftsman  "  is  mistaken.  The  poets  themselves  are  not 
self-conscious  "  artists  "  ;  they  compose  their  works  in  a  mood  of 
"inspiration  "  in  which  they  are  "  taken  out  of  themselves/'  and 
are  temporarily,  like  "seers"  or  Bacchanals,  vehicles  "possessed  " 
by  a  higher  power  of  which  they  are  the  unconscious  mouthpieces 
In  the  same  way,  the  "  rhapsode  "  with  a  special  gift  for  reciting 
Homer  is  "  inspired  "  by  the  poet  at  second-hand.  He  becomes 


40  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

temporarily  himself  the  "  mouthpiece  "  of  the  poet,  as  the  poet  is 
the  mouthpiece  of  the  god.  And  he  in  turn  "  inspires  "  his  hearers 
by  communicating  to  them,  in  a  non-logical  way,  something  of  the 
"  inspiration  "  he  has  received  from  the  poet.  Thus  poet,  reciter, 
audience,  are  like  so  many  links  of  iron,  the  first  of  which  is  "  attrac- 
ted "  by  a  magnet,  and  in  its  turn  attracts  another.  It  is  evidence 
for  the  non-rational  character  of  this  influence  that  the  rhapsode 
for  the  time  actually  enters  into  the  feelings  of  the  characters  whose 
speeches  he  is  declaiming,  shudders  with  their  fears  and  weeps 
over  their  distresses,  and  makes  his  audience  (Jo  the  like,  though 
neither  they  nor  he  may  really  be  faced  with  any  danger  or  distress. 
So  far  Ion  is  not  unwilling  to  go  with  Socrates,  but  he  is  less  ready 
to  follow  him  when  Socrates  turns  to  the  other  chief  feature  in  the 
popular  conception  of  the  poet,  and  denies  that  the  poet  as  such  is 
a  "  teacher  "  with  knowledge  to  impart  to  us.  If  Homer  were 
really  a  great  teacher  of  wisdom  human  and  divine,  it  should  follow 
that  a  rhapsode,  whose  profession  compels  him  to  be  intimately 
acquainted  with  Homer's  poetry,  is  also  a  high  authority  in  all 
fields  of  knowledge.  But  it  is  undeniable  that  a  physician  would 
be  a  sounder  judge  of  Homer's  statements  about  medicine  than  a 
rhapsode,  and  again  that  a  racing  man  would  be  better  able  to 
appreciate  and  criticize  the  advice  Nestor  gives  in  the  Iliad  about 
horse-racing  than  a  professional  rhapsode,  unless  the  rhapsode 
happens  incidentally  to  be  a  specialist  in  horse-racing.  If  then 
there  really  is  any  department  of  specialist  knowledge  which  can  be 
acquired  by  a  study  of  Homer,  what  is  it  ? 

Ion  falls  back  on  the  traditional  view  that  at  any  rate  Homer  is 
a  specialist  in  the  art  of  warfare,  and  that  a  close  student  of  Homer, 
such  as  he  himself  has  been,  learns  from  Homer  the  "  art  of  the 
general."  The  Iliad,  in  fact,  is  a  first-rate  manual  of  military  science, 
and  Ion  professes,  on  the  strength  of  his  familiarity  with  it,  to  be  a 
great  general  in  posse.  But  how  comes  it,  then,  that  he  has  never 
attempted  to  distinguish  himself  in  so  eminently  honourable  a 
profession  ?  If  there  is  no  opening  in  his  native  city  of  Ephesus, 
which  is  now  a  subject-ally  of  Athens,  why  has  he  never,  like  some 
other  aliens,  entered  the  military  service  of  Athens  herself  ? 

Nominally  the  little  dialogue  is  concerned  with  the  question 
whether  rhapsodes  and  actors  owe  their  success  to  professional 
or  expert  knowledge,  or  to  some  kind  of  "genius  "  or  non-rational 
"  inspiration."  But  it  is  clear  that  the  real  points  intended  to  be 
made  are  that  the  poet  himself  is  not  an  "  expert  "  in  any  kind  of 
knowledge  and,  as  poet,  has  not  necessarily  anything  to  teach  us. 
These  points  are  enforced  more  impressively  in  other  Platonic 
works,  notably  in  the  Phaedrus,  but  the  Ion  has  its  value,  both  as  a 
contribution  to  the  psychology  of  the  "  rhapsode  "  (or,  as  we  should 
say  to-day,  the  actor),  and  as  a  particularly  clear  and  simple  refuta- 
tion of  the  never-dying  popular  delusion  that  the  function  of  the 
poet  himself,  and  consequently  of  his  exponent,  is  primarily  didactic. 
The  type  of  critic  who  conceives  it  to  be  his  business  to  find 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  41 

"  morals  "  and  "  lessons  "  in  the  plays  of  Shakespeare,  and  regards 
it  as  the  object  of  Hamlet  or  Macbeth  to  warn  us  against  procrastina- 
tion or  ambition,  has  something  to  learn  even  from  the  Ion. 

Menexenus. — The  Menexenus  offers,  in  a  way,  a  worse  puzzle  to 
the  reader  than  any  other  work  of  the  Platonic  corpus,  and  it  is  not 
surprising  that  its  authenticity  should  be  doubted  by  students  of 
Plato  who  are  in  general  on  the  conservative  side  in  questions  of 
genuineness.  Externally  the  evidence  for  it  is  good.  It  is  twice 
cited  by  Aristotle,1  and  once  with  a  formal  title,  "  the  Funeral  Dis- 
course/' and  this  seems  to  show  that  Aristotle  at  least  believed  it  to 
be  Platonic.  Now  the  systematic  production  of  works  falsely 
ascribed  to  eminent  authors  seems  not  to  occur  in  the  history  of 
Greek  literature  until  long  after  the  time  of  Aristotle.  And  again 
it  is  not  likely  that  Aristotle,  of  all  men,  should  have  been  mis- 
informed about  the  real  authorship  of  an  Academic  dialogue.  Thus 
it  is  hard  to  believe  either  that  the  dialogue  is  a  deliberate  forgery 
or  that  it  is  a  production  of  some  lesser  member  of  the  Academy 
which  has  been  ascribed  by  a  simple  mistake  to  Plato,  as  seems  to 
be  the  case  with  a  few  of  the  minor  items  of  the  "  canon  of  Thrasylus." 
Nor  have  modern  stylometrical  investigations  given  any  reason  to 
suspect  the  little  work.  Aristotle's  allusion  thus  seems  to  compel 
us  to  accept  it  as  genuine.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  two 
notorious  difficulties  which  we  have  to  face  when  we  admit  Plato's 
authorship.  One  is  that  it  is  at  least  hard  to  see  what  Plato's 
object  in  such  a  composition  can  be.  The  other  is  that  the  dialogue 
commits  an  anachronism  to  which  there  is  no  parallel  anywhere 
in  Plato,  and  which  cannot  be  unconscious.  The  body  of  it  is  made 
up  of  a  recital  by  Socrates  of  a  "  funeral  oration  "  on  the  Athenians 
who  fell  in  the  Corinthian  war,  and  Socrates  professes  to  have 
heard  the  speech  from  the  lips  of  the  famous  Aspasia,  the  wife  of 
Pericles.  It  is  certain  that  Socrates  was  put  to  death  in  the  summer 
of  the  year  399  B.C.,  long  before  the  opening  of  the  Corinthian  war 
(395  B.C.).  Yet  he  is  made  to  carry  his  review  of  Athenian  history 
down  to  the  pacification  dictated  by  the  Persian  king,  which  ended 
the  war  in  the  year  387.  Aspasia,  the  nominal  speaker,  must 
have  died  before  Socrates.  This  is  implied  in  the  structure  of 
the  Aspasia  of  Aeschines,  on  which  see  H.  Dittmar,  Aeschines 
von  Sphettus,  45-56.  Plato  must  have  violated  chronology  quite 
deliberately  and  with  a  view  to  producing  a  definite  effect.  But 
what  can  we  suppose  the  intention  to  have  been  ? 

It  is  idle  to  suggest  that  the  whole  affair  is  a  mere  Aristophanic 
jest,  and  that  Plato  only  wants  to  show  that  he  can  rival  the 
comedians  on  their  own  ground  by  putting  ludicrous  "  topical 
allusions  "  into  the  mouth  of  his  hero.  We  cannot  reconcile  such 
a  use  of  Socrates,  for  purposes  of  pure  burlesque,  with  the  tone  of 
reverence  and  devotion  in  which  Plato  continues  to  speak  of 
Socrates  in  the  letters  written  at  the  very  end  of  his  own  life  ;  even 
1  Rhetoric,  13676  8,  1415^  30. 


42  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

if  one  could,  we  have  to  remember  that  Socrates  is  not  being  made, 
as  he  might  be  made  in  a  burlesque,  to  offer  a  remarkably  intelligent 
"  anticipation  of  the  course  of  events  "  ;  he  is  represented  as  com- 
menting on  the  events  of  the  twelve  or  thirteen  years  after  his  own 
death  ex  post  facto.  And  we  still  have  to  explain  why  Socrates 
should  pretend  that  Aspasia  too  is  still  a  well-known  figure  at 
Athens,  and  that  he  has  learned  his  discourse  from  her.  Again,  we 
cannot  account  for  this  use  of  Aspasia  by  appealing  to  the  passage 
(Menexenus,  2366)  where  Socrates  is  made  to  credit  her  with  the 
authorship  of  the  famous  "  funeral  speech/'  delivered  by  Pericles 
in  the  first  year  of  the  Archidamian  war,  and  reported  by  Thucydides. 
Plato's  object  is  not  to  ridicule  oratory  of  this  kind  by  the  insinuation 
that  its  tone  is  what  might  be  expected  from  a  woman  and  an 
hetaera.  The  remains  of  the  Aspasia  of  Aeschines  of  Sphettus, 
make  it  clear  that  the  view,  which  underlies  the  proposals  of 
Republic  v.,  that  "  the  goodness  of  a  woman  and  that  of  a  man  are 
the  same/'  was  a  genuine  doctrine  of  Socrates,  and  that  he  quite 
seriously  believed  in  the  "  political  capacity  "  of  Aspasia.  His 
profession  of  owing  his  own  "  Funeral  Discourse  "  to  her  is,  no  doubt, 
only  half-serious,  but  it  is  quite  in  keeping  with  what  we  know  to 
have  been  his  real  conviction.  We  have  therefore  to  discover  the 
object  of  the  whole  singular  mystification,  if  we  can,  from  an 
analysis  of  the  oration  itself. 

It  will  not  be  necessary  to  insert  here  a  full  analysis,  but  there  are 
certain  points,  well  brought  out  in  such  a  commentary  as  Stall- 
baum's,  which  we  have  to  bear  in  mind.'  The  discourse  is  framed 
on  the  lines  we  can  see  from  comparison  with  the  extant  examples 
to  have  been  conventional  on  such  occasions.  It  treats  first  of 
the  glorious  inheritance  and  traditions  of  the  community  into  which 
the  future  warriors  were  born  and  in  which  they  were  brought  up, 
then  of  their  own  achievements,  by  which  they  have  approved 
themselves  worthy  of  such  an  origin,  and  finally  of  the  considera- 
tions which  should  moderate  the  grief  of  their  surviving  friends 
and  relatives.  In  this  respect  it  exhibits  a  close  parallel  with  the 
discourse  of  Pericles  in  Thucydides,  the  "  funeral  speech  "  included 
in  the  works  ascribed  to  Lysias,  the  Panegyricus  of  Isocrates,  the 
discourse  of  Hyperides  on  Leosthenes  and  his  companions  in  the 
Lamian  war.  There  are  direct  verbal  echoes  of  the  speech  of 
Lysias,  perhaps  of  that  of  Pericles,  and,  I  suspect,  also  of  the 
Isocratean  Panegyricus,  a  work  of  the  year  380.  The  diction 
again  has  clearly  been  modelled  on  that  actually  adopted  in  real 
encomia  of  the  fallen,  and  it  is  this  which  makes  it  impossible  to 
use  evidence  from  style  to  date  the  dialogue.  "  Funeral  orations  " 
belong  to  the  type  of  oratory  called  by  the  Greeks  "  epideictic,"  and 
demand  an  artificial  elevation  of  diction  and  use  of  verbal  ornament 
avoided  in  "  forensic  "  pleading  and  political  speaking.  Hence 
all  the  extant  specimens  exhibit,  to  a  greater  or  a  less  degree,  the 
high-flown  and  semi-poetical  character  distinctive  of  the  Sicilian 
"  show  declamation  "  introduced  to  Athens  by  Gorgias,  and  Plato 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  43 

has  been  careful  to  preserve  this  peculiarity.  When  we  examine 
the  contents  of  the  discourse,  we  see  that  he  has  been  equally  careful 
to  conform  to  the  accepted  model.  His  oration,  like  those  of 
Lysias  and  Isocrates,  but  unlike  the  really  statesmanlike  discourse 
of  Pericles,  dwells  on  the  topics  afforded  by  mythology  for  the 
glorification  of  Athens,  the  origination  of  the  cultivation  of  corn 
and  of  the  olive  in  Attica,  the  contest  of  Athena  with  Hephaestus 
for  the  patronage  of  the  city,  the  public  spirit  and  chivalry  displayed 
in  such  legendary  exploits  as  the  protection  of  the  family  of  Heracles 
and  the  rescuing  for  burial  of  the  corpses  of  the  champions  who  fell 
before  the  gates  of  Thebes.  Lysias  and  Isocrates  both  expatiate  on 
these  prehistorical  events  at  great  length — a  length  apparently 
satirized  by  Socrates  in  the  remark  (2396)  that  they  have  already 
received  their  due  meed  of  celebration  from  the  poets.  The  speech 
then  proceeds,  like  those  which  are  apparently  its  immediate 
models,  to  a  sketch  of  the  history  of  Athens  down  to  date,  the 
object  of  which  is  to  glorify  the  city  on  two  grounds — its  rooted  and 
inveterate  antipathy  to  "  barbarians,"  (2420-0,  245^,)  and  its 
unselfish  Panhellenism,  shown  by  its  readiness  always  to  make 
sacrifices  to  preserve  the  "  balance  of  power  "  between  the  different 
Greek  cities  by  supporting  the  weaker  side  in  these  internal  quarrels 
(244^).  The  demonstration  of  the  second  point  in  particular  leads 
to  a  bold  falsification  of  history,  by  which  the  fifth  century  attempts 
of  Athens  to  dominate  Boeotia  and  the  Archidamian  war  itself 
are  made  to  appear  as  heroic  struggles  against  the  "  imperialism  " 
of  other  communities.  We  know  enough  from  Plato  of  the  real 
sentiments  both  of  himself  and  of  Socrates  to  understand  that  this 
version  of  history  cannot  represent  the  serious  convictions  of 
either  ;  it  has  all  the  appearance  of  satire  on  the  "  patriotic  "  version 
of  history  given  by  Isocrates  in  an  inconsistent  combination  with 
Panhellenism.  Similarly,  after  reading  the  Gorgias  and  Republic 
and  the  sketch  of  Athenian  history  given  in  Laws  iii.,  we  shall 
find  it  impossible  to  take  the  Menexenm  seriously  when  it  glorifies 
the  existing  constitution  of  Athens  as  a  true  aristocracy  in  which  the 
men  who  are  reputed  to  be  "  best  "  govern  with  the  free  consent  of 
the  multitude  (238^-0).  When  we  are  told  that  at  Athens,  as 
nowhere  else,  "  he  who  has  the  repute  of  wisdom  and  goodness  is 
sovereign/*  the  emphasis  must  be  meant  to  fall  on  the  words  "  who 
has  the  repute/1  and  the  encomium  is  disguised  satire.  Probably, 
then,  the  real  purpose  of  the  discourse  is  to  imitate  and  at  the  same 
time,  by  adroit  touches  of  concealed  malice,  to  satirize  popular 
"  patriotic  oratory."  It  is  no  objection  to  such  an  interpretation 
to  say,  what  is  true  enough,  that  the  speech  contains  noble  passages 
on  the  duty  of  devotion  to  one's  State  and  the  obligation  of  per- 
petuating its  finest  traditions.  Even  the  "  flag-flapper "  who 
distorts  all  history  into  a  romantic  legend  of  national  self-glorifica- 
tion, usually  has  some  good  arguments,  as  well  as  many  bad  ones, 
for  his  "  patriotism/1  and  we  may  credit  Plato  with  sufficient 
penetration  to  have  seen  that  satire  misses  its  designed  effect  unless 


44  PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

it  is  accompanied  by  intelligent  recognition  of  the  good  which  is 
mingled  with  the  evil  in  its  objects.  (This  is  why  so  much  of  the 
writing  of  Juvenal,  Swift,  Victor  Hugo,  merely  wearies  a  reader 
by  the  monotony  of  the  invective.1) 

If  Isocrates  is  the  person  against  whom  the  satire  of  the  Menex- 
enus  is  largely  directed,  we  can  see  an  excellent  reason  why  that 
satire  should  be  so  liberally  mixed  with  sympathy.  Isocrates  was 
honourably  distinguished  by  his  real  superiority  to  mere  particu- 
larism and  his  real  concern  for  the  interests  of  Greek  civilization  as 
a  whole,  and  in  this  he  and  Plato  were  wholly  at  one.  But,  unlike 
Plato,  who  regarded  the  hard  and  fast  distinction  between  Greek 
and  "  barbarian  "  as  unscientific  superstition,  Isocrates  takes  the 
antithesis  seriously  and  tends  to  regard  hate  of  the  barbarian  as 
equivalent  to  love  for  civilization.  The  combination  of  the  two 
points  of  view  in  the  Menexenus  is  a  fair  representation  of  his  lifelong 
attitude  towards  affairs.  So  again  the  distortion  of  history  by  which 
the  most  aggressive  exploits  of  Attic  imperialism,  such  as  the  attempt 
of  Pericles  and  his  friends  to  dominate  Boeotia,  and  the  Archida- 
mian  War  as  a  whole,  are  represented  as  "  wars  of  liberation," 
is  no  very  violent  parody  of  the  methods  of  Isocrates  when  he  is 
anxious,  as  in  the  Panegyricus,  to  gratify  Athenian  partiality  for 
Athens  or  Athenian  dislike  of  Sparta.  One  may  suspect  the  same 
purpose  of  parody  in  the  false  emphasis  which  is  laid  in  the  Menex- 
enus  on  the  naval  exploits  of  Athens  in  the  Sicilian  expedition  as 
efforts  for  the  "  liberation  "  of  the  oppressed.  Isocrates  notoriously 
held  the  view  that  the  naval  ascendancy  of  Athens  had  been  a 
national  misfortune,  since  it  had  led  to  the  lust  for  empire,  and 
there  are  passages  in  the  Laws  which  show  that  Plato  sympathized 
with  this  conviction.  But  it  would  be  a  telling  criticism  of  the 
Isocratean  way  of  manipulating  history  to  show  that  it  could  easily 
be  employed  for  glorifying  precisely  the  side  of  Athenian  history 
which  gave  Isocrates  himself  least  satisfaction.  You  have  only  to 
sit  as  loosely  to  facts  as  Isocrates  habitually  allows  himself  to  do 
when  he  wishes  to  praise  or  to  abuse  some  one,  and  you  can  make 
Alcibiades  into  a  hero  of  chivalry  who  was  only  doing  his  duty  by 
the  oppressed  when  he  lured  Athens  on  to  its  ruin  by  the  prospect  of 
the  conquest  of  Sicily  !  2  If  we  read  the  Menexenus  in  this  light,  we 
can  perhaps  understand  the  point  of  the  curious  anachronism  in 
its  setting.  The  satire  of  the  actual  "  Funeral  Discourse  "  is  so 
subtly  mixed  with  sympathetic  appreciation  that  it  would  be  easy 
to  mistake  the  whole  speech  for  a  serious  encomium — a  mistake 
which  has  actually  been  made  by  a  good  many  interpreters  of  Plato. 
The  ordinary  reader  needs  some  very  visible  warning  sign  if  he  is 
to  approach  the  discourse  with  the  required  anticipation  that 

1  Cf.  the  excellent  remarks  of  Sir  A.  Quiller-Couch,  Studies  in  Literature, 
p.  290  ff . 

*  Lysias  takes  care  to  "  skip  "  the  Peloponnesian  War  entirely  ;  Isocrates 
does  worse.  He  actually  justifies  the  two  great  crimes  of  the  enslavement 
and  massacre  of  the  Melians  and  the  destruction  of  Scione  I 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  45 

its  purpose  is  satirical.  The  warning  is  given,  for  any  intelligent 
reader,  by  the  amazing  introduction  of  Socrates  at  a  date  years 
after  his  death.  It  is  as  though  Plato  were  telling  us  in  so  many 
words  that  we  are  dealing  with  the  utterances  of  a  mere  puppet 
who  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  great  man  to  whose  memory  the 
dialogues  in  general  are  a  splendid  tribute.  Even  so,  the  fiction  is 
singular,  and  hardly  to  be  accounted  for  unless  we  realize  the 
presence  in  Plato  himself  of  a  peculiar  vein  of  freakish  humour 
which  comes  out  notably  in  the  singular  "  antinomies  "  of  the 
Parmenides  as  well  as  in  the  whimsicalities  of  the  Sophistes  and 
Politicus.  It  was  an  "  impish  "  trick  to  put  the  discourse  of  the 
Menexenus  into  the  mouth  of  a  puppet  Socrates,  and  we  may  be 
glad  that  the  trick  was  never  repeated,  as  we  are  glad  that  Shake- 
speare never  perpetrated  a  second  Troilus  and  Cressida.  The  very 
audacity  of  the  trick  is  some  additional  evidence  of  the  genuineness 
of  the  dialogue.  We  can  understand  that  Plato  might  take  such 
a  liberty — once,  and  in  an  unhappy  moment  ;  it  is  surely  incredible 
that  a  younger  member  of  Plato's  entourage  should  have  ventured  on 
it  at  all. 


See  further: 

RITTKR,  C. — Platon,  i.  297-308  (Hippias  //),  359-361 
(Hippias  I),  485-496  (Menexenus}. 

RAEDER,  H. — Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung,  92-94  (Ion), 
94-95  (Hippias  /I),  101-106  (Hippias  /),  125-127 
(Menexenus) . 

APELT,  O. — Beitrdge  zur  Geschichte  der  griechischen  Philosophic 
(1891),  369-390  (der  Sophist  Hippias  von  Elis)  ;  Platonische 
Aufsdtze  (1912),  203-237  (on  Hippias  I  and  //). 

KRAUS,  O. — Platons  Hippias  Minor.     (Prague,  1913.) 

DITTMAR,  H. — Aeschines  von  Sphettus  1-59  (on  the  connection 
of  the  Menexenus  with  the  Aspasia  of  Aeschines.  The 
connection  is  clearly  made  out,  but  I  think  it  an  exaggera- 
tion to  find  the  purpose  of  Plato's  dialogue  mainly  in  a 
41  polemic  "  against  Aeschines). 


CHAPTER    IV 

MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  :    CHARMIDES, 
LACHES,  LYSIS 

WE  may  group  the  three  dialogues  which  form  the  subject 
of  this  chapter  together  for  several  reasons.  From  the 
dramatic  point  of  view  all  show  an  advance  upon  what  is 
likely  to  have  been  the  earliest  form  of  the  Platonic  dialogue,  the 
direct  presentation  of  Socrates  in  conversation  with  a  single  interloc- 
utor. The  Lysis  and  Charmides  both  profess  to  be  reports  of  recently 
held  conversations  given  by  Socrates  to  an  unnamed  friend  or  friends, 
and  thus  conform  to  the  type  of  such  masterpieces  of  literary  art 
as  the  Protagoras  and  Republic.  The  fiction  that  the  dialogue  is 
reported  enables  Socrates  to  draw  a  highly  dramatic  picture 
of  the  persons  engaged  in  the  conversation  and  the  circumstances 
in  which  it  is  held.  This  device  is  not  adopted  in  the  Laches,  where 
the  method  of  direct  reproduction  of  the  conversation  is  maintained, 
but  the  same  advantage  is  obtained  by  adding  to  the  number  of  the 
interlocutors,  so  that  we  have  a  vivid  characterization  of  three 
persons,  two  of  them  notabilities,  besides  Socrates  himself.  All  three 
dialogues,  again,  are  connected  by  the  fact  that  they  deal  with 
Socrates  in  the  special  character  of  older  friend  and  adviser  of  the 
very  young,  and  two  of  them,  the  Charmides  and  Lysis  give  us  an 
attractive  picture  of  his  personal  manner  as  mentor  to  his  young 
friends.  In  the  cases  of  Charmides  and  Laches  Plato  has  been 
careful  to  indicate  approximately  the  period  of  life  to  which  Socrates 
has  attained,  and  we  see  that  both  are  meant  as  pictures  of  the 
master  as  he  was  between  the  ages  of  forty  and  fifty,  and  thus  take 
us  back  to  a  time  when  Plato  himself  was  either  an  infant  or  not  yet 
born.  .  tt  is  closely  connected  with  this  that  both  dialogues,  and 
especially  the  Laches,  are  pervaded  by  the  atmosphere  of  the  Archi- 
damian  war  and  remind  us  of  the  fact  that  Socrates  was,  among 
other  things,  a  fighting  man.  A  further  point  of  connexion 
between  these  two  dialogues  is,  that  they  are  both  concerned  at 
bottom  with  a  difficulty  arising  directly  out  of  the  Socratic  concep- 
tion of  virtue  as  identical  with  knowledge.  Each  deals  with  one 
of  the  great  recognized  virtues  demanded  from  a  Greek  "  good 
man  " — the  Charmides  with  "temperance/1  the  Laches  with  "  valour  " 
or  "  fortitude  " — and  in  both  cases  the  discussion  follows  the  same 
general  lines.  We  are  gradually  led  up  to  the  point  of  identifying 
the  virtue  under  consideration  with  knowledge  of  the  good,  and  then 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  47 

left  to  face  the  difficulty  that  the  identification  seems  to  involve 
the  further  identification  of  this  particular  virtue  with  all  virtue. 
If  valour,  for  example,  is  knowledge  of  the  good,  how  can  we  con- 
tinue to  distinguish  the  soldier's  virtue  of  valour  from  any  other 
virtue,  and  what  becomes  of  the  popular  belief  that  a  man  may  have 
one  virtue  in  an  eminent  degree,  and  yet  be  deficient  in  another — 
may  be,  for  example,  a  very  brave  soldier  but  very  "  licentious  "  ? 
This  problem  of  the  "  unity  of  the  virtues  "  forms  the  starting-point 
for  the  discussion  of  the  Protagoras,  and  cannot  be  said  to  receive  its 
full  solution  until  we  come  to  the  Republic.  Thus,  by  raising  it,  the 
Laches  and  Charmides  prelude  directly  to  what  must  have  been  the 
great  achievements  of  Plato's  literary  prime  of  manhood  ;  this  is 
an  additional  reason  for  holding  that  they  must  not  be  placed  among 
his  earliest  compositions.  It  is,  for  example,  quite  possible,  if  not 
even  probable,  that  both  may  be  later  works  than  the  Gorgias, 
which  still  retains  the  method  of  simple  direct  reproduction  of  a 
conversation  and,  for  all  its  impressive  eloquence,  shows  less  insight 
into  the  more  difficult  philosophical  problems  raised  by  the  Socratic 
conception  of  morality. 

The  Charmides. — Formally,  like  several  of  the  dialogues,  the 
Charmides  has  as  its  object  the  finding  of  a  definition.  To  us  it 
seems  at  first  pedantic  to  attach  importance,  in  morals  at  any  rate, 
to  mere  definitions  of  the  different  virtues.  A  definition,  we  are 
inclined  to  think,  is  at  best  a  matter  of  names,  whereas  ethical 
thinking  should  concern  itself  directly  with  "  concrete  realities." 
If  a  man  recognizes  and  practises  a  noble  rule  of  life,  it  matters  very 
little  by  what  name  he  calls  the  right  act,  whether  he  looks  at  it  as 
an  exhibition  of  courage,  or  of  justice,  or  of  "  temperance/1  The 
"  fine  "  deed  can,  in  fact,  easily  be  made  to  wear  the  semblance  of 
any  one  of  these  "  virtues."  This  is  true  enough,  but  it  would  be 
out  of  place  as  a  criticism  on  the  Socratic  demand  for  "  definitions  " 
in  matters  of  conduct.  From  the  Greek  point  of  view,  the  problem 
of  definition  itself  is  not  one  of  names,  but  of  things.  If  our  moral 
judgment  is  to  be  sound,  and  our  moral  practice  good,  we  must 
approve  and  disapprove  rightly.  We  must  admire  and  imitate 
what  is  really  noble,  and  must  not  be  led  into  false  theory  and  bad 
practice  by  confused  thinking  about  good  and  evil.  The  problem 
of  finding  a  definition  of  a  "  virtue  "  is  at  bottom  the  problem  of 
formulating  a  moral  ideal,  and  it  is  from  this  point  of  view  that  we 
ought  to  consider  it.  The  important  thing  is  that  we  should  know 
quite  definitely  what  we  admire  in  conduct  and  that  our  admiration 
should  be  rightly  given  to  the  things  which  are  really  admirable. 
Failure  in  finding  the  definition  means  that  we  really  do  not  know 
what  we  admire,  and  so  long  as  we  do  not  know  this,  our  moral  life 
is  at  the  mercy  of  sentimental  half-thinking. 

The  particular  virtue  selected  for  discussion  is  one  which  bulks 
very  large  in  all  Greek  thought  about  the  conduct  of  life — the 
beautiful  characteristic  called  by  the  Greeks  sophrosyne,  and  by  the 
Romans  temperantia.  It  is  easier  to  indicate  from  the  usage  of  the 


48          PLATO:    THE  MAN   AND  HIS   WORK 

language  what  this  moral  excellence  is,  than  to  find  any  one  name 
for  it  in  our  modern  English.  In  literature  we  find  sophrosyne  spoken 
of  chiefly  in  the  following  connexions.  As  its  derivation  implies, 
the  word  means  literally  the  possession  of  a  "  sane  "  or  "  wholesome  " 
mind  ;  sophrosyne  is  thus  contrasted  with  the  "  folly  "  of  the  man 
who  "  forgets  himself  "  in  the  hour  of  success  and  prosperity,  and 
"  presumes  on  "  his  advantages  of  wealth  or  power,  pushes  them 
to  the  full  extreme  in  his  dealings  with  the  less  fortunate.  Or  it 
may  equally  be  contrasted  with  the  "  unbalanced  "  conduct  of  the 
fanatic  who  has  only  one  idea  in  his  head,  can  only  see  one  side  of 
a  situation  and  is  blind  to  all  the  others.  In  this  sense,  as  the  virtue 
opposed  to  the  pride  of  the  man  who  forgets  that  the  gods  can  cast 
him  down  as  low  as  they  have  raised  him  high,  the  recklessness  of  the 
successful  man  who  forgets  that  he  may  himself  come  to  be  as  much 
at  the  mercy  of  another  as  others  are  now  at  his,  the  pitilessness  of 
the  fanatic  who  can  only  see  one  side  to  every  question,  sophrosyne 
covers  very  much  of  what  we  call  humility,  humanity,  mercy. 
Again,  the  word  is  a  name  for  the  kind  of  conduct  thought  becoming 
specially  in  the  young  towards  elders,  soldiers  towards  their  superior 
officer,  citizens  towards  their  magistrates.  In  this  sense  it  means 
proper  modesty  and  even  covers  such  minor  matters  as  a  becoming 
outward  deportment  in  speech  and  gesture.  In  still  a  third  sense, 
it  is  the  characteristic  of  the  man  who  knows  how  to  hold  his 
imperious  bodily  appetites,  "  the  desire  for  meat  and  drink  and  the 
passion  of  sex,"  in  easy  and  graceful  control,  as  contrasted  with  the 
man  who  offends  us  by  unseemly  and  untimely  greed  of  these 
appetitive  enjoyments.  In  this  aspect,  sophrosyne  is  what  in  good 
English  is  still  called  "  temperance,"  if  we  take  care  to  remember 
that  it  is  part  of  the  virtue  itself  that  it  is  not  the  imperfect  self- 
restraint  of  the  man  who  holds  himself  in  check  ungracefully  and 
with  difficulty,  but  the  easy  and  natural  self-restraint  of  the  man 
who  enjoys  being  "  temperate."  x  If  it  does  not  seem  an  affectation 
to  use  such  a  phrase,  we  may  say  that  sophrosyne  is  the  spirit  of  the 


ophrosyne  is  the  spirit  of 
e  insinuates,2  a  "  monkis 


"  disciplined  life.  It  is  not,  as  Hume  insinuates,2  a  "  monkish  " 
virtue,  except  in  the  sense  that  you  certainly  cannot  be  a  good 
monk  without  it.  Neither,  as  Hume  forgot,  can  you  be  a  good 
soldier,  and  that  is  why  in  the  Laws  3  Plato  throws  sophrosyne 
and  valour  together,  and  insists  that  the  former  is  the  major  and 
the  harder  part  of  the  lesson  every  good  "  fighting  man  "  has  to 
master.  The  very  wide  range  of  the  use  of  the  word  in  literature 
goes  a  long  way  to  explain  the  importance  Socrates  attaches  to  a 
clear  and  coherent  statement  of  its  meaning,  and  the  difficulty  the 
company  have  in  producing  such  a  statement.  The  introductory 
narrative  provides  an  opportunity  for  a  clear  indication  of  the  date 
1  Hence  Aristotle's  sharp  distinction  throughout  the  Ethics  between  the 


<rc60po;*>  and  the  ^par^y  or  morally  "  strong  "  man  in  whom  judgment  and 
"  will  "  —  in  the  Elizabethan  sense  —  are  at  variance  though  he  habitually 
compels  himself  to  follow  judgment. 

2  Inquiry  into  the  Principles  of  Morals,  Section  IX.  Part  I. 

1  Laws, 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  49 

at  which  the  conversation  is  supposed  to  take  place.  Socrates  has 
been  serving  before  the  walls  of  Potidaea,  in  the  campaign  of  the 
year  431  with  which  hostilities  between  Athens  and  the  members 
of  the  Peloponnesian  confederacy  opened,  and  has  just  returned  safe 
and  sound,  after  having  displayed  his  courage  and  coolness  in 
danger,  as  we  learn  from  the  Symposium,1  by  saving  the  life  of  Alci- 
biades.  He  is  then  a  man  of  some  forty  years  (Plato,  we  must 
remember,  is  not  yet  born).  He  goes  direct,  on  his  arrival,  to  his 
"wonted  haunts,"  the  palaestrae,  and  begins  at  once  to  ask  ques- 
tions about  the  way  in  which  "  philosophy  and  the  young  people  " 
have  been  faring  in  his  absence  on  service  (Charm.  153^).  (This, 
we  observe,  implies  that  the  interest  of  young  men  of  promise  in 
Socrates  as  a  wise  counsellor  was  already  a  reality,  eight  years  before 
Aristophanes  burlesqued  these  relations  in  the  Clouds.)  Critias, 
cousin  of  Plato's  mother,  afterwards  to  be  unhappily  known  as  a 
leader  of  the  violently  reactionary  party  in  the  "  provisional 
government  "  set  up  after  the  capitulation  of  Athens  to  Lysander, 
but  at  present  simply  a  young  man  of  parts  but  with  a  touch  of 
forwardness  and  self-confidence,  thereupon  promises  to  introduce 
Socrates  to  his  own  cousin  Charmides  (Plato's  uncle,  subsequently 
associated  with  Critias  and  his  party  as  the  head  of  the  commission 
set  up  to  dominate  the  Piraeeus),  as  a  lad  of  exceptional  promise.2 
Socrates  had  already  seen  him  as  a  mere  child,  but  he  has  now  grown 
to  be  a  youth  of  wonderful  beauty  and  equally  wonderful  sophrosyne. 
It  is  agreed  that  Socrates  shall  have  some  conversation  with  the 
lad  and  judge  of  him  for  himself. 

Socrates  leads  up  playfully  to  his  real  purpose,  the  examination 
of  the  boy's  spiritual  state.  Charmides  has  been  complaining  of 
headaches.  Socrates  professes  to  have  brought  back  from  his 
northern  campaign  a  wonderful  remedy  which  he  has  learned  from 
a  Thracian.8  The  Thracian,  however,  had  explained  that  not  only 
can  you  not  treat  a  local  disorder  properly  without  treating  the 
patient's  whole  body,  you  cannot  treat  the  body  successfully 
without  treating  the  soul,  which  is  the  real  seat  of  health  and  disease. 
Hence  Socrates  is  under  a  promise  not  to  practise  the  recipe  against 
headache  on  anyone  who  is  not  spiritually  sound  in  constitution. 
It  would  be  useless  if  employed  on  a  subject  with  a  deep-seated 
spiritual  disorder.  Sophrosyne  is  presupposed  in  spiritual  health  ; 
before  Charmides  can  be  treated  for  his  headaches,  then,  we  must 
find  out  whether  he  has  sophrosyne  (Charm.  155^-158^).  Now  if  a 
man  has  this  or  any  other  character  of  soul,  it  must,  of  course,  make 

1  Symposium,  219-220. 

f  According  to  Xenophon  (Mem.  iii.  7,  i),  it  was  Socrates  himself  who 
first  persuaded  Charmides  to  enter  public  life.  But  this  looks  like  a  mere 
inference  from  what  is  said  in  our  dialogue  of  the  modest  and  retiring  disposi- 
tion of  Charmides  in  boyhood.  If  the  fact  were  so,  it  is  singular  that  no  one 
ever  seems  to  have  accused  Socrates  of  "  corrupting  "  Charmides,  though  he 
was  made  responsible  for  Critias  and  Alcibiades. 

8  For  the  reputation  of  Thrace  as  a  home  of  this  kind  of  lore — it  was  the 
land  of  Orpheus,  we  must  remember — cf.  Eurip.  Ale.  986  ff. 


50  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

its  presence  felt,  and  its  possessor  will  therefore  have  an  opinion  of 
some  kind  about  its  nature.  (It  is  not  meant,  of  course,  that  the 
possessor  of  the  character  need  have  a  "  clear  and  distinct  idea  "  of 
it,  but  only  that  he  must  have  some  acquaintance  with  it ;  language 
about  it  will  have  some  meaning  for  him,  exactly  as  language  about 
.sight  or  hearing  will  mean  something  to  anyone  who  can  see  or  hear, 
though  it  would  be  meaningless  to  beings  born  blind  or  deaf.)  Thus 
we  are  led  to  the  question  what  kind  of  thing  Charmides  takes 
sophrosyne  to  be.  As  is  natural  in  a  mere  lad,  Charmides  fixes  first  of 
all  on  an  exterior  characteristic,  and  equally  naturally  it  is  a  charac- 
teristic of  sophrosyne  in  the  form  which  would  be  most  familiar  to 
a  boy — the  form  of  decent  and  modest  bearing  towards  one's  elders 
and  "  good  behaviour  "  generally.  One  shows  sophrosyne  by  walking, 
talking,  doing  things  generally,  in  an  "  orderly  and  quiet  "  fashion  ; 
so  perhaps  we  may  say  that  it  is  "  a  sort  of  quietness  "  (V^X"*1"1?5)* 
a  "  slowness  "  which  may  be  contrasted  with  undignified  and  un- 
graceful "  hurry  "  (159^).  This,  of  course,  is  true,  so  far  as  it  goes, 
only  it  does  not  go  very  far.  There  is  a  "  hurry  "  which  means  that 
one's  limbs  or  one's  tongue  are  not  really  under  control  as  they  should 
be.  But  we  want  to  get  behind  such  mere  outward  indications  to 
the  interior  condition  of  soul  from  which  they  spring  ;  and  besides, 
clearly  "  slowness,"  "  deliberateness,"  does  not  always  arise  from 
being  "  master  of  one's  soul."  As  Socrates  says,  in  the  various 
physical  and  mental  accomplishments  it  is  what  is  readily  and 
quickly  done,  not  what  is  done  slowly  and  with  difficulty,  that  is 
"  well  "  or  "  fairly  "  (*aA£s)  done.  He  who  reads  or  writes,  or 
wrestles  or  boxes  well,  does  these  things  quickly  ;  he  who  can  only 
make  the  proper  movements  slowly  does  not  do  them  well.  So 
with  accomplishments  of  the  mind.  A  fine  memory  or  judgment  or 
invention  is  a  quick,  not  a  slow,  memory  or  judgment  or  invention. 
Now  it  is  admitted  that  sophrosyne,  whatever  it  is,  is  something 
"  fine  "  (Ka\6v).  Clearly  then  it  cannot  be  right  to  fix  on  "  slow- 
ness "  as  what  is  specially  distinctive  of  sophrosyne  (1590-160^). 
The  point  is  that,  in  small  things  as  well  as  in  great,  the  man  who 
is  master  of  his  soul  is  free  from  "  hurry."  There  is,  in  a  sense,  a 
spacious  leisureliness  about  his  behaviour.  But  this  freedom  from 
"  haste  "  and  "  hurry  "  is  not  the  same  thing  as  slowness  :  slowness 
may  be,  and  often  is,  a  mere  consequence  of  awkwardness,  of  not 
being  master  of  yourself. 

Charmides  next  makes  a  suggestion  which  shows  a  real  attempt 
to  get  behind  the  externals  of  behaviour  to  the  spirit  and  temper 
they  reveal.  Sophrosyne  makes  a  man  quick  to  feel  shame,  and 
perhaps  it  is  the  same  thing  as  modesty  (cuSok,  1602).  The  boy 
is  still  clearly  thinking  of  the  form  in  which  sophrosyne  would  be 
most  familiar  to  a  well-bred  boy — the  sense  of  being  "  on  one's  best 
behaviour  "  in  the  presence  of  one's  parents,  one's  elders,  and  in 
general  of  those  to  whom  respect  is  due.  (We  may  compare  Kant's 
well-known  comparison  of  the  reverence  for  the  moral  law  which  is, 
according  to  him,  the  specific  ethical  feeling, with  the  sense  of  restraint 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  51 

we  feel  in  the  presence  of  an  exalted  or  impressive  personage — the 
sort  of  feeling  an  ordinary  man  would  have  if  he  were  suddenly  sum- 
moned to  an  interview  with  the  King  or  the  Pope.  There  is  a  real 
analogy  between  the  two  things  ;  as  Kant  says,  our  feeling  in  both 
cases  is  primarily  one  of  inhibition  or  restraint.  You  don't  "  loll ' 
in  the  King's  presence,  and  a  good  man  is  not  "  free  and  easy  "  in 
the  presence  of  a  moral  obligation.)  But  again,  the  analogy  is  only 
an  analogy,  not  an  identity.  Sophrosyne  cannot  be  simply  identified 
with  shamefacedness  (aurxvwj)  or  modesty  (utSws).1  For,  by 
general  consent,  it  is  something  which  is  always  not  merely  "  fine  " 
(/caXoi/)  but  good  (uyaflov),  and  there  is  a  false  modesty  which  is  not 
good.  As  Homer  says,  "  Modesty  is  not  good  in  a  beggar."  (Cf. 
the  Scots  saying,  "  Dinna  let  yer  modesty  wrang  ye.")  The  shame  or 
modesty  which  makes  a  man  too  bashful  to  tell  his  full  need  on  the 
proper  occasion  is  not  good,  but  sop hro syne  is  always  good  (i6oe- 
1610). 

This  leads  to  a  third  suggestion  which  is  more  important  than 
any  we  have  yet  met.  Charmides  has  heard  some  one — it  is  hinted 
that  this  some  one  is  Critias — say  that  sophrosyne  means  "  attending 
to  one's  own  matters  "  (TO  ra  eavroi)  TrparreiK,  i6i6),2  and  this, 
perhaps,  may  be  the  true  account.  It  does  obviously  present  one 
advantage.  The  formula  is  a  strictly  universal  one,  applicable  to 
the  whole  conduct  of  life  in  all  its  different  "  ages,"  not  merely  to 
the  kind  of  conduct  appropriate  to  the  young  in  particular.  In  a 
boy  the  shyness,  or  backwardness,  of  which  we  have  just  been  speak- 
ing is  a  laudable  thing,  and  "forwardness  "  a  fault,  but  "  shyness  " 
is  far  from  being  a  laudable  characteristic  in  a  grown  man.  But 
at  any  age  of  life  it  is  laudable  to  "  mind  your  own  affairs  "  and 
censurable  to  be  a  "  meddler  "  or  busybody.  Unfortunately,  as 
Socrates  goes  on  to  point  out,  the  phrase  "  to  attend  to  one's  own 
matters  "  is  so  ambiguous  that  the  new  suggestion  is  something  of 
a  "  conundrum  "  ;  we  have  to  guess,  if  we  can,  what  its  author  may 
have  meant  (i6id).  Clearly  he  cannot  have  meant  that  a  man 
should  only  read  and  write  his  own  name  and  no  one  else's,  or  that 
the  builder  or  the  physician  should  build  his  own  house  or  cure  his 
own  body  and  no  other,  on  pain  of  being  noted  for  a  "  meddler." 
Life  would  be  intolerable  to  a  community  where  the  rule  was  that 
every  one  should  "  attend  to  his  own  matters  "  in  the  sense  that  he 
must  "do  everything  for  himself"  (i6ie).  The  alleged  saying, 
then,  is  what  we  called  it,  a  pure  conundrum.  In  the  Republic,  as 

1  Strictly,  ald&s  is  the  name  for  laudable  modesty,  alaxvv-r)  for  the  back- 
wardness which  is  not  laudable,  mauvaise  honte.     But  the  words  are  freely 
treated  as  interchangeable. 

2  rb  TO,  toLvrov  irpdrrciv  is  the  conduct  which  is  the  opposite  of  rb  Tro\virpa.ynove'ivt 
"  having  a  finger  in  everyone's  pie."     In  Attic  life  iro\vTrpayfio<njvrj  would  show 
itself,  e.g.,  in  that  tendency  to  quarrel  with  one's  neighbours  and  drag  them 
into  law-suits  about  trifles  which  Aristophanes  regularly  ascribes  to  his  petits 
bourgeois.     Hence  ATrpdypuv  is  in  Attic  sometimes  an  epithet  of  censure — 
"  inert,"  "  lazy  " — but  often  one  of  approval — "  a  quiet  decent  man,"  a  man 
who  "  keeps  himself  to  himself." 


52  PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

we  all  know,  this  very  phrase  "  to  mind  one's  own  matters  "  is 
adopted  as  an  adequate  definition  not  merely  of  one  type  of  "  virtue," 
but  of  StKatocruViy,  "  right-doing/'  the  fundamental  principle  of 
the  whole  moral  life.  There  is  no  inconsistency  between  the  two 
dialogues.  The  point  made  in  the  Charmides  is  simply  that  the 
phrase  as  it  stands,  without  further  explanation  leaves  us  in  the 
dark.  In  the  Republic  the  necessary  explanation  has  been  supplied 
by  the  educational  theory  and  moral  psychology  which  precede  its 
introduction,  so  that  when  we  come  to  it,  it  has  a  very  definite 
significance,  and  is  seen  at  once  to  embody  the  whole  content  of  the 
Socratic  ideal  that  a  man's  business  in  life  is  the  "  tendance  of  his 
soul."  If  it  had  been  sprung  upon  us,  without  this  preparation,  in 
the  course  of  Republic  i.  as  an  answer  to  the  ethical  nihilism  of 
Thrasymachus,  it  would  then  have  been  exactly  what  Socrates 
calls  it  in  the  Charmides— &  conundrum. 

The  defence  of  the  proposed  definition  is  now  taken  up  by 
Critias.  He  replies  to  the  objection  of  Socrates  by  making  a  dis- 
tinction between  "  doing  "  (TO  Trparrciv,  TO  Ipydfca-Oai)  and  "  making  " 
(TO  TToicti/).  The  shoemaker  "  makes  "  shoes  for  his  customers,  but 
in  "  making  "  their  shoes  he  is  "  doing  "  his  own  work.  The 
shoes  he  makes  are  not  his  own  shoes,  but  the  making  of  them  is 
his  "  own  "  trade  or  work.  Here  again  we  are  dealing  with  a  real 
and  important  distinction  ;  in  the  Republic  we  shall  learn  the  true 
significance  of  the  conception  of  a  "  work  "  or  "  vocation  "  which 
is  a  man's  "  own/'  not  because  the  products  of  it  are  to  be  his  "  own  " 
property  for  his  own  exclusive  use,  but  because  it  is  the  contribution 
he  and  no  one  else  can  make  to  the  "  good  life."  Critias  has  not, 
however,  thought  out  the  implications  of  his  own  distinction,  and 
goes  wrong  from  the  start  by  an  elementary  confusion  of  ideas. 
He  appeals  in  support  of  the  distinction  to  the  saying  of  Hesiod  that 
"  no  work  is  disgraceful,"  x  on  which  he  puts  a  glaringly  false  inter- 
pretation. Hesiod,  he  says,  cannot  have  meant  that  no  occupation 
is  a  base  one,  for  there  are  base  trades  like  those  of  the  shoemaker 
and  fishmonger,  not  to  mention  worse  ones.  By  "  work  "  Hesiod 
must  have  meant  "  making  what  is  honourable  and  useful,"  and 
similarly,  when  we  say  that  sophrosyne  is  "  minding  your  own 
matters  "  or  "  doing  your  own  work  "  we  mean  that  it  is  doing  what 
is  "  honourable  and  useful  "  (i6^b-c). 

We  might  expect  that  Socrates  would  fasten  at  once  on  the 
obvious  weakness  of  this  definition  ;  it  presupposes  that  we  already 
know  what  we  mean  by  "  good  and  useful."  We  should  then  be 
led  direct  to  the  conclusion  which  it  is  part  of  Plato's  purpose  to 
drive  home,  that  we  cannot  really  know  the  character  of  sophrosyne 

1  tpyov  5'  Mkv  tfmSos  (Hesiod,  O.D.  311).  Xenophon  (Mem.  i.  2,  56-57) 
states  that  Socrates  was  fond  of  the  saying,  apparently  taking  it  in  the  sense 
that  "  honest  work  is  no  disgrace."  His  "  accuser  "  twisted  it  to  mean  that 
no  one  need  feel  ashamed  of  anything  he  does.  Comparison  with  the  similar 
charges  of  getting  an  immoral  sense  out  of  the  poets  considered  in  the 
Apologia  Socratis  of  Libanius,  seems  to  show  that  what  Xenophon  has  in  view 
is  the  pamphlet  of  Polycrates  against  Socrates. 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  58 

or  any  other  virtue  until  we  know  what  good  and  evil  are,  and  when 
we  know  that  we  have  answered  the  question  what  virtue  is.  In 
point  of  fact,  Socrates  prefers  to  make  an  unexpected  deviation 
from  the  direct  line  of  the  argument,  which  raises  a  still  more  general 
issue,  and  apparently  takes  us  out  of  the  sphere  of  ethics  into  that 
of  epistemology.  The  length  of  this  section  shows  that  it  is  meant 
to  be  the  most  important  division  of  the  dialogue,  and  we  shall  need 
therefore  to  consider  it  with  some  care. 

According  to  the  explanation  of  Critias,  a  physician  who  cures 
his  patient  is  doing  something  good  and  useful  for  both  himself  and 
the  patient  and  is  therefore  acting  with  sophrosyne.  But  he  need 
not  know  that  he  is  doing  what  is  "  good  and  useful."  (The  physi- 
cian cannot  be  sure  that  he  will  really  be  the  better,  or  that  his 
patient  will  be  the  better,  for  his  services.  It  might  be  better  for 
the  patient  that  he  should  die,  or  for  the  physician  that  he  should 
not  make  the  income  he  does  make.)  Thus  it  would  seem  that  a 
man  may  have  sophrosyne  without  being  aware  that  he  has  it 
(1640-0).  This  would  not  only  seem  inconsistent  with  the  assump- 
tion Socrates  had  made  at  the  beginning  of  his  conversation  with 
Charmides,  but  also  flatly  contradicts  the  generally  accepted  view, 
with  which  Critias  agrees,  that  sophrosyne  actually  is  the  same  thing 
as  "  self-knowledge."  (The  thought,  of  course,  is  that  "  sanity  of 
mind  "  is  precisely  a  true  understanding  of  yourself,  your  strength 
and  your  weaknesses,  your  real  situation  in  relation  to  gods  and 
men,  the  kind  of  self-knowledge  which  was  inculcated  by  the  Nosce 
teipsnm  l  inscription  in  the  Delphic  temple.)  We  thus  find  ourselves 
embarked  on  a  double  question  :  (i)  Is  self-knowledge  possible  at  all  ? 
(2)  If  it  is,  is  it  profitable ;  has  it  any  bearing  on  the  practical  conduct 
of  life  ?  Or  again :  (i)  What  is  the  object  apprehended  by  self- 
knowledge  ?  (2)  What  is  the  result  it  produces  ? 

The  second  question  is  met  by  Critias  with  the  reply  that  self- 
knowledge,  like  such  "  sciences  "  or  "  arts  "  as  arithmetic  and 
geometry,  and  unlike  such  "  sciences  "  or  "  arts  "  as  building  or 
weaving,  has  no  "  product/'  This  is,  in  untechnical  language,  the 
distinction  which  is  more  clearly  drawn  in  the  Politicus  and  finally 
takes  technical  form  in  Aristotle  as  the  distinction  between  "  specu- 
lative "  knowledge,  which  has  no  further  end  than  the  perfecting  of 
itself,  and  "  practical  "  knowledge,  which  has  always  an  ulterior 
end,  the  making  of  some  thing  or  the  doing  of  some  act.  Critias 
is  unconsciously  assuming  first  that  self-knowledge  is  cVurrwn?  or 
re'xi'Tj,  knowledge  of  universal  rules  or  principles  of  some  kind,  and 
next  that  it  is  "  speculative,"  not  "  practical  "  science.  The  result 
is  that  he  is  virtually  confusing  the  direct  acquaintance  with  one's 
own  individual  strength  and  weaknesses  really  meant  in  the  Delphian 
inscription  with  the  "  science  "  of  the  psychologist.  He  is  taking  it 
for  granted,  as  too  many  among  ourselves  still  do,  that  to  know 
psychology  and  to  have  a  profound  acquaintance  with  your  own 
1  heart  "  are  the  same  thing  (Charm.  i6$d-e.)  Socrates  lets  this 

1  yv&Ot  ffavr6f. 

3 


54  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

confusion  of  "  direct  acquaintance  "  with  "  knowledge  about  "  go 
uncriticized,  because  his  immediate  purpose  is  to  raise  a  more  general 
issue,  one  which  concerns  not  the  effect  of  knowledge,  but  the  object 
apprehended.  In  all  other  cases,  he  urges,  that  which  is  appre- 
hended by  a  "  knowledge  "  or  "  science  "  is  something  different 
from  the  knowing  or  apprehending  itself.  Arithmetic  for  example 
is  knowledge  of  "  the  even  and  odd,"  as  we  should  say,  of  the 
characters  of  the  integers.  But  "  the  even  and  odd  "  are  not  the 
same  thing  as  the  knowing  which  has  them  for  its  object.  (In  fact, 
of  course,  arithmetic  is  a  mental  activity,  the  integers  and  their 
properties  are  not.)  We  shall  find  the  same  distinction  between  the 
"  knowing  "  and  the  object  known  in  the  case  of  any  other  "  know- 
ledge "  we  like  to  take  (i66a-b).  Critias  admits  the  truth  of  this 
in  general,  but  asserts  that  there  is  one  solitary  exception.  The  self- 
knowledge  of  which  he  had  spoken  is  this  exception  ;  it  is  quite 
literally  a  knowing  which  "  knows  itself  and  all  other  knowledges/' 
and  the  virtue  sophrosyne  is  no  other  than  this  "  knowing  which 
knows  itself  "  (i66c).  In  effect  this  amounts  to  identifying  soph- 
rosyne with  what  is  called  in  modern  times  "  theory  of  knowledge/' 

We  proceed  to  test  this  thesis  in  the  true  Socratic  way  by 
asking  what  consequences  would  follow  from  it.  It  would  follow 
that  the  man  who  has  sophrosyne  would  know  what  he  knows  and 
what  he  does  not  know  but  merely  "  fancies  "  (otcrat),  and  also 
what  other  men  know  and  what  they  only  "  fancy."  Let  us  once 
more  put  our  double  question,  Is  such  knowledge  as  this  possible,  and 
if  it  is,  is  it  of  any  benefit  to  us  ? 

There  is  a  grave  difficulty  even  about  its  possibility.  For,  in  all 
other  cases,  we  find  that  a  mental  activity  is  always  directed  on 
some  object  other  than  itself.  Sight  and  hearing  do  not  see  or 
hear  sight  or  hearing ;  they  see  colours  and  hear  sounds.  Desire 
is  never  "  desire  of  desire  "  but  always  desire  of  a  pleasant  object ; 
we  do  not  wish  for  "wishing  "  but  for  good.  What  we  love  is  not 
"  loving  "  but  a  beloved  person,  what  we  fear,  not  fear  but  some 
formidable  thing,  and  so  forth.  That  is,  it  is  characteristic  of 
mental  activities  of  all  kinds  that  they  are  directed  upon  an  object 
other  than  themselves  (1670-168^).  It  would'be  at  least  "  singular  " 
(aroTTov)  if  there  should  be  a  solitary  exception  to  this  principle,  a 
"  knowing  "  which  is  not  the  knowing  of  a  science  (/m0^a)  of  some 
kind,' but  the  "  knowing  of  itself  and  the  other  knowings  "  (i68a). 
Knowing,  in  fact,  is  always  a  knowing  of  something,  and  so  relative 
to  an  object  known  ;  its  "  faculty  "  is  to  be  of  something  (1686),  and 
so  where  there  is  knowing  there  must  be  a  known  object,  just  as 
where  there  is  a  "  greater  than  "  there  must  always  be  a  "  less  " 
than  which  the  greater  is  greater.  Hence,  if  there  is  anything  which 
is  greater  than  itself,  it  must  also  be  less  than  itself ;  if  anything 
which  is  double  of  itself,  it  must  also  be  half  itself,  and  so  on.  If 
"  seeing  "  can  see  itself,  "seeing  "  itself  must  be  coloured.  Some  of 
these  consequences  are  patently  absurd,  e.g.  that  there  should  be  a 
number  which  is  greater  than,  and  by  consequence  also  less  than 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  55 

itself ;  if  it  is  not  so  obvious  that  seeing  cannot  see  itself,  and  that  sight, 
by  consequence,  is  not  a  colour,  the  position  is  at  any  rate  difficult  to 
accept.  It  would  require  a  great  philosopher  to  decide  the  question 
whether  any  activity  can  be  its  own  object,  and  if  so,  whether  this 
is  the  case  with  the  activity  of  knowing,  and  we  have  not  the 
genius  needed  to  determine  the  point  (1686-1696).  But  in  any  case, 
we  may  say  that  such  a  supposed  "  knowing  of  knowing  "  cannot  be 
what  men  mean  by  sophrosyne  unless  it  can  be  shown  that  it  would 
be  "  beneficial  "  to  us,  as  sophrosyne  admittedly  is  (1696-0). 

(So  far  then,  the  point  of  the  argument  has  been  the  perfectly 
sound  one  that  no  mental  activity  is  its  own  object.  Manifestly 
this  is  true  of  the  knowing  of  the  epistemologist,  as  much  as  of  any 
other  activity.  If  there  is  such  a  science  as  the  "  theory  of  know- 
ledge/' its  object  will  be  "  the  conditions  under  which  knowledge  is 
possible."  But  these  conditions  are  not  the  same  thing  as  anyone's 
knowing  about  them.  The  doctrines  of  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason, 
for  example,  are  one  thing  and  Kant's  knowing  or  believing  these 
doctrines  is  another.) 

We  can  now  take  a  further  step.  Let  us  concede,  for  the  pur- 
poses of  argument,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  "  knowing  of 
knowing."  Even  if  there  is,  it  is  not  the  same  thing  as  "  knowing 
what  you  know  and  what  you  do  not  know,"  and  therefore  is  not  the 
self-knowledge  with  which  Critias  has  been  trying  to  identify 
sophrosyne.  Critias  does  not  readily  take  in  the  distinction,  which 
has  therefore  to  be  made  gradually  clearer  by  illustrations.  Sup- 
pose a  man  to  "  know  about  knowing,"  what  will  this  knowledge 
really  tell  him  ?  It  will  tell  him  that  "  this  is  knowledge  "  and  "  that 
is  not  knowledge,"  i.e.  that  this  proposition  is  true,  that  proposition 
is  not  certainly  true.  But  to  know  so  much  and  no  more  would 
certainly  not  be  enough  for  the  purposes  of  the  practitioner  in 
medicine  and  statesmanship.  The  physician  needs  not  merely  to 
know  that  "  I  know  such  and  such  a  proposition,"  he  needs  to  know 
that  the  true  proposition  in  question  is  relevant  to  the  treatment  of 
his  patients.  In  other  words,  it  is  not  enough  for  him  to  know 
what  knowledge  is,  he  needs  to  know  what  health  is,  and  the  states- 
man similarly  must  know  not  merely  what  knowledge  is,  but  what 
right  is.  Ex  hypothesi  they  will  not  learn  this  from  a  science  which 
has  knowledge  as  its  object,  but  from  medicine,  of  which  the  object 
is  health  in  the  body,  or  from  politics,  which  knows  about  "  right." 
Thus  we  must  not  say  that  the  man  who  has  only  "  knowledge  of 
knowledge  "  will  know  what  he  knows  and  what  he  does  not ;  we 
may  only  say  that  that  he  will  know  the  bare  fact  that  he  knows  or 
does  not  know.  (The  meaning  is,  for  example,  that  a  man  who  was 
a  mere  epistemologist  and  nothing  more  might  be  aware  that  when 
he  says,  "  So  many  grains  of  arsenic  are  fatal,  "  he  is  saying  something 
which  satisfies  all  the  conditions  required  for  genuine  scientific 
knowledge ;  but,  if  he  only  knew  epistemology  and  nothing  else, 
he  would  not  even  know  that  he  must  not  administer  fatal  doses  of 
arsenic  to  his  fellow-men.)  Thus  if  sophrosyne  is  the  same  thing  as 


56  PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

a  "  knowledge  of  knowledge, "  the  man  who  has  it  will  not  be  helped 
by  it  to  distinguish  a  genuine  practitioner  from  a  pretender  in 
medicine  or  in  anything  else.  To  distinguish  the  true  physician 
from  the  quack,  you  need  to  know  not  epistemology,  the  "  know- 
ledge of  knowledge,"  but  medicine,  the  "  knowledge  of  things 
wholesome  and  unwholesome."  The  true  judge  of  medical  theory 
and  practice  is  not  the  epistemologist  but  the  medical  specialist,  and 
no  one  else  (i6gd-ijic).  And  this  conclusion  seems  to  dispose  of 
the  worth  of  sophrosyne,  if  we  were  right  in  identifying  it  with  a 
"  knowledge  of  knowledge."  A  self-knowledge  which  taught  us  to 
know,  in  the  first  instance,  our  own  strength  and  weakness,  and,  in 
the  second  place,  the  strength  and  weakness  of  others,  and  so 
enabled  us  to  be  on  our  guard  against  self-delusion  and  imposture, 
would  be  of  the  highest  value  for  the  conduct  of  life.  But  we  have 
just  seen  that  all  that  the  epistemologist  as  such  could  possibly 
tell  about  himself  or  anyone  else  would  be  merely  whether  he  really 
knew  epistemology  (1710-0). 

The  point  to  which  all  this  leads  us  up  is  manifestly  that  though 
sophrosyne  is  a  knowledge  of  something,  it  cannot  be  a  "  knowledge 
about  knowledge,"  nor  can  this  be  what  was  really  meant  by  those 
who  have  insisted  on  self-knowledge  as  the  one  thing  needful  for  a 
happy  life.  It  is  clearly  indicated  that  the  sort  of  knowledge  of 
ourselves  really  needed  as  a  guide  to  practice  is  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil  and  of  the  state  of  our  souls  in  respect  of  them,  a  view  which 
would  immediately  lead  to  the  further  result  that  all  the  genuine 
virtues  are  at  bottom  one  and  the  same  thing,  knowledge  of  the  good, 
and  the  distinctions  commonly  made  between  the  different  types 
of  virtue  at  best  conventional.  (It  is  incidentally  a  further  valuable 
result  of  the  argument  that  it  has  vindicated  the  autonomy  of  the 
various  sciences  by  exposing  the  pretensions  of  the  "  theory  of 
knowledge  "  to  judge  of  scientific  truths  on  a  priori  grounds,  and 
making  it  clear  that  in  every  case  there  is  no  appeal  from  the  verdict 
of  the  expert  in  a  specific  science,  so  long  as  he  claims  to  be  the  final 
authority  in  his  own  speciality.) 

The  main  purpose  of  the  discussion  becomes  apparent  when  we 
reach  its  final  section.  Even  if  we  waive  all  the  difficulties  we  have 
raised,  and  admit  that  sophrosyne  really  is  a  "  knowledge  of  know- 
ledge," and  that  such  a  knowledge  is,  (as  we  just  said  that  it  is 
not,)  "  knowing  what  we  do  know  and  what  we  do  not,"  would  this 
supposed  knowledge  be  of  any  value  for  the  direction  of  life  ? 
It  is  clear,  of  course,  that  if  we  had  such  a  knowledge,  and  directed 
our  actions  by  it,  everything  would  be  done  "  scientifically  "  (Kara 
ras  €7nor?7/Aas,  ITTICTT ^ovwi) .  Our  medical  men,  our  soldiers,  our 
sailors,  all  our  craftsmen  in  fact,  would  be  real  experts  ;  lives  would 
not  be  lost  by  the  blunders  of  the  incompetent  physician  or  strategist 
or  navigator,  clothes  would  not  be  spoiled  by  the  bungling  of  their 
makers  ;  we  may  even  imagine  that  "  prophecy  "  might  be  made 
"  scientific,"  and  that  we  could  thus  have  confident  anticipations  of 
the  future,  and,  if  you  like,  we  may  suppose  ourselves  equally 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  57 

correctly  informed  about  the  past  (a  suggestion  which  curiously 
recalls  Du  Bois-Reymond's  fanciful  picture  of  his  omniscient 
"  demon  " l).  But  we  should  be  none  the  happier  for  all  this  know- 
ledge unless  we  had  something  more  which  we  have  not  yet  men- 
tioned— knowledge  of  good.  Without  this  we  might  know  all  about 
healing  the  sick,  sailing  the  sea,  winning  battles,  but  we  should  not 
know  when  it  is  good  that  a  sick  man  should  recover,  or  that  a 
vessel  should  come  safe  to  port,  or  a  battle  be  won.  If  our  life  is  to 
be  truly  happy,  it  is  this  knowledge  of  our  good  which  must  take 
the  direction  of  it;  apart  from  that  knowledge,  we  may  be  able  to 
secure  the  successful  accomplishment  of  various  results,  but  we 
cannot  make  sure  that  anything  will  be  "  well  and  beneficially  "  done. 
But  sophrosyne  by  our  assumed  definition  is  not  this  knowledge  of 
good ;  even  when  we  waived  all  other  difficulties  about  it,  we  still 
retained  the  thesis  that  it  is  a  "  knowledge  about  knowledges,"  a 
"  science  of  sciences."  Thus  sophrosyne  seems  to  fall  between  two 
stools  ;  it  is  not  the  knowledge  of  good  which  would  really  ensure 
happiness.  It  is  not  even  a  knowledge  which  will  ensure  that  the 
practitioners  of  the  various  "  arts  "  shall  be  experts  and  practise  their 
callings  with  success  ;  for  we  have  just  seen  that  it  is  the  specialist 
in  each  department  and  not  the  man  who  knows  the  "  theory  of 
knowledge  "  who  is  the  final  judge  in  his  own  department.  Sophro- 
syne, if  we  accept  the  proposed  definition  of  it,  even  with  the  most 
favourable  interpretation,  thus  seems  to  be  of  no  practical  value 
whatever  (171^-1750) .  Yet  this  conclusion  is  so  extravagantly  para- 
doxical that  it  clearly  cannot  be  sound.  We  can  only  suppose  that  the 
fault  is  with  ourselves ;  our  notions  on  the  subject  must  be  hopelessly 
confused.  This  is  unfortunate,  as  it  makes  it  impossible  to  employ 
the  Thracian's  recipe  for  the  cure  of  Charmides,  but  there  is  no  help 
for  it.  (Of  course,  the  real,  as  distinct  from  the  dramatic,  conclusion 
has  already  been  reached  in  the  suggestion  that  what  is  really  needed 
for  the  direction  of  life  is  the  knowledge  of  good,  and  that  this  know- 
ledge is  something  quite  different  from  any  of  the  recognized  special 
"  sciences  "  or  "  arts."  The  purpose  of  the  dialogue  is  to  show  that 
serious  examination  of  the  implications  of  the  current  conceptions 
of  sophrosyne  conducts  us  straight  to  the  two  famous  Socratic  "para- 
doxes "  of  the  unity  of  virtue  and  its  identity  with  knowledge  of  good.) 
The  Laches. — The  Laches,  which  we  may  now  treat  more  briefly, 
aims  at  reaching  these  same  results  by  starting  with  the  current 
conceptions  of  the  great  fighting-man's  virtue — courage  or  valour 
or  fortitude.  As  in  the  Charmides,  the  discussion  is  accompanied  by 
an  interesting  introduction  which  enables  us  to  refer  it  to  a  definite 
period  in  the  life  of  Socrates.  Lysimachus  and  Melesias,  the  un- 
distinguished sons  of  two  of  the  greatest  Athenians  of  the  early  fifth 
century,  Aristides  "  the  just "  and  Thucydides,  the  rival  of  Pericles, 
are  both  anxious  that  their  own  sons  should  rise  to  distinction,  and 
therefore  that  they  should  receive  the  careful  education  which 

1  Du  Bois-Reymond,  Ueber  die  Grenzen  des  Naturerkennens,  178. ;  Ward, 
Naturahsm  and  Agnosticism,  i.  40  ff.  (ed.  i). 


58  PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

their  own  parents  were  prevented  by  their  preoccupation  with 
public  affairs  from  bestowing  on  themselves.  They  have  just  wit- 
nessed a  public  exhibition  given  by  one  Stesilaus,  who  professes  to 
be  able  to  teach  the  art  and  mystery  of  fighting  in  full  armour,  and 
have  brought  with  them  two  of  the  most  famous  military  men  of 
the  day,  Laches  and  Nicias,  in  order  to  get  their  opinion  on  the 
advisability  of  putting  the  lads  under  such  an  instructor. 

Socrates  also  has  been  present  at  the  display,  and  at  the  recom- 
mendation of  Laches,  who  witnessed  and  highly  admired  his 
presence  of  mind  and  courage  in  the  disastrous  retreat  of  the 
Athenian  forces  from  Delium  (424  B.C.),  he  is  taken  into  consultation 
(Laches,  i8oa-b).  It  now  comes  out  that  Sophroniscus,  the  father 
of  Socrates,  had  been  a  lifelong  friend  of  Lysimachus,  and  that 
Socrates  himself  is  a  person  of  whom  Lysimachus  has  heard  the  boys 
speak  as  an  object  of  great  interest  to  themselves  and  their  young 
companions  (iSod-e).  Laches,  as  it  comes  out  later,  knows  nothing 
of  him  except  his  admirable  behaviour  on  the  field  of  Delium  (1880), 
but  Nicias  is  perfectly  familiar  with  him  and  his  habit  of  turning 
every  conversation  into  a  searching  examination  of  the  state  of  his 
interlocutor's  soul  (187^-1886).  These  allusions  enable  us  to  date 
the  supposed  conversation  pretty  accurately.  It  falls  after  Delium 
in  424,  but  not  long  after,  since  it  is  assumed  that  Laches,  who 
fell  at  Mantinea  in  418,  is  still  burdened  by  the  cares  of  public 
office  (iSya-b).  The  references  to  the  comparative  poverty  of 
Socrates — it  is  not  said  to  be  more  than  comparative  (i86c)— 
may  remind  us  that  Aristophanes  and  Amipsias  both  made  this 
a  prominent  feature  in  their  burlesques  of  him  (the  Clouds  of 
Aristophanes  and  the  Connus  of  Amipsias),  produced  in  423.  It 
points  to  the  same  general  date  that  the  two  old  men  should  be 
thinking  of  the  speciality  of  Stesilaus  as  the  thing  most  desirable 
to  be  acquired  by  their  sons.  After  the  peace  of  Nicias,  which 
was  expected  to  put  an  end  to  the  struggle  between  Athens  and 
the  Peloponnesian  Confederation,  it  would  not  be  likely  that 
fathers  anxious  to  educate  their  sons  well  should  think  at  once  of 
6nlona%ia  as  the  most  promising  branch  of  education.  We  thus 
have  to  think  of  the  conversation  as  occurring  just  about  the  time 
when  Aristophanes  produced  his  delightful  caricature  of  Socrates 
as  a  guide  of  youth  ;  Socrates  is  a  man  of  rather  under  fifty ; 
Nicias  and  Laches,  as  Plato  is  careful  to  remind  us  (181^),  are  older 
men,  and  Lysimachus  and  Melesias  quite  old  and ' '  out  of  the  world. ' '  * 

The  two  military  experts,  as  it  happens,  are  of  different  minds 

1  The  same  approximate  date  is  suggested  by  the  allusion  to  the  famous 
Damonides,  or  Damon,  of  Oea.  Nicias  expresses  gratitude  to  Socrates  for 
having  procured  an  introduction  to  Damon  for  his  son  Niceratus.  Laches 
professes  to  think  Damon  a  mere  spinner  of  words  and  phrases,  but  Nicias 
retorts  that  it  is  not  for  him  to  judge,  since  he  has  never  even  met  the  man 
(2006).  The  assumption  is  that  Damon  is  living  in  retirement  from  society 
generally.  Since  he  was  one  of  the  two  "  sophists  "  who  "  educated  "  Pericles 
(Isocr.  xv.  235),  he  must  have  been  bora,  like  his  colleague  Anaxagoras,  about 
500  B.C.,  so  that  his  advanced  age  will  account  for  his  seclusion. 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  59 

about  the  practical  value  of  the  proposed  instruction  in  the  conduct 
of  spear  and  shield.  Nicias,  who  is  represented  all  through  as  the 
more  intellectual  of  the  two,  is  inclined  to  recommend  it  on  the 
grounds  that  a  soldier  needs  to  know  how  to  handle  his  weapons, 
that  he  is  likely  to  find  skill  of  fence  serviceable  in  actual  fighting, 
that  it  may  awaken  in  him  an  interest  in  other  branches  of  the 
military  art,  such  as  strategy,  finally  that  the  training  produces 
grace  and  agility  and  banishes  awkwardness  (i8ie-i82d).  Laches, 
a  brave  fighting-man  with  no  intellectual  capacity,  takes  a  different 
view.  He  holds  that  the  "  proof  of  the  pudding  is  the  eating  of  it." 
There  cannot  be  much  in  this  technical  skill,  for  we  see  that  the 
Spartans,  who  ought  to  be  the  best  judges  of  things  military,  set 
no  store  by  its  professors,  and  the  professors  themselves  avoid 
Sparta  like  the  plague.  They  reap  their  harvest  from  communities 
who,  by  their  own  admission,  are  backward  in  warfare.  (This  is  an 
excellent  little  bit  of  dramatic  characterization  ;  Laches  is  mentally 
too  dull  to  see  the  obvious  explanation  that  the  professionals  take 
their  wares  to  the  market  where  the  need  for  them  is  likely  to  be 
most  felt.)  Besides,  in  actual  warfare,  the  professional  masters  of 
fence  never  distinguish  themselves.1  Laches  remembers  having 
seen  this  very  professor  make  himself  a  laughing-stock  by  his  clumsy 
handling  of  a  complicated  weapon  of  his  own  forging  (182^-1840). 

In  this  disagreement  of  the  experts,  Socrates  is  now  called  upon 
to  give  the  decisive  opinion.  But,  as  he  says,  a  question  of  this 
kind  is  not  to  be  settled  by  a  majority  of  votes.  The  deciding  voice 
should  be  left  to  the  expert,  the  man  who  really  knows,  even  if  he 
were  found  to  be  in  a  minority  of  one.  But  who  is  the  expert  to 
whom  we  ought  to  appeal  in  the  present  case  ?  Not  the  mere  expert 
or  connoisseur  in  O7r\o/xa^t'a.  The  problem  is  really  concerned  with 
the  "  tendance  "  of  the  young  people's  souls,  and  the  expert  to 
whom  we  must  appeal  is  therefore  the  expert  in  "  tending  "  his 
own  soul,  the  man  who  can  achieve  "  goodness  "  in  himself  and,  by 
his  influence,  produce  it  in  others  (iS^a-e).  Now,  if  a  man  really  is 
an  expert,  he  may  take  either  of  two  ways  of  convincing  us  of  his 
claims.  If  he  has  learned  his  skill  from  others,  he  can  tell  us  who 
his  teachers  were,  and  convince  us  that  they  were  competent.2  If 
he  has  picked  it  up  for  himself,  as  expert  knowledge  is  often  picked 
up,  he  can  point  to  its  results,  he  can  give  us  examples  of  persons 
who  have  been  made  better  by  his  influence  on  them  (iS6a-b). 
Socrates  confesses  himself  to  be  no  expert,  but  maliciously  suggests 
that  the  case  may  be  different  with  the  two  generals.  They  are 
richer  than  he,  and  may  have  been  able  to  pay  "  sophists  "  for  in- 
struction in  the  art  of  "  tending  the  soul  "  ;  they  are  older  and  more 
experienced,  and  so  may  have  discovered  the  secret  for  themselves 

1  In  the  Republic  Socrates  himself  is  made  to  propose  a  training  for  his 
young  men  from  which  all  specialism  of  this  kind  is  expressly  excluded 
(Rep.  iii.  4040  ff.). 

*  We  shall  see  the  full  significance  of  this  when  we  come  to  examine  the 
Protagoras. 


60  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

(1860).  At  any  rate,  they  must  be  experts,  or  they  could  not 
pronounce  on  a  question  in  which  only  the  expert  is  competent 
with  such  confidence  and  readiness.  (The  insinuation,  of  course,  is 
that,  as  we  might  expect  from  their  disagreement,  neither  is  a  real 
"  expert  "  ;  both  are  talking  about  what  they  do  not  understand.) 

We  may,  however,  contrive  to  avoid  the  demand  for  direct 
evidence  that  there  is  an  expert  among  us.  For  if  a  man  really 
knows  what,  e.g.,  good  sight  is,  and  how  to  produce  it  in  a  patient,  he 
can  tell  us  what  sight  is ;  if  he  cannot,  he  is  manifestly  not  a  specialist 
in  the  treatment  of  the  eye.  So,  in  the  present  case,  the  man  whose 
judgment  we  need  is  the  expert  in  "  goodness,"  which  makes  our 
souls  better  souls.  If  a  man  cannot  even  say  what  goodness  is,  it 
would  be  waste  of  time  to  take  his  advice  on  the  kind  of  education 
which  will  produce  it.  Thus  the  original  question  whose  judgment 
is  authoritative  in  the  problem  of  education  may  be  replaced  by  the 
question  who  knows  what  goodness  is.  And  this  question  may  be, 
for  convenience,  further  narrowed  down.  For  our  present  purpose, 
judging  of  the  worth  of  the  art  of  the  professional  teacher  of  skill 
with  shield  and  spear,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  consider  only  one 
"  part  "  of  goodness — courage  or  valour.  A  competent  judge  on 
the  question  whether  the  accomplishment  makes  its  possessor  a 
better  soldier  must  at  least  be  able  to  say  what  courage  is  (189^- 
1900) .  We  have  now  got  our  ethical  question  fairly  posed  :  What  is 
it  that  we  really  mean  to  be  talking  about  when  we  speak  of  dy3pa'a — 
manliness,  valour,  courage — as  one  of  the  indispensable  points  of 
manhood  ?  Laches,  the  less  thoughtful  of  the  two  professional 
soldiers,  thinks  that  any  man  can  answer  so  simple  a  question 
off-hand.  "  A  man  who  keeps  his  place  in  the  ranks  in  the  presence 
of  the  enemy,  does  his  best  to  repel  them,  and  never  turns  his  back — 
there  is  a  brave  man  for  you  "  (1900).  Thus,  just  as  in  the  Char- 
mides,  we  start  with  a  proposed  definition  of  an  interior  state  of  soul 
which  confuses  the  state  itself  with  one  of  its  common  and  customary 
outward  expressions.  The  further  course  of  the  discussion  will 
reveal  the  double  defectiveness  of  this  formula.  It  is  not  even 
adequate  as  a  description  of  the  conduct  of  the  fighting-man  himself, 
and  fighting  is  far  from  being  the  only  business  in  life  which  demands 
the  same  qualities  as  those  we  expect  from  the  good  soldier.  As 
usual,  Plato  is  anxious  to  insist  upon  the  real  identity  of  the  spiritual 
state  under  the  great  apparent  variety  of  its  outward  manifestations. 
To  discover  that  other  occupations  than  those  of  warfare  also  call 
for  the  "  soldierly  "  virtues  is  a  long  step  towards  discovering  the 
essential  unity  of  the  "  virtues  "  themselves. 

Even  Laches  is  ready  to  admit  at  once  that  a  feigned  withdrawal 
is  a  proper  manoeuvre  in  warfare,  as  is  shown  by  the  practice  of 
the  Scythians,  the  pretended  retreat  by  which  the  Lacedaemonians 
drew  the  Persians  from  their  defences  at  Plataea,  and  other 
examples  (iqia-c) .  He  is  even  ready  to  allow  that  fighting  is  not  the 
only  situation  in  which  courage  may  be  shown.  A  man  may  show 
himself  a  brave  man  or  a  coward  by  the  way  he  faces  danger  at  sea, 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  61 

poverty,  disease,  the  risks  of  political  life  ;  again,  bravery  and 
cowardice  may  be  shown  as  much  in  resistance  to  the  seductions 
of  pleasure  and  the  importunities  of  desire  as  in  facing  or  shirking 
pain  or  danger,  a  consideration  which,  incidentally,  shows  the  arti- 
ficial nature  of  the  popular  distinction  between  valour,  the  virtue  of 
war,  and  sophrosyne,  the  virtue  of  peace  and  non-combatants 
(191^-0).  (It  is  this  passage  of  the  Laches  which  Aristotle  has  in 
view  in  the  Ethics  where  he  distinguishes  valour  in  the  "  primary  " 
sense  of  the  word  from  the  very  kind  of  conduct  here  called  by  the 
name.1  The  disagreement,  however,  is  a  purely  verbal  one.  Aris- 
totle does  not  mean  to  deny  that  the  qualities  in  question  are  indis- 
pensable to  the  good  life,  nor  that  there  is  a  close  analogy  between 
them  and  the  quality  of  the  soldier,  which  justifies  a  "  transference  " 
of  the  name  valour  to  them.  He  is  concerned  simply,  in  the  interests 
of  precise  terminology,  to  insist  that  when  we  speak  of  "  putting  up 
a  good  fight  "  against  disease,  financial  distress,  temptation,  and  the 
like,  we  are  using  language  which  originally  was  appropriated  to  the 
actual  "  fighting  "  of  actual  soldiers,  and  Aristotle's  purpose  in 
giving  the  series  of  character-sketches  which  make  up  this  section 
of  the  Ethics  requires  that  he  shall  describe  the  various  "  virtues  " 
in  the  guise  in  which  they  are  most  immediately  recognizable  by 
popular  thought.) 

Now  that  he  sees  the  point,  Laches  replies  very  readily  that 
there  is  a  certain  spirit  or  temper  which  is  to  be  found  universally 
in  all  the  examples  of  courageous  behaviour  Socrates  has  produced. 
They  are  all  cases  in  which  a  man  "  persists  "  in  the  face  of  opposi- 
tion or  risk  of  some  kind.  Hence  he  proposes  as  the  definition  of 
courage  that  it  is  in  all  cases  a  certain  Kaprept'a,  "  persistence/' 
"  endurance/'  "  sticking  to  one's  purpose  "  (igzc).  This  definition 
clearly  has  some  of  the  qualities  of  a  good  definition.  When  you 
speak  of  courage  as  a  "  persistence  of  soul/'  just  as  when  we  com- 
monly use  the  word  "  resolution  "  as  a  synonym  for  it,  you  are 
really  trying  to  indicate  the  spirit  which  underlies  all  the  manifold 
expressions  of  the  quality.  And  it  is,  of  course,  true  that  persistence 
or  resolution  is  a  characteristic  of  courage  ;  the  brave  man  is  one 
who  "  sticks  it  out."  But,  as  a  definition,  the  formula  is  still  too 
wide.  All  courage  may  be  persistence,  but  all  persistence  is  not 
courage.  In  the  technical  logical  language  which  makes  its  appear- 
ance in  Plato's  later  dialogues,  we  need  to  know  the  "  difference  "  2 
which  discriminates  persistence  which  is  courage  from  persistence 
which  is  not.  Since  unwise  persistence,  mere  obstinacy,  is  a  bad  and 
harmful  thing,  whereas  we  certainly  mean  by  courage  something 
we  regard  as  eminently  good,  it  looks  as  though  we  might  remedy 
the  defect  of  our  formula  by  saying  that  "  wise  persistence  " 
(<t>p6vip.os  /caprepia)  is  courage  (192^).  But  the  question  now  arises 
what  wisdom  we  mean.  A  man  may  wisely  calculate  that  by  per- 
sisting in  expenditure  he  will  make  a  commercial  profit,  but  we 
should  hardly  regard  this  as  an  example  of  courage.  When  a 

1  E.N.  Ui.  6,  11150  7  ff.  *  hafopd,  Sia<pop6rris  (Theaetet.  2oSd  ff.)« 


62  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

physician  persists  in  refusing  the  entreaties  of  his  patient  for  food 
which  he  knows  would  be  bad  for  the  patient,  we  do  not  think  the 
physician  has  shown  any  particular  courage.  In  warfare,  we  do 
not  commend  the  courage  of  a  force  which  "  holds  out  "  because  it 
knows  that  it  is  superior  in  numbers  and  still  has  the  stronger 
position  and  is  certain  of  reinforcement.  It  is  just  the  "  per- 
sistence "  of  an  inferior  force,  with  a  worse  position  and  no  hope 
of  relief,  that  impresses  us  as  singularly  courageous.  So  we  think 
more  of  the  courage  of  the  man  who  acquits  himself  well  in  the 
cavalry  though  is  he  an  unskilled  rider,  or  the  man  who  makes  a 
plucky  dive  into  deep  water  though  he  is  a  poor  swimmer,  than  we 
do  of  the  persistence  of  the  man  who  acquits  himself  well  because  he 
has  mastered  these  accomplishments.  (E.g.,  we  think  Monmouth's 
raw  countrymen  showed  great  courage  at  Sedgemoor  in  putting  up 
a  fight  against  the  Household  troops ;  we  do  not  commend  the 
courage  of  the  Household  troops  because  they  "  held  out  "  against 
a  crowd  of  peasants.)  This  looks  as  if,  after  all,  it  is  "  unwise  " 
persistence  (afow  /capreprjo-is)  rather  than  "  wise  "  which  is  the  true 
courage.  We  have  plainly  not  found  the  right  formula  yet,  and  shall 
have  to  call  on  ourselves  for  the  very  quality  of  which  we  have  been 
speaking,  "  persistence  "  in  the  inquiry,  if  we  are  to  approve  our- 
selves "  courageous  "  thinkers  (1920-1940).  We  must  not  miss  the 
point  of  this  difficulty.  Socrates  does  not  seriously  mean  to  suggest 
that  "  unwise  "  resolution  or  persistence  is  courage.  His  real  object 
is  to  distinguish  the  "  wisdom  "  meant  by  the  true  statement  that 
courage  is  "  wise  resolution  "  from  specialist  knowledge  which 
makes  the  taking  of  a  risk  less  hazardous.  The  effect  of  specialist 
knowledge  of  this  kind  is,  in  fact,  to  make  the  supposed  risk  unreal. 
The  man  whom  we  admire  because  we  suppose  him  to  be  rightly 
taking  a  great  risk  is,  in  reality,  as  he  himself  knows,  taking  little  or 
no  risk.  Our  belief  in  his  courage  is  based  on  an  illusion  which  he 
does  not  share.  But  it  is  true  that  we  do  not  regard  the  "  unwise  " 
persistency  of  the  man  who  takes  "  foolish  "  risks  as  true  courage. 
What  we  really  mean  is  that  the  brave  man  faces  a  great  risk,  being 
alive  to  its  magnitude,  but  faces  it  because  he  rightly  judges  that 
it  is  good  to  do  so.  The  "  wisdom  "  he  shows  is  right  judgment  of 
good  and  evil,  and  this  is  what  Socrates  means  to  suggest. 

At  this  point  Nicias  comes  into  the  discussion.  He  has  "  often  " 
heard  Socrates  say  that  a  man  is  "  good  "  at  the  things  he  "  knows  " 
(aTrcp  cro^o's,  194^)  and ' '  bad ' '  at  the  things  he  does  not  know  (a  d/m^s) . 
If  this  is  true,  as  Nicias  believes  it  to  be,  courage,  since  it  is  always 
a  good  quality  or  activity,  will  be  a  o-o^ta  or  &rt<m?/Ai?,  a  knowledge 
of  some  kind.  It  is  clearly  not  the  same  thing  as  any  form  of 
specialist  technical  knowledge,  for  the  reasons  we  have  already 
considered.  But  it  may  well  be  that  it  is  "  the  knowledge  of  what 
is  formidable  and  what  is  not "  (17  T&V  Scu/wi/  K<U  tfappaAcW  cirMroj/My, 
1940) ;  i.e.  the  truly  brave  man  may  be  the  man  who  knows,  in  all  the 
situations  of  life,  what  is  and  what  is  not  a  proper  object  of  fear. 
This  suggestion  is  plainly  a  step  in  the  right  direction,  as  it  in- 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  68 

corporates  the  important  distinction  between  specialist  knowledge 
and  the  kind  of  knowledge  which  might  conceivably  be  the  same 
thing  as  virtue,  the  distinction  which  would  be  made,  in  the  fashion- 
able terminology  of  our  own  day,  between  knowledge  of  facts  and 
knowledge  of  values.  Laches,  however,  who  is  in  a  bad  temper  from 
his  own  recent  rebuff,  treats  the  theory  as  a  mere  piece  of  mystifica- 
tion, and  can  hardly  be  brought  to  express  his  objections  to  it  in 
decently  civil  language.  A  physician  or  a  farmer  knows  the  dangers 
to  which  his  patients  or  his  cattle  are  exposed,  but  such  knowledge 
does  not  constitute  courage  (1956).  The  objection  shows  that 
Laches  has  missed  the  whole  point  of  the  definition,  as  Nicias  goes 
on  to  observe.  The  physician  may  know  that  a  patient  will  die  or 
will  recover  ;  he  does  not  know  whether  death  or  recovery  is  the 
really  "  formidable  "  thing  for  the  patient.  It  may  be  that  it  is 
recovery  which  would  in  some  cases  be  the  "  dreadful  "  thing,  but 
medical  science  cannot  tell  us  which  these  cases  are ;  (e.g.  a  man  might 
use  his  restored  health  in  a  way  which  would  bring  him  to  public 
disgrace  worse  than  death,  and,  of  course,  his  medical  man  cannot 
learn  from  the  study  of  medicine  whether  this  will  happen  or  not 1) . 
Even  the  "  seer  "  can  only  predict  that  a  man  will  or  will  not  die, 
or  lose  his  money,  that  a  battle  will  be  won  or  lost ;  his  art  cannot 
tell  him  which  event  will  be  better  for  the  man  or  the  State  (1950- 
196^).  This  is,  of  course,  exactly  the  reply  which  might  be  made 
to  Laches'  criticism  from  the  Socratic  standpoint.  But  it  still  leaves 
something  to  be  said  which  Socrates  is  anxious  to  say.  In  the 
first  place,  if  courage  is  knowledge  of  some  kind,  we  must  deny  that 
any  mere  animal  can  be  brave.  In  fact,  the  truly  brave  will  be  a 
small  minority  even  among  men.  Must  we  say,  then,  that  there  is 
no  difference  in  courage  between  a  lion  and  a  deer,  a  bull  and  a 
monkey  ?  Laches  thinks  the  suggestion  a  sufficient  refutation  of 
what  he  regards  as  the  sophisticated  nonsense  of  Nicias,  but,  as 
Nicias  observes,  its  edge  is  turned  if  we  distinguish  between  natural 
high  temper  and  fearlessness  (TO  a<£o/fov)  and  genuine  courage 
(TO  avSptlov,  i<)6d-i()jc).  So  far  Nicias  is  simply  insisting  on  what  we 
shall  see  from  the  Phaedo  and  Republic  to  be  the  Socratic  view.* 
Native  fearlessness  is  a  valuable  endowment,  but  it  is  only  in  a 
human  being  that  it  can  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  development  of  the 
loyalty  to  principle  we  call  courage,  and  it  is  only  in  "  philosophers  " 
that  this  transformation  of  mere  "  pluck  "  into  true  valiancy  is 
complete.  But  there  is  a  further  difficulty  which  Nicias  has  left 
out  of  account.  By  a  "  formidable  thing  "  or  "  thing  to  be  feared  " 
we  mean  a  future  or  impending  evil.  Now  there  is  no  science  of 
future  good  and  evil  distinct  from  the  science  of  good  and  evil 

1  So  in  Dickens's  Great  Expectations  it  is  "  better  for  "  the  returned  convict 
that  he  dies  in  the  prison  hospital,  since,  if  he  .had  recovered,  he  would  have 
been  sent  to  the  gallows  for  returning  from  transportation.     The  hero  is  glad 
to  hear  on  each  inquiry  that  the  patient  is  "  worse/' 

2  The  distinction  is  more  obvious  to  a  Greek  than  to  ourselves,  since  the 
vox  propria  for  "  brave  "  is  dpfyeios,  "  manly,"  and  to  call  a  brute  "  manly" 
is  felt  to  be  at  least  a  straining  of  language. 


64  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

simpliciter,  just  as  there  is  no  special  science  of  "future  health  and 
disease  "  or  of  "future  victory  and  defeat."  There  is  simply  the 
science  of  medicine  or  of  strategy,  and  these  sciences  apply 
indifferently  to  past,  present,  and  future.  So  our  definition,  if  we 
are  to  retain  it,  must  be  amended  ;  we  must  say  that  courage  is 
"  knowledge  of  good  and  evil/1  without  any  further  qualification 
(198^-1990).  But  as  now  amended  our  formula  covers  not  merely  a 
part  but  the  whole  of  goodness.  If  it  is  a  definition  at  all,  it  is  the 
definition  of  "  goodness,"  not  of  one  of  several  different  varieties  or 
departments  of  "goodness"  (1990)-  Yet  it  is  commonly  held 
that  courage  is  not  the  whole  of  "  goodness  "  ;  a  good  man  needs 
to  display  other  virtues,  such  as  "  justice  "  and  sophrosyne.  It 
appears  then  that,  after  all,  we  have  not  answered  the  question  what 
courage  is.  So  far  from  being  competent  to  choose  masters  for  the 
education  of  the  boys,  we  all  need  to  go  to  school  ourselves,  if  only 
we  could  find  a  teacher  (201  a). 

Thus  the  dialogue  has  led  us  to  the  same  result  as  the  Charmides. 
If  we  try  to  explain  what  any  one  great  typical  moral  virtue  is,  we 
find  ourselves  driven  on  to  define  it  as  "  the  knowledge  of  what  is 
good."  Every  virtue  thus  seems  on  examination  to  cover  the  whole 
field  of  the  conduct  of  life,  and  none  can  be  in  principle  distinguished 
from  any  other.  Yet  it  is  commonly  thought,  and  we  shall  see  in 
dealing  with  the  Republic  that  there  are  facts  of  experience  which 
strongly  support  the  view,  that  the  different  virtues  are  so  really 
distinct  that  a  man  may  be  eminent  for  one  and  yet  no  less  eminent 
for  the  lack  of  another,  (as  the  typical  soldier  is  commonly  thought 
to  be  at  once  braver  and  more  licentious  than  the  ordinary  peaceable 
civilian).  We  are  forced  by  our  intellect  to  accept  the  Socratic 
"  paradox  "  of  the  unity  of  virtue,  but  we  have  to  explain  how  the 
"  paradox  "  is  to  be  reconciled  with  the  facts  upon  which  popular 
moral  psychology  is  based.  How  the  reconciliation  is  effected  we 
shall  be  able  to  say  when  we  have  studied  the  Protagoras,  Phaedo, 
and  Republic.  The  all-important  point,  on  which  too  many  inter- 
preters went  wrong  in  the  nineteenth  century,  is  to  understand  that, 
to  the  end  of  his  life,  Plato  never  wavered  in  his  adherence  to  the 
"  paradox  "  itself. 

Lysis. — The  dialogue  is  linked  with  the  Charmides  by  its  setting, 
which  presents  another  charming  picture  of  the  manner  of  Socrates 
with  promising  boys  ;  some  of  the  problems  of  moral  psychology  it 
suggests  point  forward  to  one  of  the  supreme  achievements  of 
Plato's  literary  prime,  the  Symposium.  It  is  specially  interesting 
as  the  unnamed  source  from  which  Aristotle  derives  most  of  the 
questions  discussed  in  a  more  systematic  way  in  the  lectures  which 
make  up  the  eighth  and  ninth  books  of  the  Nicomachean  Ethics. 
(The  extensive  use  of  the  Lysis  in  these  books  of  itself  disposes  of  the 
misguided  attack  made  on  its  authenticity  by  some  nineteenth- 
century  scholars.) 

The  subject  of  the  discussion  is  Friendship,  a  topic  which  plays 
a  much  more  prominent  part  in  ancient  than  in  modern  ethical 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  65 

literature,  for  easily  assignable  reasons.  It  is  quite  untrue  to  say 
that  the  Greeks  "  had  no  family  life,"  but  it  is  true  that  owing  to 
the  neglect  of  the  education  of  their  women,  the  family  tended  to 
be  more  a  close  "  business  partnership  "  than  a  centre  of  intellectual 
interests  and  spiritual  emotions.  Again,  though  conjugal  affection 
could  be  a  real  thing  in  the  Hellenic  world,  for  the  same  reasons, 
romantic  love  between  the  sexes  had  little  scope  for  the  moralizing 
and  spiritualizing  effects  we  are  accustomed  to  ascribe  to  it. 
"  Passion  "  was  relatively  more  prominent,  "  affection  "  much  more 
secondary,  in  the  sexual  life  of  Periclean  Athens  than  in  that  of  any 
community  which  has  been  stamped  by  Christian  traditions.  In 
the  Greek  literature  of  the  great  period,  Eros  is  a  god  to  be  dreaded 
for  the  havoc  he  makes  of  human  life,  not  to  be  courted  for  the 
blessings  he  bestows  ;  a  tiger,  not  a  kitten  to  sport  with.1  Love,  as 
known  to  the  classical  writers,  is  a  passion  for  taking,  not  for  giving. 
Hence  in  life,  as  seen  from  the  Hellenic  point  of  view,  there  are  just 
two  outlets  for  the  spirit  of  eager  unselfish  devotion.  It  can  show 
itself  in  a  high  impersonal  form,  as  absolute  devotion  to  the  '•  city  " 
which  is  the  common  mother  of  all  the  citizens.  For  the  man  who, 
like  most  of  us,  needs  a  personal  object  of  flesh  and  blood  for  pas- 
sionate affection  and  self-sacrifice,  there  is  the  lifelong  friend  of 
his  own  sex,  whose  good  is  to  him  as  his  own.  This  is  why,  in 
Aristotle's  Ethics,  an  elaborate  study  of  friendship  immediately  pre- 
cedes the  culminating  picture  of  the  "  speculative  life/'  in  which 
man  puts  off  the  last  vestiges  of  his  human  individuality  to  lose 
himself  in  the  contemplation  of  God.  We  may  suspect  that  those 
who  condemn  the  tone  of  Greek  ethics  as  "  self-centred  "have usually 
"  skipped  "  these  books  in  their  reading  of  the  Ethics,  and  forgotten 
that  they  are  only  the  remains  of  what  was  once  a  vast  literature.2 
Plato's  interest  in  the  Lysis  is  partly  a  psychological  one.  He 
is  fascinated  by  the  mystery  of  the  attraction  which  can  draw  two 
human  beings  so  close,  that  each  is  to  the  other  as  dear  or  dearer 
than  himself,  as  modern  philosophers  have  been  by  the  mystery 
of  the  attraction  of  a  particular  woman  for  a  particular  man.  What 
does  A  see  in  B  rather  than  in  C,  to  account  for  this  attraction  ? 
But  he  has  also  a  more  specifically  ethical  purpose,  as  will  appear 
from  an  analysis  of  his  argument.  As  usual,  we  shall  find  the 
fundamental  conceptions  of  the  Socratic  morality,  the  doctrine 

1  Cf.  Bevan,  Hellenism  and  Christianity,  93-94. 

2  There  are  linguistic  difficulties  about  any  precise  reproduction  of  the 
argument  of  the  Lysis  in  English.     <t>i\€iv  can  only  be  rendered  "  to  love," 
i.e.  with  the  love  of  affection  (not  that  of  sexual  desire).     But  for  (j>t\os,  used 
as  a  substantive,  we  have  to  say  "  friend,"  while  the  adjective  has  to  be 
rendered  in  various  ways.     If  we  said  regularly  either  "  friendly  "  or  "  dear," 
we  should  obscure  the  reasoning,  since  "  friendly  "  means  definitely  "  a  person 
feeling  affection,"  and  "  dear  "  a  "  person  towards  whom  affection  is  felt." 
Either  rendering  would  make  nonsense  of  the  question,  whether  our  <f>l\ot  are 
those  whom  we  "  love  "  or  those  who  "  love  us."     Further,  when  the  adjective 
is  used  about  things,  like  wine  and  the  like,  we  cannot  render  it  by  either. 
We  have  to  say  that  a  man  "  likes  "  wine  or  horses.     This  must  be  my  apology 
for  the  shifts  to  which  I  have  been  driven. 


66  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

of  the  "  tendance  "  of  the  soul  and  the  dependence  of  happiness 
upon  knowledge  of  good,  emerging  from  the  paradoxes  in  which  the 
discussion  appears  to  entangle  itself. 

The  introduction  of  the  dialogue  closely  resembles  that  of  the 
Charmides.  Socrates  is  taking  a  walk  outside  the  city  wall  from 
the  suburb  of  the  Academy  on  the  N.W.  to  the  Lyceum  on  the 
E.,  when  he  is  accosted  by  some  of  his  young  friends  and  drawn 
into  a  palaestra  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  Lysis,  a  beautiful  and 
modest  boy  passionately  admired  by  Hippothales,  one  of  the  elder 
lads.  Hippothales,  in  fact,  as  the  others  complain,  makes  a  nuisance 
of  himself  by  inflicting  on  them  endless  bad  poems,  in  which  he 
belauds  the  antiquity,  wealth,  and  splendid  renown  of  the  family  of 
Lysis.  Socrates  good-naturedly  banters  Hippothales  on  the  mal- 
adroitness  of  attempting  to  make  a  "conquest  "  by  flatteries  which 
would  be  more  likely  to  spoil  the  recipient,  by  making  him  arrogant, 
conceited,  and  domineering,  and  is  then  invited  to  enter  the  palaestra 
and  give  a  practical  example  of  the  kind  of  conversation  really 
appropriate  to  a  "  lover  "  (Lysis,  2030-2070). 

(The  tone  which  Socrates  adopts  in  his  conversation  with  Lysis 
discloses  quietly  but  unmistakably  the  difference  between  his  own 
conception  of  a  romantic  attachment  and  that  of  his  fashionable 
young  companions.  The  tacit  presupposition  is  that  the  "  true 
lover's  "  desire  is  for  the  real  felicity  of  the  beloved ;  his  passion  is 
thus  an  entirely  pure  and  disinterested  thing,  a  form  of  <£iAia,  "  affec- 
tion/1 not  of  selfish  lust ;  and  this,  no  doubt,  is  why  Socrates  can  open 
the  argument  by  examples  drawn  from  wise  parental  affection.1) 

Lysis  has  parents  who  love  him  dearly.  Since  they  love  him  so 
well  they  are,  of  course,  anxious  for  his  "happiness."  Now  a  man 
cannot  be  happy  if  he  is  not  his  own  master  and  cannot  "  do  what 
he  desires/1  "  have  his  own  way/'  Yet  the  very  parents  who  are 
so  devoted  to  the  boy's  happiness  will  hardly  let  him  have  his  own 
way  about  anything.  He  is  not  allowed  to  drive  his  father's 
horses  or  mules,  though  a  hired  coachman  or  a  groom  who  is  a  slave 
is  allowed  to  do  as  he  thinks  good  with  them.  He  is  even  made  to 
go  to  school  under  the  conduct  of  a  paedagogus  and,  though  the 
man  is  a  slave,  has  to  do  what  he  tells  him.  When  he  comes  back 
from  school,  he  may  not  do  as  he  pleases  with  his  mother's  wools  and 
implements  for  spinning  and  weaving  ;  he  would  even  be  whipped 
if  he  meddled  with  them.  This  does  not  look  like  being  happy  or 
being  one's  own  master  (207^-209^). 

Lysis  gives  the  boyish  explanation  that  he  is  not  yet  old  enough 
to  meddle  with  such  matters.  But  the  real  reason  cannot  be  one  of 
age.  There  are  things  in  which  he  is  allowed  to  have  his  own  way. 
When  his  parents  want  him  to  read  aloud,  to  write  or  to  sing,  he  is 
allowed  to  have  his  own  way  about  the  order  in  which  he  reads  or 

1  The  brutal  selfishness  of  the  fashionable  <?/xxo-rv)j  is  the  theme  of  Socrates 
homily  in  the  Phaedrus,  on  the  text  "  that  one's  favours  should  not  be  granted 
to  a  '  lover.'  "  Cf.  the  proverb  quoted  at  the  end  of  the  homily,  that  this  sort 
of  "  love  "  is  the  "  love  of  the  wolf  for  the  lamb  "  (Phaedrus,  238^-241^). 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  67 

writes  words  and  about  tuning  the  strings  of  his  instrument,  because 
these  are  things  which  he  knows  how  to  do.  Any  man,  or  any  body 
of  men,  will  be  ready  to  let  us  manage  any  kind  of  business  at  our 
own  discretion,  if  only  it  is  believed  that  we  know  how  to  do  it 
better  than  anyone  else.  When  you  know  how  to  handle  an 
affair,  every  one  will  trust  you  to  handle  it ;  no  one  will  interfere 
with  your  action  if  he  can  help  it ;  the  affair  will  really  be  your 
affair  and  you  will  be  free  in  dealing  with  it.  But  our  best  friends 
will  be  the  first  persons  to  check  us  from  having  our  own  way  in 
matters  we  do  not  understand ;  they  will  not  be  our  affair,  and  we 
shall  be  "  under  the  control  of  others,"  "  not  our  own  masters  "  in 
handling  them  (2oga-2iob).  The  reason  is  that  we  are  "  unprofit- 
able/' "  useless  "  (dvw^cActs),  in  matters  we  do  not  understand. 
But  we  cannot  expect  anyone  to  "  love  "  us  for  our  "  uselessness." 
If  we  are  "  wise/1  everybody  will  be  our  friend,  because  we  shall 
be  "  good  and  useful "  ;  if  we  are  not,  even  our  parents  and  relatives 
will  not  be  our  friends.  Thus  the  sample  conversation  is  made  to 
lead  up  to  the  point  that  to  be  happy  and  to  be  free  is  the  same 
thing  as  to  have  true  knowledge.  Socrates  adds,  with  a  sportive 
play  on  words,  that  it  is  absurd,  /xc'ya  <£poi/€tv,  "  to  have  a  high  mind/' 
to  be  conceited,  about  matters  we  do  not  know,  and  where,  there- 
fore, we  haven't  a  "  mind  "  of  our  own  at  all  (ei/  ots  ns  /XT/TTO)  <£poi/«-i). 
This  is,  of  course,  directed  against  the  vanity  of  the  pride  of  family 
which  we  were  told  Hippothales  encouraged  in  Lysis  (ziob-d). 

Some  by-play  follows  here,  and  when  the  argument  is  resumed 
it  is  with  a  different  interlocutor.  This  is  a  device  for  calling  our 
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  main  issues  of  the  dialogue  have  not 
yet  been  raised ;  they  are  to  be  looked  for,  not  in  the  example  of  the 
right  way  of  conversing  with  an  e/xo/Acvos,  but  in  the  apparently  more 
desultory  talk  which  is  to  follow.  Socrates  remarks  that  though  he 
has  always  thought  a  good  friend  the  most  precious  possession  a 
man  can  have,  he  himself  does  not  so  much  as  understand  how  a 
friend  is  acquired.  Young  people  who  have  had  the  good  fortune 
to  form  a  passionate  friendship  in  their  earliest  days  could,  no  doubt, 
enlighten  him  out  of  their  experience.  In  this  way  we  make  the 
transition  to  the  main  problem  of  the  dialogue,  the  question: 
What  is  the  foundation  of  the  personal  attraction  of  one  man  for 
another  ? 

"  If  one  man  loves  another,  which  is  the  friend  of  the  other — the 
lover  of  the  loved,  or  the  loved  of  the  lover,  or  does  this  make  no 
difference  ?  "  I.e.,  where  there  is  a  one-sided  affection  of  A  for  B, 
does  this  entitle  us  to  say  that  A  and  B  are  "  friends  "  ?  If  not, 
does  it  entitle  us  to  call  one  of  them  a  "  friend,"  and,  if  so,  which  is 
the  friend  ?  Are  my  friends  the  persons  who  love  me  or  the  persons 
whom  I  love  ?  The  difficulty  lies  in  the  existence  of  unrequited 
affection.  A  may  be  strongly  attracted  to  B,  while  B  is  indifferent  to 
A,  or  even  repelled  by  him.  Can  we  talk  of  friendship  in  cases  of 
this  kind  ?  Or  should  we  say  that  there  is  not  friendship  unless 
the  attraction  is  reciprocal  ?  It  seems  most  reasonable  to  hold  that 


68  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

the  relation  of  friendship  only  exists  when  there  is  this  reciprocal 
affection.  In  that  case  nothing  is  <£i'Aov  to  you  unless  it  "  loves 
you  back."  To  a  Greek  this  creates  a  linguistic  difficulty.  When 
he  wishes  to  say  that  a  man  is  "  fond  of  "  anything — wine,  for 
example,  or  wisdom — he  has  to  form  a  compound  adjective  with 
<t>i\o  for  its  first  component,  <£t'Xoivos,  <£iAdo-o<£os,  or  the  like,  much 
as  when  a  German  wishes  to  say  that  he  is  fond  of  animals  he  has 
to  call  himself  a  Tierfreund.  Language  thus  seems  to  be  against 
the  view  just  suggested,  but  there  are  undeniable  facts  on  its  side ; 
very  young  children  may  feel  no  love  for  their  parents,  and  may 
feel  actual  "  hate  "  when  they  get  a  whipping,  but  the  parent,  even 
when  he  punishes  the  child,  is  its  "  best  friend."  This  suggests 
that  it  is  being  loved  that  makes  a  friend.  If  you  love  me,  I  am 
your  friend,  whether  I  love  you  or  not  (2125-2130). 

But  a  difficulty  arises  when  we  remember  that,  by  parity  of 
reasoning,  it  should  follow  that  it  is  being  hated  which  makes  a  man 
an  enemy :  (if  you  hate  me,  I  am  your  enemy,  though  my  heart 
may  be  full  of  nothing  but  goodwill  to  you,  or  though  I  may  not 
know  of  your  existence).  This  leads  to  the  paradox  that  when  A 
feels  love  to  B,  but  B  hates  A,  A  is  being  hated  by  a  friend  and  B 
loved  by  an  enemy,  and  thus  the  same  couple  may  be  said  to  be  at 
once  friends  and  enemies,  a  contradiction  in  terms  (213^). 

If  we  revise  our  view  and  say  that  it  is  not  being  loved  but  loving 
that  makes  a  friend,  so  that  he  who  loves  me  is  my  friend,  whatever 
my  attitude  to  him  may  be,  the  same  paradox  equally  follows, 
since  I  may  love  a  person  who  cannot  abide  me.  Since  we  began 
by  setting  aside  the  view  that  reciprocal  affection  is  necessary 
for  friendship,  we  seem  thus  to  have  exhausted  all  the  possibilities, 
and  to  have  shown  that  there  is  no  such  relation  as  friendship 

(2I3C). 

The  absurdity  of  this  shows  that  we  must  have  made  a  false 
start.  We  must  go  over  the  ground  again,  and  we  may  take  a  hint 
from  the  poets,  who  talk  of  friendships  as  "  made  in  heaven/ 
God,  they  say,  "  draws  like  to  its  like."  The  scientific  men  who 
write  cosmologies  also  make  use  of  this  principle  of  "  like  to  like  ' 
to  account  for  the  distribution  of  bodies  in  the  universe.  Perhaps 
this  may  be  the  secret  of  friendship ;  the  drawing  of  A  to  B  may 
be  one  case  of  a  great  universal  principle  which  underlies  the  struc- 
ture of  the  universe.  Yet,  on  closer  examination,  we  see  that 
unfortunately,  so  far  as  the  relations  of  men  are  concerned,  the 
principle  of  "  like  to  like  "  cannot  be,  at  best,  more  than  half  the 
truth.  Bad  men  are  not  made  friends  by  being  "  drawn  together." 
The  more  closely  they  are  drawn  together,  the  more  each  tries  to 
exploit  the  other,  and  the  more  hostile  they  become.  Perhaps  the 
poets  knew  this,  and  really  meant  to  say  that  a  bad  man,  being 
without  principle,  is  an  unstable  and  chameleon-like  being.  He  is 
a  "  shifty  "  fellow,  who  is  perpetually  "  unlike  "  and  at  variance 
with  himself,  and  a  fortiori  unlike  and  at  variance  with  every  one 
else.  Hence  the  poets  perhaps  meant  to  hint  that  only  men  of 


MINOR  SOCRATtC  DIALOGUES  69 

principle,  the  good,  are  really  "  like  "  one  another,  and  that  friend- 
ship can  only  exist  between  the  good  (213^-2140). 

Yet,  when  we  come  to  think  of  it,  there  is  a  worse  difficulty  to 
be  faced.  If  one  thing  can  act  on  another  and  influence  it  in  any 
way,  can  the  two  be  exactly  alike  ?  Must  there  not  be  some  un- 
likeness,  if  there  is  to  be  any  interaction  ?  And  if  one  party  is 
wholly  unaffected  by  the  other,  how  can  the  one  "  care  for  "  (ayairav) 
the  other  ?  What  "  comfort  "  (cTrtKovpt'a)  can  the  one  bring  to  the 
other  ?  And  how  can  you  feel  friendship  for  that  which  you  do  not 
care  for  ?  If  good  men  are  friends,  the  reason  must  be  in  their  good- 
ness, not  in  their  "  likeness  "  (i.e.  they  must  be  good  in  different 
ways,  so  that  their  respective  goodnesses  supplement  each  other, 
2140-2150) .  And  this,  again,  seems  impossible.  For  the  good  man  is 
'  sufficient  for  himself  "  in  proportion  as  he  is  good.  He  therefore 
feels  no  need  of  anything  but  himself.  But  he  who  feels  no  need 
does  not  "  care  for  "  anything,  and  he  who  does  not  care  for  a  thing 
can  have  no  affection  for  it.  By  this  account  there  can  be  no  friend- 
ships bet  ween  the  good  ;  being  "  self-sufficient/'  they  will  not  miss 
one  another  in  absence  or  have  any  occasion  for  one  another's  offices 
when  they  are  together.  On  what  ground,  then,  should  they  "  set 
a  value  "  on  one  another  (2150-6) -1 

Again  we  have  gone  off  on  a  false  track.  Socrates  once  heard 
some  one  say  that  likeness  is  the  source  of  the  keenest  rivalry  and 
opposition,  but  extreme  unlikeness  the  source  of  friendship.  There 
is  poetic  authority  for  this  in  the  Hesiodic  saying  about  "  two  of 
a  trade,"  and,  in  fact,  we  see  that  it  is  so.  The  rich  and  the  poor, 
the  feeble  and  the  strong,  the  ailing  man  and  the  physician,  are 
brought  into  friendly  association  precisely  because  they  are  unlike  ; 
each  needs  the  services  of  the  other  (e.g.  the  rich  man  needs  in- 
dustrious and  honest  servants,  the  poor  need  an  employer  who 
has  wherewithal  to  pay  for  their  industry  ;  the  sick  man  needs  the 
physician's  skill,  the  physician  needs  the  fee  for  it).  In  fact,  said 
this  speaker,  the  attraction  of  unlikes  is  the  key  to  cosmology.2 
Everything  in  nature  needs  to  be  tempered  by  its  opposite :  the 

1  Obviously  we  are  here  raising  a  question  of  vast  significance.  In  its 
extreme  form  it  is  the  question  whether  there  can  be,  as  Christianity  assumes, 
a  love  of  God  for  the  sinner,  or  indeed  whether  God  can  love  anything  but 
Himself.  Socrates  is  raising  a  difficulty,  but  not  solving  it.  It  is  true  that 
the  better  a  man  is,  the  less  does  the  removal  of  friends,  by  accident  or  estrange- 
ment or  death,  wreck  his  life.  In  that  sense  the  good  man  is  "  sufficient  to 
himself." 

*Note  the  way  in  which  it  is  assumed  throughout  the  dialogue  that 
Socrates  is  quite  familiar  with  the  theories  of  the  cosmologists,  and  that  his 
young  friends  will  recognize  allusions  to  them.  This  is  strictly  in  keeping 
with  the  standing  assumption  of  the  Clouds  as  well  as  with  the  autobiographical 
section  of  the  Phaedo.  The  conception  of  0i\Ja  in  particular  as  "  attraction 
of  unlike  for  unlike  "  comes  from  Empedocles  and  the  Sicilian  medicine  which 
goes  back  to  him  ;  the  thought  that  one  opposite  is  the  rpoQj,  "  food  "  or 
"  fuel,"  of  the  other  is  that  of  Heraclitus.  Heracliteanism  was  actually  repre- 
sented at  Athens  in  the  time  of  the  Archidamian  war  by  Cratylus ;  from  the 
speech  of  Eryximachus  in  the  Symposium  we  see  that  the  Sicilian  medical 
ideas  were  at  home  there  also. 


70  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

hot  by  the  cold,  the  dry  by  the  moist,  and  so  on,  for  everything  is 
"  fed  by  "  its  opposite— the  familiar  doctrine  of  Heraclitus.  Thus 
it  would  be  tempting  to  say  that  friendship  is  a  case  of  attraction 
between  opposites.  Yet  if  we  say  that,  we  shall  at  once  fall  an 
easy  prey  to  those  clever  men,  the  dvriXoytKot,  who  love  to  make  a 
man  contradict  himself.  For  they  will  say  that  hatred  and  love 
are  a  pair  of  extreme  opposites,  and  so  are  "  temperance  "  and 
profligacy,  or  good  and  evil.  Our  principle  would  thus  require  us 
to  believe  that  a  man  will  generally  be  most  attracted  to  the  very 
persons  who  detest  him,  that  a  remarkably  temperate  man  will 
make  his  bosom  friend  of  a  notorious  profligate,  and  the  like.  But 
manifestly  these  statements  are  not  true.  So  once  more  we  have 
come  to  no  result.  Neither  simple  "  likeness  "  nor  simple  "  unlike- 
ness  "  can  be  the  secret  of  the  attraction  between  friends  (2150-2160). l 
We  may  attempt  a  more  subtle  explanation.  Perhaps  the  truth 
is  that  in  friendship  one  party  is  good,  the  other  "  neither  good  nor 
bad,"  the  only  alternative  of  which  we  have  yet  taken  no  account. 
(The  suggestion  is  that  the  relation  is  regularly  one  between  the 
possessor  of  some  excellence  and  some  one  who  aspires  to  the 
excellence  but  has  not  yet  attained  it.  The  friend  to  whom  we  are 
drawn  is  what  we  should  like  to  become.)  We  may  illustrate  by  a 
simple  example  from  medicine.  Health  is  a  good  thing,  disease  a 
bad  thing  ;  the  human  body  may  be  said  to  be  neutral,  because  it 
is  capable  of  both.  Now  no  one  cares  about  the  doctor,  so  long  as 
he  is  well.  But  when  he  is  afraid  of  being  ill,  he  welcomes  the  doctor. 
He  does  this  not  when  he  is  at  his  last  gasp,  but  before,  when  he 
apprehends  illness,  i.e.  when  he  is  neither  in  full  health  nor  beyond 
help.  We  may  say  that  this  is  a  case  in  which  "  that  which  is 
neither  good  nor  bad  becomes  friendly  to  that  which  is  good  because 
of  the  presence  of  what  is  evil  "  (2176).  And  here  we  must  make  a 
careful  distinction.  "  Some  things  are  such  as  to  be  themselves 
such  as  that  which  is  present  to  them,  others  are  not  "  (2170).  Thus 
if  the  golden  locks  of  a  boy  are  daubed  with  white  paint,  "  white- 
ness "  is  present  to  them,  but  they  are  not  themselves  white 
(since,  of  course,  the  paint  can  be  washed  off).  But  when  the  boy 
has  become  an  old  man,  "  whiteness  "  will  be  "  present  "  to  his 
hair  in  a  different  sense  ;  his  hair  will  itself  be  white.  (The  only 
object  of  these  remarks  is  to  warn  us  against  supposing  that  when 
Socrates  speaks  of  the  "  presence  "  of  what  is  evil  to  what  is  "  neither 
good  nor  bad,"  he  is  using  the  term  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is 
employed  when  we  explain  the  possession  of  a  predicate  by  a  thing 
by  saying  that  the  corresponding  form  is  "  present "  to  the  thing. 
In  this  sense  mipouo-t'a,  "  presence  "  of  the  form,  is  an  equivalent  for 
ju,c'0c£i5,  the  "  participation  "  of  a  thing  in  the  form,  as  we  see  from 
the  free  use  of  both  expressions  in  the  Phaedo?  It  is  assumed  that 

1  I.e.  it  is  not  true  either  that  any  and  every  "  likeness,"  nor  yet  that  every 
and  any  "  unlikeness,"  can  be  the  foundation  of  friendship. 

8  Cf.  Phaedo,  loprf,  where  Socrates  says  that  we  may  call  the  relation  of 
form  to  sensible  thing  irapowla  or  Kowuvta  or  "  whatever  you  please  "  (efre  STT-Q 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  71 

the  technical  language  of  the  theory  of  forms  is  so  familiar  a  thing 
that  Socrates  needs  to  warn  the  lads  not  to  be  misled  by  it  ;  an 
odd  representation  if  the  whole  theory  had  been  invented  by  Plato 
after  Socrates'  death.) 

The  theory,  then,  works  out  thus.  So  long  as  a  thing  is  not  yet 
itself  evil,  the  "  presence  "  of  evil  makes  it  desire  the  corresponding 
good  ;  when  the  thing  itself  has  become  evil,  it  has  lost  both  desire 
and  affection  for  good.  This  explains  why  neither  those  who  are 
already  wise,  like  the  gods,  nor  those  who  are  simply  ignorant  are 
"  lovers  of  wisdom  "  (^tAdo-o^oi).  "  Philosophers/'  as  we  are  also 
told  by  Diotima  in  the  Symposium,  are  between  the  two  extremes  —  • 
on  the  way  to  wisdom,  but  only  on  the  way.  They  are  aware  of 
their  ignorance  and  anxious  to  get  rid  of  it.  The  theory  naturally 
appeals  to  the  lads,  since  a  boy's  enthusiastic  devotions  are  regularly 
attachments  of  this  kind  to  some  one  older  than  himself  whom  he 
admires  and  wants  to  grow  like  (2i6c-2i8b). 

Still,  on  reflection  Socrates  finds  a  fatal  flaw  in  this  attractive 
solution  of  his  problem.  If  we  revert  to  our  illustration,  we  observe 
that  the  patient  is  attached  to  his  physician  "  because  of  something  " 
and  "  for  the  sake  of  something/'  He  values  the  doctor  because  he 
is  afraid  of  illness  and  for  the  sake  of  health,  and  of  these  disease  is 
bad  and  "  hateful  "  to  him,  health  is  dear  or  welcome  (4>i'Aoi/)  and 
good.  Thus,  if  we  generalize  the  principle,  we  must  state  it  more 
exactly  than  we  did  at  first.  We  must  say,  "  That  which  is  neither 
good  nor  bad  is  friendly  to  that  which  is  good  because  of  that  which  is 
bad  and  hateful,  and  for  the  sake  of  that  which  is  good  and  welcome/' 
Now,  passing  by  all  merely  verbal  points  to  which  exception  might 
be  taken,  this  statement  implies  that  whatever  is  dear,  or  welcome, 
or  friendly  (<£i'Aov)  to  us,  is  welcome  as  a  means  to  something  else, 
just  as  the  physician's  skill  is  welcome  as  a  means  to  keeping  or 
recovering  health.  But  health  itself  is  surely  also  welcome  (</>tAov). 
Are  we  to  say  that  it  too  is  only  welcome  as  a  means  to  something  ? 
Even  if  we  say  this,  sooner  or  later  we  are  bound  to  come  upon 
something  which  is  dear  to  us  simply  on  its  own  account,  and  is 
that  for  the  sake  of  which  all  other  "  dear  "  things  are  dear.  A 
father  whose  son  has  swallowed  hemlock  will  be  eager  to  put  his 
hand  on  a  jar  of  wine.  But  he  only  cares  for  the  jar  because  it 
holds  the  wine,  and  he  only  cares  about  the  wine  because  it  will 
counteract  the  poison.  It  is  his  son,  not  a  sample  of  Attic  pottery 
or  of  a  particular  vintage,  about  whom  he  is  really  concerned.  So 
long  as  a  thing  or  person  is  only  "  dear  "  to  us  for  the  sake  of 
something  else,  it  is  only  a  J  'aeon  de  parler  to  call  it  "  dear."  What  is 
really  "  dear  "  to  us  is  "  just  that  upon  which  all  our  so-called 

affections  terminate  "  (cVcii^o  avro  ck  o  irao-at  avrat  at  A.€yo/xo'cu  <t>t\tai 

T€\€vrG>(riv,  22ob).     (Thus  the  question  about  the  secret  sources 


5fy  Kal  flrwsf  Trpoffycvo^vrj).  Elsewhere  in  the  dialogue  the  form  is  said  to 
"  occupy  "  (K<LTt\w,  a  military  metaphor)  the  thing,  the  thing  to  "  receive  " 
(Mxc<rOai,  again  a  military  metaphor)  or  to  "  partake  in  "  (furtxtty)  the 
form. 


72  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

of  affection  has  brought  us  face  to  face  with  the  conception 
of  the  summum  bonum,  which  is  the  source  of  all  secondary  and 
derivative  goodness,  2186-2206.) 

We  have  thus  eliminated  from  our  last  statement  the  clause 
"  for  the  sake  of  that  which  is  good  and  welcome. "  Will  the  rest 
of  the  formula  stand  criticism  ?  Is  it  true  that  what  we  "  care  for  " 
is  "good"  and  that  we  care  for  it  "  because  of  "  (to  escape  from) 
evil  ?  If  the  second  of  these  statements  is  sound,  it  should  follow 
that  in  a  world  where  there  were  no  evils,  we  should  no  longer  care 
about  anything  good,  any  more  than  we  should  value  medicine  in  a 
world  where  there  was  no  disease.  If  this  is  so,  then  our  attitude 
to  the  supreme  object  of  all  our  affections  is  unique.  We  care 
about  the  secondary  objects  of  affection  "  for  the  sake  of  something 
welcome  to  us  "  (<£t'Aov),  i.e.  because  they  are  means  to  this  primary 
object ;  but  we  must  say  of  the  primary  object  of  all  affection  itself 
that  we  care  for  it  "  for  the  sake  of  the  unwelcome  "  (fyOpov),  if 
we  should  really  value  it  no  longer  in  a  world  where  there  were  no 
evils.  Perhaps  the  question,  as  we  put  it,  is  a  foolish  one,  for  who 
can  tell  what  might  or  might  not  happen  in  such  a  world  ?  But 
our  experience  of  the  world  we  live  in  teaches  us  as  much  as  this. 
To  feel  hungry  is  sometimes  good  for  us,  sometimes  harmful. 
Suppose  we  could  eliminate  all  the  circumstances  in  which  being 
hungry  is  harmful,  hunger  would  still  exist,  and  so  long  as  hunger 
existed  we  should  "  care  for  "  the  food  which  satisfies  it.  (Even 
in  a  socialist  Utopia  where  every  one  was  sure  of  sufficient  food, 
and  every  one  too  healthy  and  virtuous  to  be  greedy,  men  would 
still  have  "  wholesome  appetite  "  and  care  about  their  dinners.) 
This  is  enough  to  dispose  of  the  theory  that  we  only  care  about  good 
as  an  escape  from  evil  (2206-2210). 

Thus  our  formula  seems  to  have  gone  completely  by  the  board, 
and  the  course  of  the  argument  has  suggested  a  new  one.  It  seems 
now  that  the  cause  of  all  attachment  (<f>i\ia)  is  desire  (eVi0u/u'a), 
and  that  we  must  say  "  what  a  man  desires  is  dear  to  him  and  when 
he  is  desiring  it."  (Thus  we  arrive  at  a  purely  relative  definition 
of  TO  <f>i\ov,  probably  intentionally  modelled  on  the  famous  relativist 
doctrine  of  Protagoras  that  "  what  a  man  thinks  true  is  true — for 
him,  and  so  long  as  he  thinks  it  so/1)  We  may  proceed  to  develop 
this  thought  a  little  farther.  A  creature  which  desires  regularly 
desires  that  of  which  it  is  "  deficient  "  (cvSofs).  So  we  may  say 
that  "  the  deficient  "  (TO  frSccs)  is  "  attached  "  (<£i'W)  to  that 
of  which  it  is  "  deficient."  And  deficiency  means  being  "  deprived  " 
of  something.  (The  "  deficient  "  creature  is  "  defective  "  ;  it  is 
without  something  it  must  have  in  order  to  be  fully  itself.) 
"  Passion  "  (<po>?),  friendship,  desire,  then,  are  all  felt  for  something 
which  "belongs  to  one's  self"  (TO  OIKCIOV).  Friends  or  lovers, 
thus,  if  they  really  are  what  they  profess  to  be,  are  oiKeiot  to  one 
another  ;  they  "  belong  to  "  one  another ;  each  is,  as  we  might  say, 
a  "  part  of  the  other  "  in  "  soul,  or  temper  or  body  "  (*aTa  TO  TT}$ 
rj  cTSos).  A  thing  for  which  we  feel  affection 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  78 

is  then  something  <£vo-ct  oi/ceiW  to  ourselves,  "  our  very  own/'  It 
follows  that  since  each  party  to  the  affection  is  thus  "  the  very 
own  "  of  the  other  party,  affection  must  be  reciprocal,  and  Socrates 
is  careful  to  apply  this  lesson  by  adding  that  "  a  genuine  lover  " 
must  be  one  who  has  his  love  reciprocated.  (This  is  plainly  in- 
tended as  a  comment  on  the  current  perversions  of  "  romantic  " 
passion.  Reciprocated  affection  was  the  last  thing  the  pervert 
could  expect  from  his  7rcu6W,  a  point  of  which  we  shall  hear  more 
in  the  Phaedrus.  The  fashionable  epacmfc,  it  is  meant,  is  not 
worthy  of  the  name  of  a  lover  at  all  (221^-2226).) 

Formally  the  dialogue  has  ended  in  a  circle,  or  seems  to  have 
done  so.  If  TO  ot/c€tov,  "  what  belongs  to  one's  self/'  is  also  TO  ofiotov, 
"  what  is  like  "  one's  self,  we  have  contradicted  our  earlier  con- 
clusion that  friendship  is  not  based  on  "  likeness/'  If  we  try  to 
escape  from  the  contradiction  by  distinguishing  between  TO  ot/cetov 
and  TO  o/xotov,  it  is  attractive  to  say  that  all  good  things  are  oiVeta 
to  one  another  (in  virtue  of  their  common  goodness),  all  bad  things 
otKcta  in  virtue  of  their  badness,  and  all  "  neutral  "  things  again 
OIKCUI.  But  this  would  contradict  our  decision  that  friendship  is 
impossible  between  the  bad.  Or  if  we  identify  TO  OIKCIOV,  what  is 
one's  own,  with  TO  ayaOov,  one's  good,  we  should  have  to  say  that 
friendship  is  only  possible  between  two  men  who  are  both  good, 
and  this  again  would  contradict  another  of  our  results  (222b-e). 

In  ending  in  this  apparently  hopeless  result,  the  Lysis  resembles 
a  much  more  famous  dialogue,  the  Parmenides.  In  neither  case 
need  we  suppose  that  Plato's  real  intention  is  to  leave  us  merely 
befogged.  The  way  in  which  the  thought  that  what  is  most  near 
and  intimate  to  each  of  us  (TO  otVctor)  is  the  good  is  kept  back  to 
the  very  end  of  the  conversation  suggests  that  this — that  man  as 
such  has  such  a  "  natural  good,"  and  that  it  is  the  one  thing  worth 
caring  for  in  life — is  the  thought  he  means  the  discussion  to  leave 
in  our  minds.  If  we  go  back  to  the  various  proposed  explanations 
of  the  secret  of  friendship  with  this  thought  in  our  minds,  it  may 
occur  to  us  that  they  do  not,  after  all,  formally  contradict  one 
another.  The  common  bond  between  the  parties  to  associations 
which  are  all  correctly  called  "  friendships  "  may  be  different  in 
different  cases.  Or  rather,  the  bond  between  the  "  friends  "  may 
in  every  case  be  association  in  the  pursuit  of  some  "  good,"  but 
goods  are  of  very  different  levels  of  value,  and  "  friendships  "  may 
exhibit  the  same  variety  of  levels.  Thus  it  may  be  that  the  full 
and  perfect  type  of  friendship  can  only  be  based  on  common  pursuit 
of  the  true  supreme  good,  and  in  that  case  friendship  in  the  fullest 
sense  will  only  be  possible  between  "  the  good."  Yet  there  may 
be  associations  between  men  founded  on  the  common  pursuit  of 
some  good  inferior  to  the  highest  (e.g.  the  common  pursuit  of  the 
"  business  advantage  "  of  both  parties,  or  the  common  pursuit  of 
amusement  or  recreation).  These  would  be  "  friendships  "  but  of 
a  lower  type,  and  it  may  quite  well  be  the  case,  e.g.,  that  a  good  man 
and  a  bad  one.  or  even  two  bad  men  may  be  associated  in  this 


74  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

inferior  sort  of  "  friendship."  Such,  at  least,  are  the  lines  on  which 
Aristotle  in  the  Ethics  develops  a  theory  of  friendship  in  which  all 
the  conflicting  points  of  view  of  our  dialogue  are  taken  up,  and  each 
is  found  to  have  its  relative  justification. 


See  further  : 

RITTER,  C. — Platon,  i.  284-297  (Laches) ,  343-359  (Charmides\ 

497-504  (Lysis). 
RAEDER,  H. — Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung,  95-99  (Laches 

Charmides),  153-158  (Lysis). 
STOCK,  ST.  GEORGE. — Friendship  (Greek  and  Roman)  in  E.R.E. 

vol.  vi. 


CHAPTER   V 

MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES:  CRATYLUS, 
EUTHYDEMUS 

BOTH  the  dialogues  to  be  considered  in  this  chapter  have 
something  of  the  character  of  "occasional  works."  Both 
are  strongly  marked  by  a  broad  farcical  humour,  which  is 
apparently  rather  Socratic  than  Platonic  ;  we  meet  it  again,  e.g., 
in  the  comic  fury  of  the  satire  in  some  parts  of  the  Republic,  but  it 
is  quite  unlike  the  grave  and  gentle  malice  of  such  works  as  the 
Parmenides  and  Sophistes.  The  mirth,  especially  in  the  Euthydemus, 
has  something  of  the  rollicking  extravagance  of  Aristophanes,  and, 
according  to  the  Symposium,  there  really  was  a  side  to  Socrates 
which  made  him  congenial  company  for  the  great  comic  poet. 
(Both  men  could  relish  wild  fun,  and  both  could  enjoy  a  laugh  at 
themselves.)  In  neither  of  our  two  dialogues  is  the  professed  main 
purpose  directly  ethical,  though  the  Socratic  convictions  about  the 
conduct  of  life  incidentally  receive  an  impressive  exposition  in 
the  Euthydemus.  It  seems  impossible  to  say  anything  more  precise 
about  the  date  of  composition  of  either  than  that  stylistic  con- 
siderations show  that  both  must  be  earlier  than  the  great  dramatic 
dialogues,  Protagoras,  Symposium,  Phaedo,  Republic.  Since  the 
Cratylus  is  a  directly  enacted  drama  with  only  three  personages, 
while  the  Euthydemus  is  a  reported  dialogue  with  numerous  per- 
sonages and  a  vigorously  delineated  "  background,"  this  second  is 
presumably  the  more  mature  work  of  the  two. 

Cratylus. — The  personages  of  the  dialogue  other  than  Socrates 
are  two,  Hermogenes  and  Cratylus.  Hennogenes  is  well  known 
to  us  as  a  member  of  Socrates1  entourage.  Both  he  and  Cratylus 
figured  in  the  Telauges  of  Aeschines,1  where  Socrates  was  apparently 
made  to  criticize  the  squalor  affected  by  the  extreme  Orphic  and 
Pythagorist  spirituali.  We  learn  from  Plato  (Phaedo  596)  that 
Hennogenes  was  present  at  the  death  of  Socrates.  Xenophon 
mentions  him  several  times  and  professes  to  owe  some  of  his  in- 
formation to  him.  He  was  a  base-born  brother  of  the  famous, 
or  notorious,  "  millionaire  "  Callias,  son  of  Hipponicus,  the  muni- 
ficent patron  of  "sophists"  (Crat.  391^),  but  himself  poor,  and 
apparently  on  no  very  good  terms  with  his  brother.  As  Callias 
was  connected  by  marriage  with  Pericles,  the  appearance  of  him 
and  his  brother  among  the  associates  of  Socrates  is  one  of  the  many 

1  See  E.R.E.,  art.  SOCRATES,  and  H.  Dittmar's  Aeschines  von  Sphettus» 
213-244.  He  and  Callias  are  prominent  figures  in  Xenophon's  Symposium- 


76  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

indications  that  the  philosopher  stood  in  early  life  in  close  relations 
with  the  Periclean  circle.  Of  Cratylus  we  apparently  know  only 
what  Aristotle  has  told  us  in  his  Metaphysics,1  that — as  we  could 
have  inferred  from  our  dialogue  itself — he  believed  in  the  Heraclitean 
doctrine  of  universal  "  flux/'  and  that  he  carried  his  conviction  of 
the  impermanence  of  everything  to  the  length  of  refusing  to  name 
things,  preferring  to  point  at  them  with  his  fingers.  (The  use  of  a 
significant  name  would  suggest  that  the  thing  named  really  had 
some  sort  of  relatively  permanent  character.)  But  one  may 
reasonably  suspect  the  story  of  being  no  more  than  an  invention  of 
some  wag  which  Aristotle  has  perhaps  taken  too  seriously.2  Accord- 
ing to  Aristotle,  Plato  had  been  "familiar"  with  him,  and  derived 
from  him  his  rooted  conviction  that  sensible  things,  because  of  their 
complete  impermanence,  cannot  be  the  objects  of  scientific 
knowledge. 

It  is  not  clear  whether  Aristotle  means  to  place  this  connexion 
of  Plato  with  Cratylus  before  or  after  the  death  of  Socrates,  but 
presumably  he  means  that  it  was  before  that  event,  since  he  says 
that  it  belonged  to  Plato's  youth.  The  fact  is  likely  enough,  since 
Cratylus  seems  to  have  been  one  of  Socrates'  associates.  (We  must 
not  suppose  Aristotle  to  mean  that  when  Plato  associated  with  him 
he  had  not  yet  met  Socrates  ;  the  close  relations  of  Socrates  with 
Critias,  Charmides,  Adimantus,  Glaucon,  show  that  Plato  must 
have  been  acquainted  with  him  from  early  childhood.)  We  need 
not  believe,  and  we  can  hardly  believe,  that  the  influence  of  Cratylus 
really  counted  for  much  in  determining  Plato's  own  thought ;  he 
would  not  need  any  special  master  to  inform  him  that  sensible 
things  are  mutable.  Most  probably  Aristotle,  who  only  knew 
Plato  in  Plato's  old  age,  has  exaggerated  the  importance  of  an 
acquaintance  which  had  really  no  great  significance.  In  any  case, 
the  tone  of  the  whole  dialogue  requires  us  to  suppose  that  both 
Cratylus  and  Hermogenes  are  youngish  men,  decidedly  younger 
than  Socrates.8  The  "  dramatic  date  "  of  the  conversation  is 
hardly  indicated  with  certainty.  If  we  may  suppose,  what  seems 
to  me  most  likely,  that  the  "  curfew  regulations  "  in  Aegina,  alluded 
to  at  433a,  were  connected  with  the  Athenian  military  occupation 
of  the  island  in  431,  this  would  suggest  a  date  not  too  long  after 
the  beginning  of  the  Archidamian  war,  when  Socrates  would  be  in 
the  early  forties,  and  the  other  two  perhaps  twenty  years  younger. 

1  Aristotle,  Met.  9870  32,  loioa  12. 

2  Since  Cratylus  appears  in  our  dialogue  as  holding  that  many  of  the  names 
by  which  we  actually  call  things  are  not  their  "  real  names,"  the  point  of  the 
jest  may  have  been  less  recondite.     It  may  lie  in  his  uncertainty  what  the 
"  real  name  "  of  a  given  thing  is.     A  good  deal  of  fun  might  obviously  be 
got  out  of  this,  e.g.,  in  a  comedy. 

•This  was  certainly  true  of  Hermogenes,  since  his  elder  brother  Callias 
was  still  alive  and  active  in  public  affairs  at  a  date  when  Socrates,  if  he  had 
still  been  living,  would  have  been  a  centenarian.  The  active  career  of  Callias 
hardly  begins  until  the  end  of  the  fifth  century.  The  youth  of  Cratylus  is 
expressly  remarked  on  by  Socrates  at  the  end  of  the  dialogue  (440^,  £ri  -ydp 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  77 

This  is  further  borne  out  by  the  reference  (386^)  to  Euthydemus 
as  a  person  whose  views  are  of  interest.  We  shall  see  below  that 
the  Euthydemus  requires  to  be  dated  at  latest  not  after  421  or  420. l 

The  ostensible  subject  of  discussion  is  the  origin  of  language. 
Are  names  significant  by  "nature"  (<£vcm),  in  virtue  of  some 
intrinsic  appropriateness  of  the  verbal  sign  to  the  thing  signified, 
or  only  significant  "  by  convention  "  (VO/AW),  i.e.  arbitrary  imposi- 
tion ?  Cratylus  takes  the  first  view ;  there  is  a  natural  "  Tightness  " 
of  names  which  is  one  and  the  same  for  every  one,  Greek  or  barbarian 
(3836).  If  you  call  a  thing  by  any  other  name  than  its  own  in- 
trinsically "  right  "  name,  you  are  not  naming  it  at  all,  even  though 
you  are  using  for  it  the  word  which  every  one  else  uses.  Hermogenes 
is  on  the  side  of  "  convention  "  or  arbitrary  imposition  ;  he  holds 
that  whatever  we  are  accustomed  to  call  anything  is,  for  that 
reason,  the  name  of  the  thing.  The  dispute  is  referred  to  Socrates, 
who  is  careful  to  explain  that  he  cannot  decide  the  question  with 
expert  knowledge,  as  he  has  never  attended  the  expensive  fifty- 
drachma  lecture  of  Prodicus  on  the  right  use  of  language  ;  he  can 
only  contribute  the  suggestions  of  his  native  mother- wit  (384&).a 

The  issue  under  consideration  is  thus  only  one  aspect  of  the 
famous  "  sophistic  "  antithesis  between  "  nature  "  and  "  social 
usage  "  which  we  know  to  have  been  the  great  controversial  issue 
of  the  Periclean  age.  The  fancy  that  if  we  can  only  discover  the 
original  names  of  things,  our  discovery  will  throw  a  flood  of  light  on 
the  realities  named,  seems  to  recur  periodically  in  the  history  of 
human  thought.  There  are  traces  of  it  in  Heraclitus  and  Herodotus  ; 
in  the  age  of  Pericles  it  was  reinforced  by  the  vogue  of  allegorical 
interpretations  of  Homer,  which  depended  largely  on  fanciful 
etymologies.  Much  of  the  dialogue  is  taken  up  by  a  long  series  of 
such  etymologies  poured  forth  by  Socrates  under  what  he  himself 
declares  to  be  "  possession  "  by  some  strange  personality.  It  is 

1  Reference  is  made  several  times  in  the  Cratylus  to  a  certain  Euthyphro 
who  exhibited  the  phenomena  of  "possession"  (tvQov<ria<Tfji6s) .     This  may  be 
the  same  person  who  gives  his  name  to  the  dialogue  Euthyphro,  and  was 
attempting  to  prosecute  his  own  father  for  murder  in  the  spring  of  the  year  399. 
There  is  no  difficulty  about  the  chronology  if  we  suppose  that  at  that  date 
Euthyphro,  whose  manner  is  that  of  an  elderly  rather  than  a  very  young 
man,  was  a  year  or  two  over  fifty,  and  his  father  seventy-five  or  more.     But 
the  identification,  though  accepted  by  eminent  scholars,  seems  precarious. 
There  is  nothing  about  the  religious  fanatic  Euthyphro  to  suggest  that  he  was 
subject  to  "  possession."     It  is  true  that  Socrates  playfully  calls  him  a  p&vrit 
(Euthyph.  3^),  but  tiavrtK-fi  had  many  forms. 

2  It  is  not  suggested  that  it  was  poverty  which  prevented  Socrates  from 
attending  the  lecture.     It  seems  clear  that  Socrates  was  not  really  poor  until 
his  middle  age.     As  Burnet  has  said,  the  way  in  which  the  comic  poets  dwelt 
on  his  poverty  when  they  attacked  him  in  423,  suggests  that  his  losses  were  then 
fairly  recent.     In  the  Protagoras,  which  takes  us  back  before  the  Archidamian 
war,  he  appears  to  have  a  house  of  his  own  with  a  courtyard,  and  at  least  one 
servant  (3106,  31  ia)t  and  speaks  of  himself  in  a  w*ay  which  implies  that  he  could 
at  need  have  helped  to  pay  Protagoras  on  behalf  of  his  young  friend  (31  id, 
£y<6  TC  KO.I  <rb  Apytpiov  tKeivy  iwrBbv  trotpoi  Mpeffa  reXeir  Ivtp  ffov).         Hence  the 
absence  of  any  reference  to  poverty  is  perhaps  an  indication  of  "  dramatic 
date." 


78  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

plain  that  we  are  not  to  find  the  serious  meaning  of  the  dialogue 
here,  especially  as,  after  delighting  Cratylus  by  a  pretended  demon- 
stration that  language  supports  the  Heraclitean  philosophy,  since 
the  names  of  all  things  good  contain  references  to  movement,  and 
the  names  of  all  bad  things  to  arrest  of  movement,  he  turns  round 
and  produces  equally  ingenious  and  far-fetched  etymological 
grounds  for  supposing  that  the  original  "  giver  of  names  "  must 
have  held  the  Eleatic  doctrine  that  motion  is  an  illusion,  since  all 
the  names  of  good  things  appear  to  denote  rest  or  stoppage  of 
motion.  Obviously,  we  are  to  take  all  this  as  good-humoured 
satire  on  attempts  to  reach  a  metaphysic  by  way  of  "  philology  "  ; 
as  far  as  etymologies  go,  a  little  ingenuity  will  enable  us  to  get 
diametrically  opposite  results  out  of  the  same  data. 

The  real  purpose  of  the  dialogue,  so  far  as  it  has  any  purpose 
beyond  the  preservation  of  a  picture  of  Socrates  in  one  of  his  more 
whimsical  moods,  is  to  consider  not  the  origin  of  language,  but  its 
use  and  functions.  If  we  consider  the  purposes  which  spoken 
language  subserves,  we  shall  see  that  if  it  is  to  be  adequate  for  those 
purposes,  it  must  conform  to  certain  structural  principles.  Hence 
the  formula  of  the  partisans  of  "  convention  "  that  the  "  right 
name  "  of  anything  is  just  whatever  we  agree  to  call  it,  makes 
language  a  much  more  arbitrary  thing  than  it  really  is.  A  "  right 
name  "  will  be  a  name  which  adequately  fulfils  all  the  uses  for 
which  a  name  is  required,  and  thus  one  man's  or  one  city's  voca- 
bulary may  name  things  more  rightly,  because  more  adequately, 
than  that  of  another.  But  so  long  as  the  purpose  for  which  names 
are  required  is  adequately  discharged  by  any  vocabulary,  things 
will  be  rightly  "  named "  in  the  vocabulary.  The  names  for 
things  will  not  have  the  same  syllables  and  letters  in  Greek  and  in 
a  "  barbarian  "  language,  but  if  the  purposes  for  which  speech  is 
required  are  equally  well  achieved  in  both  languages,  both  names 
will  be  equally  "  true  "  names  for  things.  So  the  partisans  of 
Averts,  who  hold,  like  Cratylus,  that  there  is  one  particular  com- 
bination of  sounds  which  is  the  one  and  only  "  right  name  "  of  a 
given  thing,  are  also  only  partly  right.  They  are  right  in  thinking 
that  the  right  assignment  of  names  is  not  arbitrary,  but  depends  on 
principles  of  some  kind,  and  that  a  nomenclature  which  "  every  one 
agrees  in  using  "  may,  for  all  that,  be  a  bad  one  ;  they  are  wrong  in 
thinking  that  if  a  given  succession  of  sounds  is  a  "  right  name  "  for 
a  certain  thing,  no  other  such  combination  can  be  its  "  right  name." 
The  Cratylus  is  thus  not  so  much  concerned  with  the  "  origin  "  of 
language,  as  with  the  principles  of  philosophical  and  scientific 
nomenclature,  though  it  contains  many  incidental  sound  observa- 
tions about  those  analogies  between  the  different  movements  of 
articulation  and  natural  processes  which  seem  to  underlie  the 
"  onomatopoeic  "  element'in  language,  as  well  as  about  the  various 
influences  which  lead  to  linguistic  change. 

Hermogenes,  at  the  outset,  adopts  an  extreme  form  of  the  view 
that  language  is  wholly  arbitrary.  If  I  like  to  call  a  thing  by  a 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  79 

certain  name  that  is  its  name  for  me,  even  in  the  case  of  my  inverting 
the  usage  of  every  one  else.  Thus,  if  I  call  "  horse  "  what  every 
one  else  calls  ''man/'  "horse"  really  is  my  private  name,  the 
name  in  my  private  language  (tSi'a,  3850)  for  that  being,  as  truly  as 
"man"  is  its  name  "in  the  language  of  the  public"  (8r//xoo-ta) . 
Now  this  assertion  raises  a  very  large  question.  A  name  is  a  part, 
an  ultimate  part,  of  a  \oyos  or  statement.  Statements  may  be  true 
or  they  may  be  false  ;  they  are  true  if  they  speak  of  realities  (ovra) 
as  they  really  are,  false  if  they  speak  of  them  otherwise.  But  if  a 
whole  "  discourse  "  or  "  statement  "  may  be  either  true  or  false, 
we  must  say  the  same  about  its  parts.  Every  part  of  a  true  state- 
ment must  be  true,  and  thus,  since  there  are  true  and  false  Xoyot, 
there  must  be  true  and  false  names  (385^).  This  looks  like  a  fallacy, 
but  we  shall  see  that  it  is  not  really  one  if  we  note  carefully  the  use 
Socrates  makes  of  the  distinction.  His  point  is  the  sound  one, 
that  language  is  a  social  activity ;  it  is  primarily  an  instrument  of 
communication.  A  "name"  given  by  me  privately  to  something 
which  everybody  else  calls  differently  does  not  discharge  this 
function  ;  it  misleads,  is  a  bad  instrument  for  its  purpose.  This 
is  what  Socrates  means  by  calling  it  a  "  false  "  name.  It  is  a 
spurious  substitute  for  the  genuine  article  which  would  do  the  work 
required. 

This  disposes  of  the  suggestion  of  a  purely  "  private  "  language 
peculiar  to  the  individual,  but  still  it  may  be  reasonably  main- 
tained that  at  any  rate  though  the  names  "  barbarians  "  give  to 
things  are  not  the  same  as  those  used  by  Greeks,  they  are  just  as 
much  the  "  true  names  "  of  things  as  the  Greek  words  (385^). 
I.e.  we  may  urge  that  the  plurality  of  languages  shows  that  language 
is  an  arbitrary  thing,  though  it  depends  on  the  arbitrium  of  a  group, 
not  of  a  single  man.  But  if  names  are  arbitrary,  is  the  reality 
(oucn'a)  of  the  things  named  equally  arbitrary  ?  If  a  thing's  name 
is  just  whatever  some  one  likes  to  call  it,  is  the  thing  itself  just 
whatever  some  one  thinks  it  to  be  ?  Protagoras  actually  held  that 
everything  really  is  for  any  one  just  what  he  thinks  it  to  be,  so  long 
as  he  thinks  it  to  be  so,  and  Hermogenes  reluctantly  admits  that  he 
sometimes  feels  driven  to  accept  the  view,  strange  as  it  is.  How- 
ever, we  may  perhaps  dismiss  it  with  the  remark  that  it  leaves  no 
room  for  distinguishing  wiser  and  less  wise  men,  since  it  says  that 
every  one's  beliefs  are  true — for  him  and  no  one  else,  and  just  as 
long  as  he  holds  them.  But  it  seems  the  most  patent  of  facts  that 
some  men  are  good,  and  therefore  wise,  and  some  wicked  and  there- 
fore unwise.  Yet  we  can  hardly  go  to  the  opposite  extreme  with 
Euthydemus,  who  says  that  all  statements  whatever  are  true,  always 
and  "  for  every  one."  This  would  equally  lead  to  the  view  that 
there  is  no  distinction  between  the  virtuous  and  the  vicious,  and 
consequently  none  between  wisdom  and  the  lack  of  it *  (386^). 

1  Since,  if  Euthydemus  is  right,  you  can  always  truly  predicate  both  virtue 
and  vice  of  any  subject  whatever.  Formally,  Protagoras  says  that  a  proposition 
is  true  only  when  it  is  being  believed  by  some  one ;  Euthydemus,  that  what  we 


80  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Now  if  neither  of  these  doctrines  can  be  true,  "  objects  "  (ra 
Trpay/xara)  clearly  have  some  determinate  real  character  of  their 
own  (overlay  rtVa  pifianov)  which  is  independent  of  our  "  fancy  "  ; 
and  if  this  is  so  "  activities  "  (7rpaf«s)  will  also  have  a  "  nature  " 
or  "  reality  "  ($v'crii>)  of  their  own,  since  "  activities  "  are  one  form 
of  "  object  "  (lv  rt  €1809  Tu)i/  oi/rujf,  3860).  Hence,  if  we  want  to 
perform  an  act,  we  cannot  do  it  in  any  way  and  with  any  instrument 
we  please.  We  must  do  it  in  the  way  prescribed  by  the  nature  of 
the  object  we  are  acting  on,  and  with  the  "naturally  proper" 
instrument  (<5  irtyvKt).  For  example,  in  cleaving  wood,  if  we  are 
to  succeed,  we  must  split  the  wood  "  with  the  grain  "  and  we  must 
use  a  naturally  suitable  implement.  Speaking  of  things  and  naming 
them  is  an  activity  (xrpa&s),  and  what  we  have  just  said  applies 
therefore  to  naming.  If  we  want  to  name  things  we  must  name 
them  not  just  as  the  fancy  takes  us,  but  "  as  the  nature  of  the 
objects  permits  and  with  the  instrument  it  permits."  The  instru- 
ment or  tool  for  naming  things  is,  of  course,  the  name  itself.  We 
may  define  a  name  as  "  an  instrument  by  which  we  inform  one 
another  about  realities  and  discriminate  between  them  "  (3886-0, 

oi/o/xa  apa  SiSacrKoAiKov  TI  eamv  opyavov  Kat  Sia/cpmKov  rr)s  oucrtas). 
In  all  the  crafts  (weaving,  for  example)  one  craftsman  (e.g.  the 
weaver)  has  to  make  a  proper  use  of  some  implement  which  has 
been  properly  made  by  some  other  craftsman  (e.g.  the  carpenter, 
who  makes  the  wooden  implements  which  the  weaver  uses).  Now 
from  our  definition  of  a  name  we  see  at  once  who  is  the  expert  crafts- 
man who  "  uses  "  names  as  his  tools  ;  he  is  the  "  teacher  "  or 
"instructor"  (6  SiSao-KaAi/cds).  But  who  is  the  other  expert  who 
makes  the  tools  which  the  teacher  uses  ?  According  to  the  very 
theory  from  which  we  started,  they  are  made  by  vd/xos,  "  social 
usage."  Hence  we  may  say  that  they  are  the  manufacture  of  the 
"  legislator,"  the  institutor  of  social  usage.  And  legislation  is 
not  work  that  anyone  can  do,  "  unskilled  labour  "  ;  it  is  "  skilled 
labour,"  work  for  an  expert,  or  professor  of  a  TC'XVT/.  Clearly  then, 
it  is  not  correct  to  say  that  anyone  whatever  can  arbitrarily  give 
names  to  things  (386^-3890).  (Thus  the  result  so  far  is  that,  since 
the  function  of  language  is  the  accurate  communication  of  know- 
ledge about  things,  the  vocabulary  of  "  social  usage  "  will  only  be 
satisfactory  when  it  supplies  a  nomenclature  which  corresponds  to 
the  real  agreements  and  differences  between  the  things  named.) 

Well,  what  would  the  expert  in  establishing  usages  have  before 
his  mind's  eye  in  assigning  names  ?  We  may  see  the  answer  by 
considering  the  way  in  which  the  carpenter  works  when  he  makes  a 
KcpKts  for  the  weaver.  He  "  keeps  his  eyes  on  "  the  work  the 
Kcpjct's  is  meant  to  do  in  weaving  —  its  function.  If  one  of  his 
articles  breaks  while  he  is  making  it,  of  course  he  makes  a  fresh  one, 
and  in  making  it  he  does  not  "  fix  his  eye  "  on  the  spoilt  and  broken 

u's  but  on  the  form  (e!8os)  with  an  eye  to  which  he  had  been 


all  disbelieve  is  as  true  as  what  we  all  believe.     Both  positions  make  science 
impossible. 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  81 

making  the  one  which  broke  (3896).  It  is  this  "model"  /cc/m's, 
kept  by  the  carpenter  before  his  mind's  eye  in  making  all  the 
different  wooden  Kcpja'&s,  which  best  deserves  the  name  of  avro 
o  com/  K6/3Kt9,  "  just  the  Kepi's,  "  the  K€/3/as  and  nothing  else  "  (ib.). 

There  are  three  points  to  be  got  hold  of  here,  (i)  The  carpenter 
cannot  give  the  tools  he  makes  for  the  weaver  just  any  shape  he 
pleases  ;  the  shape  or  form  of  the  Ke/Ws  is  determined,  independently 
of  anyone's  fancy,  by  the  work  it  is  meant  to  do.  (2)  Strictly 
speaking,  when  the  carpenter  is  said  in  common  parlance  to  make 
a  K(pKi<s,  what  he  does  is  to  put  the  form,  which  is  the  "  natural  " 
or  "  real  "  KC^KIS,  into  the  wood  on  which  he  is  working.1  (3)  And 
though  the  shape  of  a  KC/WS  is  something  fixed,  it  will  be  repro- 
duced by  the  carpenter  in  different  material,  according  as  the 
implement  is  wanted  for  weaving  different  sorts  of  cloth  (e.g.,  you 
would  need  the  wood  to  be  harder  for  work  on  some  kinds  of  material 
than  on  others).  We  may  transfer  these  results  to  the  case  of  the 
"  legislator  "  who  makes  names.  The  letters  and  syllables,  like 
the  wood  of  the  carpenter,  are  the  material  into  which  he  has  to 
put  "  the  real  name  "  (eVeu/o  o  co-rtv  ovofjia).  Differences  in  the 
material  will  not  matter,  in  this  case  any  more  than  in  the  other, 
so  long  as  the  resulting  instrument  answers  its  purpose.  This  is 
why,  though  the  sounds  of  a  Greek  word  and  those  of  the  "  bar- 
barian "  equivalent  may  be  very  different,  each  is  a  true  name  if 
it  discharges  the  function  of  a  name  adequately  (3896-3900).  (It 
should  be  noted  that  all  through  this  passage  the  technical  language 
of  the  doctrine  of  forms  is  used  without  explanation.  Plato 
assumes  that  Hermogenes  and  Cratylus  may  be  counted  on  to  know 
all  about  it.  To  my  own  mind,  it  is  just  the  frequency  with  which 
this  assumption  is  made,  apparently  without  any  consciousness 
that  it  calls  for  any  justification,  which  is  the  strongest  reason  for 
refusing  to  believe  that  the  whole  doctrine  was  "  developed  "  by 
Plato  or  anyone  else  after  the  death  of  Socrates.) 

Who,  then,  decides  whether  a  given  piece  of  wood  has  really 
received  the  "  form  of  Kepi's,"  as  it  should  have  done  ?  Not  the 
expert  who  makes  the  implement  (the  carpenter),  but  the  expert 
who  will  have  to  use  it  (the  weaver).  And  this  is  a  general  rule. 
The  man  who  makes  an  implement  must  "  take  his  specifications  " 
from  the  man  who  is  to  use  it.  Thus  we  arrive  at  a  distinction 

1  According  to  the  well-known  statements  of  Aristotle  (Met.  9916  6,  io8oa  3, 
royoa  18,  a/.),  the  Academy  of  his  own  day  held  that  there  are  no  "  forms  "  of 
artificial  things.  No  doubt  the  statement  is  true,  but  it  has  no  bearing  on  the 
form  of  KtpKls  in  the  Cratylus  or  that  of  K\IVTJ  in  Republic  x,  Aristotle  is 
speaking  of  the  theory  as  he  knew  it,  i.e.  after  367,  and  it  is  notorious  that  this 
version  of  the  doctrine  has  to  be  learned  from  his  writings,  not  from  Plato's. 
The  only  character  in  the  dialogues  of  Plato's  later  life  who  ever  says  anything 
about  the  doctrine  is  Timaeus,  and  he  speaks  pretty  much  as  Socrates  is  made 
to  do  in  the  earlier  dialogues.  In  the  Cratylus  there  is  no  suggestion  that  the 
etfios  is  a  sort  of  supra-sensible  "  thing."  It  is  just  a  "  type  "  to  which  the 
manufacturer's  articles  must  conform,  and  its  independence  means  simply 
that  the  structure  of  the  icepick  is  determined  by  its  function,  independently 
of  anyone's  caprice. 


82  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

afterwards  explicitly  formulated  in  the  Politicus  and  reproduced  as 
fundamental  in  the  opening  paragraphs  of  the  Nicomachean  Ethics, 
the  distinction  between  superior  and  subordinate  "  arts/'  the  rule 
being  that  it  is  the  "  art  "  which  uses  a  product  that  is  superior, 
the  "  art "  which  makes  it  that  is  subordinate.  This  will 
apply  to  the  case  of  the  "  legislator  "  who  makes  names.  There 
must  be  a  superior  expert,  whose  business  it  is  to  judge  of  the 
goodness  of  the  names,  namely,  the  expert  who  is  to  use  them,  and 
he  can  be  no  other  than  the  expert  in  asking  and  answering  questions, 
that  is  the  "  dialectician  "  or  metaphysician.  The  "  legislator  " 
who  is  to  bestow  names  rightly  must  therefore  work  under  the 
superintendence  and  to  the  specifications  of  the  "  dialectician," 
the  supreme  man  of  science.  (In  other  words,  the  test  of  the 
adequacy  of  language  is  not  mere  "  custom,"  but  its  capacity  to 
express  the  highest  truth  fully  and  accurately.) 

Cratylus,  then,  is  right  in  thinking  that  language  depends  on 
"  nature,"  and  that  names  can  only  rightly  be  given  by  a  man  who 
"  fixes  his  eye  on  the  real  (<£vVei)  name  and  can  put  its  form  into 
letters  and  syllables  "  (389^-390^). *  At  any  rate,  this  is  how  the 
matter  looks  to  Socrates,  though,  as  he  had  said,  he  cannot  go  on 
to  convince  Hermogenes  by  explaining  which  names  are  the  "  right  " 
ones.  For  that  one  must  go  to  the  professional  sophists,  such  as 
Protagoras,  or,  since  Hermogenes  has  no  money  to  pay  them,  he 
might  ask  his  brother  Callias  to  teach  him  what  he  has  learned  from 
Protagoras  on  this  very  subject  foqia-c).  Perhaps  we  can  hardly 
do  this,  since  Hermogenes  has  already  decided  against  the  main 
principle  of  Protagoras'  book  on  Truth.  But  something  can  be 
done,  to  make  a  beginning,  with  Homer.  He  sometimes  gives  two 
names  for  a  thing,  that  used  by  "  gods  "  and  that  used  by  "  men," 
and  in  such  cases  we  sometimes  find  that  the  name  used  by  the 
"  gods  "  is  significant  (e.g.,  we  call  a  certain  river  Scamander,  but 
the  gods  call  it  "  the  Yellow  River,"  Eavtfos).  Or  again  he  tells  us 
that  Hector's  son  was  called  Scamandrius  by  the  women,  but 
Astyanax  by  his  father  and  the  men.  Now,  on  the  average,  the 
men  of  a  society  are  more  intelligent  than  their  women-folk,2  and 
their  name  for  the  boy  is  presumably  his  "  right  "  name.  And, 

1  It  is,  of  course,  with  intentional  humour  that  Socrates  forgets  that 
Cratylus  had  meant  something  quite  different  when  he  said  that  names  are 
11  by  nature."  Note  the  repeated  insistence  on  the  point  that  Greek  has  no 
necessary  superiority  over  a  "  barbarian  "  language  (like,  e.g.,  Persian).  The 
notion  that  "  barbarians  "  are  intrinsically  inferior  to  Hellenes,  so  prominent 
in  Isocrates  and  Aristotle,  is  foreign  to  the  Platonic  dialogues,  though  it  is 
recognized  as  a  fact  that  Hellenes  show  more  aptitude  than  Egyptians  and 
other  peoples  for  science.  The  all-round  inferiority  of  the  non-Hellene  is  not 
a  Socratic  or  Platonic  doctrine.  That  the  point  should  be  insisted  on  in  a 
discussion  about  language  is  all  the  more  interesting  since  pdppapos  seems 
originally  to  have  meant  one  who  "  jabbers  " — like  a  swallow,  as  Clytaem- 
nestra  says  in  Aeschylus. 

*  This  is  given  as  a  mere  statement  of  fact,  and  in  a  place  like  the  Athens 
of  the  fifth  century  it  was  true.  It  is  not  implied  that  it  ought  to  be  so,  or 
need  be  so.  Indeed,  as  we  shall  see,  Socrates  held  that  it  need  not  be  so. 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  88 

in  fact,  we  see  that  it  has  a  significance  which  makes  it  appropriate. 
The  name  means  "  Burgh- ward,"  and  is  therefore  very  suitable  to 
the  son  of  Hector  who  "  warded  "  Troy  so  effectually  (3910-3920). 

Once  started  on  this  trail,  Socrates  proceeds  to  propound  a 
host  of  derivations  of  names — proper  names  of  heroes  and  gods,  and 
common  nouns — with  the  general  purpose  of  showing  that  in  their 
original  form,  often  widely  different  from  that  to  which  we  are 
accustomed,  they  have  a  "  connotation "  which  makes  them 
specially  appropriate.  There  is  no  need  to  follow  this  part  of  the 
conversation  in  any  detail,  all  the  more  since  Socrates  professes  to 
be  surprised  by  his  own  readiness  and  suggests  that  he  must  have 
been  infected  by  an  abnormal  "  possession  "  from  having  just  left 
the  company  of  the  "inspired"  Euthyphro  (396^).  We  could 
hardly  be  told  more  plainly  that  the  extravagances  which  are  to 
follow  are  meant  as  a  caricature  of  the  guesses  of  "  etymologists  " 
working  in  the  dark  without  any  scientific  foundation.1  But,  like 
a  wise  man,  Socrates  mixes  some  sense  with  his  nonsense.  Thus  it 
is  a  sound  principle,  whatever  we  may  think  of  some  of  the  applica- 
tions made  of  it,  that  proper  names  of  men  and  gods  are  likely  to 
have  been  originally  significant,  though  their  meaning  has  been 
lost  through  linguistic  changes.  It  is  sound  sense  again  to  say 
(398^)  that  we  may  often  be  put  on  the  true  track  by  considering 
archaic  forms  which  are  obsolete  in  current  speech,  or  peculiar 
dialectical  variants  (4010).  So  again  Socrates  is  quite  right  in 
calling  attention  to  the  presence  of  "  barbarian  "  words  in  the 
current  vocabulary  (4090),  though  the  use  he  makes  of  the  fact  as 
a  convenient  way  out  of  a  difficulty  whenever  he  is  at  a  loss  is 
manifestly  jocular  (4210-^).  The  jocularity  is  even  more  patent 
when  he  pretends  (4020)  to  make  the  sudden  discovery,  which  he 
then  rides  to  death,  that  the  ancient  names  of  the  gods  and  a  host 
of  other  words  show  that  the  creators  of  the  Greek  language  were 
Heracliteans,  or  (4096)  that  the  name  Selene  conveys  the  discovery, 
connected  at  Athens  with  the  name  of  Anaxagoras,  that  the  moon 
shines  by  reflected  light.  It  is  no  surprise  to  us  when,  after  a  long 
interval  of  more  serious  discussion,  we  find  him  (4370  ff.)  expressing 
his  doubts  whether  after  all  etymology  might  not  be  made  to  bear 
equal  witness  to  Parmenides  and  his  doctrine  of  the  absolute 
motionlessness  of  the  real. 

We  come  back  to  seriousness  at  4220:  with  the  reflection  that, 
after  all,  the  process  of  derivation  cannot  go  on  for  ever.  We  must, 
in  the  end,  arrive  at  a  stock  of  primitive  names,  the  ABC  (erroix*"*) 
of  all  the  rest.  How  are  we  to  account  for  the  appropriation  of 
each  of  these  to  its  signification  ?  We  may  do  so  if  we  reflect  that 
language  is  a  form  of  gesture.  If  we  were  all  deaf  and  dumb  we 

1  Probably,  if  only  we  had  adequate  literary  records  of  the  Periclean  age 
we  might  find  that  a  good  many  of  the  etymologies  are  specimens  of  the 
serious  speculations  of  the  persons  satirized.  Few  of  them  are  much  more 
extravagant  than,  e.g.,  the  derivation  of  /tfyw£  from  KJP  hinted  at  in  Euripides, 
Troad.  425. 


84  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

should  try  to  communicate  information  by  imitating  with  our  own 
bodies  the  shapes  and  movements  oi  the  things  to  which  we  wanted 
to  call  attention.  Now  we  can  imitate  in  the  same  way  by  vocal 
gestures.  If  a  man  could  reproduce  the  "  reality  "  of  different 
things  by  the  vocal  gestures  we  call  "  letters  "  and  "  syllables/'  he 
would  be  naming  the  various  things  (4230-4246) .  The  primitive 
names  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  produced  by  this  method  of 
imitation.  We  may  test  this  suggestion  and  judge  of  the  "  right- 
ness  "  of  these  primitive  words  by  making  a  careful  classification 
of  the  elementary  components  of  our  speech — the  vowels,  consonants, 
and  so  forth — and  considering  the  movements  by  which  they  are 
produced.  We  shall  ask  whether  there  are  not  analogies  between 
these  various  processes  and  processes  in  nature  at  large,  and  whether 
primitive  names  do  not  seem  to  be  composed  of  sounds  produced 
by  movements  analogous  with  those  of  the  things  they  signify, 
allowance  being  made  for  a  considerable  amount  of  variation  for 
the  sake  of  euphony  and  greater  ease  of  articulation.  We  might, 
to  be  sure,  save  ourselves  trouble  by  simply  saying  that  the  primi- 
tive words  were  invented  by  gods  or  "  barbarians  "  of  long  ago, 
but  this  would  be  shirking  the  chief  problem  which  the  scientific 
expert  in  the  theory  of  language  has  to  face  (425^-4266).  Socrates 
therefore  ventures,  with  misgivings,  to  state  some  of  his  observa- 
tions on  the  subject.  The  pages  in  which  he  does  so  (4266-427^) 
have  often  been  commended  for  their  penetration,  but  the  subject 
has  more  interest  for  the  student  of  phonetics  than  for  the  philo- 
sopher, and  we  need  not  delay  over  the  details.  What  is  of  real 
interest  to  others  than  specialists  in  phonetics  is  the  discernment 
shown  by  the  insistence  on  the  general  principle  that  speech  is  to  be 
regarded  as  a  species  of  mimetic  gesture,  and  the  clear  way  in 
which  such  vocal  gesture  is  distinguished  from  direct  reproduction 
of  natural  noises  and  the  cries  of  animals  (4230-^). 

Hitherto  the  conversation  has  been  a  dialogue  between  Socrates 
and  Hermogenes  ;  Cratylus  now  replaces  the  latter  as  interlocutor. 
He  is  delighted  with  all  that  Socrates  has  said — no  doubt  because 
Socrates  has  professed  to  find  Heracliteanism  embodied  in  the  very 
structure  of  language — and  thinks  it  could  hardly  be  bettered.  But 
Socrates  himself  has  misgivings,  and  would  like  to  consult  his  second 
thoughts.  (What  the  by-play  here  really  hints  is  that  we  are 
now  to  come  to  a  discussion  to  which  Plato  attaches  greater  im- 
portance than  he  does  to  the  entertaining  etymological  speculations 
on  which  so  much  time  has  been  spent.) 

We  said  that  name-giving  is  a  trade,  and  that  the  workman 
(8r}fj.iovpy6s)  who  makes  names  is  the  "  legislator."  Now  in  general 
there  are  better  and  worse  workmen  in  any  trade  ;  we  should  expect, 
then,  that  there  are  degrees  of  goodness  and  badness  in  the  names 
made  by  different  legislators  (i.e.  linguistic  tradition,  of  which  the 
vo/uo0rn?s  is  a  personification,  approximates  more  or  less  nearly, 
in  the  case  of  different  idioms,  to  the  ideal  of  a  "  philosophical " 
language).  Cratylus  denies  this,  on  the  ground  that  a  word  either 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  85 

is  the  right  name  of  a  certain  thing,  or  is  not  that  thing's  name  at 
all,  but  the  name  of  something  else.  There  cannot  be  any  inter- 
mediate degree  of  "  Tightness  "  in  this  case.  If  you  call  a  thing  by 
the  name  of  something  else,  you  are  not  speaking  of  the  thing  in 
question  at  all ;  (e.g.  to  say  "  Hermogenes  "  when  you  meant  Cratylus, 
is  trying  to  say  "  what  is  not/'  and  that  is  impossible).  You  cannot 
say  nothing.  Whenever  you  speak  you  must  be  saying  something. 
Not  only  must  you  mean  (Xcyecv)  something,  but  you  must 
enunciate  (<£avai)  something.  Hence  when  a  man  uses  any  but  the 
"  right  name  "  Cratylus  holds  that  he  merely  makes  a  senseless 
noise,  like  a  "  sounding  brass  "  (\f/o<J>civ  cywy*  a.v  faty  rov  rotovro^, 

p,aTrjv   currov   eavrov   Kii/ovvra,    wcrTrcp  av    et  TIS  ^aXjciov  Ktv^o-ctc   K/oowag, 

43oa).  In  other  words,  you  cannot  make  a  statement  which  is 
significant  and  yet  false.  Every  statement  is  either  true  or  mean- 
ingless. The  difficulty  here  suggested  only  seems  fanciful  to  us, 
because  the  explanation  of  it  given  for  the  first  time  in  Plato's  own 
Sophistes  has  become  part  of  our  current  thought.  To  say  "  what 
is  not  "  does  not  mean  to  say  what  is  simply  meaningless,  but  only 
to  say  what  means  something  different  from  the  real  facts  of  the 
case.  Until  this  had  been  explained,  there  was  a  double  difficulty 
for  the  Greek  mind  in  understanding  how  it  is  possible  to  speak 
falsely.  Partly  the  difficulty  is  due  to  the  accident  of  language 
that  the  word  eivcu  is  ambiguous  ;  it  means  "  to  be  "  or  "  to  exist  "  ; 
in  Greek,  especially  in  the  Ionic  Greek,  which  was  the  original 
tongue  of  science,  it  also  means  "  to  be  true,"  as  when  Herodotus 
calls  his  own  version  of  the  early  life  of  Cyrus  TO  coV,  "  the  true 
narrative,"  or  Euripides  in  Aristophanes  speaks  of  the  story  of 
Phaedra  as  an  o>v  Adyos,  "  an  over-true  tale."  Behind  the  merely 
verbal  ambiguity  there  is  further  a  metaphysical  one,  the  confusion 
between  "  what  is  not  "  in  the  absolute  sense  of  "  blank  nothing/' 
and  "  what  is  not  "  in  the  merely  relative  sense  of  "  what  is  other 
than  "  some  given  reality.  So  long  as  you  confuse  "  what  is  not  " 
in  this  relative  sense  with  what  is  just  nothing  at  all,  you  must 
hold  it  impossible  to  say  significantly  "  what  is  not  "  (i.e.  to  make 
a  false  statement  which  has  any  meaning).  This  explains  why,  in 
the  age  of  ^  Pericles  ^and  Socrates,  it  should  have  been  a  fashionable 
trick  of  dvriAoyiKoi  or  tpurrucoi,  pretenders  who  made  a  show  of 
intellectual  brilliance  by  undertaking  to  confute  and  silence  every 
one  else,  to  argue  that  no  statement,  however  absurd,  if  it  means 
anything,  can  be  false.  The  most  violent  paradoxes  must  be  true, 
because  they  mean  something,  and  therefore  he  who  utters  them  is 
saying  "  what  is."  Plato  regularly  connects  this  theory  of  the 
impossibility  of  speaking  falsely  with  the  philosophy  of  Parmenides, 
and  its  unqualified  antithesis  between  "  what  is  "  and  mere  non- 
entity. He  means  that  the  doctrine  arises  as  soon  as  you  convert 
what  Parmenides  had  meant  for  a  piece  of  physics  into  a  principle  of 
logic.  Cratylus,  to  be  sure,  is  a  follower  not  of  Parmenides,  who 
regarded  change  of  every  kind  as  an  illusion,  but  of  Heraclitus, 
who  thought  change  the  fundamental  reality.  But  he  is  led  by  a 
4 


86  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

different  route  to  the  same  result.  Whether  you  start  with  the 
premise  that  "  what  is  not,"  being  just  nothing  at  all,  cannot  be 
spoken  of,  or  with  the  premise  that  to  call  a  thing  "  out  of  its  name  " 
must  be  to  speak  of  something  else  and  not  of  the  thing  in  question, 
in  either  case  the  conclusion  has  to  be  drawn  that  you  cannot 
significantly  say  what  is  false,  since  that  would  be  to  speak  of  a 
given  thing  and  yet  not  to  speak  of  it  "  as  it  is."  l 

Though  this  issue  of  the  possibility  of  significant  false  statement 
has  been  raised,  we  need  not  go  to  the  bottom  of  it  for  our  present 
purposes.  (In  fact,  Plato's  own  logical  studies  had  presumably 
not  yet  led  him  to  the  complete  solution.)  It  is  enough  to  remember 
that  we  have  already  agreed  that  a  name  is  a  "  representation  " 
(/At/Ai/fia)  of  that  which  it  names.  It  is  like  a  portrait,  except  that 
the  portrait  is  a  visible,  the  name  an  audible,  representation.  Now 
we  might  take  the  portrait  of  a  woman  for  a  portrait  of  a  man  ;  we 
should  then  be  connecting  the  portrait  with  the  wrong  original, 
but  still  it  would  be  a  portrait  of  some  original.  We  do  the  same 
thing  when  we  misapply  a  name  ;  it  does  not  cease  to  be  a  name 
because  we  apply  it  to  the  wrong  thing.  Again,  a  portrait  is  not 
an  exact  replica.  One  artist  seizes  points  which  another  misses, 
and  thus  there  may  be  a  better  and  a  worse  portrait,  and  yet  both 
are  portraits  of  the  same  original.  Why  may  not  the  same  thing  be 
true  of  the  primitive  names  in  language  ?  Why  may  not  a  name 
be  an  imperfect  but  real  "  representation  "  of  that  for  which  it 
stands  ?  (This  would  explain  why  the  primitive  names  in  different 
languages  may  all  be  genuine  "  vocal  gestures,"  denoting  the  same 
thing,  in  spite  of  the  differences  between  them.)  Cratylus  suggests 
that  the  analogy  with  portraiture  does  not  hold.  A  bad  portrait 
may  leave  out  some  characteristic  of  its  original,  or  put  in  some- 
thing not  present  in  the  original,  and  yet  be  a  recognizable  portrait 
of  the  man.  But  in  the  case  of  a  name,  if,  for  example,  we  put  in 
or  leave  out  a  single  letter,  we  have  not  written  that  name  at  all. 

1  It  has  been  the  fashion,  especially  in  Germany,  for  a  generation  and  more, 
to  connect  the  paradox  about  false-speaking  specially  with  the  name  of 
Antisthenes,  and  to  regard  all  the  references  to  it  in  Plato  as  direct  attacks  on 
that  rather  insignificant  person.  This  seems  to  me  quite  unhistorical. 
The  standing  assumption  of  Plato  is  that  the  dvriKoytKot  are  quite  a  numerous 
and  fashionable  body.  Socrates  even  refers  to  them  in  the  Phaedo  (gob), 
where  Antisthenes  is  supposed  to  be  present  (596)  and  all  possibility  of  an 
attack  on  his  own  old  friend  is  out  of  the  question.  The  one  dialogue  of 
Plato's  early  life  in  which  they  are  singled  out  for  special  satire  is  the  Euthy- 
demus,  and  we  see  from  the  Cratylus  itself  that  Euthydemus  really  was  a  well- 
known  personage  who  held  views  of  this  kind.  Isocrates  too  (x.  i)  implies 
that  the  "  eristics  "  who  maintain  the  paradox  are  a  fairly  numerous  body  of 
the  generation  before  his  own.  lor  this  reason  it  seems  to  me  put  of  the 
question  to  find  attacks  on  Antisthenes  in  any  of  the  Platonic  dialogues  in 
which  Socrates  is  the  principal  figure.  Whether  in  the  later  dialogues,  when 
Socrates  has  fallen  into  the  background,  Plato  ever  criticizes  Antisthenes  on 
his  own  account,  is  another  question  with  which  we  shall  not  be  concerned 
until  we  come  to  deal  with  the  Parmenides  and  Sophistes,  though  I  believe  we 
shall  find  reason  to  think  that  there  also  he  has  very  different  antagonists 
in  view. 


MINOR  SOCRAT1C  DIALOGUES  87 

We  may  reply  that  it  is  not  with  quality  as  it  is  with  number.  Any 
addition  or  subtraction  will  make,  e.g.,  the  number  10  another 
number  (such  as  9  or  n),  but  a  "  representation  "  may  be  like  the 
original  without  reproducing  it  in  its  details.  Thus  the  portrait- 
painter  reproduces  the  outward  features  and  complexion  of  his 
sitter,  but  leaves  out  everything  else.  The  sitter  has  entrails, 
movement,  life,  thought  ;  the  picture  has  none,  and  yet  it  is  a 
picture  of  him.  In  fact,  if  it  did  reproduce  the  whole  reality  of  the 
sitter,  it  would  not  be  a  portrait  at  all  but  a  reduplication  of  the 
man  himself.  Full  and  complete  reproduction  is  thus  not  the  kind 
of  "  Tightness  "  we  require  in  a  portrait,  and  we  have  already  recog- 
nized that  a  name  is  a  kind  of  portrait  of  which  vocal  gesture  is  the 
medium  (4300-4336). 

If  we  are  agreed  so  far,  we  may  now  say  that  a  well-made  name 
must  contain  the  "  letters  "  which  are  "  appropriate  "  to  its  signi- 
fication ;  i.e.  those  which  are  "  like  "  what  is  signified  (i.e.  the 
vocal  gestures  which  compose  the  name  must  have  a  natural 
resemblance  to  some  feature  in  that  which  it  names  ;  a  name  which 
contains  inappropriate  sounds  may  be  still  a  recognizable  name  if 
some  of  its  components  are  appropriate,  but  it  will  not  be  a  well- 
made  one).  The  only  way  of  escaping  our  conclusions  would  be 
to  fall  back  on  the  view  that  names  are  purely  conventional  and 
arbitrary.  This  is  impossible,  since  in  any  case  there  must  be 
some  sort  of  natural  appropriateness  about  the  elementary  com- 
ponents of  vocal  gesture  to  lead  the  imposers  of  names  in  the  making 
of  their  first  conventions,  just  as  there  must  be  in  nature  colouring 
materials  appropriate  for  the  reproduction  of  the  tints  of  a  face  if 
there  is  to  be  such  an  art  as  portraiture.  But  we  can  see  that 
"  convention  "  and  the  arbitrary  play  their  part  in  language  too. 
Thus  there  is  a  "  roughness  "  about  the  sound  of  the  letter  r  which 
makes  it  appropriate  in  the  name  of  anything  hard  and  rough, 
while  there  is  a  smoothness  of  articulation  about  /  which  makes 
it  inappropriate  for  the  same  purpose.  Yet  this  letter  actually 
occurs  in  the  very  word  o^At/pos  itself,  and  even  Cratylus  must 
admit  that  "  thanks  to  custom  "  he  knows  what  the  word  means. 
It  discharges  its  function  as  a  name  none  the  worse  for  containing 
an  inappropriate  sound  (433&-435&).  In  particular  we  should  find 
it  quite  impossible  to  show  that  the  names  of  the  numerals  are 
made  up  of  gestures  naturally  appropriate  to  signify  those  particular 
numbers.  The  principle  of  natural  significance,  however  sound, 
is  a  most  uncertain  guide  in  etymological  studies  (435&-c). 

We  revert  to  a  position  we  had  laid  down  at  the  outset.  The 
"  faculty  "  (8wa/us)  or  function  of  a  name  is  to  convey  instruction 
(StSacTfcetv).  Does  this  imply  that  a  man  who  has  knowledge  of 
names  will  also  have  a  corresponding  knowledge  of  the  realities 
(TrpdypaTo)  for  which  the  names  stand  ?  Cratylus  is  inclined  to 
think  so,  and  even  to  hold  that  the  knowledge  of  names  is  the  only 
way  to  the  knowledge  of  things.  Not  only  is  the  understanding 
(TO  navOdv€w)  of  words  the  one  way  to  the  understanding  of 


88  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

things ;  inquiry  into  language  is  the  only  road  of  inquiry  and  dis- 
covery. The  one  way  to  discover  the  truth  about  things  is  to 
discover  the  meanings  of  names  (4360).  But  obviously  this  would 
put  all  science  in  a  very  unfavourable  position.  The  study  of 
names  will  only  at  best  show  what  the  givers  of  the  names  sup- 
posed to  be  the  truth  about  things,  and  how  if  these  name-givers 
were  wrong  in  their  suppositions  ?  Cratylus  holds  that  we  need 
not  feel  any  anxiety  on  the  point.  The  best  proof  that  the  "  giver 
of  names  "  was  one  who  knew  all  about  things  is  the  consistent  way 
in  which  all  names  support  one  and  the  same  theory  about  things. 
Has  not  Soci  ates  himself  shown  that  they  all  point  to  the  Heraclitean 
doctrine  of  the  flux  (4360)  ?  Unfortunately  this  is  not  conclusive ; 
if  you  start  with  false  initial  postulates  you  may  be  led  to  gravely 
erroneous  conclusions,  and  yet  these  conclusions  may  be  quite 
compatible  with  one  another,  as  we  see  in  the  case  of  certain  geo- 
metrical false  demonstrations.1  The  supreme  difficulty  in  any 
science  is  to  be  sure  that  your  initial  postulates  themselves  are  true 
(4360-^).  And,  on  second  thoughts,  we  may  doubt  whether  the 
testimony  of  language  is  quite  so  self-consistent  as  we  had  fancied. 
There  are  many  words  which  seem  to  indicate  that  the  "  giver  of 
names  "  was  an  Eleatic  rather  than  an  Heraclitean  (437^-^),  and 
it  would  be  absurd  to  decide  on  the  truth  of  such  incompatible  views 
by  appeal  to  a  "  numerical  majority  "  of  derivations. 

In  any  case,  the  view  Cratylus  is  maintaining  is  self-contra- 
dictory. He  holds  that  the  inventors  of  the  first  names  must  have 
known  the  truth  about  things  in  order  to  give  each  its  "  true  " 
name,  and  also  that  the  truth  about  things  can  only  be  discovered 
by  the  study  of  names.  How  then  did  the  original  makers  of 
names  discover  it  ?  Perhaps,  says  Cratylus,  the  first  names  were 
of  a  superhuman  origin ;  language  began  as  a  divine  revelation, 
and  its  divine  origin  guarantees  the  "  Tightness  "  of  the  primitive 
names.  If  that  is  so,  then  both  our  sets  of  derivations  cannot  be 
sound,  or,  as  Cratylus  says,  one  set  of  words  cannot  be  real  "  names  " 
at  all  (4380).  But  the  question  is,  which  set — those  which  suggest 
the  "  flux  "  or  those  which  suggest  that  movement  is  an  illusion — 
are  real  names  ?  We  cannot  decide  the  issue  by  appeal  to  other 
words,  for  there  are  no  other  words  than  those  employed  in  language. 
The  appeal  will  have  to  be  to  the  realities  words  signify,  and  we 
shall  have  to  learn  what  these  realities  are,  not  from  words,  but  "from 
one  another  and  from  themselves  "  (4380).  Besides,  even  if  we 
admit  that  the  truth  about  things  can  be  learned  by  studying  their 
names,  since  well-made  names,  as  we  have  said,  are  "  likenesses  " 

1  436^.  Siaypdp/uLara  here  seems,  as  in  some  other  passages  in  Plato  and 
Aristotle,  to  mean  "  proofs  "  rather  than  "  figures."  One  might  illustrate  the 
point  by  reference  to  the  entertaining  section  of  De  Morgan's  Budget  of  Para- 
doxes which  deals  with  James  Smith  the  circle-squarer.  Mr.  Smith's  method 
of  proving  his  tnesis  (that  *•=»  y)  was  to  assume  it  as  a  postulate,  and  then 
show  that  it  led  to  consequences  compatible  with  itself  and  with  one  another. 
He  forgot  to  ask  whether  it  did  not  lead  also  to  consequences  incompatible 
with  independently  known  truth. 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  89 

of  the  things  they  name,  it  must  be  a  nobler  and  more  assured 
method  to  study  the  reality  (aA^eia)  directly  in  itself,  and  judge 
of  the  merits  of  the  "  likeness  "  from  our  knowledge  of  the  original 
than  to  try  to  discover  from  a  mere  study  of  the  "  likeness  "  whether 
it  is  a  good  one,  and  what  it  represents  (4390).  How  a  knowledge  of 
realities  is  to  be  acquired  it  may  take  greater  thinkers  than  our- 
selves to  say,  but  it  is  satisfactory  to  have  learned  that  at  least  we 
cannot  acquire  it  by  the  study  of  names  (439&). 

Socrates  keeps  the  point  on  which  he  wishes  to  insist  most  until 
the  end.  Whatever  the  opinion  of  the  framers  of  language  may 
have  been,  the  Heraclitean  doctrine  of  universal  impermanence 
cannot  be  true.  There  are  such  things  as  "  Beauty  "  and  "  Good- 
ness "  (OLVTO  KOL\OV  KOL  ayaOov)  and  other  realities  of  that  kind.  Even 
Cratylus  admits  this  at  once.  He  does  not  extend  his  doctrine 
of  impermanence  to  the  realm  of  "  values."  Now  they  cannot 
be  everlastingly  mutable  ;  they  are  what  they  are  once  for  all  and 
always.  You  could  not  call  anything  "  the  so-and-so  "  (avro,  439^), 
if  it  had  no  determinate  character  but  were  merely  mutable.  And 
the  merely  mutable  could  not  be  known.  What  is  known  is  known 
as  having  this  or  that  determinate  character,  but  if  the  doctrine 
of  "  flux  "  is  true,  nothing  ever  has  such  determinate  character. 
Not  to  mention  that  knowing  as  a  subjective  activity  also  has  a 
determinate  character,  so  that  in  a  world  where  everything  is 
incessantly  becoming  something  else,  there  could  be  neither  objects 
to  be  known  nor  the  activity  of  knowing.  But  if  knower  (TO 
yiyvwo-Kov) ,  object  known  (TO  yiyvwo-Ko/xevoi/),  Beauty,  Good,  are 
real,  the  Heraclitean  doctrine  cannot  be  true.  We  will  not  now 
ask  which  of  these  alternatives  is  the  right  one,  but  we  may  say 
that  it  does  not  look  a  sensible  procedure  for  a  man  to  have  such 
confidence  in  names  and  their  givers  that  he  hands  over  his  soul 
to  "  names  "  for  "  tendance/1  and  asserts  dogmatically  that  all 
men  and  all  things  are  sick  of  a  universal  "  defluxion  "  and  as 
leaky  as  a  cracked  pitcher  (4400-^).  This  is  the  issue  which  young 
men  like  Cratylus  and  Hermogenes  should  face  seriously  and 
courageously  and  not  decide  in  a  hurry  (440^).  Thus  the  dialogue 
leaves  with  us  as  the  great  problem,  or  rather  the  two  aspects  of 
the  same  great  problem  of  all  philosophy,  the  metaphysical  problem 
of  the  reality  of  the  forms  and  the  moral  problem  of  the  right 
"  tendance  of  the  soul.11 1 

Eulhydemus. — The  dialogue,  as  we  have  said,  has  more  of  the 
spirit  of  broad  farce  than  any  other  work  of  Plato  ;  it  would  be 
possible  to  see  in  it  nothing  more  than  an  entertaining  satire  on 
"  eristics  "  who  think  it  a  fine  thing  to  reduce  every  one  who  opens 
his  mouth  in  their  company  to  silence  by  taking  advantage  of  the 

1 1  can  see  no  reason  to  fancy  that  the  dialogue  is  intended  as  a  polemic 
against  the  nominalism  of  Antisthenes  in  particular.  A.'s  preoccupation 
with  names,  like  the  choice  of  the  themes  for  his  extant  declamations,  only 
shows  that  he  was  influenced  by  the  general  tendencies  of  the  "  sophistic  " 
age.  I  am  wholly  sceptical  about  theories  which  represent  the  Platonic 
Socrates  as  engaged  in  attacks  on  one  of  his  own  companions. 


90  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

ambiguities  of  language.  Even  if  this  were  Plato's  main  object, 
it  would  still  be  a  reasonable  one.  An  attempt  to  detect  and 
expose  the  principal  fallacies  in  dictione  would  be  a  useful  contri- 
bution to  the  as  yet  only  nascent  study  of  logic.  It  is  thus  not 
surprising  that  Aristotle  should  have  made  frequent  use  of  the 
dialogue  in  his  own  systematic  essay  on  Fallacies,  the  de  Sophisticis 
Elenchis.  But  the  real  purpose  of  the  dialogue  is  more  serious  and 
proves  to  be  a  moral  one,  arising  out  of  the  claim  of  the  sophists 
of  the  Periclean  age  to  be  able  to  "  teach  goodness."  A  man  who 
undertakes  this  task  must  be  prepared  to  win  the  adherence  of  a 
pupil  by  satisfying  him  first  that  "  goodness/'  the  secret  of  a  satis- 
factory life,  can  be  taught ;  and  next,  that  the  speaker  is  one  of  the 
experts  who  can  teach  it.  No  one  will  go  to  school  to  you  unless  you 
can  persuade  him  that  you  have  something  important  to  teach, 
and  that  you  are  competent  to  teach  it.  This  accounts  for  the 
rise  of  a  distinct  branch  of  literature,  the  "  protreptic  "  discourse, 
which  aims  at  winning  the  hearer's  assent  to  the  idea  that  he 
must  live  the  "  philosophic  "  life,  and  encouraging  his  confidence 
that  a  particular  teacher  will  show  him  how  to  do  it.  To  this  type 
of  literature  belonged,  among  other  works,  Aristotle's  famous 
Protrepticus  and  Cicero's  almost  equally  famous  Latin  imitation 
of  it,  the  Hortensius,  both  now  unhappily  lost.  The  true  object  of 
the  Euthydemus  is  to  exhibit  the  directness,  simplicity,  and  power 
of  Socratic  "  protreptic,"  addressed  to  a  young  and  impressionable 
mind  ;  the  fooleries  of  the  two  sophists  afford  an  entertaining 
background,  without  which  the  picture  would  not  produce  its  full 
effect.  We  might  suppose  Plato  to  have  felt  that  to  a  careless 
observer  the  close  cross-questioning  characteristic  of  Socrates  must 
seem  very  much  the  same  sort  of  thing  as  the  futile  sporting  with 
words  on  which  the  ordinary  "  eristic  "  plumes  himself.  By  pitting 
the  one  thing  directly  against  the  other  he  drives  home  his  point 
that,  for  all  their  apparent  minute  hair-splitting,  the  questions  of 
Socrates  are  no  idle  displays  of  ingenuity,  but  have  the  most 
momentous  and  most  truly  practical  of  all  objects  ;  their  purpose 
is  to  win  a  soul  from  evil  for  good. 

In  form  the  Euthydemus  is  a  narrated  drama.  Socrates  describes 
to  his  old  friend  Crito,  with  a  great  deal  of  humour,  a  mirthful  scene 
in  his  favourite  haunt,  the  palaestra  near  the  Lyceum,  at  which  he 
had  been  present  the  day  before.  The  supposed  date  can  only  be 
fixed  by  consideration  of  a  number  of  bits  of  internal  evidence. 
It  is,  as  we  see  from  Euthydemus,  2710,  "  many  years  "  after  the  foun- 
dation of  Thurii  (444  B.C.),  and  must  be  before  the  year  of  the  great 
scandal  about  the  "  profanation  of  the  mysteries,"  just  before  the 
sailing  of  the  Athenian  Armada  for  Sicily  (416-5),  since  Axiochus 
of  Scambonidae,  father  of  the  lad  Clinias  who  figures  as  respondent, 
was  one  of  the  principal  persons  ruined  by  the  affair.1  A  date  not 
later  than  about  420,  and  possibly  a  little  earlier,  seems  to  fit  all  the 

1  For  the  ruin  of  Axiochus,  the  uncle  of  Alcibiades  the  person  whose  de- 
struction was  the  main  object  of  the  raisers  of  the  scandal,  see  Andocides,  i.  16. 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  91 

indications.  The  centre  of  attraction  in  the  dialogue  is  the  beautiful 
and  modest  Clinias  ;  it  is  on  his  person  that  Euthydemus,  whom  we 
have  already  met  in  the  Cratylus,  and  his  brother  Dionysodorus, 
natives  of  Chios  who  had  been  among  the  original  settlers  of  Thurii,  but 
found  themselves  banished  in  the  years  of  faction  which  followed  on 
the  foundation  of  the  city  and  have  since  then  haunted  Athens  and  her 
dependencies,  make  the  experiment  of  displaying  a  new  educational 
discovery,  a  method  of  instantaneously  "  teaching  goodness/' 
Hitherto  they  had  taught,  like  other  professionals,  the  art  of  fence 
on  the  field  and  in  the  law-courts  ;  their  crowning  achievement  is  a 
recent  invention  which  they  are  anxious  to  parade  and  Socrates  to 
witness.  It  proves,  in  fact,  to  be  simply  "  eristic/1  the  trick  of 
stopping  a  man's  mouth  by  catching  at  the  natural  ambiguities  of 
language.  Perhaps  it  is  an  indication  of  date  that  Socrates  is 
made  to  lay  the  stress  he  does  on  the  contrast  between  this  latest 
marvel  and  the  now  familiar  art  of  effective  forensic  pleading  which 
had  been  the  thing  taught  by  Protagoras  and  the  earliest  "  sophists." 
The  two  men,  however,  are  described  as  elderly,  so  that  they  will 
be  at  least  as  old  as  Socrates  himself,  and  we  must  remember  that 
though  Socrates  was  the  first  Athenian  to  interest  himself  in  logic, 
it  had  been  founded  by  Zeno,  who  cannot  at  most  have  been  more 
than  ten  years  younger  than  Protagoras.  Hence  too  much  must 
not  be  made  of  this  point.1  The  serious  business  of  the  dialogue  is 
opened  by  Socrates  in  a  short  speech,  laying  down  the  main  lines 
it  is  to  follow.  Clinias  is  a  lad  of  great  promise  and  illustrious 
connexions  ;  it  is  of  the  first  moment  that  he  should  grow  up  to  be 
a  thoroughly  good  man.  The  sophists  are  therefore  invited  to 
prove  the  value  of  their  latest  discovery  by  convincing  him  "  that 
one  must  give  one's  attention  to  goodness  and  philosophy  "  (2750). 
They  fall  to  work  at  once  by  asking  a  series  of  questions  so  con- 
structed that  they  can  only  be  answered  by  "Yes"  or  "No." 
and  that  the  respondent  can  be  equally  silenced  whichever  answer 
he  gives.  The  first  question — from  its  recurrence  elsewhere  we 
may  infer  that  it  was  a  "  stock  "  puzzle — turns  on  the  double  sense 
of  the  word  yavOdvciv,  which  means  primarily  to  "  learn  "  ;  but 
derivatively,  in  colloquial  language,  to  "  understand,"  "  take  the 
1  The  pair  of  "  eristics,"  Euthydemus  and  his  brother  Dionysodorus,  are 
natives  of  Chios  who  had  been  among  the  first  settlers  at  Thurii  (this  is  implied 
by  the  tense  of  dw^Krjo-av  at  271^),  but  had  been  exiled  thence  and  have  spent 
"many  years  "  ire  pi  rofode  roi)s  T^TTOUS,  i.e.  Athens  and  the  islands  of  the  Aegean 
(ayic).  The  date  of  the  foundation  of  Thurii  is  444.  Socrates  is  ij$rj  irpce  pure  pot 
(2726),  "  not  exactly  a  young  man,"  but  no  more  ;  this  suggests  an  age 
not  far  off  fifty,  but  probably  something  short  of  it.  Perhaps  the  allusion  of 
272$  to  the  figure  he  cuts  among  the  boys  in  the  music-class  of  Connus  is  best 
taken  as  a  humorous  reference  to  some  shaft  aimed  at  him  in  the  Connus 
of  Amipsias  (exhibited  in  423),  and  in  that  case,  we  must  suppose  that  play  to 
be  still  a  recent  work.  Alcibiades  is  spoken  of  at  275^  in  a  way  which  implies 
that  he  is  already  in  the  prime  of  manhood.  286$  refers  to  Protagoras  in  a 
way  which  seems  to  mean  that  he  is  already  dead.  But  since  Plato  insists 
that  Protagoras  was  a  generation  older  than*  Socrates  (Protag.  317^)  and  also 
says  that  he  died  at  about  seventy  (Meno,  gie),  this  does  not  take  us  with 
certainty  much  below  the  year  430. 


92  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

meaning  of  "  a  statement.  The  eristic  method  of  the  two  brothers 
may  be  reproduced  in  English  by  taking  advantage  of  the  double 
sense  which  "  learning  "  happens  to  bear  in  our  own  language. 
Who  are  learners,  the  wise  or  the  ignorant,  i.e.  those  who  already 
know  something  or  those  who  do  not  ?  There  is  here  a  triple 
equivoque,  since  the  "  wise  "  (<ro<£oi)  may  mean  "  clever,  intelligent  " 
pupils,  as  well  as  persons  who  already  know  the  thing  to  be  taught, 
and  the  "  ignorant  "  (dfta0c?s)  may  mean  "  the  dull,  stupid,"  as 
well  as  those  who  are  ignorant  of  a  given  subject.  The  lad  takes 
the  question  to  mean,  "  Which  class  of  boys  learn  what  they  are 
taught,  the  clever  boys  or  the  dull  ones  ?  "  and  answers,  "  The 
clever."  But,  it  is  retorted,  when  you  lads  were  learners  in  reading  or 
music,  you  did  not  yet  know  these  subjects  and  therefore  were  not 
"  wise  "  (o-o^ot)  about  them,  and  so  must  have  been  "  ignorant  " 
(a/*a0ets) .  And  yet  again,  in  your  schooldays,  it  was  not  the 
"  dull  "  (d/mfcis)  among  you,  but  the  quick  or  clever  (o-o^oi)  who 
"  took  in  "  (cpdvOavov)  what  the  schoolmaster  dictated.  Ergo,  it 
is  the  cro^oi,  not  the  d//,a0€is  who  "  learn."  (As  we  might  say, 
the  dull  don't  get  learning  from  their  schoolmasters,  but  the  quick 
(275^-2760)). 

A  new  puzzle  is  now  started.  When  a  man  learns  something, 
does  he  learn  what  he  knows  or  what  he  does  not  know  ?  (This 
again  is  a  standing  catch,  intended  to  prove  the  paradox  that  it  is 
impossible  to  learn  anything,  to  get  new  knowledge.)  The  natural 
answer  is  that  a  man  learns  what  he  does  not  already  know,  since 
learning  means  getting  fresh  knowledge.  But  when  a  schoolmaster 
dictates  something  to  you,  you  "  learn  "  the  sense  of  the  passage 
(you  take  in  its  meaning).  What  he  dictated  is  a  series  of  "  letters," 
but  you  must  have  "  known  "  your  letters  before  you  could  do 
dictation.  Thus  when  you  "  learn,"  you  must  already  "  know  " 
the  thing  you  are  learning.  Yet,  per  contra,  to  learn  means  to  get 
knowledge,  and  no  one  can  get  what  he  already  has.  Ergo,  after 
all,  it  is  what  you  do  not  know  that  you  learn  (2760-2770) . 

It  is  clear,  of  course,  what  the  origin  of  "  eristic  "  of  this  kind  is. 
Euthydemus  and  his  brother  are  borrowing  and  degrading  the 
logical  method  of  Zeno.1  In  Zeno's  hands,  the  deduction  of 
apparently  contradictory  conclusions  from  the  same  premisses 
had  a  legitimate  object.  The  intention  was  to  discredit  the  pre- 
misses themselves.  And  in  fact,  Zeno's  antinomies  do  establish 
the  important  result  that  the  postulates  of  Pythagorean  mathe- 
matics are  incompatible  with  one  another  and  require  revision 
(e.g.  it  is  indispensable  to  Pythagorean  geometry  that  every  straight 

1  This  is  made  especially  clear  twice  over  (2755,  2760),  by  the  whispered 
remark  of  Dionysodorus  that  his  brother  will  "  catch  the  boy  out  "  equally 
whichever  way  he  answers  the  question.  This  construction  of  "  antinomies," 
to  show  that  the  affirmation  and  the  denial  of  the  same  proposition  are 
equally  impossible,  was  the  special  contribution  of  Zeno  to  the  development 
of  logical  method.  There  is  also  probably  intentional  point  in  the  way  in 
which  we  are  reminded  of  the  connexion  of  the  brothers  with  Thurii — the 
place,  of  all  others,  where  they  would  be  most  certain  to  meet  Eleatics. 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  93 

line  should  be  capable  of  bisection,  and  yet,  on  the  Pythagorean 
principles,  a  line  may  contain  an  odd  number  of  "  points  "  and 
therefore  be  incapable  of  bisection,  because  you  cannot  "  split  the 
unit  ").  With  eristics  like  Euthydemus  this  hunting  after  "  anti- 
nomies," perfectly  legitimate  when  intended  as  a  criticism  ol  pre- 
suppositions which  lead  to  an  "  antinomy/'  becomes  a  mere  delight 
in  entrapping  the  respondent  into  contradicting  himself  by  mere 
neglect  to  guard  against  ambiguity  in  words,  and  its  object  is  not 
to  detect  error  but  to  produce  admiration  for  the  ingenious  deviser 
of  the  ambiguous  formula.  This  is  the  point  on  which  Socrates 
now  fastens.  The  two  "  sophists  "  care  nothing  about  convincing 
Clinias  of  the  need  for  "  goodness  and  philosophy  "  ;  their  concern 
is  merely  to  make  a  display  of  their  own  cleverness.  Accordingly, 
Socrates  interrupts  the  performance.  He  professes  to  think  that 
what  has  gone  before  is  not  meant  as  any  sample  of  the  "  wisdom  " 
of  the  brothers.  It  is  a  mere  piece  of  "  fun/'  like  the  sportive 
preliminaries  which  precede  initiation  into  the  Corybantic  rites, 
or,  as  we  might  say,  like  those  popularly  supposed  to  precede  an 
initiation  into  freemasonry.  So  far  the  two  great  men  have  merely 
been  playing  a  "  game  "  with  the  lad,  enjoying  a  "  practical  joke  " 
at  his  expense  ;  no  doubt  the  serious  part  of  their  "  protreptic  " 
is  yet  to  come.  Before  it  comes,  Socrates  would  like  to  show,  by  a 
conversation  of  his  own  with  the  boy,  what,  in  his  "  foolish  and 
amateur  fashion "  (I&WTIKWS  TC  KCU  ycXouos),  he  supposes  the 
drift  of  such  exhortations  must  be,  though,  of  course,  he  fully 
expects  to  be  left  in  the  shade  by  two  such  eminent  professionals 
(277^-2780). 

There  follows  at  once  a  simple  statement,  in  clear  language  such 
as  a  mere  boy  can  follow,  of  the  root  ideas  of  Socratic  ethics.  Of 
course  every  one  of  us  wants  cv  Tr/oarTeiv,  to  "  fare  well/'  to 
"  make  a  success  of  life."  And  equally,  of  course,  making  a  success 
of  life  means  having  "  abundance  of  good  "  (TroXXa  dyafla).  Now 
what  things  is  it  good  to  have  ?  "  The  first  man  you  meet  "  will 
mention  some  of  them  :  wealth,  health,  beauty,  bodily  advantages 
in  general,  good  birth,  a  position  of  influence  and  respect.  But 
there  are  other  good  things  than  these,  or  at  least  other  things  which 
Socrates  and  Clinias  regard  as  good :  sophrosyne,  justice,  courage, 
wisdom.  Is  the  list  of  goods  now  complete  ?  Perhaps  we  have 
left  out  the  most  important  of  all,  "  good  luck  "  (curuxta),  without 
which  any  other  advantages  may  turn  out  to  be  disguised  curses. 
And  yet,  on  second  thoughts,  we  have  not  forgotten  it.  For  wisdom 
is  itself  evruxta.  Who  have  the  best  "  luck  "  or  "  good  fortune  " 
in  playing  musical  instruments,  in  reading  and  writing,  in  navigation, 
warfare,  medicine  ?  The  men  who  know  how  to  do  these  things — 
expert  musicians,  sailors,  soldiers,  physicians.  One  would,  e.g., 
think  it  a  great  piece  of  luck  in  war  to  be  serving  under  a  com- 
petent and  not  under  an  incompetent  commander.  In  general, 
wisdom  or  knowledge  (oro^ca)  leads  to  efficient  achievement 
and  so  to  "  good  fortune/1  If  we  have  wisdom,  then 


94  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 


we  may  expect  "  success,"  "  good  fortune  "  (TO  evrvxelv)  in  the 
department  of  practice  which  our  "  wisdom  "  covers  (2780-2800). 

On  reviewing  these  results,  we  see  ground  to  criticize  one  of 
them,  the  statement  that  we  shall  be  happy  and  "  make  life  a 
success  "  (ev$aijjLov€Lv  KOL  cu  Trparrciv)  if  we  "  have  abundance  ol 
good  things."  To  have  them  will  not  benefit  us  unless  we  also  use 
them,  any  more  than  it  would  benefit  an  artisan  to  have  the  materials 
and  tools  of  his  trade  if  he  never  used  them.  So,  e.g.,  "  wealth  " 
is  of  no  benefit  unless  we  use  it.  And  it  would  not  be  enough  to 
say  that  we  must  not  only  have  the  various  good  things  but  use 
them.  We  must  add  that,  to  be  happy,  we  must  use  them  right. 
They  are,  in  fact,  dangerous  tools  ;  if  you  use  them  in  the  wrong 
way  you  do  yourself  a  harm  ;  it  would  be  better  to  leave  them 
alone  than  to  use  them  wrongly.  Now  in  all  crafts  and  businesses 
it  is  the  expert's  knowledge  (eVio-TT//^)  of  his  craft  which  enables 
him  to  use  his  materials  and  implements  in  the  right  way, 
and  the  same  thing  holds  good  of  health  and  wealth  and  the  goods 
in  popular  esteem  generally.  Knowledge  enables  us  to  use  wealth, 
health,  and  all  other  "  advantages  "  rightly,  and  to  achieve  success 
(euTrpayia).  If  a  man  had  all  other  possessions  besides  wisdom 
and  were  not  directed  by  "  sense  "  (vovs)  in  his  undertakings,  the 
less  he  undertook  the  fewer  blunders  he  would  make,  and  the 
happier  he  would  be.  It  would  be  happier  for  him  to  be  poor  than 
rich,  timid  than  courageous,  sluggish  and  dull  rather  than  of  active 
temper  and  quick  perception,  since  the  less  he  undertook  the  less 
mischief  he  would  do.  In  fact,  none  of  the  things  we  began  by 
calling  good  can  be  called  unconditionally  (aura  *a0'  aura)  good. 
They  are  better  than  their  opposites  when  they  are  conjoined  with 
the  wisdom  to  make  a  right  use  of  them  (^po'i^o-is  re  KOL  <ro<£ta), 
but  worse  when  they  are  disjoined  from  it.  It  follows  that,  properly 
speaking,  there  is  just  one  thing  good,  wisdom,  and  just  one  bad 
thing,  apaOia,  "dullness,"  stupidity  (2806-281^).  (Compare  the 
precisely  similar  line  of  reasoning  by  which  Kant  reaches  the  con- 
clusion that  the  good  will  is  the  only  thing  which  is  unconditionally 
good,  because  it  is  the  only  good  which  cannot  be  misused.) 

We  may  draw  a  final  conclusion.  We  now  see  that  since  happi- 
ness depends  on  wisdom  and  knowledge,  the  one  end  after  which 
every  man  should  strive  is  to  become  "  as  wise  as  possible."  Hence 
what  we  should  crave  to  get  from  our  parents,  friends,  fellow- 
citizens,  alien  acquaintances,  before  everything  else,  is  just  wisdom. 
One  should  be  ready  to  "  serve  and  slave  "  and  render  "  any  service 
that  is  comely  "  l  to  any  man  for  the  sake  of  wisdom  ;  that  is  to  say, 
provided  that  wisdom  can  really  be  taught  and  does  not  "  come  by 
accident  "  (d™  Tavro/xctTov),  a  difficult  question  which  we  have  not 

1  onovv  TUV  tca.\G)v  bin)p€Tr]iJLdTwjf,  2826.  The  qualification  is  inserted  be- 
cause tpaffral  have  been  mentioned,  and  Socrates  wishes  to  guard  himself 
against  being  supposed  to  include  chastity  as  one  of  the  prices  which  mav 
be  paid  for  "  wisdom."  His  attitude  on  that  point  is  as  unqualified  as  Plato's 
own  in  the  Laws. 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  95 

faced.  If  we  may  assume  that  wisdom  can  be  taught,  we  have 
satisfied  ourselves  of  the  absolute  necessity  of  pursuing  it,  "being 
philosophers  "  (2820-^). 

Socrates  has  really  given  us  so  far  only  half  of  a  "  protreptic 
discourse  "  such  as  would  be  to  his  mind.  He  has  led  up  to  the 
conclusion  that  happiness  depends  on  the  direction  of  life  and 
conduct  by  knowledge,  but  has  not  so  far  told  us  what  knowledge 
in  particular  it  is  of  which  we  cannot  make  an  ill  use.  It  is  funda- 
mental for  his  purpose  that  we  should  distinguish  such  knowledge 
from  every  recognized  form  of  expert  professional  knowledge,  and 
the  distinction  will  be  made  later.  For  the  present  we  return  to 
the  "  comic  relief  "  of  the  fooleries  of  Euthydemus  and  his  brother, 
which  become  increasingly  absurd,  precisely  in  order  that  the 
heightened  contrast  of  tone  shall  mark  the  second  part  of  Socrates' 
discourse,  when  we  reach  it,  as  the  most  important  thing  in  the  whole 
dialogue.  For  the  present  he  proposes  that  the  "professionals" 
shall  now  take  up  the  argument  at  this  point,  and  decide  the  question 
whether  one  needs  to  learn  every  kind  of  "  knowledge/1  or  whether 
there  is  one  special  knowledge  which  conducts  to  happiness.  Or, 
if  they  prefer,  they  may  go  over  the  ground  he  has  already  covered 
and  do  so  in  a  less  amateurish  fashion.  Of  course  they  do  neither  ; 
their  object  is  simply  epater  les  bourgeois,  and  Dionysodorus,  the 
older  of  the  two,  sets  to  work  at  once  to  administer  a  thoroughly 
sensational  shock.  Can  Socrates  and  the  others,  who  profess  to 
feel  so  much  affection  for  Clinias,  be  serious  in  saying  that  they  are 
anxious  that  he  should  become  "  wise  "  ?  For  their  language 
implies  that  he  is  not  yet  what  they  wish  him  to  become.  They 
say  they  want  him  to  "  be  no  longer  what  he  now  is  " ;  but  to  wish 
a  man  to  "  be  no  longer  "  is  to  wish  that  he  may  perish — a  pretty 
wish  on  the  part  of  one's  "  affectionate  friends  "  (2830-^).  (Here 
again  we  are  on  Eleatic  ground,  and  we  see  that  it  is  not  for  nothing 
that  Plato  reminds  us  repeatedly  that  his  two  sophists  had  lived  at 
Thurii.  The  argument  that  nothing  can  change,  because  that 
which  "  becomes  different  "  is  becoming  "  what  it  is  not/1  and 
therefore  becoming  nothing  at  all,  derives  directly  from  Parmenides 
as  soon  as  his  physics  are  converted  into  logic,  and,  like  the  rest  of 
the  puzzles  connected  with  it,  only  gets  its  solution  when  we  come 
to  the  distinction  between  absolute  and  relative  not-being  intro- 
duced in  the  Sophistes.  In  our  dialogue  Plato  is  not  seriously 
concerned  with  the  solution  of  these  difficulties ;  what  he  is  con 
cerned  with  is  the  futility  of  regarding  them  as  a  preparation  for 
the  conduct  of  life,  and  the  moral  levity  of  the  professors  who  make 
a  parade  of  them.)  The  immediate  effect  of  the  sally  of  Dionyso- 
dorus is  to  call  forth  from  Ctesippus,  an  older  lad  deeply 
attached  to  Clinias,  an  angry  complaint  of  the  "  falsity  "  of  the 
accusation,  and  this  gives  Euthydemus  an  opening  for  airing  his 
principal  piece  of  "wisdom/1  which  we  have  already  met  in  the 
Cralylus — the  doctrine  that  all  statements  are  true,  or,  as  he  puts 
it  now,  that  "  it  is  impossible  to  speak  falsely/1  for  the  reason  that 


96  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

whenever  you  make  a  statement,  you  must  either  be  saying  "  what 
is  "  or  saying  "  what  is  not."  In  the  first  case,  you  are  telling 
the  truth,  for  to  "  say  what  is,"  is  truth-speaking.  As  for  the 
second  case,  "  what  is  not  "  is  just  nothing  at  all,  and  no  one  can 
speak  and  yet  say  "  nothing  "  ;  whoever  speaks  at  all  is  saying 
something  (283^-284^).  The  regular  corollary  is  promptly  drawn 
that  OVK  €<mv  di/rtXcycti/,  no  man  can  contradict  another,  since  there 
can  be  no  contradiction  unless  both  parties  are  speaking  of  the 
same  "  thing  "  (the  logical  subject  must  be  the  same  in  the  two  state- 
ments). But  since  you  cannot  speak  of  a  thing  "  as  it  is  not/' 
in  the  case  of  apparent  contradiction,  one  or  both  parties  would 
have  to  be  speaking  of  "  what  is  not,"  and  this  is  impossible.  If 
the  two  parties  are  making  significant  statements  at  aU,  since  such 
statements  must  be  statements  of  "  what  is,"  they  must  be  talking 
about  two  different  subjects,  and  so  there  is  no  contradiction  (285^- 
286C).1 

It  is  characteristic  of  Socrates  that  he  insists  at  once  on  calling 
attention  to  the  practical  bearings  of  this  piece  of  logical  paradox. 
It  implies  that  two  men  cannot  even  think  contradictory  pro- 
positions ;  if  a  false  statement  is  impossible,  mental  error  is 
impossible  too,  and  from  this  it  follows  that  no  one  can  commit  an 
error  in  practice  (^a^aprdv^v  orav  ™  irpa.rrrj),  and  the  claim  of  the 
brothers  to  be  able  to  teach  goodness  must  therefore  be  an  empty 
one,  for  their  teaching  is  superfluous.2  Dionysodorus  eludes  the 
difficulty  partly  by  insisting  that  his  present  assertion  should  be 
considered  on  its  own  merits  independently  of  anything  he  may 
have  said  before,  and  partly  by  catching  at  the  phrase  which 
Socrates  has  used,  that  he  cannot  understand  what  the  statement 
"  means  "  (vow).  How  can  a  statement  be  said  to  "  mean  " 
anything  ?  3  The  conversation  is  rapidly  degenerating  into  mere 
personalities  (AoiSopta)  when  Socrates  saves  the  situation  by 
repeating  his  former  suggestion  that  the  eminent  wits  from  Thuni 
are  still  only  engaged  on  the  "  fun  "  which  is  to  introduce  their 
serious  wisdom.  They  need  to  be  pressed  a  little  more,  and  we 
shall  then  get  at  last  to  the  earnest.  This  gives  him  an  excuse 

lNote  that  at  286c  Socrates  describes  this  paradox  as  "stale,"  and 
ascribes  it  to  "  Protagoras  and  men  of  a  still  earlier  date,"  as,  in  fact,  it  does 
follow  from  the  foffpuiro*  ^rpov  doctrine.  This  should  dispose  of  the  fancy  that 
Antisthenes  is  specially  aimed  at  in  the  dialogue.  The  "  still  older  "  person 
meant  is  presumably  Parmenides,  who  expressly  denies  that  "  what  is  not  " 
can  be  spoken  of  or  named. 

1  Exactly  the  same  point  is  urged  against  Protagoras  at  Theaetet.  161  c-e. 
But  in  that  dialogue,  where  Plato's  main  purpose  is  epistemological,  Socrates 
is  careful  to  consider  whether  Protagoras  might  not  make  a  rejoinder  to  this 
criticism  (i66tf-i68c),  and  to  examine  the  soundness  of  the  rejoinder  (1710- 
1726,  1780-1796). 

8  The  cjuibble  turns  on  the  uses  of  the  word  votw,  which  signifies  (a)  to 
think,  to  intend,  to  purpose,  (b)  to  mean  or  signify.  The  sophist  pretends  to 
take  the  expression  "  your  words  mean  so-and-so,"  in  the  sense  that  they 
"  intend  "  or  "  think,"  and  asks  how  anything  but  a  tyvxh  can  possibly 
"  think  "  anything.  There  is  the  same  Aquivoqtie  in  the  distinction  in  English 
between  "  to  mean  "  and  "  to  mean  to  "  say  or  do  something. 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  97 

for  returning  to  his  own  specimen  of  serious  "  protreptic  "  at  the 
point  where  he  had  left  off. 

We  saw  that  the  one  thing  needful  for  the  conduct  of  life  is 
knowledge.  But  what  kind  of  "  knowledge  "  ?  Of  course,  the 
knowledge  which  will  "  profit  "  us,  "  useful  knowledge."  Now 
what  kind  of  knowledge  is  that  ?  It  cannot  be  any  kind  of  know- 
ledge which  merely  teaches  us  how  to  produce  something  without 
also  teaching  us  how  to  use  the  thing  we  have  produced.  This 
enables  us  to  dismiss  at  once  all  the  specialized  industrial  arts, 
like  that  of  the  maker  of  musical  instruments,  none  of  which  teach 
a  man  how  to  use  the  thing  they  have  taught  him  to  make.  In 
particular,  this  consideration  applies  to  the  art  of  the  AoyoTroios,  which 
looks  so  imposing.  We  might  think  that  this  art  of  composing 
effective  speeches  is  just  the  kind  of  knowledge  we  need  for  the 
conduct  of  life,  since  it  teaches  us  how  to  make  the  "  charm  "  or 
"  spell  "  which  is  potent  against  those  most  deadly  of  enemies, 
angry  and  prejudiced  dicasteries  and  ecclesiae.  Yet,  after  all, 
the  important  thing  is  to  know  how  to  use  the  "  spell/1  but  the 
XoyoTTotos  only  teaches  you  how  to  make  it.1  There  might  be  some- 
thing to  say  for  the  soldier's  profession,  the  art  of  catching  a  human 
prey  ;  but,  after  all,  the  hunter  does  not  know  how  to  use  the  game 
he  captures,  but  has  to  pass  it  on  to  the  cook  or  restaurateur ;  and 
in  the  same  way  the  commander  who  "  captures  "  a  city  or  an 
army  has  not  learned  from  his  profession  what  to  do  with  his 
capture  when  he  has  made  it.  The  military  art,  then,  is  clearly 
not  the  supreme  art  needed  for  the  right  conduct  of  life  (288b- 
290^).* 

Incidentally  we  note  that  the  claim  of  any  of  the  purely  specula- 
tive branches  of  knowledge,  the  mathematical  sciences,  has  been 
disposed  of  by  this  criticism.  The  mathematicians  also  are,  in 
their  way,  "  hunters  "  on  the  trail  of  "  realities  "  (ra  WTO).  But 
though  their  8taypa/x/xara  (here  again  the  word  means  "  proofs  " 

1  The  point  here,  as  in  the  Gorgias,  which  classes  "  rhetoric  "  with  "  swim- 
ming "  as  a  device  for  preserving  your  life,  is  that  the  patron  of  the  \oyoTroi6* 
is  normally  one  of  the  well-to-do  minority  of  whom  the  Periclean  democracy 
were  naturally  suspicious  precisely  because  democracy  really  meant  the 
"  exploitation  "  of  this  class  for  the  benefit  of  the  "  proletarian."  From  the 
well-to-do  victim's  point  of  view,  effective  public  speaking  is  exactly  what  it 
is  called  here,  a  "  spell  "  to  put  the  watchful,  hostile  belua  of  democracy  to 
sleep  ;  from  the  democrat's  point  of  view,  it  is  a  trick  by  which  the  fu<r<55?;/*os 
gulls  the  simple  citizens  into  taking  him  for  the  "  people's  friend." 

1  Socrates  is  made  to  assert  that  this  criticism  was  delivered  by  Clinias 
on  his  own  account ;  Crito  thinks  such  a  mere  boy  could  not  have  shown  such 
acuteness,  and  hints  that  the  remark  must  really  have  come  from  Socrates 
himself  (2905).  This  is  dramatically  in  keeping  with  the  picture  Plato  has 
drawn  01  Crito— a  dull,  honest  man.  But  the  real  point  is  that  the  "  pro- 
treptic "  of  Socrates  is  effective  in  the  right  way  ;  it  elicits  from  a  younger 
mind  flashes  of  insight  which  would  have  been  impossible  but  for  the  way 
in  which  the  preceding  questions  have  led  up  to  them.  This  is  the  true 
answer  to  the  criticism  of  Grote  that  anyone  can  ask  puzzling  questions. 
The  peculiarity  of  the  Socratic  Question  is  not  to  be  puzzling,  but  to  be 
enlightening. 


&8  PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

rather  than  "  figures  ")  "  find  "  the  quarry,  the  mathematicians 
do  not  know  how  to  "  treat/'  it ;  that  task,  if  they  have  any  sense, 
they  leave  to  the  SiaA**™™?,  the  critical  philosopher.1  On 
scrutiny,  the  "  art  "  which  seems  to  have  the  best  claims  to  suprem- 
acy is  the  /Sao-iAt/o)  r^vr/,  the  "  art  of  the  king/1  i.e.  statesman- 
ship. If  there  is  any  "  speciality  "  which  can  secure  happiness, 
it  should  certainly  be  that  of  the  man  who  knows  how  to  govern 
and  administer  the  community  (since,  of  course,  no  one  except  a 
paradox-monger  would  deny  that  "  human  well-being  "  is  what  all 
true  statesmanship  takes  as  its  end).  But  with  this  result  we  seem 
to  have  come  round  in  a  complete  circle  to  the  same  point  from 
which  our  argument  set  out.  It  is  clear  that  statesmanship 
(77  TroAmKT)  rfyvrj)  is  the  supreme  master-art ;  generals  and  other 
functionaries  are  only  servants  of  the  statesman.  He  uses,  as 
means  to  his  end — the  well-being  of  the  state — victory  in  war  and 
all  the  other  results  which  the  generals  and  the  rest  make ;  and  we 
have  seen  already  in  the  Cratylus  that  the  art  which  uses  a  product 
is  always  the  master-art  in  relation  to  those  which  made  the  product. 
But  the  statesman  too  has  something  to  produce  ;  he  uses  the 
products  of  all  the  other  "  craftsmen  "  as  means  to  producing 
something  himself,  and  this  something  must  be  something  bene- 
ficial, and  therefore  good.  Now  we  had  already  satisfied  ourselves 
that  knowledge  is  the  only  thing  which  is  unconditionally  good. 
Hence,  if  statesmanship  is  really  the  art  of  the  conduct  of  life,  such 
results  as  wealth,  civic  independence,  freedom  from  party  strife, 
must  be  its  mere  by-products  ;  its  main  product  must  be  wisdom 
and  goodness.  Yet  what  wisdom  and  goodness  does  true  states- 
manship produce  in  those  on  whom  it  is  exercised  ?  It  does  not 
aim  at  making  them  all  "  good  "  shoemakers  or  "  good  "  carpenters, 
or  "  good  "  at  any  other  special  calling.  Apparently  we  must 
say  that  the  knowledge  which  the  art  of  the  statesman  produces  in 
us  is  the  knowledge  of  itself.  But  what  use  do  we  make  of  this 
knowledge  of  statesmanship  ?  Perhaps  its  use  is  that  it  enables  us 
to  make  other  men  good.  But  then  we  come  back  to  the  old 
question,  "  Good  at  what  ?  "  We  seem  to  have  reached  the  con- 
clusion that  happiness  depends  on  knowing  how  to  make  other 
men  good  at  knowing  how  to  make  yet  other  men  (and  so  on  ad 
indefinitum)  good  at  knowing  ...  no  one  can  say  precisely  what 
(2910-2920). 

1  The  point  becomes  clear  if  we  think  of  the  relation  of  a  Pythagorean 
geometer  to  the  typical  $iaXe/crut6s  Zeno.  The  mathematicians  "  track  "  or 
"  hunt  down  "  truths  like  the  Pythagorean  theorem,  but  they  are  so  far  from 
knowing  what  to  "  do  with  them  "  that  it  is  left  for  a  8ta\e/mK<5s  like  Zeno 
to  show  that  the  discovery  itself  leads  to  consequences  which  are  fatal  to 
some  of  the  postulates  of  the  Pythagorean  geometer  (such  as  the  incommen- 
surability  of  the  "  side  "  and  the  "  diagonal  ").  The  last  word  on  the 
question  what  can  be  "  made  of  "  the  results  of  the  sciences  rests  with  the 
critical  "  metaphysician,"  who  has  to  test  the  claims  of  these  sciences  to  give 
a  finally  satisfactory  account  of  "  the  real."  Note  the  complete  acceptance 
here  of  the  "  primacy  of  the  practical  reason,"  which  is  as  characteristic  ol 
Socrates  and  Plato  as  of  Kant. 


MINOR  SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  99 

The  serious  positive  purpose  of  the  argument,  which  has  in- 
cidentally slipped  into  becoming  a  direct  conversation  between 
Socrates  and  Crito,  is  not  hard  to  discover.  The  knowledge  on 
which  the  right  conduct  of  life  and  the  right  government  of  men 
alike  depend  is  not  knowledge  of  the  way  to  meet  any  one  particular 
type  of  situation  or  to  discharge  any  one  particular  calling  or 
function  ;  it  is  knowkdge  of  good,  or,  to  put  the  point  in  more 
modern  phraseology,  knowledge  of  absolute  moral  values.  On  the 
Socratic  assumption  that  knowledge  of  this  kind  is  always  followed 
by  corresponding  action,  and  is  therefore  the  only  knowledge  which 
is  guaranteed  against  all  possible  misuse,  the  question  for  what  we 
are  to  use  it  becomes  superfluous  ;  we  do  not  "  use  "  it  as  a  means 
to  some  ulterior  end  at  all,  we  simply  act  it  out.  To  put  the  matter 
in  the  Greek  way,  every  "  art  "  is  an  "  art  of  opposites  "  ;  that  is, 
may  be  used  for  a  bad  as  well  as  for  a  good  end.  The  special  know- 
ledge of  toxicology  which  makes  a  man  a  medical  specialist  may 
also  make  him  a  dangerous  secret  poisoner.  The  intimate  know- 
ledge of  the  Stock  Exchange  and  share  market  which  makes  a 
man  an  excellent  trustee  for  the  fortune  of  his  ward  will  also 
make  him  a  particularly  dangerous  "  fraudulent  trustee  "  if  he 
applies  it  for  dishonest  ends.  But  "  knowledge  of  the  good  " 
is  in  a  unique  position  which  distinguishes  it  from  all  special 
professional  or  technical  knowledge,  the  thing  with  which  the 
"  sophists "  and  their  pupils  regularly  confuse  it.  It  too, 
in  a  sense,  is  "  of  opposites,  "  since  to  know  what  is  good  in- 
volves knowing  that  what  is  incompatible  with  good  must  be  evil. 
But,  on  Socratic  principles,  this  knowledge  is  not  a  knowledge  of 
opposites  in  the  sense  that  it  can  be  put  to  either  of  two  opposite 
uses,  a  good  one  and  a  bad  one.  The  possession  of  the  knowledge 
carries  along  with  it  the  possession  of  the  "  good  will."  We  thus 
recover  the  fundamental  positions  of  the  Socratic  ethics  from  the 
apparently  fruitless  argument.  The  reason  why  the  positive  result  is 
not  stated  is  simply  that  the  object  of  Socrates'  "  protreptic  "  is 
not  to  do  another  man's  thinking  for  him  and  present  him  with 
ready-made  "  results,"  but  to  stimulate  him  to  think  along  the 
right  lines  for  himself,  so  that  when  the  "  result  "  emerges,  it 
comes  as  a  personal  conviction  won  by  a  genuine  personal  exercise 
of  intelligence.  Hence  Socrates  is  represented  as  breaking  off  at 
the  point  we  have  reached,  and  appealing  to  the  two  distinguished 
strangers  to  help  him  out  of  the  "  squall  "  in  which  he  seems  to  be 
threatened  with  shipwreck.  As  we  should  expect,  they  do  nothing 
of  the  kind,  but  fall  to  their  old  trick.  $  Socrates  does  not  need  any 
help,  for  they  will  prove  to  him  that  he  already  has  the  knowledge 
for  which  he  is  seeking.  He  knows  some  things,  ergo  he  has  know- 
ledge ;  but  one  cannot  both  have  knowledge  and  not  have  it,  ergo 
he  knows  everything.  And  so,  for  the  matter  of  that,  does  every 
one  else  (2930-0).  Euthydemus  and  his  brother  have,  in  fact,  a 
sort  of  universal  infallibility  ;  they  know  all  trades  and  the  answers 
to  all  the  most  trifling  speculative  questions.  This,  says  Socrates, 


100          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

must  be  the  great  truth  to  which  all  that  has  gone  before  was  the 
playful  prelude.1 

From  this  point  onwards  the  dialogue  becomes  increasingly 
farcical  as  the  two  brothers  go  on  to  develop  one  absurdity  after 
another,  until  Socrates,  the  only  member  of  the  company  who  has 
preserved  his  gravity,  takes  his  leave  of  them  with  many  ironical 
compliments  and  the  advice  to  take  care,  in  their  own  interests,  not 
to  cheapen  the  price  of  their  wisdom  by  too  many  public  exhibitions. 
There  is  no  need  to  follow  in  detail  the  whole  series  of  ludicrous 
paralogisms  which  precedes  this  finale.  Aristotle  found  good 
material  in  it  for  his  own  study  of  fallacies,  but  Plato's  object  is 
ethical  rather  than  logical,  as  has  been  already  said.2  The  extreme 
absurdity  of  the  performances  by  which  the  brothers  follow  up  the 
second  and  more  important  part  of  the  "  protreptic  "  argument  are 
merely  meant  to  throw  that  section  of  the  dialogue  into  the  strongest 
relief.  The  one  comment  it  may  be  worth  while  to  make  is  that  the 
standing  rule  of  "  eristic/1  by  which  the  respondent  is  expected  to 
reply  to  each  question  exactly  as  it  has  been  put,  without  raising 
any  objection  to  its  form  or  qualifying  his  answer  by  the  introduc- 
tion of  any  distinguo,  however  simple,  of  itself  provides  exceptional 
opportunity  for  the  perpetration  of  every  kind  of  "  fallacy  in  the 
diction."  From  this  point  of  view  much  of  the  dialogue  might  be 
said  to  be  a  criticism  of  the  method  of  question  and  answer  as  a 
vehicle  of  philosophic  thought.  It  is  clear,  and  Plato  may  have 
meant  to  hint  this,  that  the  method  is  the  most  uncertain  of 
weapons  unless  the  questioner  combines  intelligence  with  abso- 
lutely good  faith  ;  this  is  why  it  may  be  a  powerful  weapon  of 
criticism  in  the  hands  of  Socrates,  but  is  nothing  but  an  instru- 
ment of  sophistry  in  those  of  a  Euthydemus  whose  only  object  is  to 
make  men  stare. 

At  the  end  of  Socrates'  narrative,  Plato  adds  a  sort  of  appendix, 
a  page  or  two  of  direct  conversation  between  Socrates  and  Crito. 
Crito  observes  that  the  remark  had  already  been  made  to  him  by  a 
certain  writer  of  speeches  for  the  law-courts  who  fancied  himself  a 
"  great  wit  "  (vaw  cro<£os),  that  the  disgraceful  scene  in  the  Lyceum 
was  enough  to  show  that  "  philosophy  "  is  "  mere  waste  of  time  " 
(ovScv  7r/oay/Aa),  for  the  professionals  who  had  just  been  making 
egregious  fools  of  themselves  were  actually  among  its  most  eminent 

1  We  are  still  dealing  with  the  misuse  of  Eleatic  doctrine.  The  proof  of 
the  infallibility  of  every  one  is  made  to  turn  on  the  principle  of  contiadiction 
plus  the  neglect  of  qualifying  conditions.  We  cannot  both  have  knowledge 
and  not  have  it ;  if  you  know  anything,  you  have  knowledge,  and  therefore 
have  all  knowledge.  This  is  just  the  Eleatic  doctrine  that  there  is  no  half-way 
house  between  "  what  is  "  and  blank  nonentity,  transferred  from  physics 
to  logic.  Whenever  we  come  on  dim\ayiKol  we  are  safe  in  looking  for  the 
influence  of  Zeno. 

1  Note  that  at  30 ia  Socrates,  without  any  explanation,  falls  into  the 
technical  language  of  the  so-called  "  ideal  "  theory  when  he  says  that  *a\d 
wpdyftara  are  different  from  aM  rb  Ka\6v,  though  a  certain  /rdXXos  "  is  present " 
to  them,  and  that  this  peculiar  Socratic  use  of  the  word  irapelvai  is  even  made 
the  subject  of  a  jest. 


MINOR  SOCRAT1C  DIALOGUES  101 

living  representatives.  The  critic  who  made  the  remark  was  not 
himself  a  political  man,  nor  had  he  ever  addressed  a  law-court, 
but  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  skilled  professional  composer  of 
speeches  for  litigants  (3046-3050).  Socrates  replies  that  these  men, 
who,  as  Prodicus  once  said,  are  on  the  border-line  between  politics 
and  philosophy,  are  always  jealous  of  the  philosopher  ;  they  think 
he  keeps  them  out  of  rightful  recognition.  The  truth  is,  that  the 
man  who  tries  to  combine  two  callings  is  regularly  inferior  in 
both  to  the  man  who  confines  himself  to  one.  //  the  philosophic 
life  and  the  life  of  affairs  are  both  good  things,  the  man  who  tries 
to  play  both  parts  is  certain  to  be  inferior  in  each  to  the  specialist 
in  his  own  line  (3050-306^). 

Ic  has  naturally  been  suspected  that  there  is  some  personal 
allusion  underlying  these  remarks,  and  the  view  has  often  been  taken 
that  Plato  is  aiming  a  shaft  on  his  own  account  at  his  rival  Isocrates. 
It  is  true,  of  course,  that  during  the  lifetime  of  Socrates,  Isocrates 
was  known  only  as  a  Aoyoypa<£o9  or  composer  of  speeches  for  the 
courts,  but  that  some  time  early  in  the  fourth  century  he  gave  up 
this  profession  for  that  of  presiding  over  a  regular  institution  for 
the  preparation  of  young  men  of  promise  for  a  political  career. 
It  is  true  also  that  Isocrates  called  the  kind  of  education  he  bestowed 
on  his  pupils  his  "  philosophy,"  and  that  he  affected  to  look  down 
on  the  severely  scientific  studies  of  Plato's  Academy  as  "  useless  " 
and  unpractical.  From  Plato's  point  of  view,  it  would  be  highly 
d  propos  to  speak  of  Isocrates  as  "on  the  border  line  "  between  a 
politician  and  a  philosopher,  and  inferior  to  each  in  his  own  depart- 
ment— except  that  one  might  doubt  whether  Plato  did  really  think 
Isocrates  inferior  in  statesmanship  to  the  commonplace  Athenian 
men  of  affairs  of  his  own  time. 

Yet  I  think  the  identification  quite  impossible.  At  the  date 
indicated  by  all  the  allusions  of  the  Euthydemus  Isocrates  would 
still  be  no  more  than  a  lad,  whereas  the  person  spoken  of  by  Crito 
is  already  a  Xoyoypa^og  of  established  repute.  Still  less  could 
Socrates,  at  this  date,  be  supposed  to  anticipate  that  Isocrates 
would  some  day  lay  claim  to  the  reputation  of  a  philosopher.  (The 
case  is  rather  different  with  the  express  references  of  the  Phaedrus 
to  Isocrates,  since,  as  we  shall  see,  the  date  of  that  dialogue  is 
supposed  to  be  later.)  We  must  suppose  Socrates  to  be  alluding 
rather  to  some  well-known  figure  of  the  time  of  the  Archidamian 
war.  There  is  no  reason  why  there  should  not  have  been  more 
than  one  personage  of  the  age  to  which  Callicles  and  Thrasymachus 
belong  who  fancied  himself  as  a  blend  of  the  philosophical  thinker 
and  the  practical  "  statesman."  The  remains  of  Antiphon  "  the 
sophist,"  for  example,  suggest  by  their  character  that  he  might 
perfectly  well  be  the  person  intended,  and  we  know  from  a  notice 
preserved  by  Xenophon l  that  he  was  among  the  acquaintances  of 

1  Xen.  Mem.  i.  6.  It  is  important  to  note,  as  Professor  Burnet  has 
done,  that  the  information  cannot  depend  on  Xenophon's  personal  recollec- 
tions, but  must  have  been  taken  from  some  source  describing  Socrates  a?  he 


102          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Socrates.  It  is  true  that  there  is  no  direct  proof  that  he  was  a 
writer  of  speeches  for  the  law-courts,  but  there  is  no  reason  why  he 
may  not  have  been.  In  fact,  it  does  not  seem  to  me  by  any  means 
established  that  Antiphon  the  "  sophist  "  and  Antiphon  of  Rhamnus, 
the  famous  politician  and  Aoyoypa^os,  are  two  distinct  persons.1 
And  I  feel  sure  that  we  have  no  right  wantonly  to  attribute  to  Plato 
the  anachronisms  which  a  reference  to  Isocrates  in  our  dialogue 
would  imply,  nor  is  there,  in  point  of  fact,  any  real  evidence  that 
there  ever  was  any  personal  ill-feeling  between  Isocrates  and  Plato.2 
The  real  object  of  the  passage  is  probably  simply  to  recognize  the 
fact  that  to  a  good  many  persons  the  dialectic  of  Socrates  must  have 
seemed  much  on  a  par  with  the  frivolities  of  Euthydemus  and 
his  brother,  and  to  hint  that,  if  we  choose,  we  may  discover  the 
real  difference  between  the  two  things  from  the  dialogue  itself,  as 
we  certainly  can. 


See  further : 

RITTER,  C. — Platon,  i.  450-462  (Euthydemus),  462-496  (Cvatylus). 
RAEDER,  H. — Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung,  137-153- 
STEWART,  J.  A.— Plato's  Doctrine  of  Ideas,  34-39  (Cratylus.) 
WARBURG,  M. — Zwei  Fragen  zum  Kratylos.     (Berlin,  1929.) 

was  at  the  time  of  the  Archidamian  war.  This  gives  it  all  the  more  historical 
value. 

1  The  question  should  probably  be  decided,  if  decided  at  all,  on  linguistic 
and  stylistic  grounds.  But  are  the  remains  of  the  "  sophist  "  extensive  enough 
to  permit  of  effective  comparison  with  those  of  the  Xoyoypd^os  ?  And  to 
what  extent  should  we  expect  to  find  a  \oyoypd<f>os  exhibiting  in  his  composi- 
tions for  the  courts  the  peculiarities  of  his  personal  literary  style  ?  Professor 
S.  Luria  calls  my  attention  in  particular  to  two  articles  by  Bignone  in  the 
Rendiconti  del  R.  Istituto  Lombard,  di  scienze,  1919,  pp.  567  f.,  755  If.,  as  estab- 
lishing the  non-identity  of  the  two  men.  I  regret  that  I  have  not  myself 
seen  these  essays. 

8  On  this  point  see  the  remarks  of  Burnet,  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I.,  215. 
Isocrates  may  have  enjoyed  aiming  his  shafts  at  the  Academic  mathematics, 
but  the  deliberate  adoption  of  Isocratean  tricks  of  style  in  the  Sophistes  and 
the  other  later  dialogues  seems  to  show  that  Plato  is  not  likely  to  have  borne 
him  any  malice  on  account  of  his  inability  to  appreciate  science, 


CHAPTER    VI 
SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  :   GORGIAS,  MENO 

THE  Gorgias  is  a  much  longer  work  than  any  we  have  yet 
considered,  and  presents  us  with  an  exposition  of  the  Socratic 
morality  so  charged  with  passionate  feeling  and  expressed 
with  such  moving  eloquence  that  it  has  always  been  a  prime 
favourite  with  all  lovers  of  great  ethical  literature.  The  moral 
fervour  and  splendour  of  the  dialogue,  however,  ought  not  to  blind 
us,  as  it  has  blinded  most  writers  on  Platonic  chronology,  to  certain 
obvious  indications  that  it  is  a  youthful  work,  earlier  in  composition, 
perhaps,  than  some  of  those  with  which  we  have  been  concerned. 
We  might  have  inferred  as  much  from  the  mere  fact  that  Plato 
has  adopted  the  form  of  the  direct  dialogue  for  so  considerable  a 
'  work,  and  thus  missed  the  chance  of  giving  us  a  description  of  the 
personality  of  Gorgias  to  compare  with  his  elaborate  portrait  of 
Protagoras.  Personally,  I  cannot  also  help  feeling  that,  with  all 
its  moral  splendour,  the  dialogue  is  too  long  :  it  "  drags.1'  The 
Plato  of  the  Protagoras  or  Republic,  as  I  feel,  would  have  known 
how  to  secure  the  same  effect  with  less  expenditure  of  words  ; 
there  is  a  diffuseness  about  our  dialogue  which  betrays  the  hand 
of  the  prentice,  though  the  prentice  in  this  case  is  a  Plato.  For 
this  reason  I  think  it  a  mistake  in  principle  to  look,  as  some  have 
done,  for  an  ethical  advance  in  doctrine  as  we  pass  from  the 
Protagoras  to  the  Gorgias.  As  we  shall  see  when  we  come  to  deal 
with  the  Protagoras,  the  ethical  doctrine  of  the  dialogues  is  identical, 
and  it  is  inconceivable  to  me  that  any  reader  of  literary  sensibility 
can  doubt  which  of  the  two  is  the  product  of  a  riper  mastery  of 
dramatic  art.  Beyond  this  general  statement  that  the  Gorgias  must 
be  an  early  work,  and  probably  a  work  dating  not  many  years  after 
the  death  of  Socrates,  I  do  not  think  it  safe  to  hazard  any  con- 
jecture as  to  the  date  of  composition.1 

1  We  shall  see  when  we  come  to  deal  with  the  Republic  that  it,  and  con- 
sequently any  dialogues  which  precede  it,  must  be  dated  not  much  later  than 
387,  within  twelve  years  of  Socrates'  death.  If  the  Gorgias  falls  early  in  this 
period,  we  must  place  its  composition  quite  soon  after  that  event,  while  the 
feelings  connected  with  it  were  still  in  their  first  freshness  in  Plato's  mind. 
Professor  Wilamowitz-Moellendorf,  in  his  Plato,  i.  221,  ii.  94-105,  makes  an 
ingenious  attempt  at  a  more  exact  dating.  He  starts  from  the  curious  mis- 
quotation of  Pindar's  well-known  lines  about  p6juoj,  as  given  by  all  our  best  MSS. 
at  Gorgias  4846  (where  the  text  has  been  corrected  back  again  in  all  the  printed 
editions).  He  rightly,  as  it  seems  to  me,  holds  that  the  misquotation  is  what 
Plato  actually  wrote,  and  then  goes  on  (again,  I  believe,  rightly)  to  infer  from 

103 


104          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

It  is  unusually  difficult  to  determine  the  date  at  which  the 
conversation  is  supposed  to  be  held.  It  has  sometimes  been  sup- 
posed that  a  reference  made  by  Socrates  to  some  occasion  when  he 
was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  the  /3ov\rj  who  had  to  preside 
over  the  meetings  of  the  lKK\rj<ria,  and  raised  a  laugh  by  his  ignor- 
ance of  the  formalities  to  be  observed  in  "  putting  the  question  " 
(Gorg.  473*),  has  to  do  with  the  events  of  the  trial  of  the  generals  at 
Arginusae,  where  we  know  from  both  Plato  and  Xenophon  that 
Socrates  actually  was  one  of  the  presiding  committee.  If  this 
interpretation  were  certain,  we  should  have  to  suppose  the  con- 
versation to  fall  somewhere  in  the  last  year  of  the  Peloponnesian 
war,  when  Athens  was  fighting  with  her  back  to  the  wall  for  her 
very  existence.  There  are  certainly  no  signs  in  the  dialogue  that 
this  situation  is  presupposed ;  it  seems  rather  to  be  taken  for 
granted  that  the  political  and  commercial  life  of  the  city  is  in  a 
normal  condition.  Moreover,  as  Burnet  has  said,  the  democracy 
was  in  no  laughing  mood  at  the  trial  of  the  generals,  and  we  thus 
seem  forced  to  suppose  that  the  reference  is  to  some  unknown 
incident  which  happened  on  some  former  occasion  when  Socrates 
was  a  member  of  the  /SovA*?.1  On  the  other  side,  it  would  appear 
from  the  opening  sentences  of  the  dialogue  that  Socrates  is  as  yet  a 
complete  stranger  to  Gorgias  and  his  profession,  and  this  suggests 
that  Gorgias  is  in  Athens  for  the  first  time.  There  seems  no  good 
reason  to  deny  the  statement  of  Diodorus  Siculus  that  Gorgias 
visited  Athens  first  as  a  member  of  the  embassy  sent  thither  by  his 
native  city,  Leontini,  in  the  year  427,  and  such  a  date  would  fit  in 
very  well  with  certain  other  indications  in  the  work,  e.g.  the  refer- 
ence to  the  "  recent  "  death  of  Pericles,2  and  the  statements  about 
the  almost  despotic  power  of  the  Athenian  demagogue.8  (These 
would  suit  the  time  when  the  place  of  Pericles  was  being  taken  by 
Cleon  and  men  of  his  stamp  to  perfection.)  Possibly,  too,  the  date 

Libanius'  Apology  of  Socrates  that  the  accusation  of  misquoting  Pindar  had 
figured  in  the  pamphlet  of  Polycrates  against  Socrates  published  somewhere 
about  393.  His  final  inference  is  that  the  accusation  was  based  on  this 
passage  of  the  Gorgias,  which  must  thus  be  anterior  to  the  pamphlet  of 
Polycrates.  I  hope  to  suggest  reasons  for  believing  that  the  misquotation 
in  Plato  is  conscious  and  made  for  a  legitimate  purpose.  At  this  point  I 
merely  wish  to  observe  that  it  cannot  have  been  the  foundation  of  an  accusa- 
tion against  the  memory  of  Socrates  for  two  conclusive  reasons  :  (i)  that  in 
any  case  a  misquotation  in  Plato  would  be  no  proof  of  anything  against 
Socrates,  and  (2)  that  the  person  who  is  made  by  Plato  to  misquote  Pindar  is 
not  Socrates,  but  Callicles,  who  is  arguing  against  him.  Polycrates,  to  judge 
from  the  line  Isocrates  takes  with  him  (Isoc.  xi.  1-8),  was  pretty  much  of  a 
fool,  but  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  he  could  have  used  a  misquotation  put  by 
Plato  into  the  mouth  of  Callicles  to  damage  the  reputation  of  Socrates.  At 
the  same  time,  I  feel  no  doubt  that  the  Gorgias  was  written  as  early  as  Pro- 
fessor Wilamowitz  holds,  and  most  probably  earlier. 

1  This  is  quite  compatible  with  the  statement  of  Apology,  326  i.  Socrates 
says  there  that  he  has  been  a  member  of  the  /fovXi}.  He  does  not  say  that  he 
had  only  served  once  in  that  capacity.  See  Burnet's  note  in  he.  cit.  The  best 
historians  hold  that  Xenophon  has  made  a  slip  in  saying  that  Socrates  was  the 
Anerdrijf  at  the  famous  trial. 

1  Gorgias,  503$.  •  Ibid.  466$. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  105 

would  not  be  too  early  for  the  allusion  to  the  handsome  Demus, 
the  son  of  Plato's  own  stepfather  Pyrilampes,  as  a  reigning  beauty, 
though  there  may  be  a  very  small  anachronism  here  since  Aristo- 
phanes first  mentions  the  craze  for  Demus  in  the  Wasps,  which 
belongs  to  the  year  422. l  On  the  other  side,  again,  we  find  the 
Antiope  of  Euripides  quoted  as  a  well-known  and  popular  work,2 
and  the  date  of  that  tragedy  seems  to  be  c.  408.  The  career  of 
Archelaus  of  Macedon,  again,  comes  in  for  a  good  deal  of  discussion,3 
and  it  has  commonly  been  inferred  from  Thucydides  that  his  reign 
did  not  begin  until  414-413,  though  disputed  successions  and  the 
simultaneous  existence  of  several  pretenders  to  the  crown  were  so 
common  in  Macedonia  that  we  cannot  build  very  confidently  on 
such  data.  It  is  very  unfortunate  that  we  have  no  independent 
information  about  Callicles  of  Acharnae,  who  appears  ill  the  dialogue 
as  a  cultivated  and  ambitious  young  man  who  has  lately  entered 
political  life,  though  the  mere  fact  that  Plato  specifies  his  deme  is 
enough  to  show  that  he  is  an  actual  man,  and  not,  as  has  been 
suggested,  an  alias  for  some  one.  If  he  really  attempted  to  act 
up  to  the  Nietzschian  theories  ascribed  to  him  in  the  dialogue,  it 
may  not  be  wonderful  that  no  record  of  his  career  has  survived. 
In  the  names  which  Plato  gives  as  those  of  his  immediate  associates 
we  recognize  some  which  were  prominent  in  the  second  half  of  the 
great  war,  but,  of  course  their  early  days  would  belong  to  its 
first  half.  On  the  whole,  the  arguments  for  an  early  dramatic 
date  seem  to  preponderate,  though  the  references  to  the  Antiope 
and  the  usurpation  of  the  Macedonian  crown  by  Archelaus, 
especially  the  second,  seem  to  create  a  little  difficulty.4 

The  characters  of  the  dialogue  besides  Socrates  are  four — Gorgias, 
the  famous  "  orator  "  of  Leontini,  whose  well-known  rhetorical 
devices  for  adding  pomp  and  glitter  to  language  represent  the  first 
stage  in  the  development  of  a  literary  prose  style  rising  above 
colloquialism  or  bald  narration  of  matter  of  fact  and  yet  remaining 
prose ;  Polus  of  Agrigentum,  his  enthusiastic  disciple  and  admirer ; 
Callicles  of  Acharnae,  of  whom  we  only  know  what  Plato  has 
thought  fit  to  tell  us ;  and  Chaerephon,  the  lean,  impetuous,  and 
apparently  rather  superstitious  companion  of  Socrates,  whom 

1  Gorgias,  481^,  Aristoph.  Wasps,  89. 

*  Gorgias,  4840-486^.     Since  Aristotle  appears  to  have  been  the  first  person 
to  attempt  to  construct  a  chronology  of  the  Attic  drama  by  making  a  collection 
of  didascaliae,  I  should  have  attached  no  importance  to  this  particular  point 
but  for  the  fact  that  if  the  commonly  accepted  view  about  the  date  of  the 
Antiope  is  correct  Plato  must  pretty  certainly  have  seen  the  performance 
himself. 

8  Ibid.  470^-47 id. 

*  The  way  in  which  Nicias  is  mentioned  at  472*2  certainly  seems  to  assume 
that  he  is  living  and  at  the  very  height  of  his  prosperity.     This  would 
exclude  any  date  much  later  than  the  sailing  of  the  Syracusan  expedition  in 
415.     The  difficulties  seem  to  me  to  be  created  by  the  very  wealth  of  topical 
allusions  for  which  the  dialogue  is  remarkable.     It  would  be  very  hard,  in 
the  absence  of  something  like  the  complete  files  of  a  newspaper,  to  make  so 
many  of  these  allusions  without  falling  into  a  small  error  here  or  there,  and 
there  were  no  newspapers  or  gazettes  at  Athens. 


106          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Aristophanes  finds  so  useful  as  a  butt.1  The  precise  scene  is  not 
indicated ;  apparently  it  is  not  in  the  house  of  Callicles,  who  is 
acting  as  host  to  the  distinguished  visitor,  but  in  some  public  place 
where  Gorgias  has  been  giving  a  display  of  his  gifts.2  The  ostensible 
subject  of  the  conversation  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from 
the  real  subject.  Professedly  the  question  propounded  for  dis- 
cussion is  the  new  speciality  which  Gorgias  has  introduced  to 
Athens,  the  art  of  impressive  speech  ;  the  points  to  be  decided  are 
whether  it  is  really  an  "  art  "  at  all,  and  if  it  is,  whether  it  is,  as 
Gorgias  claims,  the  queen  of  all  other  "  arts."  But  to  discover 
the  real  object  of  the  work  we  need  to  look  carefully  at  the  general 
construction  of  the  argument,  and  particularly  at  the  end  of  the 
whole  composition.  If  we  do  this,  we  find  that  the  dialogue  really 
consists  of  three  successive  conversations  of  Socrates  with  a  single 
interlocutor  ;  it  has,  so  to  say,  three  scenes,  each  with  two  "  actors." 
In  the  first  conversation  between  Socrates  and  Gorgias  the  topic 
of  conversation  really  is  the  character  and  worth  of  the  "  rhetori- 
cian's "  art ;  in  the  second,  between  Socrates  and  Polus,  we  find 
that  the  rival  estimates  of  the  worth  of  rhetoric  depend  on  sharply 
contrasted  ethical  convictions  about  the  true  happiness  of  man. 
In  the  final  conversation  with  Callicles,  where  the  tone  of  the  dialogue 
reaches  its  level  of  highest  elevation,  all  secondary  questions  have 
fallen  completely  into  the  background  and  we  are  left  with  the 
direct  and  absolute  conflict  between  two  competing  theories  of  life, 
each  represented  by  a  striking  personality.  The  true  object  of  the 
whole  work  thus  emerges  :  it  is  to  pit  a  typical  life  of  devotion  to 
the  supra-personal  good  against  the  typical  theory  and  practice  of 
the  "  will  to  power  "  at  its  best.  We  are  to  see  how  the  theory  of 
the  "  will  to  power,"  expounded  by  a  thoroughly  capable,  intelligent, 
and  far  from  merely  ignoble  champion,  like  Callicles,  and  the 
"  practice  "  of  it  as  embodied  in  Periclean  Imperialism  look  from 
the  point  of  view  of  a  Socrates,  and  also  how  the  convictions  and 
career  of  a  Socrates  look  to  the  intelligent  worshipper  of  "  strength  "  ; 
and  when  we  have  looked  at  each  party  with  the  eyes  of  the  other, 
we  are  to  be  the  judges  between  them.  Life  and  the  way  it  should 
be  lived,  not  the  value  of  rhetoric,  is  the  real  theme,  exactly  as  the 
real  theme  of  the  Republic  is  not  the  merits  and  demerits  of  com- 
peting political  and  economic  systems,  but  "  righteousness,  temper- 
ance, and  judgment  to  come."  3 

1  For  the  leanness,  cf.  Aristoph.  Clouds,  502-503  ;  for  the  impetuousness, 
Apology,  2 1  a,  cr<po5p6s  £<f>  6n  6pfj,-/i<rcicv ;  for  the  superstition,  Aristoph.  Birds, 
*553  «•»  where  his  taste  for  things  ghostly  is  burlesqued  by  making  him  the 
fraudulent  confederate  who  plays  the  "  spirits  "  in  Socrates*  stances. 

*  Or  perhaps  we  are  to  suppose  that  Socrates  and  Callicles  meet  in  the 
street,  and  that  the  scene  changes  to  the  house  of  Callicles  after  the  opening 
courtesies. 

3  The  Gorgias  stands  in  sharp  contrast  with  the  greatest  of  the  dialogues 
in  respect  of  the  way  in  which  the  three  sections  of  which  the  argument  consists 
are  marked  off,  like  scenes  on  the  Greek  or  French  stage,  by  the  putting 
forward  of  a  new  respondent  to  bear  the  brunt  of  the  argument.  Where  his 
dramatic  geuius  is  at  its  highest,  Plato  is  accustomed  to  interweave  the 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  107 

Formally  the  dialogue  opens  in  a  familiar  way.  Socrates  is 
anxious  to  discover  tne  precise"cEafacter  of  the  an  or  JJ  speciality  " 
(TCX^)  profession  by  Gorgias,  the  art  of  "rhetoric."  It  is,  as 
Gprgias  says  (449^),  an  arLpf"  speech  "~  or  "discourse11  (^pl 
Aoyovs),  and  as  such  it  makes  those  who  possess  it  skilled  in  "  speak- 
ing/' and  therefore,  since  speech  is  the  expression  of  thoughTbr 
intelligence,  makes  them  intelligent  (Swarov?  <£pov€<V,  4500)  about 


something.  But  this  is  far  from  an  adequate  definition.  We 
may  say  that  "  arts  "  are  of  two  kinds  :  the  operations  of  the 
one  kind  are  wholly  or  chiefly  manual,  those  of  the  other  kind  are 
purely  or  principally  effected  by  Aoyot,  "  discourses  "  (450^),  a 
first  intimation  of  the  distinction,  which  becomes  fundamental  in 
Plato's  later  dialogues  and  in  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle,  between 
"  theoretical  "  and  "  practical  "  sciences.  Now  rhetoric  is  not  the 
only  "  art  "  of  the  second  kind  ;  there  are  many  others,  such  as 
theoretical  and  practical  arithmetic  (apiB^riKri  and  XoytoriK^), 
geometry,  medicine,  and  others,  in  which  manual  operations  play 
no  part  or  a  subordinate  one  ;  but  Gorgias  certainly  does  not  mean 
to  say  that  he  teaches  medicine  or  mathematics.  To  complete  the 
definition  we  need  to  know  what  is  the  subject-matter  with  which 
the  "  discourse  "  of  the  rhetorician  is  concerned,  as  the  "  discourse  " 
of  the  arithmetician  is  concerned  with  "  the  odd  and  even  "  (i.e. 
with  the  properties  of  the  integer-series  (4510-^)).  Gorgias  thinks 
it  enough  to  say  that  the  subject-matter  is  "  the  most  important 

of   human  concerns  "   (TO.  psy  terra  TWV  av^/owTrettur  7r/my/xaTa»/),    "  the 

supreme  interests  of  mankind."  But  a  statement  of  this  kind, 
which  attempts  to  define  by  means  of  a  mere  formula  of  laudation, 
is  ambiguous,  since  there  are  different  opinions  on  the  question 
what  is  the  "  great  concern  "  of  man.  A  physician  might  say  that 
it  is  health,  an  economist  or  a  business  man  that  it  is  wealth. 
Hence,  though  Gorgias  may  be  right  in  his  estimate  of  his  art,  the 
estimate  itself  presupposes  an  answer  to  the  ethical  question  what 
is  the  chief  good  for  man  (452^).  Gorgias  replies  that  the  chief 
good  for  man  is  eA€r0€pt'a,  freedom,  in  the  sense  of  having  his  own 
way  and  being  able  to  impose  his  will  on  his  fellow-citizens,  and 
that  it  is  rhetoric,  the  art  of  persuasive  or  plausible  speech  which 
produces  this  good  (452^).  Thus  the  thought  is  that  "  power  " 
is  the  chief  good  and  that  rhetoric,  the  art  of  persuasion,  is  the 
supreme  art,  because,  in  the  life  of  a  city  like  Athens,  persuasive 
eloquence  is  the  great  weapon  by  which  the  statesman  acquires 
power  ;  the  persuasive  speaker  gets  his  policy  adopted  by  the 
ecclesia,  his  financial  schemes  by  the  ftovX^  and  successfully 
impeaches  his  opponents  and  defends  his  partisans  before  the 
dicasteria.  The  secret  of  a  Pericles,  for  example,  is  simply  his 
command  over  the  resources  of  persuasive  eloquence.  Gorgias 
holds  that  he  can  teach  this  secret  to  a  pupil,  and  that  is  why  he 
regards  his  own  r^vy  as  the  supreme  achievement  of  the  human 
threads  of  his  plot  more  subtly.  This,  again,  is  a  fair  ground  for  an  inference 
about  the  place  of  the  dialogue  in  the  series  of  Plato's  works. 


108         PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

intelligence.1  It  should  be  noted  that  the  hint  is  thus  given  early 
in  the  dialogue  that  the  real  problem  to  be  discussed  is  the  ethical 
question,  not  formally  reached  until  we  come  to  the  scene  in  which 
Callicles  is  the  respondent,  whether  "  power,"  unchecked  freedom  to 
do  as  one  likes  and  to  make  others  do  as  one  likes,  is  the  highest 
good.  The  dispute  about  the  "merits"  of  the  art  of  rhetoric  is 
wholly  subservient  to  this  ethical  purpose  and  is  mainly  introduced 
because,  in  a  Greek  democracy,  facility  and  persuasiveness  in  speech 
were  necessarily  the  chief  instruments  by  which  such  "  power  " 
was  to  be  attained.2 

We  know  now  what  Gorgias  means  by  "  rtietgric  "  :  he  means 
an  "jirt"  of^ersnasion.  It  is  an  "  art "  because  ifis,  or  claims 
£o~T>e,  reducible  to  intelligible  principles ;  its  end  or  aim  is  to 
"  persuade  "  men  to  accept  the  views  of  the  practitioner,  and 
so  to  make  them  consenting  instruments  of  his  will.  But  the 
definition  has  the  fault  of  being  too  wide  :  it  does  not,  in  fact, 
state  the  specific  differentia  of  the  orator's  accomplishment. 
There  are  other  "arts,"  including  that  of  the  arithmetician,  of 
which  we  might  equally  say  that  they  are  arts  by  which  men  are 
persuaded  to  accept  the  specialist's  opinion,  since  they  "  teach  " 
us  certain  truths,  and  he  who  is  taught  is  certainly  persuaded  of 
the  things  taught  him.  We  must  ask  then,  further,  what  kind 
of  persuasion  does  rhetoric  employ,  and  about  what  matters  does 
it  produce  persuasion?  (4540).  Gorgias  replies  that  rhetoric  is 
the  kind  of  persuasion  employed  "  before  dicasts  and  mobs  in 
general,"  and  that  it  persuades  about  "  matters  of  right  and 
wrong,"  i.e.  it  is  the  art  of  effective  public  speaking  on  ques- 
tions of  morality  (4546).  This  at  once  suggests  an  important 
distinction.  Persuasion  or  conviction  (TO  irwTww)  may  be  pro- 
duced by  instruction  or  without  it.  In  the  first  case,  a  man 
is  not  only  persuaded  to  hold  an  opinion,  he  is  led  to  know- 
ledge; in  the  second,  he  is  convinced  but  does  not  really  know 
that  his  conviction  is  true.  Now  obviously  a  "  mob  "  cannot  be 
conducted  to  knowledge  on  grave  and  complicated  issues  in  the 
short  time  required  for  the  delivery  of  an  effective  speech.  The 
orator,  therefore,  must  be  a  practitioner  of  the  mere  persuasion 
which  does  not  produce  real  knowledge.  We  must  expect,  then, 

»We  are  certainly  dealing  here  with  a  thesis  actually  maintained  by 
Gorgias.  For  in  the  Philebus,  Protarchus  remarks  (Phileb.  tfa-b)  that  he 
had  often  heard  Gorgias  maintain  that  the  art  of  persuasion  is  far  superior 
to  all  others,  because  the  man  who  possesses  it  can  make  every  one  do  hia 
will  and  do  it  voluntarily.  Obviously  the  reference  is  not  to  the  Gorgias 
itself  (though  458^  implies  that  an  audience  is  present  at  the  discussion), 
but  to  some  statement  actually  made  in  a  discourse  of  Gorgias.  Gorgias 
452(i  fl.  clearly  refers  to  the  same  statement  and  probably  reproduces  it 
with  close  fidelity. 

1  We  might  say,  in  fact,  that  the  great  weakness  of  ancient  democracy  was 
that  it  really  meant  government  by  irresponsible  orators,  as  modern  demo- 
cracy tends  to  mean  government  by  equally  irresponsible  "  pressmen." 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  109 

that  such  a  man  will  not  attempt  to  persuade  his  audience  about 
matters  which  obviously  demand  special  technical  knowledge, 
such  as  naval  and  military  engineering,  but  only  about  "  right  and 
wrong  "  (which  are  popularly  held  not  to  be  questions  for  specialists). 
Yet,  as  Gorgias  observes,  the  greatest  naval  and  military  con- 
structions of  Athens — the  dockyards,  the  harbours,  the  "  long  walls  " 
— were  undertaken  not  at  the  instigation  of  engineering  specialists, 
but  at  that  of  Themistocles  and  Pericles,  who  were  eminent 
"orators,"  but  not  engineers.  In  fact,  you  will  find  that  before 
any  public  audience  a  skilful  orator  will  always  succeed  in 
proving  more  "  convincing  "  than  an  "  expert  "  who  is  no  orator, 
even  on  questions  which  fall  within  the  expert's  province.  The 
"  orator  "  who  knows  nothing  of  medicine,  for  example,  will  always 
be  more  persuasive,  even  on  a  medical  question,  than  the  medical 
specialist  who  is  no  orator.  In  general,  the  man  who  is  merely 
an  "  orator  "  who  understands  his  business  will  be  able  to  pass 
himself  off  before  the  public  as  a  consummate  authority  in  matters 
where  he  has  no  real  technical  knowledge  at  all,  and  this  is  precisely 
the  secret  of  his  power.  (The  trick  is  that  habitually  employed 
in  our  own  age  by  the  able  and  eloquent  advocate  "  speaking  from 
his  brief/1  and  the  view  of  Gorgias  amounts  to  holding  that  states- 
manship is  just  a  matter  of  consummate  skill  in  speaking  from  a 
brief.)  To  be  sure,  bad  men  may  employ  this  formidable  weapon 
for  the  worst  of  ends,  but  that  is  not  the  fault  of  the  teacher  from 
whom  they  have  learned  to  use  it,  but  their  own.  It  is  as  absurd 
to  blame  the  teacher  for  a  pupil's  abuse  of  the  art  as  it  would  be 
to  hold  a  boxer  or  fencing-master  responsible  for  a  foul  blow  struck 
by  one  of  his  pupils  (455^-457^).  Thus  we  see  that  Gorgias  makes 
no  claim  to  "  teach  goodness."  It  is  important  that  his  pupils 
should  make  a  right,  not  a  wrong,  use  of  the  weapons  he  teaches 
them  to  use,  but  his  concern  is  merely  to  teach  the  "  manage  "  of 
the  weapons. 

There  is  an  obvious  weak  point  in  this  commendation  of  the 
orator's  art,  and  Socrates  fastens  on  it  at  once.  The  "  orator,11  by 
Gorgias'  own  account,  is  no  "  expert,"  and  the  "  mob  "  or  "  crowd  " 
before  whom  he  succeeds  in  silencing  the  real  expert  are  not  experts 
either.  Thus,  on  the  showing  of  Gorgias  himself,  oratory  is  a 
device  by  which  an  ignorant  man  persuades  an  audience  equally 
ignorant  with  himself  that  he  understands  a  question  better  than 
the  expert  who  really  knows  about  it.  Does  this  apply  to  the 
moral  issues  with  which  the  "  orator  "  will  be  largely  concerned  ? 
Does  he  need  to  know  no  more  about  right  and  wrong,  honour  and 
dishonour,  than  about,  e.g.,  naval  engineering  or  medicine  ?  If  he 
does  need  knowledge  of  this  kind,  where  is  he  to  get  it,  since  Gorgias 
has  explained  that  it  is  not  his  own  business  to  impart  it  ?  Gorgias, 
rather  inconsistently,  suggests  that,  in  case  of  need,  a  pupil  might 
incidentally  get  the  knowledge  of  right  and  wrong  from  himself ; 
in  any  case,  he  needs  to  have  it.  The  "  orator  "  must  be  St'/cotos, 
"  a  moral  man/'  (If  he  were  not,  of  course,  he  might  make  the 


110          PLATO :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

worst  use  of  his  oratorical  skill.)  But  if  he  is  "  a  moral  man," 
he  will  not  have  the  wish  to  do  wrong.  At  this  rate,  a  true  orator 
would  never  abuse  his  skill,  and  this  seems  inconsistent  with  the 
former  contention  that  when  an  orator  does  misuse  his  art,  the 
blame  lies  with  himself  and  not  with  his  teacher  (457^4616). 

So  far  our  results  have  come  to  this  :  it  has  at  least  been  sug- 
gested that  a  statesman,  who  owes  his  power  in  a  democracy  to 
skill  in  persuasion,  need  not  be  an  expert  in  any  of  the  technical 
arts,  but  does  require  sound  moral  principles,  though  it  is  not 
quite  clear  how  he  is  to  come  by  them.  Here  Gorgias  retires  from 
the  argument,  and  his  place  is  taken  by  his  younger  disciple  and 
admirer  Polus,  who  is  prepared  to  break  with  conventional  views 
about  morality,  as  the  respectable  Gorgias  is  not.  According  to 
Polus,  Socrates  has  taken  an  unfair  advantage  of  the  conventional 
modesty  which  had  led  Gorgias  to  disclaim  the  status  of  a  pro- 
fessional teacher  of  right  and  wrong.  The  disclaimer  was  a  mere 
piece  of  good  manners,  and  Socrates  has  himself  committed  a 
breach  of  manners  in  pretending  to  take  it  seriously.  Polus  also 
insists  that  Socrates  shall  play  the  part  of  "  respondent  "  and 
submit  his  own  definition  of  rhetoric  for  examination,  as  Socrates, 
in  fact,  is  quite  willing  to  do.  According  to  this  definition,  which 
opens  the  second  of  the  three  sections  of  the  dialogue,  rhetoric  is 
not  an  "art,"  a  matter  of  expert  knowledge,  at  all.  It  is  a  mere 
empirical  "  knack "  (c/xTreipta,  Tpi/?r?),  and  more  precisely,  a 
"  knack  of  giving  pleasure  "  (4620).  In  this  respect  it  is  like 
confectionery.  The  confectioner  pleases  the  palates  of  his  cus- 
tomers by  a  clever  combination  of  flavours,  and  the  "  orator  " 
in  the  same  way  "  tickles  the  ears  of  the  groundlings  "  by  attractive 
combinations  of  words  and  phrases.  It  is  meant  that  neither 
confectionery  nor  oratory  is  really  an  application  of  rational  prin- 
ciples ;  you  cannot  lay  down  rules  for  either,  since  both  are  mere 
tricks  of  gratifying  the  tastes  of  a  body  of  patrons,  and  in  each  case 
the  trick  depends  on  nothing  more  scientific  than  a  tact  which 
cannot  be  taught  but  only  picked  up  by  long  personal  experience 
of  successes  and  failures.  There  is  thus  nothing  "  fine  "  about 
either  ;  they  are  both  branches  of  a  "  knack  "  for  which  the  proper 
name  is  KoXaKeia,  "  humouring  the  moods  of  a  patron,"  l  "  acting 
the  parasite." 

We  may,  in  fact,  distinguish  four  species  of  this  KoA.aK€ta, 
each  of  which  is  a  spurious  counterfeit  or  "  ghost  "  (etSoAov)  of  a 
real  science  or  art.  We  start  from  the  now  familiar  Socratic  con- 

1  The  word  must  not  be  translated  "  flattery."  The  successful  demagogue 
often  scores  his  point  better  by  "slanging  "  his  audience  than  by  flattering 
them.  In  the  language  of  the  fifth  century,  *6\a£  meant  what  the  new 
comedy  calls  ira/>d<nros,  the  "  trencherman  "  or  sycophant  or  toady  who  keeps 
his  place  at  a  great  man's  table  by  compliance  with  his  moods,  like  the 
"  hangers-on  "  of  Gaunt  House  in  Thackeray.  The  thought  of  Socrates  is 
that  the  "  statesman  "  who  supposes  himself  to  be  imposing  his  will  on  the 
"  many-headed  monster '"  is  merely  adroitly  "  pandering  "  to  the  creature's 
lusts.  This  is  the  verdict  of  philosophy  on  all  successful  "  opportunism." 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  111 

ception  of  the  "  tending  "  of  a  thing.  There  is  a  double  art  oi 
tending  the  body,  that  is,  of  keeping  it  in  a  state  of  health  and 
fitness,  and  a  corresponding  double  art  of  tending  the  soul.  In  the 
case  of  the  body,  the  two  arts  of  "  tending  "  have  no  common 
name  ;  they  are  those  of  "  gymnastic/'  bodily  culture  (which  sets 
up  the  ideal  of  true  bodily  "  fitness  "),  and  medicine  (whose  function 
it  is  to  restore  the  "  unfit  "  to  health).  The  art  of  "  tending  "  the 
soul  has  a  single  name  ;  it  is  called  TroAm/a/,  "  statesmanship  "  : 
but  it  also  has  two  branches,  legislation  (vo^ofoTiKT?),  which  sets 
the  standard  of  spiritual  health,  and  "  justice  "  (or  righteousness, 
SiKaiocruV^) ,  which  corrects  and  repairs  disease  in  the  soul.  Each 
of  these  four  is  a  genuine  art  ;  it  aims  at  the  good  or  true  best  con- 
ditjon  of  body  or  soul,  and  thus  rests  on  a  scientific  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil.  The  regulations  of  "  gymnastic  "  and  medicine 
are  based  on  knowledge  of  what  is  wholesome  for  the  body,  those 
of  the  legislator  and  the  judge  on  knowledge  of  what  is  wholesome 
for  the  soul.  But  each  of  the  four  arts  has  its  counterfeit,  and  the 
counterfeit  differs  from  the  true  art  in  taking  as  its  standard  the 
pleasant  and  not  the  good.  Thus  the  confectioner  is  a  counterfeit 
of  the  physician.  The  physician  aims  at  prescribing  the  diet  which 
will  be  wholesome  for  us,  the  confectioner  at  prescribing  that  which 
will  please  our  palates.  Now  it  is  possible  to  know  what  diet  is 
wholesome,  but  you  can  only  discover  what  diet  will  please  a  man's 
palate  by  guesses  based  on  long  acquaintance  with  his  moods  and 
whims,  and  even  when  you  guess  right,  the  dishes  you  prepare  will 
commonly  not  be  good  for  your  patron. 

In  the  same  way,  KOju/xum/crj,  the  "  art,"  if  you  could  call  it 
so,  of  bodily  adornment  (the  calling  of  the  friseur,  the  professional 
beautifier,  the  jeweller,  and  many  others),  is  a  parody  of  the  genuine 
art  of  the  trainer.  "  Gymnastic  "  makes  the  body  inherently 
attractive  and  graceful  by  training  it  in  the  exercises  which  produce 
genuine  grace,  agility,  and  vigour ;  KOfi/Mmm;  mimics  this  real  art 
by  producing  a  sham  grace  and  charm  effected  by  the  artifice  of 
cosmetics,  fashionable  clothes,  and  the  like.  (Here,  again,  there  is 
no  real  standard,  nothing  but  the  caprice  of  the  passing  "  fashion.11) 
So  with  the  arts  which  have  to  do  with  the  health  of  the  soul.  The 
sophist  professes  to  teach  goodness,  but  what  he  teaches  as  goodness 
is  merely  the  kind  of  life  which  is  likely  to  recommend  itself  to  his 
auditors  ;  the  "  orator  "  claims  to  be  the  physician  of  the  disorders 
of  the  body  politic,  but  the  measures  he  recommends  only  persuade 
his  audience  because  he  is  careful  to  recommend  what  is  agreeable 
to  their  mood  of  the  moment.  Thus  we  may  define  rhetoric  by 
saying  that  it  is  the  counterfeit  of  one  part  of  "  politics/'  namely,  of 
justice  (4630-4660). * 

Polus  urges  in  reply  that  rhetoric  cannot  be  a  form  of  KoXaWa, 

1  The  most  extravagant  "  public  man  "  always  insists  that  he  is  only 
advocating  the  "  just  rights  "  of  his  nation,  or  church,  or  class.  But  a  "  just 
right"  in  his  mouth  means,  in  fact,  whatever  his  supporters  are  keenly  set  on 
demanding. 


112          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

since  the  "  hanger-on  "  is  a  disreputable  character,  whereas  the 
"  orator  "  is  the  most  powerful  person  in  the  community,  and,  it  is 
implied,  the  figure  of  highest  consequence.  He  can  use  his  influence 
to  secure  the  banishment  of  anyone  he  pleases,  to  confiscate  his 
goods,  even  to  procure  his  execution.  Thus  he  is  virtually  an 
autocrat  with  no  superior.  Socrates  admits  the  fact,  but  denies  the 
inference  that  either  orator  or  autocrat  is  really  powerful,  if  by 
"  power  "  you  mean  anything  which  it  is  good  for  a  man  to  have. 
The  autocrat,  recognized  or  unrecognized,  no  doubt  always  does 
"as  he  thinks  good/'  but  for  that  reason  he  never  does  "  what  he 
wishes  "  (4660).  And  it  is  not  good  for  a  man  to  do  "  as  he  thinks 
good  "  if  his  thinking  is  false.  To  explain  the  point  more  fully, 
we  may  put  it  thus.  There  are  many  things  which  we  do,  not  for 
the  mere  sake  of  doing  them,  but  as  means  to  something  else,  as 
when  a  man  drinks  a  disagreeable  medicine  at  his  doctor's  order, 
for  the  sake  of  recovering  health,  or  follows  the  fatiguing  and 
dangerous  calling  of  the  sea  with  a  view  to  making  a  fortune.  In 
all  such  cases,  where  a  thing  is  done  as  a  means  to  some  ulterior  end, 
it  is  the  ulterior  end,  not  the  disagreeable  or  indifferent  means  to  it, 
that  the  man  wishes  for.1  And  he  wishes  for  the  end  because  he 
thinks  it  a  good.  So  when  we  put  a  man  to  death,  or  banish  him, 
or  confiscate  his  property,  we  always  have  an  ulterior  end.  We  only 
do  these  things  because  we  think  they  will  be  "  useful  "  in  view  of 
that  end.  If  the  autocrat,  then,  is  mistaken  in  supposing  that  such 
steps  will  "  be  for  his  good/'  if  they  are  really  bad  for  him,  he  is 
not  doing  "  what  he  wished,"  and  should  not  be  called  "  powerful." 
(The  thought  is  thus  that  every  one  really  wishes  for  good,  no  one 
wishes  for  evil.  "  The  object  of  every  man's  desire  is  some  good 
to  himself."  To  be  really  powerful  means  to  be  able  to  get  good  ; 
it  is  weakness,  not  power,  to  "  do  whatever  you  please,"  if  the 
consequence  is  that  you  reap  evil  and  not  good  (4660-4690) .) 

We  now  pass  to  the  direct  enunciation  of  the  main  ethical 
doctrine  of  the  dialogue.  This  is  elicited  by  the  unmannerly 
remark  of  Polus  that,  whatever  Socrates  may  be  pleased  to 
profess,  he  would  certainly  envy  the  man  who  could  forfeit,  im- 
prison, or  kill  anyone  he  pleased.  Socrates  replies  that  he  would 
not.  The  man  who  inflicts  such  things  on  another,  even  when  they 
are  righteously  deserved,  is  not  to  be  envied  ;  the  man  who  inflicts 
them  undeservedly  is  miserable  and  pitiable.  What  is  more,  he  is 
more  pitiable  and  miserable  than  the  unfortunate  innocent  victim, 
since  to  commit  injustice  is  much  worse  than  to  have  to  suffer  it. 
Socrates  himself  would,  of  course,  like  Candide  in  a  similar  case, 

1  Note  that  in  the  course  of  this  argument  (at  4680)  Socrates  talks  of  things 
"  participating  "  in  good  and  "  participating  "  in  evil,  using  the  very  word 
(fju-rfaiv )  which  appears  in  connexion  with  the  theory  of  Forms  as  technical 
for  the  relation  between  the  "  particular  thing  "  and  the  "  universal  "  we 
predicate  of  it.  Since  it  cannot  reasonably  be  doubted  that  the  Gorgias  is  a 
considerably  earlier  work  than  the  Phaedo,  this  creates  a  grave  difficulty  for 
those  who  suppose  that  the  theory  is  an  invention  of  Plato's  own,  expounded 
for  the  first  time  in  'the  Phaedo. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  118 

"choose  neither  the  one  nor  the  other/'  but  if  he  had  to  choose, 
he  would  much  rather  suffer  the  crime  than  commit  it  (469^-^). 

Polus  treats  this  view  as  a  ridiculous  paradox.  He  admits 
that  any  man  with  a  knife  under  his  cloak  might  claim  to  be 
"  powerful/1  in  the  sense  that  he  can,  like  the  autocrat,  kill  any 
one  he  has  a  mind  to  kill,  but  for  one  thing,  the  certainty  of  punish- 
ment. Impunity  must  be  stipulated  for  as  one  of  the  conditions 
of  "  power/'  but  a  child  could  refute  Socrates'  view  that  it  is  only 
"  better  "  to  kill,  banish,  and  confiscate  at  will  when  these  acts  are 
done  "  justly."  One  has  only  to  consider  the  very  latest  example 
from  contemporary  life,  that  of  Archelaus,  who  has  made  himself 
king  in  Macedonia.  His  whole  career  has  been  one  of  rebellion 
and  murder,  but  he  has  gained  a  throne  by  it.  By  Socrates'  theory 
he  ought  to  be  the  most  wretched  of  men,  but  he  is,  in  fact,  the 
happiest,  and  there  is  not  a  man  in  Athens,  not  even  Socrates,  who 
would  not  dearly  like  to  change  places  with  Archelaus  (469^-471^). 
An  appeal  of  this  kind  is,  however,  an  ignoratio  elenchi  in  the  most 
literal  sense.  Even  if  every  one  but  Socrates  would  be  willing  to 
go  into  the  witness-box  on  behalf  of  Polus,  it  is  possible  that  a 
solitary  witness  may  be  a  witness  to  truth,  and  the  testimony  of 
numbers  on  the  other  side  erroneous.  Socrates  will  not  consider 
his  own  case  as  established  unless  he  can  produce  one  solitary 
witness  to  it,  the  antagonist  himself  (472^).  In  other  words,  the 
appeal  must  be  to  argument  and  not  to  authority.  The  first  step 
we  must  take  is  to  define  the  issue  at  stake  as  precisely  as  we  can. 
It  is,  in  fact,  the  most  important  of  all  practical  issues,  the  solution 
of  the  question,  "  Who  is  the  truly  happy  man  ?  "  Polus  maintains 
that  a  man  may  be  happy  but  wicked ;  Socrates  denies  this.  As 
a  corollary,  there  is  a  secondary  disagreement.  Polus  holds  that 
the  wicked  man,  to  be  happy,  must  go  unpunished ;  Socrates,  that 
such  a  man  is  in  any  case  unhappy,  but  more  unhappy  if  he  escapes 
punishment  than  if  he  suffers  it,  and  he  must  try  to  convince  Polus 
on  both  points  (472^-474^). 

The  precise  point  of  disagreement  between  the  opposing  views 
now  receives  a  still  more  exact  definition.  Polus  is  still  so  far 
under  the  influence  of  current  moral  conventions  that  he  admits 
at  once  that  to  commit  a  wrong  is  more  "  ugly  "  or  "  disgraceful  " 
(aurxiov)  than  to  suffer  one,  but  he  declines  to  draw  the  further 
inference  that  the  "  uglier  "  thing  must  also  be  the  greater  evil. 
He  distinguishes,  as  Socrates  refuses  to  do,  between  the  good  (ayaOov) 
and  the  "  fine  "  or  "  noble  "  (KaXo'i/),  and  consequently  also  between 
the  "  ugly  "  (cuVxpoV)  and  the  evil  (KCIKO'V).  The  task  of  Socrates 
is  to  show  that  these  distinctions  are  unreal  The  argument  runs 
as  follows.  When  we  distinguish  between  "  fine  "  bodies,  coloum 
sounds,  callings  (cViT^Scv/xara)  and  others  which  are  "  ugly " 
or  "  base,"  our  standard  is  always  either  "  benefit  "  or  "  pleasure." 
By  a  "  fine  "  shape  or  colour  or  sound,  we  mean  one  which  is  either 
serviceable  or  immediately  agreeable  in  contemplation  or  both. 
The  same  thing  holds  good  when  we  speak  of  "  fine  "  or  "  noble  " 


114          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

usages  (vd/xot)  and  callings  in  life,  or  of  the  "  beauty  "  of  a  science.1 
We  mean  that  the  usage  or  business  or  science  in  question  either  is 
highly  beneficial  or  "  creates  in  the  disinterested  spectator  a  pleasing 
sentiment  of  approbation/'  or  both,  a  view  which  delights  Polus 
by  its  apparent  Hedonistic  implications.  It  follows  that  by  calling 
anything  "  ugly  "  or  "  base/'  we  must  mean  that  it  is  either  dis- 
serviceable,  or  painful,  or  both.  Also,  that  when  we  say  "  A  is 
finer  than  5,"  we  must  mean  that  A  is  either  more  pleasant  or 
more  useful  than  B,  or  both  more  pleasant  and  more  useful.  And 
when  we  call  A  "  more  ugly  "  than  B,  we  mean  that  it  is  either 
more  harmful  or  more  painful,  or  both.  Now  we  are  agreed  that 
the  commission  of  wrong  (TO  d8iK€ti>)  is  an  "  uglier  "  thing  than  the 
suffering  of  it  (TO  dSiKcicrflcu),  and  it  is  certainly  not  the  case  that  it  is 
more  painful  to  commit  the  crime  than  to  have  it  committed  on 
you.  It  must  follow  that  the  commission  of  the  wrong  is  the  more 
harmful,  i.e.  the  more  evil  course,  the  worse  course.  Now  no  one 
can  rationally  prefer  an  alternative  which  is  at  once  the  worse 
and  the  more  "  ugly  "  of  those  open  to  him,  and  Socrates  has  thus 
established  his  main  point  out  of  the  mouth  of  his  antagonist 
(4740-476^).  We  come  now  to  the  proof  of  the  corollary. 

We  begin  with  a  consideration  of  general  logic.  Wherever 
there  is  an  agent  (TTOLW)  there  is  a  correlative  "  patient  " 
(TTtto-x^v),  a  thing  or  person  which  is  acted  upon.  Also  the 
modality  of  the  activity  gives  rise  to  strictly  correlated  qualifica- 
tions (rraQrj)  in  agent  and  patient.  If  the  agent,  e.g.,  strikes  a 
sudden,  or  a  severe,  or  a  painful  blow,  the  patient  is  suddenly, 
severely,  or  painfully  struck.  If  the  agent  "  cuts  deep/1  the  patient 
is  "  deeply  cut/'  and  so  forth.  Now  to  be  punished  for  a  crime  is 
to  be  the  patient  in  a  relation  in  which  the  inflictor  of  the  penalty 
is  the  agent.  Hence,  if  the  agent  inflicts  the  penalty  deservedly  or 
justly,  the  patient  undergoes  it  deservedly  or  justly.2  And,  as 
Polus  does  not  deny,  what  is  just  is  "  fine/'  and  therefore,  as  we 
have  seen,  either  good  or  pleasant.  Hence  the  man  who  is  justly 
punished  has  something  good  done  to  him  (since  no  one  will  suggest 
that  he  finds  the  punishment  pleasant).  He  is  benefited  by  what 
is  done  to  him.  We  may  go  on  to  specify  the  nature  of  the  benefit. 
Goods  and  evils  may  be  classed  under  three  heads  :  good  or  bad 

1  Note  that  the  "  induction  "  is  exactly  parallel  with  that  of  the  famous 
speech  of  Diotima  (Symposium,  2ioaff.),  when  the  successive  stages  in  the 
ascent  to  the  contemplation  of  Beauty  are  delight  in  one  person's  bodily  beauty, 
in  bodily  beauty  universally,  in  beauty  of  soul  and  character,  beauty  of 
occupations  and  usages  (^TiTTjSetf/iara  and  v6^oi)t  beauty  of  sciences  (^rwrT^cu). 
The  more  carefully  the  Platonic  dialogues  down  to  the  Republic  are  studied, 
the  more  of  a  piece  we  find  their  teaching  to  be,  and  the  harder  it  becomes  to 
trace  any  "  development  "  within  them. 

*  Observe  once  more  that  the  logical  principle  presupposed  ners  of  the 
interconnexion  between  the  modalities  of  correlates  is  that  which  is  used  in 
the  Republic  to  establish  the  reality  of  the  distinction  between  the  "  parts  in 
the  soul "(  Rep.  iv.  4$8b-e).  Both  passages  presuppose  the  existence  of  a 
good  deal  of  recognized  logical  doctrine  as  early  as  the  time  of  the  Archi- 
damain  war. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  115 


conditions  of  fortune  (x/o^ara),  of  body,  of  soul.  A  bad  condition 
of  fortune  is  poverty  ;  of  body,  weakness,  disease,  deformity.  The 
corresponding  bad  state  of  soul  is  wickedness  (dSt/a'a),  and  admittedly 
wickedness  is  the  "  ugliest  "  of  the  three.  Yet  it  is  certainly  not 
more  painful  to  be  wicked  than  to  be  destitute  or  physically  ill. 
By  our  preceding  reasoning,  therefore,  it  must  be  very  much  more 
evil  or  harmful.  Badness  of  soul  is  thus  the  very  greatest  evil  to 
which  a  man  is  exposed,  and  thus  we  get  back  to  the  fundamental 
principle  of  the  whole  Socratic  ethics  (4766-4770)  -1 

One  further  step  remains  to  be  taken.  There  is  an  "  art  " 
which  covers  each  of  the  three  kinds  of  evil.  Business  (xprj^ana-TiKri) 
releases  us  from  poverty,  medicine  from  physical  disease,  "  justice  " 
administered  by  a  competent  judge  from  wickedness.  The  judge 
who  passes  sentence  on  the  criminal  is  thus  a  physician  of  the  soul, 
and  his  calling  is  a  "  finer  "  one  than  that  of  the  healer  of  the  body, 
because  he  cures  a  graver  disease.  In  both  cases  the  process  of 
treatment  is  disagreeable  but  salutary  for  us.  And  again,  in  both 
cases,  the  happiest  condition  is  to  be  in  bodily  or  spiritual  health, 
and  so  not  to  need  the  physician.  But  in  both  also,  the  man  who 
is  cured  of  a  grave  disease  by  a  sharp  treatment  is  much  less  badly 
off  than  the  man  who  has  the  disease  without  receiving  the  cure. 
Thus  a  man  like  Archelaus  who  lifts  himself  by  successful  crime 
above  all  possibility  of  correction  is  like  a  man  with  a  deadly  disease 
who  refuses  to  submit  to  the  surgeon.  The  claim  advanced  for 
rhetoric,  then,  that  it  enables  its  possessor  to  "  get  off  "  when  he 
is  called  to  account  for  his  misdeeds,  is  wholly  vain.  The  best  use 
a  man  who  has  fallen  into  crime  could  make  of  eloquence  would  be 
to  expend  it  in  denouncing  himself  and  ensuring  that  he  shall 
receive  from  the  judge  whatever  chastisement  may  be  needed  to 
restore  his  soul  to  health.  If  eloquence  is  to  be  used  to  enable 
the  criminal  to  "  get  off  "  the  penalties  of  his  misdeeds,  it  would  be 
appropriate  to  reserve  this  employment  of  it  for  the  case  of  our 
mortal  enemies,  as  the  deadliest  injury  we  can  inflict  (477^-481^). 

So  far  we  have  been  concerned  simply  with  an  emphatic  state- 
ment of  the  thesis  that  to  do  wrong  is  always  worse  than  to  suffer 
it,  with  the  inevitable  corollary  that  it  is  worse  to  do  wrong  with 
impunity  than  to  be  punished.  With  the  opening  of  the  third  scene 
of  Plato's  drama  we  proceed  to  the  application  of  these  moral 
principles  to  the  theory  of  statesmanship  and  government.  That 
this  application  is  the  principal  theme  of  the  dialogue  is  indicated 
both  by  the  fact  that  this  part  of  the  work  is  longer  than  both  the 
others  together,  and  by  the  introduction  of  a  new  spokesman  whose 
case  is  presented  with  an  unmistakable  gusto  quite  absent  from  all 
that  has  gone  before.  The  new  speaker  is  a  certain  Callicles  of 
Acharnae,  of  whom  we  learn  little  more  than  that  he  has  recently 
begun  to  aspire  to  a  prominent  place  in  Athenian  public  life.  He  is 

1  Note  the  assumption  of  the  threefold  classification  of  goods  as  goods  of 
soul,  body,  and  "estate/'  as  something  quite  familiar  (Gorg.  4770  ff.).  This 
too,  then,  is  clearly  pre-Academic. 


116          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

one  of  the  very  few  characters  in  Plato's  dialogues  of  whose  historical 
reality  we  have  no  independent  evidence,  but  it  should  be  clear 
from  the  very  vigour  with  which  his  character  is  drawn  that  he 
is  a  genuine  man  of  flesh  and  blood.  His  intervention  at  once 
gives  a  more  realistic  touch  to  the  dramatic  picture  and  lifts  the 
argument  to  a  distinctly  higher  level.  Polus  was  not  only  half- 
hearted in  his  professed  rejection  of  conventional  moral  convictions, 
but  also  wanting  in  moral  seriousness.  He  had  nothing  more 
inspiring  to  say  in  support  of  his  eulogy  of  the  "  tyrant  "  than  that 
it  is  a  pleasant  thing  to  be  able  to  gratify  all  your  passions  without 
apprehension  of  consequences.  Clearly,  established  morality  is  in 
no  danger  from  the  assaults  of  worldlings  of  this  type,  least  of  all 
when  they  are  mere  literary  gentlemen  talking  for  talking's  sake. 
Callicles  is  quite  another  matter.  His  morality,  like  Nietzsche's, 
may  be  an  inverted  one,  but  it  is  one  with  which  he  is  in  downright 
earnest.  He  has  a  definite  ideal  which  carries  him  off  his  feet,  and, 
though  it  is  a  false  ideal,  Plato  plainly  means  to  make  us  feel  that 
there  is  a  certain  largeness  about  it  which  gives  it  a  dangerous 
fascination.  To  be  fascinated  by  it,  indeed,  you  need  to  have  a 
certain  greatness  of  soul ;  it  is  notable  that  Callicles  himself  is 
wholly  above  the  appeal  to  the  mere  en  joy  ability  of  being  able  to 
gratify  ignoble  cupidities,  of  which  Polus  had  made  so  much.  The 
ideal  he  is  defending  is  that  of  the  men  of  action  for  action's  sake, 
the  Napoleons  and  Cromwells,  and  it  is  his  conviction  that  there  is 
a  genuine  moral  right  on  which  the  ideal  rests.  His  imagination 
has  been  fascinated  by  the  vision  of  a  Nature  whose  law  is  that 
"  the  weakest  goes  to  the  wall/1  and  he  sees  the  life  of  human 
societies  in  the  light  of  this  vision.  He  is  as  earnest  as  Carlyle  in 
his  conviction  that  superior  ability  of  any  kind  gives  the  moral 
right  to  use  the  ability  according  to  your  own  judgment  and  without 
scruples.  Hence  he  feels  that  in  rejecting  "  conventionalism  "  in 
morals  he  is  not  rejecting  morality  itself ;  he  is  appealing  from  a 
petty  and  confined  morality  of  local  human  conventions  to  an 
august  morality  of  "  Nature  "  or  "  things-as-they-are."  The  case 
for  the  partisans  of  Averts  in  the  fifth-century  dispute  about  <£vo-ts 
and  VO/AOS  could  not  well  be  argued  more  persuasively,  and  it  is 
Plato's  purpose  that  it  shall  be  argued  with  the  maximum  of 
persuasiveness  with  a  view  to  its  thorough  refutation. 

If  Socrates  is  in  earnest  and  his  theory  is  true,  Callicles  says, 
the  whole  of  our  actual  social  life  is  organized  on  wrong  lines  ;  our 
whole  conduct  is  "  topsy-turvy."  Socrates  does  not  deny  this,  but 
replies  that  he  and  Callicles  are  lovers  of  two  very  different  mis- 
tresses, "  philosophy  "  and  the  Athenian  democracy.  Socrates' 
mistress,  "  philosophy,"  has  taught  him  to  speak  her  language,  and, 
unlike  the  mistress  of  Callicles,  she  always  holds  the  same  language. 
It  is  she,  not  her  lover,  whom  Callicles  will  have  to  refute.1  Callicles 

1  481^.  Here  comes  in  the  humorous  reference  to  the  mortal  "  sweetings  " 
of  Socrates  and  Callicles  respectively,  Alcibiades  and  Demus,  son  of  Pyri- 
lampes.  We  know  from  Aristophanes  ( Wasps,  98)  that  Demus  was  the  fashion- 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  117 

thinks  the  task  will  not  be  difficult  if  once  we  make  the  distinction 
between  mere  "  convention  "  and  Nature,  or  "  reality."  Polus 
had  only  been  silenced  because  he  had  not  the  courage  to  say 
what  he  really  thought.  He  deferred  to  the  tradition  of  the  average 
respectable  man  by  saying  that  it  is  "  uglier  "  to  commit  a  wrong 
than  to  suffer  one.  But  this  is  a  mere  convention  of  weaklings, 
set  up  for  their  own  protection.  In  "  reality  "  to  commit  a  wrong 
or  aggression  is  not  the  "  ugly  "  thing ;  the  "  ugly  "  thing  is  to  have 
it  committed  on  you.  It  is  weaklings,  slaves,  persons  who  cannot 
stand  up  for  themselves  like  men,  who  have  to  "  put  up  "  wrongs  ; 
the  strong  are  aggressive  and  commit  what  the  conventions  of  the 
weak  call  "  wrongs."  If  we  look  at  <£u<m,  "  things-as-they-are," 
we  see  that  the  stronger  animal  regularly  pushes  the  weaker  aside. 
Human  life  displays  the  same  features,  if  we  look  at  it  on  the  large 
scale.  By  what  right,  for  example,  but  that  of  the  stronger  did 
Darius  attack  the  Scythians  or  Xerxes  the  Greeks  ?  Their  pro- 
ceedings may  have  been  unlawful  by  the  standard  of  the  self- 
interested  conventions  of  the  weak,  but  they  had  Nature's  right — 
the  right  of  the  strong  to  impose  his  will  on  the  weak — on  their 
side  ;  indeed,  the  conqueror  is  acting  in  strict  accord  with  "  Nature's 
VO/AOS  "  x  in  disregarding  pur  paltry  human  vofwi.  When  a  really 
strong  man — in  fact,  the  Ubermensch — appears,  he  will  soon  tear  up 
pur  "  contracts  "  and  "  formulae,"  and  prove  himself  what  he  really 
is  "  by  right  of  nature,"  the  master  of  us  all,  as  Pindar  hinted  in  his 
well-known  eulogy  of  the  piratical  feat  of  Heracles  who  drove  the 
cows  of  Geryones  "  without  leave  asked  or  price  paid."  2 

able  beauty  at  Athens  in  the  year  422.  So  far  the  jest  makes  for  giving 
the  Gorgias  a  dramatic  date  in  the  Archidamian  war.  But  the  supposed 
relations  between  Socrates  and  Alcibiades  could  also  be  used  playfully  in  the 
Symposium,  the  assumed  date  of  which  is  the  year  416,  so  that  the  argument 
is  not  conclusive.  If  Socrates  is  thinking  of  the  profession  of  the  "  Paphla- 
gonian,"  to  the  personified  Attic  Demus  in  Aristophanes  (Knights,  732, 
0tX£  ff\  &  AT?/*.'*  ipMTfy  T  cl/j,l  06$),  this  would  also  make  for  the  earlier  date. 

1  Gorg.  4830,  KCIT&  v6fu>v  ye  rbv  0tfo-ews.     The  first  occurrence,  so  far  as  I 
know,  in  extant  literature,  of  the  ominous  phrase  "law  of  Nature."    Callicles, 
of  course,  intends  the  words  to  be  paradoxical — "a  convention,  if  you  like, 
but  Reality's  convention,  not  a  human  device." 

2  Gorg.  4846.     I  agree  with  Wilamowitz  that  the  misquotation  by  which  the 
MSS.  made  Callicles  credit  Pindar  with  saying  that  vdpos  dyct  fttaiQv  rb  SiKaibraTov 
"  does  violence  to  the  most  righteous  claim  "  (whereas  the  poet  wrote  SIKCUUV 
r&  /Sia^raTov,  "  makes  the  most  high-handed  action  just  ")  comes  from  Plato 
and  should  not  be  "  corrected,"  as  it  has  been  by  all  the  editors.     (Callicles 
expressly  says  that  he  does  not  know  the  lines  accurately.)     But  I  doubt  the 
cogency  of  the  far-reaching  inferences,  including  one  as  to  the  date  of  com- 
position of  the  dialogue,  which  Wilamowitz  bases  on  the  misquotation.     I 
should  conjecture  that  Plato  makes  it  quite  deliberately,  and  that  the  verses 
had  been  actually  quoted  in  this  form  by  the  champions  of  0tf<ns  against  VO/MOS 
in  the  fifth  century.     We  must  remember  that  in  the  time  of  Socrates  there 
were  no  "  official  "  texts  at  Athens,  even  of  the  Attic  dramatists  ;   still  less 
would  it  be  possible  to  secure  the  text  of  a  foreign  poet  against  misquotation. 
In  the  Apologia  Socratis  of  Libanius  (fourth  century  A.D.)  Anytus  is  repre- 
sented as  having  made  a  point  of  this  particular  misquotation  at  the  trial  of 
Socrates.     This  probably  means,  as  Wilamowitz  holds,  that  the  complaint 
occurred  in  the  pamphlet  of  Polycrates  against  Socrates,  published  some 


118          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

As  for  what  Socrates  has  said  about  the  lessons  of  philosophy, 
philosophy  is  a  graceful  accomplishment  in  a  young  man,  but  to 
take  it  in  earnest  in  mature  life  is  ruin.  It  unfits  a  man  for  the 
life  of  action,  leaves  him  ignorant  of  the  laws  of  the  community,  the 

Erinciples  of  public  and  private  business,  and  the  real  passions  of 
is  fellow-men,  like  Amphion  in  the  Antiope  of  Euripides.  One 
should  cultivate  philosophy  up  to  a  certain  point,  when  one  is  a 
lad,  but  a  grown  man  should  lay  it  aside  with  the  toys  of  his  boy- 
hood. It  is  unmanly  in  a  man  of  ability  and  ripe  years  to  take 
no  part  in  affairs  and  sit  whispering  "  with  a  parcel  of  lads  in  a 
corner." l  Callicles  pushes  the  point  "  in  a  spirit  of  friendship  "  ; 
Socrates  is  a  man  of  admirable  natural  parts,  but  his  way  of  life 
has  left  him  at  the  mercy  of  anyone  who  wishes  to  do  him  a  harm. 
If  he  were  falsely  accused  on  a  capital  charge,  he  would  be  quite 
incapable  of  making  an  effective  defence — more's  the  pity  (4810- 
486^).  Socrates  professes  himself  delighted  to  have  such  an 
opponent  to  deal  with,  a  man  who  is  at  once  "  educated,"  sincere 
(as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  his  professed  view  of  the  proper  place 
of  philosophy  in  man's  life  is  one  which  Socrates  knows  him  to  hold 
in  common  with  several  distinguished  associates),  and  perfectly 
frank  in  speaking  his  mind  without  any  deference  to  the  conventions. 
If  we  can  convince  a  man  with  these  qualities  of  the  soundness  of 
our  view  of  life,  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  of  its  truth. 
But  first  we  must  be  quite  clear  on  the  point  that,  in  the  doctrine 
of  Callicles,  "  better  "  is  a  mere  synonym  of  "  stronger  "  and 
"  worse  "  of  "  weaker."  If  this  is  granted,  as  it  is,  then,  since  "  the 
many  "  are  stronger  than  one  man,  their  conventional  usages  are 
the  usages  of  the  stronger,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  better,  and  should 
be  regarded  as  the  "  naturally  fine  "  (Kara  <£uViv  Ka\d).  But  their 
convention  is  just  what  Callicles  has  been  denouncing,  the  conven- 
tion that  aggression  is  wrong  and  that  to  commit  it  is  "  uglier  " 
than  to  suffer  it.  Thus  the  antithesis  between  "  nature  "  and 
"  convention  "  on  which  Callicles  had  based  his  argument  is  unsound. 
This,  says  Callicles,  is  mere  catching  at  a  word.  He  never  meant 
by  the  "  stronger  "  (KPCITTOVS)  those  who  are  merely  superior  in 
muscle  and  brawn  (icrxvporepoi).  A  canaille  of  slaves  would,  at 
that  rate,  be  stronger  and  better  than  the  "  strong  man."  By 
the  "stronger"  he  really  meant  "the  wiser"  (<£poi/i/xwTcpoi) ,  the 
"  men  of  parts."  "  Natural  right  "  is  that  "  the  better  and  wiser 
should  rule  and  have  the  advantage  over  (TrAeW  *x*iv)  the  worse  " 
(486^-4900). 

years  after  399  B.C.     But  the  complaint  cannot  have  been  based  on  our  pas- 
sage, where  it  is  Callicles,  not  Socrates,  who  misquotes. 

1  Gorg.  485^  7.  Plato  has  sometimes  been  thought  to  have  fallen  here 
into  attributing  his  own  way  of  life  in  the  Academy  to  Socrates.  But  (a)  it 
is  most  unlikely  that  the  Academy  existed  when  the  Gorgias  was  written  ; 
(6)  from  Plato's  account  it  appears  that  most  of  the  conversations  of  Socrates 
with  his  young  friends  were  held  "  in  a  corner,"  in  places  like  the  gymnasium 
of  the  Lyceum  or  the  palaestra  of  Taureas,  so  that  Callicles'  language  is  perfectly 
appropriate. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  119 

But  what  exactly  may  this  mean  ?  If  food  and  drink  are  to  be 
distributed  to  a  company  of  men  of  varying  physique,  and  there  is 
just  one  physician  among  them,  he  is  certainly  the  "  wisest  "  in 
matters  of  diet,  and  it  may  be  reasonable  that  he  should  regulate 
the  distribution  by  his  orders ;  but  is  he  to  get  the  biggest  ration, 
even  if  he  should  be  the  greatest  invalid  of  the  party  ?  Should 
the  weaver  always  have  the  biggest  and  finest  clothes  or  the  maker 
of  shoes  the  biggest  shoes  and  most  of  them  ?  Naturally  not ; 
Callicles  really  means  that  the  "  strong  "  are  men  with  the  intel- 
ligence to  know  how  a  city  may  be  "  well  administered,"  and 
the  daring  to  carry  out  their  designs  (ot  av  €ts  TO.  -rifc  TroXcws 

irpdyaara  tfrpovifJLoi  wart,  Svrwa  av  rpoirov  €V  OIKOLTO,  /cat  ftr)  aovov 
<f>p6vip.oi  a\\a  KCU  avSpcioi,  IKQVOI  wres  a  av  vo^crwcrtv  cTJTreAetv,  49*^)' 
It  is  right  that  such  men  should  be  sovereign  in  the  State  and 
"  have  the  advantage  "  (TT\€OV  evctv)  of  their  subjects. 

Should  we  add  that  the  best  men  are  also  sovereigns  over  them- 
selves in  the  popular  phrase,  i.e.  can  govern  their  own  passions  ? 
No ;  for  in  the  nature  of  things  the  great  man  is  one  who  has  great 
passions  and  is  intelligent  and  daring  enough  to  secure  them  full 
gratification.  The  popular  commendation  of  temperance  is  a 
mere  trick  by  which  the  weaklings  of  the  "  herd/1  who  have  not 
manhood  enough  to  live  the  best  kind  of  life  themselves,  enslave 
their  "  natural  superiors  "  (4920).  If  a  man  is  born  to  a  throne, 
or  has  the  manhood  to  win  his  way  to  a  throne,  it  would  be  base 
and  bad  in  him  not  to  rise  above  the  conventional  "  temperance  " 
and  "  justice  "  of  the  herd,  and  reap  the  full  benefit  of  his  capacity 
for  himself  and  his  friends.  In  the  capable,  lawless  self-will  (rpv^ij 
/cat  d/coAacrta  /cat  €\€vOcpta,  4<)2c)  are  virtue  and  happiness ;  regard 
for  the  "  unreal  catchwords  "  (TO,  ?rapa  <f>vo-iv  (TwOy/mara)  of  the 
vulgar  is  contemptible.  Thus  the  ideal  of  Callicles,  like  that  of 
Nietzsche,  is  the  successful  cultivation  of  the  Wille  zur  Macht,  and 
his  "  strong  man,"  like  Nietzsche's,  is  a  being  of  the  type  of  Caesar 
Borgia  as  conceived  in  popular  legend.1 

The  thesis  of  Callicles  and  the  moralists  of  the  "  will  to  power  " 
then  is  that  one  "  ought  "  (del)  to  have  violent  desire  and  gratify 
it  to  the  full ;  to  "  want  nothing  "  is  the  condition  of  a  stone.  But 
perhaps,  as  Euripides  said,  what  we  call  life  is  really  death.  There 
is  a  rival  view,  developed  by  a  certain  wise  man  of  Italy,  that  the 
tale  of  those  who  are  condemned  in  the  underworld  to  draw  water 
in  leaky  pitchers  is  an  apologue  descriptive  of  the  death-in-life 

1  Cf .  Blake,  Marriage  of  Heaven  and  Hell :  "  Those  who  restrain  Desire  do 
so  because  theirs  is  weak  enough  to  be  restrained  ;  and  the  restrainer  or 
Reason  usurps  its  place  and  governs  the  unwilling.  And  being  restrained, 
it  by  degrees  becomes  passive,  till  it  is  only  the  shadow  of  Desire."  The 
recently  discovered  Oxyrhynchus  fragments  of  Socrates'  contemporary, 
Antiphon  "  the  sophist,"  have  revealed  to  us  one  of  the  quarters  in  which 
these  conceptions  found  literary  expression  in  the  age  of  the  Archidamian  war. 
It  is,  I  believe,  of  Antiphon  among  others  that  Plato  is  thinking  when  he 
makes  Glaucon  declare  that  this  same  theory  is  widely  current  in  his  owo 
circle  (Rep.  ii.  3586). 


120          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

of  the  service  of  the  passions.  The  leaking  pitcher,  or  sieve,  is 
"  the  part  of  the  soul  in  which  our  desires  are  "  ;  the  more  grati- 
fication you  give  them,  the  more  they  crave,  and  this  impossibility 
of  ever  contenting  them  shows  the  intrinsic  absurdity  of  the 
attempt.1  And  it  is  clear  that  if  one  had  to  fill  a  number  of  vessels 
from  a  few  scanty  springs,  a  man  who  did  not  care  whether  his 
vessels  were  sound  or  cracked,  and  who  allowed  a  vessel  to  run  over, 
would  have  a  very  difficult  task.  The  man  who  made  sure  that 
his  pitchers  were  sound  and  that  none  of  them  ran  over  would  be 
much  more  successful.  Callicles,  however,  thinks  this  simile 
misleading.  When  the  vessel  has  been  filled,  you  can  get  no  more 
enjoyment  out  of  the  process  of  "  filling  "  it  ;  the  enjoyment 
(^80  vri)  depends  on  the  continuance  of  the  flow.  To  get  it,  you 
must  always  have  room  for  "  more  "  to  flow  in  (4946).  2  (Callicles 
thus  assumes  the  psycho-physical  theory  according  to  which  pleasure 
is  or  accompanies  —  the  theory  hardly  distinguishes  these  alter- 
natives —  the  "  filling-up  "  or  making  good  of  a  process  of  "  de- 
pletion "  in  the  organism,  pain  the  process  of  "  depletion  "  itself. 
The  doctrine  is  familiar  to  us  from  Plato's  acceptance  of  it,  so  far 
as  the  satisfaction  of  physical  appetites  are  concerned,  in  the 
Republic  and  Philebus,  and  Aristotle's  vigorous  polemic  against  it 
in  the  Nicomachean  Ethics.  Plato  rejects  it,  except  for  these  cases, 
and  the  rejection  of  it  is  the  basis  of  the  important  distinction  of  the 
Philebus  between  "  pure  "  or  "  neat  "  and  "  mixed  "  pleasures. 
It  is  taught  more  unreservedly  by  the  Pythagorean  Timaeus  at 
Tim.  6^a-6^b,  and  we  see  from  Aristotle's  polemic  that  it  was  fully 
accepted  by  Speusippus  and  the  extreme  anti-Hedonists  of  the 
Academy.  Its  origin  is  pretty  clearly  to  be  found  in  the  medical 
doctrine  of  Alcmaeon,  according  to  which  all  disease  is  disturbance 
of  the  state  of  iVovo/xtu  ("constitutional  balance")  between  the 
hot,  the  cold,  the  moist,  and  the  dry  in  the  organism.  The  im- 
mediate assumption  of  Callicles  that  rjSovrj  and  ir\rjp<D<ris  may 


1  Gorg.  498a-c.  Note  (i)  that,  as  Burnet  says,  the  allusion  to  the  Italian 
"  sage  "  seems  plainly  meant  for  Philolaus  or  some  contemporary  Pytha- 
gorean ;  (2)  that  the  unexplained  mention  of  "  the  part  of  the  soul  in  which 
the  £iri0vfj.lai  are  "  presupposes  the  doctrine  of  the  "  tripartite  soul  "  more 
fully  explained  in  Rep.  iv.,  which  must  thus  be,  as  there  is  much  in  the 
Republic  itself  to  indicate,  of  Pythagorean  origin,  as  Posidonius  is  known  to 
have  asserted  (Burnet,  Early  Greek  Philosophy*,  278,  n.  2).  It  is  evidence  of 
the  same  thing  that  the  doctrine  is  taught  also  in  Plato  by  the  Italian  Pytha- 
gorean Timaeus,  who  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  learned  it  from  Socrates 
just  before  delivering  his  own  discourse.  (3)  The  tale  of  the  cracked  pitchers 
is  not  connected  by  Plato  with  the  Danaids.  His  version  represents  it  as 
describing  the  future  destiny  of  the  "uninitiated";  this  suggests  Orphic 
Provenance. 

1  Cf.  Hobbes,  Leviathan,  c.  xi.  :  "  There  is  no  such  Finis  ultimus  (utmost 
ay  me)  nor  Summum  Bonum  (greatest  Good)  as  is  spoken  of  in  the  Books  of 
the  old  Morall  Philosophers.  Nor  can  a  man  any  more  live,  whose  Desires 
are  at  an  end,  than  he,  whose  Senses  and  Imaginations  are  at  a  stand.  .  .  . 
So  that  in  the  first  place,  I  put  for  a  generall  inclination  of  all  mankind,  a 
perpetual!  and  restlesse  desire  of  Power  after  power,  that  ceaseth  onely  in 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  121 

be  equated  shows  us  that  this  doctrine  was  a  commonplace  in  culti- 
vated circles  of  the  age  of  Socrates.) 

Obviously,  if  happiness  depends  on  such  a  process  of  unending 
"  filling-up,"  it  demands  a  similarly  unending  process  of  "  depletion/' 
If  water  is  always  to  be  running  into  the  pitcher,  it  must  also  be 
always  running  out  at  the  cracks.  Would  it  then  be  intense  happi- 
ness to  have  a  continual  itch,  provided  one  could  go  on  endlessly 
getting  the  gratification  of  chafing  the  itching  place  ?  You  must 
admit  this  if  you  mean  to  be  serious  with  the  theory.1  What  is 
more,  the  life  of  a  catamite  must  be  eminently  happy,  if  he  can  only 
get  a  perpetual  series  of  satisfactions  for  his  unnatural  prurigo.  For 
all  his  "  freedom  from  convention/'  Callicles  objects  to  this  par- 
ticular "  transvaluation  of  values/'  but  you  cannot  avoid  it  so 
long  as  you  persist  in  identifying  good  with  pleasant.  To  condemn 
any  kind  of  gratification,  you  must  distinguish  good  from  pleasant, 
and  this  Callicles  admits  he  cannot  consistently  do  (4950). 

We  proceed  next  to  consider  the  identification  of  good  and  bad 
with  pleasure  and  pain  on  its  merits.  Two  difficulties  occur  to  us 
at  the  very  outset,  (a)  Good  and  bad  are  "  contraries  "  ;  you 
cannot  predicate  both  at  once  of  the  same  subject,  nor  can  you 
deny  both  at  once.  A  man  cannot  have  both  predicates  at  once,  nor 
"  get  rid  "  of  both  at  once.  Pleasure  and  pain  are  not  opposed  in 
this  way.  E.g.,  when  a  hungry  man  is  satisfying  his  hunger  by  a 
square  meal,  he  feels  at  once  the  pleasure  of  appeasing  the  hunger 
and  the  painfulness  of  the  still  unappeased  hunger  which  urges 
him  to  eat  more.  When  his  hunger  is  sated  and  he  leaves  off,  the 
pleasure  and  the  pain  are  both  at  an  end.  But  it  is  just  at  this 
point,  where  both  the  pleasure  and  the  pain  are  over,  that  the  man 
reaches  the  good  to  which  eating  ministers,  the  restoration  of  normal 
equilibrium  in  his  organism.2  (b)  Callicles  himself  makes  a  dis 
tinction  between  "  good  "  men  and  "  bad  "  ones,  the  "  good/1 
according  to  him,  being  the  intelligent  and  bold,  the  "  bad  "  the 
silly  or  timorous.  He  must  hold,  therefore,  that  good  is  "  present 
to  "  8  the  former  and  not  to  the  latter.  But  he  cannot  deny  that 
fools  and  cowards  feel  pleasure  and  pain  at  least  as  keenly  as  the 

1  Dante,  it  may  be  remembered,  regards  such  a  life  as  a  torment  for  the 
damned,  and  the  worst  of  the  damned  (Inferno,  xiv.  40,  xv.  131,  xxix.  76  ff.). 

*  The  presupposed  doctrine  is  that  explained  at  length  in  the  Philebus, 
that  the  satisfactions  of  appetite  attend  on  the  process  (ytvcerts)  by  which 
a  "  depletion  "  of  the  organism  is  made  good.  Thus  they  are  (a)  preceded 
by  a  painful  consciousness  of  "  want"  (ft/Seta),  and  (6)  are  not,  even  while 
they  last,  wholly  pleasurable.  Their  piquancy  and  intensely  exciting  char- 
acter depends  on  the  tension  between  satisfied  want  and  the  persistence  of 
still  unsatisfied  want.  This  is  why  these  pleasures  are  "  mixed,"  not  "  neat  " 


3  Gorg.  4970,  "  We  call  good  men  good  in  virtue  of  the  presence  of  good 
things  "  to  them  (ayaO&v  vapowtq.}  .  irapovvia  has  here  precisely  the  sense 
it  bears  when  used  in  connexion  with  the  forms  in  the  Phaedo.  The  predicate 
"  good  "  is  predicable  of  a  certain  man  because  he  "  has  "  goodness  of  some 
kind  or  other,  is  "  possessed  of  "  good.  On  a  Hedonist  theory  this  means  that 
"  X  is  good  "  always  implies  "  X  is  enjoying  pleasure,"  and  it  is  this  implica- 
tion Socrates  is  calling  in  question. 


122          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

intelligent  and  daring,  if  not  more  keenly,  since  cowards,  for  example, 
seem  to  feel  more  distress  in  the  face  or  the  enemy  and  more  delight 
at  their  disappearance  than  brave  men  do.  Thus  there  are  empirical 
objections  to  the  identification  of  pleasure  with  good  (4950-4996). 

Callicles  extricates  himself  for  the  moment  in  the  only  way 
possible  to  a  Hedonist  in  a  "  fix/'  Like  Mill,  he  declares  it  obvious 
that  "  pleasures  differ  in  quality"  ;  there  are  better  pleasures  and 
worse  pleasures,  and  it  is  unfair  in  Socrates,  as  Mill  said  it  was  in 
his  opponents,  to  neglect  the  distinction.  For  example,  a  pleasure 
which  contributes  to  bodily  health  is  good,  one  which  is  detri- 
mental to  health  is  bad,  and  the  same  thing  is  true  of  pains.  The 
rule  for  choice  is  that  we  should  choose  the  good  pleasures  and  pains 
and  avoid  the  bad  ones.  In  fact,  Callicles  is  prepared  to  admit  now 
that  pleasure  is  a  means  to  good  (5000).  But  the  right  selection 
of  pleasures  will  demand  a  "  competent  expert  "  ;  not  every  one 
can  be  trusted  to  make  it. 

We  are  thus  brought  face  to  face  with  the  final  problem  raised 
by  our  dialogue.  Socrates  and  Callicles  stand  respectively  for  two 
antithetical  ideals  in  life,  the  one  for  the  "  life  of  philosophy,"  the 
other  for  the  "  life  of  action  "  as  followed  by  a  man  of  affairs  in  the 
Athenian  democracy.  The  choice  between  these  competing  ideals 
is  the  ultimate  practical  problem,  and  it  is  this  issue  which  is  to  be 
decided  by  the  "  competent  judge."  The  distinction  we  have  been 
forced  to  make  between  the  pleasant  and  the  good  shows  that  the 
qualifications  of  the  competent  judge  must  not  be  based  (as  Mill 
tries  to  base  them)  on  an  empirical  acquaintance  with  the  flavours 
of  pleasure  (a  thing  of  which  the  empiric  understands  neither  the 
character  nor  the  cause,  5oi#),  but  on  a  true  r^xvrj,  which  knows 
about  the  good  of  the  soul  as  medicine  does  about  the  good  of  the 
body  ;  in  fact,  Socrates  means,  moral  science  is  to  prescribe  the 
soul's  regimen  as  medicine  prescribes  the  regimen  of  the  body 


Now  there  is  certainly  one  class  of  "  rhetoricians,"  i.e.  practi- 
tioners of  the  use  of  language  to  work  on  men's  feelings  and 
imaginations,  who  are  empirics  of  the  type  of  the  confectioner, 
namely,  the  poets.  Their  standard  is  always  simply  the  "  taste  " 
of  their  public.  They  aim  at  pleasing  this  taste,  and  incidentally 
gaining  their  own  advantage  by  doing  so,  without  troubling  them- 
selves in  the  least  whether  their  productions  will  make  any  one  a 
better  man.  And  what  is  poetry,  when  you  divest  it  of  the  addition 
of  tune,  rhythm,  and  metre,  but  rhetoric  —  the  effective  use  of 
language  ?  Has  the  rhetoric  of  an  Athenian  politician  any  saner 
basis  ?  Does  the  politician  aim  at  the  improvement  of  his  public, 
or  merely  at  gratifying  their  moods  (501^-5020)  ?  a 

1  Thus  Socrates  disposes  in  advance  of  Mill's  preposterous  appeal  to  a 
jury  of  pleasure-tasters  devoid  of  all  ethical  preferences.  From  his  point 
of  view,  to  consult  judges  with  such  a  "  qualification  "  about  pleasures 
would  be  like  selecting  medicines  by  the  agreeableness  of  their  tastes. 

1  The  whole  indictment  of  poetry  in  the  Republic  is  contained  in  principle 
in  what  is  said  here  about  its  character  as  a  "  mere  mechanic  "  trick  of  pleasing 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  123 

Callicles  thinks  that,  though  the  suggestion  of  Socrates  may  be 
true  about  some  statesmen,  there  are  others  who  really  are  guided 
by  regard  for  the  good  of  their  fellow-citizens.  He  could  not  say 
so  much  for  any  living  man  of  affairs,  but  it  is  true  of  the  great 
men  of  the  past,  from  Themistocles  to  the  recently  dead  Pericles. 
They  did  make  Athenians  "  better  "  by  their  careers.  Socrates 
will  not  admit  this.  Themistocles  and  the  rest  made  Athens  great, 
if  it  is  greatness  to  gratify  all  your  cravings  and  passions,  good  and 
bad  alike.  But  the  scientific  practitioner  in  any  department  must 
have  an  ideal  before  him  into  accord  with  which  he  sets  himself  to 
bring  the  material  on  which  he  works,  as,  e.g.,  the  physician  has  an 
ideal  standard  of  health  which  he  tries  to  reproduce  in  his  patients. 
Has  there  ever  been  a  statesman  in  Athens  who,  in  the  same  way, 
has  had  an  ideal  of  character,  "  goodness  of  soul,"  and  set  himself 
to  promote  it  in  the  citizens  ?  The  physician,  unlike  his  counterfeit 
the  confectioner,  aims  at  producing  in  a  human  body  a  definite 
14  order  and  regulation  "  (rafts  K<U  KOO-/XOS)  ;  the  statesman,  if  he 
is  more  than  a  mere  unprincipled  empiric,  should  aim  at  doing  the 
same  thing  for  the  human  soul.  This  is  to  say  that  his  purpose 
should  be  to  produce  "  temperance  and  justice  "  (o-ox^poo-vvT/  *ca! 
&iKaio<ruvrj)  in  the  souls  of  his  public.  The  object  of  a  statesman 
and  orator  secundum  art  em  is  the  production  of  national  character. 
If  the  cTTiflv/buai  of  the  citizens,  the  "  national  "  aspirations  and 
ambitions,  are  unhealthy  and  evil,  the  public  man  who  is  not  a  mere 
"  toady  "  will  aim  at  repressing  them,  and  so  making  the  national 
soul  "  better  "  by  "  chastisement  "  (5056-0). 

Callicles  is  so  disgusted  with  this  return  of  the  argument  to  the 
apparent  paradox  which  had  led  to  his  intervention  in  the  dis- 
cussion, that  Socrates  is  left  to  act  as  respondent  to  his  own  ques- 
tions as  he  draws  to  his  formal  conclusion.  Good  is  not  the  same 
thing  as  pleasure  ;  it  depends  universally  on  "  order  and  Tightness 
and  art"  and  shows  itself  in  a  condition  of  "  regulation  and  orderli- 
ness/1 This  means  that  the  temperate  or  "  disciplined  "  soul  is 
the  good  soul,  the  "  unchastened  "  (dKoAao-ros),  "  undisciplined" 
soul  is  bad.  The  former  acts  "  appropriately  to  the  situation  " 
in  all  the  situations  of  life,  and  consequently  acts  well,  does  well, 
and  is  "  happy  "  ;  the  latter,  not  meeting  the  situations  of  life  with 
the  appropriate  responses,  is  not  merely  bad  but  unhappy,  especially 
if  it  is  not  held  in  check  by  "  chastisement."  These  are  the 
principles  on  which  public  no  less  than  private  conduct  should  be 
organized  ;  the  life  of  the  "  superman  "  or  of  the  "  superstate  " 
is  simply  that  of  a  bandit,  and  a  bandit  has  the  hand  of  gods  and 
men  against  him.  He  does  not  know  how  to  "  communicate  "  or 
"  go  shares  "  (Koivwclv) ,  but  all  social  life  depends  on  "  communica- 
and  amusing.  That  poets  aim  merely  at  pleasing  the  taste  of  an  audience, 
good  or  bad,  was  a  current  view.  Herodotus  uses  it  (ii.  116)  to  explain  why 
Homer  adopted  a  "  false  version  "  of  the  story  of  Helen,  Euripides  (H.F. 
1341-6)  to  discredit  the  whole  poetical  mythology.  In  the  flurcroi  \6-yoi  it 
occurs  more  than  once  as  an  objection  to  the  appeal  to  poets  on  questions  of 
morality  that  their  standard  is  dfovd, 


124          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

tion."  Indeed  the  "  wise  "  (the  Pythagorean  men  of  science)  say 
that  "  communication  "  or  "  reciprocity  "  (KOWWIO.)  is  the  basis 
not  only  of  all  human  affections  and  moral  virtues,  but  of  the  whole 
physical  order  of  heaven  and  earth.  "  Geometrical  equality  "  is 
the  great  law  of  the  universe  (5080),  x  and  this  is  why  the  "  wise  " 
call  the  universe  KOO^OS,  "  the  order  of  things."  In  setting  up 
TrAcop^ta,  "  going  beyond  the  limit,"  as  a  principle  for  life,  Callicles 
has  forgotten  his  geometry.  But  if  these  convictions  are  sound, 
we  must  also  admit  Socrates'  paradox  that  the  best  use  an  offender 
can  make  of  rhetoric  is  to  ensure  his  own  conviction.  Callicles  was 
right  in  saying  that  Socrates'  rule  of  life  left  him  at  the  mercy 
of  an  aggressor,  but  wrong  in  thinking  the  position  "  ugly." 
The  "  ugliness  "  is  not  in  the  suffering  but  in  the  perpetrating  of 
aggression.  To  escape  this  conclusion  you  must  show  that  the 
principle  that  "  wickedness  is  the  greatest  of  evils  to  its  possessor  " 
is  false  (5090). 

To  commit  wrong,  then,  is  the  worst  evil  which  can  befall  a  man  ; 
to  have  to  submit  to  it,  though  a  lesser  evil,  is  also  an  evil.  In 
neither  case  will  the  mere  purpose  to  avoid  the  evil  avail  of  itself 
to  secure  its  end.  To  avoid  being  wronged  you  also  need  "  power  " 
or  "  strength."  And,  since  we  long  ago  agreed  on  the  principle 
that  wrong-doing  is  "  involuntary,"  a  consequence  of  error,  you 
need  to  secure  yourself  against  it  by  acquiring  some  "  power 
or  TC'XVT/,  organized  knowledge"  (5100).  2  If  you  want  to  avoid 
being  wronged,  you  must  either  DC  an  "  autocrat  "  or  a  friend  of 
the  sovereign  body,  whatever  it  may  be  (ercupos  TIJS  vTrapxovVijs 
TroAiTa'as,  5100).  In  an  autocracy  this  means  that  you  must  be 
a  "  creature  "  of  the  autocrat  ;  in  a  democracy,  like  Athens,  you 
must  make  yourself  a  favourite  with  your  "  master  "  the  populace, 
and  conform  yourself  to  its  moods  and  prejudices.  In  neither 
case  have  you  secured  yourself  against  the  greater  evil  of  committing 
wrong.  On  the  contrary,  to  be  a  favourite  with  either  autocrat 
or  populace  you  must  sink  to  their  moral  level  and  sympathize 
with  their  injustices.  Callicles  thinks  this  only  sensible,  for  the 
"  leviathan  "  will  kill  you  if  you  do  not  humour  it.  But  this  plea 
rests  on  the  assumption  that  life  at  any  cost  and  on  any  terms  is 
supremely  desirable,  even  at  the  cost  of  moral  corruption.  It 
amounts  to  basing  the  high  claims  made  for  rhetoric  on  the  view  that 
rhetoric  is  an  art  of  saving  your  skin.  No  doubt  it  is  ;  the  politician 
is  constantly  saving  his  skin  by  his  plausible  speech.  But  swimming 


}  ycwptTpucri,  i.e.  proportion,  "  equality  of  ratio."  It  is  called 
so,  in  contradistinction  to  "  arithmetical  "  or  absolute  "  equality,"  because 
of  the  part  it  plays  in  the  geometry  of  "  similar  "  figures.  The  "  wise  " 
meant  are  the  Pythagoreans  who  were  the  discoverers  of  the  various  elemen- 
tary "  progressions,"  or,  as  the  Greeks  called  them,  dvaXoylai,  "  proportions," 
and  gave  the  name  K<S<T/AOJ  to  what  had  before  them  been  called  ofyav6s. 
For  the  thought  we  might  compare  Kant's  insistence  on  the  principle  of 
Gemeinschaft  and  reciprocal  interconnexion  in  nature. 

1  Cf.  Ep.  vi,  322^,  where  Plato  recommends  Erastus  and  Coriscus  to  the 
"  protection  "  of  Hermias  on  much  the  grounds  here  spoken  oi. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  125 

and  seamanship  save  your  skin  too,  and  are  not  thought  of  supreme 
moment  for  a  gentleman's  education.  An  ordinary  skipper  will 
bring  you,  your  family,  and  all  your  belongings  safe  from  Egypt 
or  the  Pontus,  but  he  asks  a  very  modest  fare,  and  his  calling  is 
thought  a  very  humble  one.  And  this  is  as  it  should  be,  for  the 
skipper  has  really  done  a  man  who  is  hopelessly  diseased  in  body 
or  soul  no  real  service  ;  it  would  be  better  for  such  a  man  to 
go  to  the  bottom  (5110-5126).  So  an  ordinary  engineer  may  save 
the  lives  of  a  whole  community  by  the  machines  he  builds,  but  a 
man  like  Callicles  regards  the  engineer  as  a  "  base  mechanic  " 
and  would  not  dream  of  intermarriage  with  his  family.  If  mere 
life  is  the  highest  good,  why  should  not  all  these  "  mechanics  " 
advance  the  same  claims  which  are  put  forward  on  behalf  of 
rhetoric  ($i2c-d)  ?  The  truth  is  that  the  important  thing  is  not 
to  live  long,  but  to  live  well ;  is  a  man  likely,  or  is  he  not,  to  attain 
that  end  by  conforming  himself  to  the  spirit  and  temper  of  the 
community,  e.g.  of  the  Athenian  8171*09,  as  he  must  do  if  he  means 
to  be  a  "  public  man  "  (5120-5 130)  ? 

"  Impressive,  but  not  convincing/'  is  the  verdict  of  Callicles 
on  all  this.  Convincing  or  not,  however,  it  is  plain  that  if  we  aim 
at  a  statesmanship  which  is  more  than  successful  "  parasitism  "  l 
(fcoAaiceta),  a  statesmanship  which  is  a  genuine  art  of  "  tendance  of 
our  fellow-citizens/1  our  chief  problem  will  be  to  promote  national 
character  ;  it  is  no  true  service  of  the  State  to  increase  its  wealth 
or  power,  unless  its  citizens  are  fitted  by  their  character  to  use 
wealth  or  wield  power2  (5140).  On  the  hypothesis,  then,  our 
fitness  for  the  statesman's  calling  depends  on  our  possession  of  a 
science  (cTno-Tr//^) ,  in  fact,  on  our  knowledge  of  moral  values.  Now 
an  expert  can  establish  his  claim  to  be  an  expert  in  two  ways :  (a)  by 
pointing  out  the  master  from  whom  he  has  learned  his  knowledge,  (b) 
by  pointing  to  the  results  in  which  his  knowledge  has  been  em- 
bodied. If  a  man  can  satisfy  neither  of  these  tests,  we  cannot  take 
his  claims  to  be  an  expert  seriously.  No  one  would  give  an  appoint- 

1  We  might  perhaps  use  a  biological  analogy  to  bring  out  better  the  full 
meaning  of  the  distinction  between  the  *6\a£  and  the  genuine  "  craftsman  " 
which  runs    all   through   the    dialogue.     The    ic6\a£   or  "  trencherman  "    of 
social  life  lives,  and  lives,  according  to  the  vulgar  estimate,  well  by  living  on 
his  patron  (whom  he  really  depraves  by  "pandering"  to  his  vices),  exactly 
as  the  parasitical  organism  fattens  itself  on  the  tissues  of  its  unfortunate 
"  host."     So  the  empiric  in  statesmanship,    the   "  opportunist,"   makes   a 
"good  thing"  for  himself  of  depraving  the  national  character  and  lowering 
the  national  ideals.     The  best  comment  on  the  view  Socrates  takes  of  the 
influence  of  the  "  orators  "  on  national  life  is  the  humorous  caricature  of  the 
same  thing  in  the  scene  of  Aristophanes  (Knights,  725  ff.)  where  the  sausage- 
seller  and  the  Paphlagonian  bid  against  each  other  for  the  lucrative  post  of 
pimp-in-chief  to  Demus.     Aristophanes  and  Socrates  agree  in  their  estimate 
of  the  vvv  iro\iTiKot. 

2  Cf.  the  lesson,  e.g.,  of  the  Euthydemus  that  wealth  and  power  are  good  or 
bad  according  as  the  "  soul  "  which  is  to  use  them  is  good  or  bad.     Note  that 
there  is  once  more  a  tacit  allusion  to  the  apologue  of  the  "  three  lives." 
"  Wealth  "  and  "  power  "  are  the  ends  of  the  "  body-loving  "  and  "  distinc- 
tion-loving "  lives  respectively,  ^irurr^i}  the  end  of  the  "  philosophic  "  life. 


126          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

ment  as  a  public  physician  to  a  candidate  who  could  not  prove 
that  he  had  effected  any  cures  as  a  private  practitioner.  So  an 
aspirant  to  statesmanship  may  fairly  be  expected  to  satisfy  us 
that  he  has  "  in  private  practice  "  made  the  souls  or  characters 
of  his  fellow-men  better.  How  do  the  famous  public  men  of  Athens, 
from  Miltiades  to  Pericles,  stand  this  test  (515^)  ?  It  is  Socrates' 
conviction  that  one  and  all  fail  under  it.  Pericles,  as  every  one  is 
saying,  made  the  Athenians  worse,  not  better  ;  he  made  them 
"  idle,  cowardly,  talkative,  and  greedy  "  (5150).  The  best  proof 
of  this  is  the  notorious  fact  that  at  the  end  of  his  career,  they  actually 
turned  on  him  and  found  him  guilty  of  embezzlement.1  The  con- 
viction was,  to  be  sure,  iniquitous,  but  whose  "tendance  "  of  the 
animal  civis  Atticus  had  taught  it  these  iniquitous  ways  ?  The 
"  tendance  "  of  Pericles  himself  ($i6a-d).  He  made  the  animal 
"  wilder,"  and  this  disposes  of  his  claim  to  be  a  statesman.  The 
same  is  true  of  Cimon  and  Miltiades  :  the  very  wrongs  they  ended 
by  suffering  from  the  8^05  prove  that  they  too  had  made  their 
"  cattle  "  worse  by  their  treatment  (516^-^). 2  None  of  these 
famous  men  was  even  skilled  in  the  spurious  "  parasitic  "  kind  of 
rhetoric — for  each  of  them  ended  by  displeasing  the  common 
patron  (517*). 

You  may  say  that,  after  all,  these  must  have  been  great  men, 
for  their  "  public  works  "  (e.g.  the  creation  of  the  Athenian  navy, 
the  building  of  the  walls,  docks,  and  the  like)  speak  for  them.  And 
this  really  proves  that  they  were,  so  to  say,  good  "  domestics  "  or 
"  personal  servants  "  of  Demus  ;  they  knew  how  to  provide  their 
master  with  the  things  he  desired.  But  what  they  did  not  know — 
and  true  statesmanship  consists  in  knowing  just  this — was  how  to 
get  him  to  desire  what  is  really  good  (5i7&).3  To  call  them  states- 
men is  like  calling  a  confectioner  or  a  fancy  baker  a  specialist  in 
hygiene  and  medicine  ;  it  is  to  compare  a  subordinate  "art," 
which  makes  things,  with  the  master-art  which  "  uses  "  them 
aright  (517^-5180).  If  a  man  made  that  confusion,  his  cooks  and 
confectioners  would  soon  ruin  his  constitution,  and  he  would  lay 
the  blame  for  his  want  of  wholesome  appetite  on  the  inferiority  of 
his  present  cook  as  compared  with  his  old  one.  Callicles  is  making 

1  5150,  ravrl  y&p  tywye  d«:oi/a;  KT\.  Socrates  means  that  this  is  the  verdict 
to  be  heard  on  all  sides  now  that  Pericles  is  dead  and  his  dominance  is  at  an 
end.  He  would  "  hear  "  this,  of  course,  from  many  quarters.  It  is,  e.g.,  the 
view  of  Aristophanes  and  apparently  of  the  contemporary  comic  dramatists 
generally.  The  statement  that  Pericles  had  made  Athenians  "  lazy  and 
greedy  "  dt&  rrjv  tuff0o$oplai>  refers,  of  course,  to  his  establishment  of  the 
dicasts'  fjuvOfa.  The  picture  of  Philocleon  and  his  friends  in  the  Wasps  is 
an  admirable  illustration  of  the  point. 

*  Socrates  would  have  the  Old  Comedy  on  his  side  in  what  he  says  about 
Pericles  ;  the  point  about  Miltiades  and  Cimon  is  made  to  show  that  the  heroes 
of  Aristophanes  and  the  anti-Pericleans  are  in  the  same  condemnation. 

8  5l5t,  ovd'  4y&  \f/{y<*)  TOVTOVS  ws  yc  dia.K6vov?  elvai  7r6\eo>s.  Pericles  and  the  rest 
have  no  claim  to  be  "  physicians  of  the  commonwealth,"  but  they  were  com- 
petent purveyors,  major-domos,  and  butlers.  So  much  Socrates  will  concede, 
but  no  more. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  127 

precisely  the  same  blunder.  The  real  authors  of  the  disorders  of 
the  "  body  politic  "  were  the  "  statesmen  "  of  the  past  who  ruined 
the  constitution  of  the  public  by  filling  it  with  "  harbours  and  docks 
and  such  stuff,  without  justice  and  temperance.'1  When  the 
"  cold  fit  "  of  the  disorder  arrives,  the  sufferer  will  lay  the  blame 
for  his  disorder  on  Alcibiades,  or  perhaps  Callicles  himself,  who  are 
at  worst  only  minor  contributors  to  the  mischief.1  When  the  public 
turns  and  rends  one  of  its  leaders  in  this  fashion,  he  usually  com- 
plains of  its  injustice.  But  the  complaint  is  as  ludicrous  as  that  of 
the  sophists  who  profess  to  teach  their  pupils  "  goodness/'  and  then 
accuse  them  of  cheating  them  of  their  fees.  The  very  complaint 
shows  that  neither  sophist  nor  politician  can  do  what  he  professes 
to  do  ;  the  one  cannot  make  his  pupils  "  good,"  the  other  cannot 
promote  the  real  good  of  the  "  people  "  (5176-5200).  Of  the  two 
pretenders,  there  is  a  certain  advantage  on  the  side  of  the  sophist. 
The  art  he  caricatures,  that  of  the  legislator,  is  a  nobler  thing  than 
the  art  of  the  judge,  as  that  of  the  physical  trainer  who  keeps  the 
body  fit  is  nobler  than  that  of  the  physician  who  banishes  disease. 
If  either  pretender  really  believed  in  himself,  he  would  exercise 
his  calling  gratis  ;  a  man  who  can  make  an  individual  or  a  people 
"  good  "  has  no  need  to  take  precautions  against  ungrateful  or 
unfair  treatment  (^2oc-e).2 

What,  then,  did  Callicles  mean  when  he  recommended  Socrates 
to  take  up  "  public  life  "  ?  Did  he  mean  that  Socrates  should  be  a 
physician  to  the  public  or  merely  a  "  toady  "  and  "  body-servant  "  ? 
The  truth  is  that  Socrates  himself  is  the  only  real  statesman  of  his 
time,  for  he  is  the  only  Athenian  who  aims  in  his  use  of  speech  not 
at  giving  pleasure  but  at  doing  real  good  to  those  with  whom  he 
speaks.  He  may  very  possibly  be  dragged  into  court  as  a  "  corrupter 
of  youth/'  and  if  that  should  happen,  his  condemnation  is  certain, 
for  he  would  be  the  physician  pleading  against  the  confectioner 
before  a  jury  of  children  of  whom  he  had  already  spoken.3  But  he 
would  die  innocent  of  offence,  and  the  dreadful  thing  is  not  to  die, 
but  to  enter  the  unseen  world  with  a  soul  laden  with  guilt  (5210- 
5220). 


1  This  allusion  to  a  possible  turning  of  the  STJ/AOS  against  Alcibiades  seems 
to  make  it  clear  that  the  supposed  date  of  the  conversation  must  at  any  rate 
be  well  before  the  event  which  fulfilled  the  prophecy  —  the  scandal  about  the 
"  profanation  of  the  mysteries  "  in  415.     Observe  the  contempt  expressed 
by  Callicles  at  5200  for  the  professional  "  teachers  of  goodness."     This  is 
strictly  in  keeping  with  his  theories  about  the  superman,  since  no  one  can 
teach  you  to  be  a  superman  ;  you  have  to  be  born  one. 

2  Is  this  an  allusion  to  the  anecdote  told  by  later  writers  about  Protagoras 
and  his  defaulting  pupil  ?     Or,  more  probably,   is  not  the  story  to  which 
Plato  alludes  a  contemporary  jest  into  which  the  name  of  Protagoras  was 
worked  before  the  time  of  Aristotle  ? 

8  We  might  at  first  be  surprised  to  find  Socrates  at  what  seems  to  be  an 
early  stage  in  his  career  contemplating  the  possibility  of  prosecution  for 
"corrupting  the  young."  But  we  should  compare  Apoloey9  i86ff.,  where 
Socrates  insists  that  the  prejudice  against  him  and  his  influence  goes  back 
to  the  old  caricatures  of  the  comic  poets,  who  charged  him  with  useless 
speculations  and  "  making  the  worse  argument  appear  the  better." 


128          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

The  argument  of  the  dialogue  is  now  complete.  We  reach  the 
climax  of  the  Socratic  ethics  of  the  "  tendance  of  the  soul  "  with 
the  declarations  that  statesmanship  is  nothing  but  the  practice 
of  this  same  "  art  "  on  the  large  scale,  that  its  indispensable  basis 
is  knowledge  of  moral  values,  and  that  the  apparent  "  mugwump  " 
Socrates  is  in  fact  the  one  man  of  his  age  and  city  who  is  leading  the 
real  "  active  life,"  because  he  has  himself,  and  tries  to  communicate 
to  every  one  else,  a  moral  faith  and  moral  ideals.  He  alone,  in  a 
world  of  "  opportunist  "  careerists,  is  doing  work  which  will  last, 
because  he  alone  is  building  on  a  rock.  What  makes  the  Gorgias 
so  important  in  spite  of  its  longueurs,  is  that,  more  fully  than  any 
other  dialogue,  and  with  an  intenser  ?ra0o?,  it  works  oat  the  applica- 
tion of  the  conception  of  "  tendance  of  the  soul  "  to  the  whole 
complicated  business  of  life.  Formally,  the  conversation  is  pro- 
longed for  a  few  pages,  to  give  Socrates  the  opportunity  to  drive 
home  the  exceeding  horror  of  sin  by  an  imaginative  myth  of  judg- 
ment after  death,  the  earliest  in  order  of  composition  of  Plato's 
masterpieces  in  this  kind.  The  basis  of  the  story,  in  this  case, 
seems  more  strictly  Orphic  and  less  Pythagorean  than  in  the  com- 
panion pictures  of  the  Republic  and  Phaedo.  The  scenery,  "  the 
meadow  where  the  three  ways  meet,"  x  the  judges  before  whom 
the  dead  appear,  the  original  division  of  the  universe  into  heaven, 
earth,  and  the  underworld,  used  as  the  motif  for  the  tale,  are  all 
familiar  to  us  as  features  of  the  Orphic  mythology.  On  the  other 
hand,  nothing  is  said  of  the  Pythagorean  reincarnation  which  plays 
so  prominent  a  part  in  the  eschatology  of  the  Republic,  Phaedo,  and 
Phaedms.  This  presumably  means  that  that  doctrine  is  no  part  of 
the  serious  convictions  of  Socrates  or  Plato,  and  this  may  be  why 
Socrates  expressly  says  at  5246  that  he  accepts  the  present  account 
of  the  judgment  as  true,  without  any  warning,  such  as  he  gives 
in  the  Phaedo,  against  pressing  its  details. 

The  main  thought  of  the  myth  is  the  impossibility  of  escaping 
the  scrutiny  of  the  eye  of  the  divine  judge.  In  the  old  days,  men 
were  judged  while  still  in  the  body,  and  the  stains  and  sores  of  the 
soul  often  escaped  notice,  especially  when  the  party  to  be  judged 
was  a  great  man,  who  appeared  with  all  the  splendours  of  external 
pomp  and  circumstance.  To  prevent  such  mistakes,  the  judgment 
has  now  been  placed  after  death,  that  the  soul  may  appear  at  the 
tribunal  naked,  without  the  "  tunic  "  of  the  body.  This  ensures 
that  its  destiny  shall  be  decided  by  its  worth,  not  by  the  station  it 
has  held  on  earth.  We  shall  find  Plato  preaching  the  same  doctrine 
of  a  divine  judgment  which  neglects  nothing  and  can  make  no 

1  The  three  ways  are  the  roads  which  lead  (a)  from  earth  to  "  the  meadow," 
(6)  from  the  meadow  to  heaven,  (c]  from  the  meadow  to  hell.  As  usual,  hell 
is  depicted  in  the  main  as  a  purgatory  for  the  not  wholly  depraved.  A  few 
incurables  are  detained  there  permanently  as  a  warning  to  others,  but  these 
are  chiefly  "  supermen  "  of  the  Napoleonic  type.  Ordinary  human  weakness 
is  regarded  as  curable."  Not  all  "statesmen  "  take  the  road  to  destruction. 
Aristides  "  the  just  "  is  instanced  as  an  example  of  a  man  who  filled  high 
office  nobly  and  went  "  straight  to  heaven  "  (5266). 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  129 

error,  in  the  tenth  book  of  the  Laws,  without  any  mythology  at  all. 
In  the  Gorgias,  the  point  to  notice  is  the  tone  of  earnestness  with 
which  Socrates  is  made  to  profess  the  doctrine  as  his  own  personal 
faith.  This  representation  is  quite  incompatible  with  the  singular 
view  that  "  the  historic  Socrates  "  was  an  agnostic  on  the  problem 
of  immortality.  If  Plato  misrepresented  his  master  in  the  matter, 
the  misrepresentation  did  not  begin  with  the  Phaedo.  He  must 
have  ended  the  Gorgias  with  a  deliberate  mystification.1 

The  Meno. — There  are  points  of  contact  between  the  Meno  and 
the  Gorgias  which  make  it  convenient  to  consider  them  together, 
though  the  main  purpose  of  the  Meno  connects  it  rather  with  two 
more  mature  dialogues,  the  Phaedo  and  the  Protagoras,  as  well  as 
with  the  Apology.  The  dramatic  setting  of  the  dialogue  is  of  the 
simplest.  It  is  a  conversation  between  Socrates  and  the  young 
Thessalian  Meno,  who  is  attended  by  at  least  one  slave,  broken  by 
an  interlude  which  brings  on  the  scene  the  prominent  politician 
Anytus,  afterwards  the  instigator  of  the  proceedings  against 
Socrates.  Where  the  conversation  takes  place  we  are  not  told, 
except  that  it  is,  of  course,  somewhere  in  Athens.  The  dramatic 
date  can  be  readily  fixed  by  reference  to  the  facts  about  Meno 
recorded  in  Xenophon's  Anabasis.  Meno  joined  the  expedition 
of  Cyrus  the  younger  against  his  brother  Artaxerxes  II  at  Colossae 
in  the  middle  of  March  401  B.C.  (Anab.  i.  2,  6),  rendered  the  im- 
portant service  of  being  the  first  of  the  Greek  adventurers  to  declare 
for  Cyrus  openly  when  the  army  had  reached  the  Euphrates  and 
its  real  objective  became  clear  (ibid.  i.  4,  13),  and  was  present  with 

1  I  may  here  append  a  very  brief  statement  about  the  conclusion  which 
seems  to  me  safest  on  the  question  of  the  dramatic  date  of  the  dialogue.  As 
I  have  said,  1  think  the  tone  of  the  reference  to  a  possible  revulsion  of  feeling 
against  Alcibiades  excludes  any  date  later  than  about  416.  The  main 
difficulty  to  set  against  this  conclusion  is  the  free  use  made  by  both  Callicles 
and  Socrates  of  the  Antiope  of  Euripides,  which  is  assumed  to  be  a  familiar 
and  popular  work.  The  scholiast  on  Aristophanes'  Frogs  53  refers  to  the  play 
as  "  recently  produced  "  at  the  time  of  production  of  the  Frogs  (405  B.C.),  and 
implies  that  it  was  a  later  work  than  the  Andromeda  (produced  in  412  along 
with  the  Helena,  both  of  which  are  burlesqued  by  Aristophanes  in  the  Thesmo- 
phoriazusae,  a  play  of  the  year  411).  Unless  Plato  has  forgotten  the  real 
date  of  a  play  of  which  he  probably  saw  the  first  performance,  there  must  be 
some  error  in  the  scholiast's  reckoning.  The  references  to  the  actual  state  of 
affairs  throughout  the  dialogue  suggest  that  Pericles  has  not  yet  found  a 
successor  recognized  as  such  by  admirers  like  Callicles.  The  picture  of  the 
power  actually  wielded  by  the  "  orators  "  seems  to  me  so  completely  in 
keeping  with  the  tone  of  Aristophanes'  Knights  and  Wasps,  that  I  would 
suggest  that  the  most  suitable  date  is  during  the  career  of  Cleon,  somewhere 
about  424-422,  or  at  most  a  little  later.  As  the  demagogues  had  been  able 
to  disgrace  Pericles  at  the  end  of  his  life,  427  would  be  a  possible  date,  but  I 
think  rather  less  likely.  We  need  not  suppose  that  Gorgias  is  in  Athens  for 
the  first  time,  or  that  he  only  came  there  once.  Andron,  the  best  known  of 
the  associates  of  Callicles,  is  specially  connected  for  us  with  the  events  of 
411-410  ;  he  had  been  a  member  of  the  "  four  hundred,"  but,  like  Critias, 
took  a  prominent  part  in  the  overthrow  of  that  body,  being  the  proposer  of 
the  psephism  which  "  attainted  "  its  leading  spirit,  the  orator  Antiphon. 
But  in  the  Gorgias,  no  doubt,  we  are  to  think  of  him  as,  like  Callicles,  only 
just  beginning  his  career. 


180          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

the  others  at  the  battle  of  Cunaxa.  The  rivalry  between  Clearchus 
and  Meno,  after  the  battle,  led  directly  to  the  capture  of  the  prin- 
cipal Greek  leaders  by  Tissaphcrnes  and  the  death  of  Clearchus 
(ibid.  ii.  5,  27  ff.).  Meno,  with  the  rest,  was  sent  a  prisoner  to  the 
Persian  court,  where  he  was  executed  after  a  year's  confinement 
(ibid.  ii.  6,  29).  Xenophon,  who  was  a  fervid  admirer  of  the  stupid 
and  brutal  Clearchus,  gives  Meno  the  worst  of  characters.  One 
may  discount  a  great  deal  of  this,  but  the  general  impression  that 
the  man  was  a  spoilt  and  petulant  boy,  only  half  civilized,  is  borne 
out  by  Plato's  dialogue.  Xenophon  does  not  mention  Meno's  age 
at  death,  but  implies  that  he  was  still  a  mere  lad  (crt  u>/><uos,  he  says) 
when  he  was  put  in  charge  of  the  1500  men  he  brought  to  the 
expedition.  Hence  we  shall  hardly  be  far  wrong  if  we  suppose  his 
presence  in  Athens  to  be  connected  with  the  forthcoming  enterprise. 
This  means  that  we  must  date  it  not  long  before  his  arrival  in 
Colossae.  We  must  thus  think  of  Socrates  as  an  old  man,  within 
two  or  three  years  of  seventy,  and  of  the  conversation  as  taking 
place  after  the  restoration  of  the  democracy  in  403,  when  Anytus 
was  one  of  the  two  or  three  most  powerful  and  respected  public  men. 
The  Meno  then,  anlike  any  of  the  dialogues  we  have  so  far  con- 
sidered, is  dated  at  a  time  which  would  be  compatible  with  sup- 
posing Plato  to  have  been  actually  present  at  the  conversation 
and  to  be  describing  it  from  his  own  recollections.1  The  dialogue 
opens  with  an  abruptness  hardly  to  be  paralleled  elsewhere  in  the 
genuine  work  of  Plato  by  the  direct  propounding  of  a  theme  for 
discussion  ;  there  are  not  even  the  ordinary  formalities  of  salutation. 
May  we  argue  that  this  indicates  that  its  composition  belongs  to 
the  very  earliest  years  of  Plato's  literary  activity  ?  This  would  be 
an  important  consideration,  since,  as  no  one  denies,  the  whole 
characteristic  metaphysics  of  the  Phaedo,  the  theory  of  forms  and 
the  doctrine  of  "  reminiscence/'  are  explicitly  taught  in  the  Meno. 
In  any  case  there  ought  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  Meno  is  a  cruder 
and  earlier  work  than  either  of  the  two  great  dramatic  dialogues 
with  which  it  is  most  intimately  connected,  the  Phaedo  and  the 
Protagoras,  and  this  of  itself  would  be  enough  to  prove  that  the 
Phaedo  is  not,  as  has  been  supposed,  a  first  publication  of  an  im- 
portant philosophical  discovery. 

The  question  raised  by  .Meno  (700)  is  one  directly  suggested 
by  the  activity  of  Protagoras  and  the  other  "  teachers  of  goodness  " 
Can  "  goodness  "  be  taught,  or,  if  not,  can  it  be  acquired 


1  The  only  other  "  Socratic  "  discourses  for  which  this  would  be  possible, 
so  far  as  I  can  see,  are  the  Apology  (where  Plato  mentions  his  own  presence). 
Theaetetus  and  Euthyphro,  (?)  Philebus.  It  would  consequently  be  possible 
for  the  Sophistes  and  Politicus  also,  though  the  fiction  by  which  the  Theaetetus, 
with  which  these  dialogues  are  especially  connected,  is  represented  as  read 
from  notes  made  by  Euclides  is  probably  intended  to  suggest  that  Plato  is 
not  a  Kw<f>&v  vptowTrov  in  these  discourses.  These  facts  suggest  that,  except 
in  the  case  of  the  Apology,  Plato  means  us  to  think  of  himself  as  absent  even 
in  the  one  or  two  instances  when  he  might,  so  far  as  date  goes,  have  been 
present  :  his  intention  is  to  suppress  his  own  personality  altogether. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  131 


by  "  practice  "  —  is  it  do-K^roV  ?  If  it  can  be  acquired  neither  by 
instruction  nor  by  practice,  is  it  "  naturally  "  inborn,  or  how  do 
we  come  by  it  ?  This  is  just  the  point  at  issue  between  the 
champions  of  vd/xos  and  the  partisans  of  <£vW  in  the  time  of 
Socrates.  (For  the  Socratic  answer  to  the  problem  we  need  to  go 
partly  to  the  Protagoras,  still  more  to  the  elaborate  account  of  the 
training  proposed  for  the  "  auxiliaries  "  and  the  "  philosopher 
kings  "  of  the  Republic.  Plato's  own  final  position  has  to  be  learned 
from  the  educational  sections  of  the  Laws.  At  present  it  will  be 
enough  simply  to  state  summarily  the  results  reached  in  the  Re- 
public. There  is  no  formal  discussion  of  the  problem  in  the  dialogue, 
but  the  solution  of  it  is  given  implicitly  in  the  educational  pro- 
gramme laid  down  in  the  course  of  books  iii.-vii.  Socrates'  solution 
there  depends  on  a  distinguo.  There  are  two  distinct  levels  of 
"  goodness/'  one  which  will  be  sufficient  for  the  ordinary  good 
citizen  and  even  for  the  "  auxiliaries/'  the  executive  force  of  society, 
and  a  higher,  indispensable  to  the  statesmen  who  have  to  direct 
the  whole  of  the  national  life  and  determine  its  standard.  For  those 
whose  business  in  life  is  to  obey  rules  based  on  the  ideals  of  the  true 
statesman,  all  that  is  necessary  is  a  discipline  in  absolute  loyalty 
to  the  traditions  in  which  the  ideals  are  embodied,  and  this  dis- 
cipline is  secured  by  the  moulding  of  temper,  taste,  and  imagina- 
tions described  in  Republic  iii.-iv.  Such  an  education,  however,  does 
not  result  in  personal  insight,  but  at  best  in  loyalty  to  a  noble  rule 
of  life  taken  on  trust.  The  "  goodness  "  of  the  classes  who  are 
"  under  authority  "  is  thus  not  ^aOrjrov  but  dovo/ToV,  a  result 
not  of  enlightenment  but  of  discipline.  But  in  the  statesman  who 
has  to  create  the  national  tradition,  something  more  is  needed. 
He  must  know,  as  a  matter  of  personal  insight,  what  the  true  moral 
"  values  "  are.  The  statesman  is  therefore  required  to  possess  a 
"  philosophic  "  goodness,  based  on  direct  personal  insight  into  the 
structure  of  the  universe  and  man's  place  in  that  structure.  Such 
insight  can  only  be  won  by  the  mind  which  has  been  trained  in 
arduous  scientific  thinking  for  itself,  and  is  therefore  "  knowledge," 
and,  like  all  knowledge,  comes  by  "teaching";  but  this  teaching 
is  no  mere  communication  of  "  results."  A  man  is  not  made  a 
thinker  of  the  first  order  by  any  imparting  of  "  information,"  but 
by  stimulating  in  him  the  power  and  the  ambition  to  think  for 
himself.  This  is  why  the  one  effective  method  of  teaching  in  philo- 
sophy and  science  is  the  association  of  an  older  and  a  younger  mind 
in  the  prosecution  of  an  "  original  research.") 

To  return  to  the  Meno.  Meno's  question,  flung  out  in  an  airy 
way  as  though  it  could  be  disposed  of  in  a  sentence,  cannot  really 
be  answered  without  facing  one  still  more  fundamental.  We  cannot 
expect  to  know  how  "  goodness  "  is  produced  until  we  know  what 
it  is.  And  this  is  more  than  anyone  at  Athens,  and  most  of  all 
Socrates,  professes  to  know.  We  are  thus  brought  back  to  the 
problem  of  definition  which  has  met  us  already  in  other  dialogues 
(jic-d).  According  to  Meno,  this  problem  is  no  real  problem  at 


182          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

all.  Gorgias  could  have  told  Socrates  what  goodness  is,  or,  if 
Socrates  has  forgotten  what  Gorgias  has  to  say,  Meno,  whose 
admirer  Aristippus  had  been  a  patron  of  Gorgias,  can  remind  him. 
There  are  a  variety  of  "  goodnesses  "  (dperai).  The  goodness  of  a 
man  is  to  have  capacity  for  public  affairs,  to  be  a  valuable  ally  and 
a  dangerous  enemy,  and  to  know  how  to  hold  his  own ;  that  of  a 
woman  is  to  look  after  "  the  home  "  and  to  obey  her  husband ;  and 
there  are  yet  other  goodnesses  appropriate  to  a  child,  an  elderly 
man,  a  slave,  and  so  forth.  In  fact,  every  age  of  life  and  every 
social  station  has  its  own  peculiar  goodness  (720).  (Thus  we  have 
once  more  the  confusion  of  definition  with  enumeration.)  These 
commonplaces,  however,  do  not  answer  our  question.  We  want 
to  know  what  the  oucr/a,  or  essentia  of  "  goodness  "  is,  and  this 
must  be  something  in  respect  of  which  the  "  goodnesses  "  of  male  and 
female,  old  and  young,  bond  and  free,  do  not  differ,  a  "  single 
identical  pattern  "  (cv  ci^os,  720),  in  virtue  of  which  the  common 
name  apcrr/  is  bestowed.1  Consider  the  analogy  of  health  or 
strength.  One  might  say,  as  Meno  has  done,  that  there  is  "  health 
in  a  man  "  and  "  health  in  a  woman,"  "  manly  strength  "  and 
"  womanly  strength/'  and  that  they  have  their  differences.  And 
Meno  himself  must  admit  that  "  in  respect  of  being  health  "  or 
"  in  respect  of  being  strength  "  masculine  health  and  strength 
do  not  differ  from  feminine.2  There  is  a  single  "  pattern  "  of 
health  (cV  Travraxotf  cTSo?)  in  all  healthy  beings,  and  similarly 
with  strength.  So,  since  we  can  speak  of  a  good  man  and  of  a  good 
woman,  there  must  be  some  one  "  pattern  "  of  goodness  in  man 
and  woman,  young  and  old.  (In  the  language  of  to-day,  "  good- 
ness "  must  be  a  determinable,  of  which  the  "  goodness  of  a  man/1 
the  "  goodness  of  a  woman/'  and  the  rest  are  the  determinants.) 
We  may  note  that  this  position,  which  arises  at  once  from  the 
application  of  the  theory  of  forms  to  human  conduct,  is  of  first- 

1  The  "  something  which  is  the  same  in  all  cases  "  and  justifies  the  use  of  a 
common   name   is  successively  spoken   of  as   ova-La   (what   the   thing  is,  its 
quid)  (726),  as  a  single  eTSos,  pattern  (720,  d,  e),  as  something  which  "  pervades  " 
all  the  cases,  5tA  tr^vrtav  &rr/j>  (740),  is  the  same  "  over  them  all,"  M  iraa-i  raMr 
(750).     All  these  are  names  for  the  objective  reality  indicated  by  the  employ- 
ment of  a  common  predicate  of  many  subjects,  and  the  abundance  of  them 
presupposes  the  existence  of  an   already  rather  elaborate  logical  doctrine 
founded  on  the  metaphysics    of    forms.     Linguistically,  ovvia  is  the   most 
interesting  of  them,  since  in  this  sense  it  is  a  loan-word  from  Ionic  science ; 
the  only  familiar  meaning  in  the  Attic  of  the  fifth  century  was  the  legal  one, 
"estate,"  "property,  personal  or  real."     On  the  probability  that  the  philo- 
sophical meaning  of  the  word  comes  from  the  Pythagoreans,  see  Burnet's  note 
on  Euthyphro,  loa  7.     As  to  e?5os,  criticism   has   not  shaken  my  conviction 
that  its  philosophical  use  is  a  development  from  its  source  in  Pythagorean 
mathematics — "regular  figure." 

2  That  in  a  sense  there  is  male  health  and  female  health  is  clear  from  the 
simple  fact  that  there  are  professors  of  and  treatises  on  gynaecology.     But 
the  eI5os  of  health,  namely,  that  it  is  "equilibrium  in  the  constituents  of  the 
organism,"  holds  good  for  both  sexes.     'Ihe  thesis  that  the  "  goodness  "  of  a 
woman  is  the  same  as  that  of  a  man  was  ascribed  to  Socrates  also  by  Aeschines 
in  his  Aspasia,  and  is  thus  a  genuine  tenet  of  the  Socratic  ethics  (cf.  Burnet, 
art.  SOCRATBS,  in  Encyclopaedia  oj  Religion  and  Ethics,  xi.  667). 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  133 

rate  importance  for  both  logic  and  ethics.  In  logic  it  means  that 
there  is  no  third  alternative  between  realism  and  nominalism.  A 
universal,  unambiguously  employed,  signifies  something  or  it  does 
not.  If  it  signifies  anything,  that  something  is  not  an  arbitrary 
fiction  of  my  mind  ;  if  it  signifies  nothing,  there  is  an  end  of  all 
science.  Science  stands  or  falls  with  "  objective  reference." l 
In  ethics  the  doctrine  means  that  there  really  is  one  moral  standard 
for  all  of  us,  male  or  female,  Greek  or  barbarian,  bond  or  free. 
There  really  is  one  "  eternal  and  immutable  "  morality,  not  a 
variety  of  independent  moral  standards,  one  perhaps  for  the 
"  private  man  "  and  another  for  the  "  nation  "  or  its  politicians, 
or  one  for  "  the  herd  "  and  another  for  the  "  superman."  The 
particular  application  of  this  conviction  to  the  case  of  man  and 
woman  is  shown  to  be  genuinely  Socratic  by  the  fact  that  it  not 
only  appears  in  Republic  v.  as  the  principle  on  which  Socrates 
justifies  the  participation  of  women  in  public  life,  but  is  also 
implied  in  the  fragments  of  the  Aspasia  of  Aeschines  as  his  reason 
for  asserting  the  capacity  of  women  for  the  tasks  of  war  and 
statesmanship.2 

Meno  is  inclined  at  first  to  deny  the  position.  But  he  has  to 
admit  that  both  what  he  regards  as  man's  work  and  what  he  calls 
woman's  work  are  only  well  done  if  they  are  performed  with 
sophrosyne  and  justice,  and  similarly  that  wilfulness  (uKoAacria)  and 
unfairness  are  faults  alike  in  children  and  in  elderly  men.  Thus 
sophrosyne  and  justice  emerge  as  characteristic  of  human  goodness, 
irrespective  of  age,  sex,  or  status.  There  is  then  such  a  thing  as  a 
"  goodness  in  virtue  of  which  all  human  beings  are  good  "  ;  can 
Meno  remember  what  Gorgias  supposed  this  goodness  to  be  ?  He 
suggests  that  it  may  be  "  capacity  to  command  "  («f>xcu>  olov  T  cTvai 
ruv  avBpuirw,  73^).  But  what  then  about  a  child  or  a  slave 
(who,  of  course,  show  their  "  goodness  "  not  by  giving  orders,  but 
by  obeying  them)  ?  And  again,  one  may  give  unjust  commands, 
and  this  can  hardly  be  goodness,  since  it  is  not  disputed  by  Meno 
that  justice  is  a  virtue  and  injustice  a  vice.  We  must  at  least 
qualify  the  statement  by  saying  that  goodness  in  man  is  the  capacity 

1  We  could  not  meet  the  argument  by  falling  back  on  Aristotle's  well- 
known  doctrine  of  the  "  analogous  "  employment  of  universals.  True  as 
that  doctrine  is,  it  remains  also  true  that  in  its  strict  and  primary  (Ktipiov) 
sense  the  universal  can  still  be  asserted  of  a  plurality  of  subjects,  and  to  be 
significant  must  be  asserted  of  each  and  all  of  them  in  the  same  sense.  Thus, 
even  if  it  be  granted,  that  there  is  no  one  common  "  goodness  "  of  all  things, 
e.g.  that  there  is  no  more  than  an  analogy  between  the  goodness  of  a  good 
razor  and  that  of  a  good  man,  the  Aristotelian  ethics  is  based  on  the  view  that 
there  is  a  "  human  goodness  "  which  is  one  and  the  same  for  all  men  ;  there 
is  not  one  goodness  of  Peter  and  a  different  and  merely  analogous  goodness  of 
Paul.  Peter  and  Paul  have  to  be  pronounced  good  or  bad  by  the  same 
standard.  Aristotle's  attempt  in  the  Politics  to  justify  the  conventional  pre- 
judice which  sets  up  a  different  moral  standard  for  the  two  sexes  amounts  to 
a  denial  of  the  moral  unity  of  humanity,  and  contradicts  the  very  principles 
on  which  his  own  ethics  are  constructed. 

1  See  the  collection  of  these  fragments  in  H.  Dittmar's  Aeschines  von 
SpheUos. 


134          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

to  command  justly  (73d).  This  at  once  raises  the  question  whether 
commanding  justly  is  goodness  or  only  ap^rrj  ns,  one  form  of 
goodness ;  in  fact,  in  the  language  of  a  more  developed  logic,  whether 
we  are  not  confusing  a  genus  with  one  of  its  own  species.  We  may 
illustrate  the  confusion  by  a  simple  example.  It  would  be  false 
to  say  that  "  circularity  is  figure  "  (o-x^tu),  though  true  to  say 
that  it  is  one  figure  among  others  (732).  There  are  other  figures 
besides  circles,  and  Meno  admits  that  there  are  "  many  "  forms  of 
goodness  besides  justice.  Our  attempt  at  definition  has  failed  ; 
like  the  original  enumeration,  it  has  left  us  with  many  goodnesses 
instead  of  one  (746). 

Perhaps  we  may  get  a  hint  of  the  kind  of  statement  we  really 
want  if  we  go  back  to  our  illustration  of  the  circle.  There  are 
many  figures  (o^/mra)  of  which  the  circle  is  only  one,  just  as  there 
are  many  colours,  of  which,  e.g.,  white  is  one  among  others.  But  we 
might  try  to  define  figure  in  a  way  which  would  express  what  is 
common  to  all  figures,  by  saying,  for  example,  that  "  figure  is  the  one 
thing  which  always  accompanies  colour/'  "  the  sole  inseparable  con- 
comitant of  colour  "  (o  p,6vov  ru)j>  OVTCOI/  rvy^ai/ct  ^pupaTi  act  CTTO/XCVOV, 

750).  It  is  true,  as  Meno  remarks,  that  such  a  "  definition  " 
would  involve  the  undefined  term  "  colour."  A  pugnacious  eristic 
would  ignore  this  criticism  ;  he  would  retort  that  he  had  done 
his  part  in  giving  his  own  definition  and  that  any  amendment 
of  it  was  the  business  of  his  antagonist.  But  we  are  not  disputing 
for  victory,  and  Socrates  is  ready  to  meet  the  criticism  by  attempting 
a  better  definition.  Meno  will  admit  that  he  knows  what  mathe- 
maticians mean  by  a  "  boundary  "  ;  if  we  say  then  that  "  figure  is 
the  boundary  of  a  solid  "  (o-reptov  ircpa?),  the  statement  will  hold 
good  universally  and  exclusively,  and  not  be  open  to  the  criticism 
that  it  introduces  a  second  "  unknown  "  (760). 

Meno  should  now  attempt  a  similar  definition  of  goodness,  but 
irrelevantly  insists  that  Socrates  shall  go  on  to  define  colour.  This, 
as  Socrates  says,  is  the  mere  whim  of  a  capricious  "  beauty/'  but 
he  will  comply  with  it.  Meno  at  any  rate  will  be  satisfied  by  a 
definition  based  on  the  doctrine  of  Gorgias,  which  is  derived  from 
the  "  efflux  "  theory  of  Empedocles.1  Assuming  this  theory,  we 
may  say  that  colour  is  "an  efflux  from  surfaces  which  fits  into  the 
passages  of  the  visual  apparatus  and  is  sensible  "  (aTroppoy  o-^/xarwv 
6\l/€i  <rv/A/x€Tpos  KCU  cuo^Tos,  j6d) ,  a  definition  which  Meno  thinks 

1  For  the  Empedoclean  theory  of  the  part  played  by  these  "  effluxes  " 
and  the  "  passages ''  in  the  sense-organs  into  which  they  fit,  see  Theophrastus 
de  Sensu,  7-9,  and  the  criticism  of  Aristotle  de  General.  A  324^  25^.,  de  Sensut 
4376  23ff.,  with  the  striking  fragment  84  of  Empedocles,  quoted  by  Aristotle, 
de  Sensu,  4376  26  [R.P.  1776,  c]  ;  Burnet,  Early  Greek  Philosophy  8,  246-249. 
The  definition  is  based  on  the  Empedoclean  theory  because  Gorgias,  as  a 
Sicilian,  is  assumed  to  be  in  accord  with  the  biological  views  of  the  founder  of 
Sicilian  medicine.  Quintilian  iii.  i,  8  [R.P.  232]  gives  it  as  the  "  tradition  " 
that  Gorgias  had  originally  been  a  "  disciple  "  of  E.  Cf.  D.L.  viii.  58-59. 
In  the  Timaeus  Plato  makes  his  spokesman,  who  is  represented  as  holding  the 
principles  of  the  Sicilian  medicine,  give  the  same  account  of  colours.  (Tim. 


SOCRAT1C  DIALOGUES  185 

admirable,  though  Socrates  calls  it  "  stagy  "  and  says  it  is  inferior 
to  that  just  given  of  figure.1 

Meno  at  last  makes  an  attempt  at  the  definition  of  goodness. 
It  is  "  to  desire  the  fine  things  and  to  be  able  to  secure  them  " 

(iinOv^ovvTa  TWV  KaA.o)i>  Swarov  slvai  7ropt£€cr#ai,  776).  But  the  State- 
ment is  doubly  open  to  criticism,  (a)  It  implies  that  it  is  possible 
to  desire  what  is  not  "  fine,"  that  is,  to  "  desire  evil."  But,  in  fact, 
no  one  can  or  does  desire  what  he  knows  to  be  evil,  for  that 
would  be  equivalent  to  the  impossibility  of  desiring  to  be  unhappy 
(770-786).  The  first  clause  of  Meno's  definition  is  thus  superfluous, 
and  it  reduces  to  the  statement  that  goodness  is  "  ability  to  secure 
goods."  (b)  By  "  goods  "  he  means,  as  he  explains,  such  things  as 
wealth,  health,  and  high  civic  and  social  distinction  (the  ends,  be 
it  noted,  of  the  "  body-loving  "  and  "  distinction-loving  "  lives). 
But  we  cannot  call  ability  to  get  these  things  by  any  means,  fair 
or  foul,  goodness  ;  it  would  be  truer  to  say  that  the  virtuous  man 
is  /ncapable  of  gaining  fortune  or  position  by  foul  means.  So  we 
have  to  introduce  the  qualification  that  goodness  is  capacity  to 
secure  good  things  "  by  righteous  "  or  "  honest  "  means,  or  some- 
thing to  that  effect.  Now  righteousness,  honesty,  or  whatever 
other  qualifications  we  introduce,  have  already  been  admitted  to 
be  "  parts  "  of  goodness,  so  that  we  are  in  effect  saying  that  good- 
ness or  virtue  is  attaining  certain  ends  by  the  practice  of  some 
specific  virtue  (i.e.  we  introduce  one  or  more  of  the  determinants 
of  a  given  determinable  into  a  proposed  definition  of  that  deter- 
minable  itself,  and  thus  commit  a  vicious  "circle,"  7?b~7ge). 
We  are  thus  no  nearer  to  a  satisfactory  definition  than  we  were 
before. 

Meno  is  half  inclined  to  lay  the  blame  for  the  collapse  of  the 
argument  on  Socrates,  who,  he  says,  has  the  reputation  of  always 
being  bepuzzled  himself  and  communicating  his  bewilderment  to 
others.  He  benumbs  men's  wits  as  the  fish  called  vdpicrj  benumbs 
their  muscles  if  they  touch  it.  In  any  other  company  Meno  would 
have  plenty  to  say  about  "  goodness,"  but  in  the  presence  of 
Socrates  he  is  "  paralysed."  In  any  foreign  city  Socrates  would 
run  a  real  risk  of  being  arrested  for  sorcery.  Socrates  has  to  admit 
the  accusation,  with  the  reservation  that  the  comparison  with  the 
vdpKr}  is  only  apt  on  the  assumption  that  the  creature  itself  is  as 
"  numb  "  as  its  victims.  The  difficulties  his  conversation  creates 
in  others  are  only  the  reflection  of  those  he  finds  in  his  own  thinking. 
But  if  Meno  will  adventure  on  the  definition  of  "  goodness  "  over 
again,  he  will  do  his  best  to  examine  the  new  result  (80  a-d).  At 
this  point  Meno  again  tries  to  run  off  on  an  irrelevant  issue.  He 
brings  up  the  "  sophistic  "  puzzle  which  we  have  already  met  in 

1  Why  does  Socrates  prefer  the  definition  of  figure  to  that  of  colour  ? 
Presumably  because  the  second  implies  a  detailed  physical  and  physiological 
speculation  which  is  highly  problematic  ;  the  other  presupposes  only  the 
principles  of  geometry,  and  geometry  is  an  indubitable  "  science."  The 
definition  of  colour  is  rpayuc/i,  "  stagy,"  because  it  makes  a  show  with  grand 
words  which  are  only  a  cover  for  imprecision  and  uncertainty. 


136          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

the  Euthydemus,  that  "  inquiry  "  is  impossible  because  you  cannot 
inquire  after  something  you  already  know,  nor  yet  after  what  you 
do  not  know  (since,  in  the  second  case,  you  would  not  even  recog- 
nize the  object  you  were  looking  for,  if  you  should  succeed  in  finding 
it).  This  dilemma,  however,  would  cease  to  be  a  difficulty  if  there 
should  be  truth  in  a  doctrine  which  Socrates  has  learned  from 
"  priests  and  priestesses  who  have  been  at  the  pains  to  understand 
their  professional  duties  "  and  also  from  Pindar  and  other  poets. 
The  doctrine  is  that  our  soul  is  immortal  and  our  present  life  only 
one  episode  in  its  history.  If  this  is  so,  the  soul  must  long  ago 
have  "learned"  everything,  and  only  needs  to  be  "put  in  mind  " 
of  something  it  has  temporarily  forgotten  in  order  to  regain  its 
knowledge  by  diligent  following  of  the  clue  provided  by  "  re- 
miniscence." Learning,  in  fact,  is  just  a  process  of  "  re-call  " 
(d^a/xv^o-ts) ,  and  for  this  reason  the  sophistic  argument  to  show 
that  it  is  impossible  to  learn  a  new  truth  is  a  mere  appeal  to  mental 
indolence  (Soe-S2a).  (As  we  are  encountering  the  doctrine  of 
"  recollection  "  for  the  first  time,  it  is  worth  while  to  note  what  the 
exact  point  of  it  is.  It  must  be  observed  that  it  is  not  a  theory  of 
"  innate  ideas,"  or  "  innate  knowledge,"  in  the  popular  sense  of  the 
words.  We  are  not  supposed  to  bring  any  actual  knowledge  into 
the  world  ready-made  with  us.  On  the  contrary,  we  are  said  to 
"  have  learned  "  truth  but  to  have  lost  it  again,  and  we  have  to 
recover  what  we  have  lost.  The  recovery  requires  a  real  and 
prolonged  effort  of  steady  thinking  ;  what  "  recollection,"  or  more 
accurately  "  being  reminded,"  does  for  us  is  to  provide  the  starting- 
point  for  this  effort.  In  the  Phaedo,  this  is  illustrated  by  the 
way  in  which  chance  "  associations  "  will  start  a  train  of  thinking, 
as  when  the  sight  of  an  absent  friend's  belongings  or  his  portrait 
sets  us  thinking  of  the  friend  himself.  The  main  emphasis  thus 
falls  not  on  the  Orphic  doctrine  of  pre-existence  and  re-incarnation, 
which  Socrates  professes  to  have  learned  from  poets  and  priests, 
but  on  the  function  of  sense-experience  as  suggestive  of  and  pregnant 
with  truths  of  an  intelligible  order  which  it  does  not  itself  adequately 
embody  or  establish.  And  the  philosophical  importance  of  the 
doctrine  is  not  that  it  proves  the  immortality  of  the  soul,1  but  that 
it  shows  that  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  is  not  a  matter  of  pas- 
sively receiving  "  instruction,"  but  one  of  following  up  a  personal 
effort  of  thinking  once  started  by  an  arresting  sense-experience. 
But  for  this  "  suggestiveness  "  of  sense-experience  the  ignava  ratio 
of  the  eristic,  "  you  cannot  learn  the  truth  from  any  teacher,  because 
unless  you  know  it  already,  you  will  not  recognize  it  for  the  truth 
when  he  utters  it,"  would  be  valid.  We  see,  then,  why  both 
Socrates  and  Plato  hold  that  "  knowledge  "  can  only  be  won  by 

1  In  the  Phaedo  itself  the  argument  is  found  insufficient  to  meet  the 
formidable  difficulty  raised  by  Cebes  that  even  if  pre-existence  is  true, 
it  gives  us  no  guarantee  that  we  shall  continue  to  be  after  the  dissolu- 
tion of  our  present  body.  For  the  illustrations  from  "  association,"  see 
Phaedo,  73$  fi. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  137 

personal  participation  in  "  research  "  ;  it  cannot  simply  be  handed 
on  from  one  man  to  another.1 

An  illustration  of  the  principle  that  "  learning  "  is  really  "  being 
reminded  of  something/'  i.e.  is  the  following  up  by  personal  effort 
of  the  suggestions  of  sense-experience,  may  now  be  given.  Socrates 
calls  forward  the  lad  who  is  attending  on  Meno,  after  satisfying 
himself  that  the  boy  can  understand  a  question  in  plain  Greek,  but 
has  never  been  taught  any  mathematics,  and  undertakes  to  show 
how  he  can  be  brought  to  see  geometrical  truths  for  himself  by 
merely  asking  appropriate  questions  which  enable  the  answerer 
to  correct  his  own  first  hasty  thoughts.  The  point  to  be  estab- 
lished is  that  the  areas  of  squares  are  proportional  to  the  second 
powers  of  the  lengths  of  their  sides,  and  in  particular  that  the  area 
of  a  square  described  on  the  diagonal  of  one  previously  described 
is  double  the  area  of  the  original  figure.2  We  are  to  think  of 
Socrates,  of  course,  as  drawing  the  requisite  figure,  which  will  be 
found  in  any  commentary  on  the  Meno,  in  the  sand  as  he  speaks. 
The  boy's  first  thought  is  that  if  we  want  to  make  a  square  with 
twice  the  area  of  a  given  one,  we  must  make  its  sides  twice  as  long. 
(That  is,  he  argues,  "  since  22  =2  x  2,  42  =2  x  4.)  He  is  easily  made 
to  see  for  himself  that  this  cannot  be  true  (since  4x4=16),  and 
amends  his  first  answer  by  suggesting  that  the  side  of  the  second 
square  should  be  to  that  of  the  first  as  3  to  2  (i.e.  he  suggests  that 
32=8).  Again  it  is  easy  to  get  him  to  see  that  this  is  impossible 
(since  3  x  3  =9).  The  length  of  the  line  we  require  must  be  greater 
than  that  of  our  original  line,  but  less  than  half  as  great  again 
U/2 >!<•!).  And  with  a  few  more  questions,  the  lad  is  led  to 
see  that  the  line  we  require  as  the  base  of  our  second  square  is  no 
other  than  the  diagonal  of  our  original  figure  (826-856)  .3  The 
point  insisted  on  is  that  the  lad  starts  with  a  false  proposition,  is 
led  to  replace  it  by  one  less  erroneous,  and  finally  by  one  which,  so 
far  as  it  goes,  is  true.  Yet  Socrates  has  "  told  "  him  nothing.  He 
has  merely  drawn  diagrams  which  suggest  the  right  answers  to  a 
series  of  questions.  The  only  "  information  "  he  has  imparted  to 
the  slave  is  that  a  certain  line  is  technically  called  by  "  the  sophists," 
i.e.  "  professionals/'  a  "  diagonal."  Everything  else  has  been  left 
to  the  boy  to  think  out  for  himself  in  response  to  the  suggestions 
provided  by  Socrates'  diagrams  and  questions.  Yet  undeniably 

1  See  the  language  on  this  point  of  Plato,  Ep.  vii.  34 ic.  Perhaps  I  may 
refer  to  the  statement  of  the  theory  in  my  little  volume,  Platonism  and  its 
Influence  (Boston,  U.S.A.,  1925)  c.  2,  as  well  as  to  Burnet,  Greek  Philosophy, 
Part  I.,  pp.  220-222. 

1  The  particular  theorem  is  chosen,  no  doubt,  because  of  the  importance 
of  the  "  side  and  diagonal  "  as  the  most  elementary  instance  of  a  pair  of  "  in* 
commensurable  "  magnitudes. 

8  Thus,  to  put  it  arithmetically,  what  has  been  proved  is  that  ^/2  lies  some- 
where between  i  and  1-5.  In  the  famous  passage  Rep.  5466  ff.  it  is  made 
clear  that  Socrates,  in  fact,  knows  quite  well  how  to  construct  the  whole  series 
of  fractions  which  form  the  "  successive  convergents  "  to  /^/2.  For  his 
purpose  here  it  is  enough  to  consider  the  "  second  convergent,"  |,  and  to 
show  that  this  is  too  large  a  value. 


138          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

the  lad  began  by  not  knowing  something  and  ended  by  knowing  it. 
Thus  he  "  brought  up  the  knowledge  from  within  "  (avaXaftw 
avros  e£  avrov  TYJV  eTrtorr^ryv) ,  and  such  a  process  is  "  being  re- 
minded," "  recalling  "  something.  We  infer  then  that  the  slave 
once  "  had  "  the  knowledge  he  had  forgotten,  and  since  he  has 
never  in  this  life  been  "  taught  "  geometry,  the  "  once  "  must  have 
been  "  before  he  was  a  man,1' l  and  thus  we  see  that  the  soul  is 
immortal.  (Socrates,  however,  hastens  to  remark  that  he  would 
not  care  to  be  too  confident  about  anything  in  the  theory  except 
the  main  point  that  it  proves  that  we  can  arrive  at  truth  and  thus 
saves  us  from  the  sloth  and  self-neglect  which  are  natural  conse- 
quences of  the  eristic  ignava  ratio  (86ft).2) 

We  have  wandered  away  far  from  our  original  question  about 
the  teachability  of  goodness,  and  Meno  is  anxious  to  have  that 
answered  without  further  digression.  The  humour  of  the  situation 
is  that  this  is  impossible.  We  cannot  really  expect  to  know  whether 
goodness  or  anything  else  can  be  taught  unless  we  first  know  what 
the  thing  in  question  is,  as  we  have  admitted  that  we  do  not.  But 
we  may  give  a  tentative  and  provisional  answer  to  the  question 
€*£  v7ro0€o-€G>s,  subject  to  an  initial  postulate,  sous  condition.  Only 
we  must  make  another  digression  to  explain  what  we  mean  by 
this  restriction.  If  you  ask  a  geometer  whether  a  certain  problem 
is  soluble,  he  may  often  have  to  say  that  he  does  not  know  whether 
the  problem  has  a  perfectly  general  solution  or  not,  but  that  he  can 
give  a  solution  for  it,  subject  to  a  specified  restriction.  This  is 
illustrated  for  us  by  the  example  of  a  problem  about  the  inscription 
of  a  triangle  of  given  area  in  a  circle  of  given  diameter.  The  geo- 
meter may  be  unable  to  say  whether  the  inscription  can  be  effected 
unless  the  data  are  further  specified  by  some  restricting  condition. 
He  will  then  answer  that  "  I  cannot  solve  your  problem  as  it 
stands,  but  if  the  area  in  question  satisfies  the  condition  X,  the 
inscription  is  possible."  3  So  we,  in  our  present  state  of  uncertainty 

1  The  same  way  of  speaking  about  our  ante-natal  condition  as  the  "  time 
when  we  were  not  yet  men  "  is  characteristic  of  the  Phaedo.  It  implies  that 
the  true  self  is  not,  as  is  commonly  thought,  the  embodied  soul,  but  the  soul 
sitnpliciter,  the  body  being  the  instrument  (tpyavw)  which  the  soul  "  uses," 
and  the  consequent  definition  of  "  man  "  as  a  "  soul  using  a  body  as  its  instru- 
ment." Since  that  which  "  uses  "  an  implement  is  always  superior  to  the 
implement  it  uses,  this  definition  merely  embodies  the  Socratic  conviction 
that  the  soul  is  the  thing  of  supreme  value  in  us. 

*  The  caution  should  not  be  understood  to  mean  that  Socrates  doubts  the 
fact  of  immortality.  His  firm  belief  in  that  is  the  assumption  of  the  Phaedo 
and  is  really  presupposed  by  Apolog.  40^-410.  He  means,  as  he  says,  that  he 
wiJl  not  go  bail  for  the  X£yos ;  it  is  not  really  a  complete  demonstration  of 
pre-existence  and  immortality,  as  is  frankly  admitted  in  the  Phaedo,  though,  no 
doubt,  it  suggests  their  possibility.  The  real  reason  why  Socrates  attaches  so 
much  importance  to  the  doctrine  of  "  reminiscence  "  (di/d/uo/tm)  is  independent 
of  the  use  of  it  as  an  argument  for  "  survival."  One  should  be  careful  to 
bear  in  mind  that  dpd/xiojcris  does  not  properly  mean  in  the  theory  "  remember- 
ing," but  "  being  reminded  of  "  something.  Sensible  experiences  are  always 
"  suggesting  "  to  us  "  ideal  "  standards  which  none  of  them  actually  exhibit. 

3  The  precise  character  of  the  restriction  imposed  by  the  geometer  in 
Socrates'  illustration  has  been  a  matter  of  much  dispute,  which  is  due  partly 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  139 

about  the  true  character  of  goodness,  can  only  answer  Meno's  ques- 
tion sous  condition  If  goodness  is  knowledge,  then  it  is  something 
which  can  be  taught,  i.e.  according  to  the  theory  of  learning  we 
have  just  laid  down,  something  which  can  be  "  recalled  to  mind  " 
(dvajjivrjGrTov,  8jb)  \  if  goodness  is  anything  other  than  knowledge, 
it  cannot  be  taught.  (We  now  see  the  real  purpose  of  the  introduc- 
tion of  the  doctrine  of  dva^i/^a-ts.  The  object  is  to  show  that  though 
the  "  teachability  "  of  goodness  is  a  direct  consequence  of  the 
Socratic  principle  that  "  goodness  is  knowledge,"  Socrates  does  not 
mean,  as  some  of  the  "  sophists  "  seem  to  have  done,  that  a  man 
can  become  good  by  any  mere  passive  listening  to  the  "  instruc- 
tions "  of  a  lecturer,  since  no  knowledge  whatever  is  acquired  in  this 
way  ;  all  "  learning  "  is  an  active  response  of  personal  thought  and 
effort  to  the  "  hints  "  derived  from  a  more  mature  fellow-learner.) 

Goodness,  then,  can  be  taught,  if  goodness  is  knowledge  and  not 
otherwise,  and  we  are  thrown  back  on  the  antecedent  question 
whether  goodness  is  or  is  not  knowledge.  (Thus  we  conform  to  the 
rule  of  order  laid  down  at  Phaedo  wic-e.  We  first  consider  what 
are  the  "  consequences,"  o-v/x/Jai'vovra,  of  a  "  postulate "  ;  only 
when  we  are  clear  on  this  preliminary  question  do  we  go  on  to  ask 
whether  the  "  postulate  "  itself  can  be  "  justified.")  To  answer 
our  new  question,  we  have  again  to  start  with  an  unproved  "  postu- 
late," the  V7r69c<ri<>  that  apcrr}  is  a  good  thing.  (No  question  arises 
of  a  "  justification  "  of  this  inroOtans,  because  both  Socrates  and 
Meno  accept  it  as  common  ground  ;  it  is  an  i/cavoi/  Tt  such  as  is 
spoken  of  in  the  passage  of  the  Phaedo  about  logical  method.)  It 
follows  at  once  that  if  knowledge  is  the  only  good,  "  goodness  "  or 
"  virtue  "  (aptrrj)  must  be  knowledge  ;  if  there  are  other  goods 
besides  knowledge,  it  is  possible  that  ap€T-j  may  be  one  of  these  other 
goods  (87^).  Thus  we  find  ourselves  driven  in  the  end  to  face  the 
ultimate  question  whether  knowledge  is  not  the  only  good,  or  at  any 
rate  an  indispensable  constituent  of  all  good.  This  question  is  now 
treated  in  the  way  already  familiar  to  us.  Whatever  is  good  is 
"  beneficial  "  (ox^cXi/xdv),  i.e.  does  us  good.  Now  the  commonly 
recognized  goods  are  such  things  as  health,  physical  strength, 
comeliness,  and  we  may  add,  wealth.  But  none  of  these  is  "  un- 
conditionally "  good ;  all  may  "  harm  "  their  possessor  ;  they 
benefit  him  when  they  are  rightly  used  but  harm  him  when  they  are 
misused.  So  with  the  commonly  recognized  good  characters  of 
the  "  soul,"  of  which  Socrates  proceeds  to  give  a  list.  Courage, 
in  the  popular  sense,  covers  "  daring  "  or  "  venturesomeness  " 
(Oappos)  of  every  kind.  But  though  venturesomeness  combined 
with  sound  sense  (vofc)  is  beneficial,  senseless  daring  is  harmful  to 
its  possessor,  and  the  same  thing  is  true  of  o-axfrpoa-vvr},  "  appetitive 
coldness,"  retentive  memory,  and  qualities  of  soul  generally.  To 

to  uncertainty  about  the  technical  terminology  of  geometers  in  the  fifth 
century.  For  our  purpose  it  is  sufficient  to  grasp  the  main  point  that  there 
are  such  restrictions.  It  is,  e.g.,  obvious  that  some  restricting  condition  must 
connect  the  area  of  the  given  triangle  with  the  radius  of  the  given  circle. 

For  a  correct  solution  see  A.  S.  L.  Farquharson  in  C.Q.,  xvii.  i  (Jan.  1923). 


140          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

be  beneficial,  they  must  be  accompanied  by  intelligence  or  under- 
standing (^poFTyo-ts)  ;  they,  too,  are  harmful  when  misused.  We 
infer,  then,  that  the  goodness  of  all  other  good  things  is  conditional  on 
the  "  goodness  of  soul  "  of  the  possessor,  and  this  again  conditional 
on  his  intelligence  (foovrjo-is).  It  follows  that  intelligence,  or  some 
specific  form  of  intelligence  (TJTOI  a-v^nao-a  r)  juc'pos  rt),  is  identical 
with  "  goodness,"  and  therefore  that  "  men  are  not  good  by 
nature/1  i.e.  goodness  is  not  a  matter  of  congenital  endowment  (as 
Callicles  maintains  in  the  Gorgias  for  example,  Sjd-Sqa).1 

This  last  inference  admits  at  once  of  empirical  verification,  for 
if  goodness  were  congenital  endowment,  we  could  detect  its  presence 
in  early  life,  and  so  we  could  secure  a  succession  of  true  statesmen 
by  merely  selecting  the  properly  endowed  natures  in  early  life  and 
bringing  them  up  "  under  guard/1  carefully  isolated  from  all 
risks  of  contamination.2  Yet,  on  second  thoughts,  we  may  see 
reason  to  distrust  our  identification  of  goodness  with  knowledge. 
If  it  were  knowledge,  surely  there  would  be  professional  teachers 
of  it  and  they  would  have  "  pupils."  But  there  does  not  appear 
to  be  any  such  "  profession."  It  is  lucky  for  us  that  Anytus  has 
just  taken  a  seat  by  our  side  at  this  point  of  the  conversation.  He 
is  the  son  of  a  worthy  citizen  who  made  a  fortune  by  steady  intelli- 
gence and  industry ;  the  popular  judgment  is  clearly  that  he  has 
had  an  excellent  early  training  and  education,  as  is  shown  by  his 
repeated  election  to  high  offices.  His  opinion  on  the  question 
whether  there  are  "  teachers  of  goodness  "  ought  therefore  to  be 
highly  valuable  (Sgb-qob). 

(Why  does  Plato  introduce  Anytus  at  this  particular  point  ? 
Note  that  he  is  not  supposed  to  have  heard  the  preceding  discussion, 
which  he  would  have  been  quite  incapable  of  appreciating.  He 
comes  up  to  the  bench  on  which  Socrates  and  Meno  are  sitting, 
and  joins  them  just  in  the  nick  of  time,  as  they  are  beginning  to 
consider  the  problem  about  the  professional  teachers  of  goodness. 
Nor  is  there  any  appearance  of  "  irony  "  in  what  is  said  about  him  ; 
unlike  Xenophon,  Plato  never  suggests  that  Anytus  had  any  dis- 
creditable private  motives  for  supporting  the  prosecution  of  Socrates. 
The  irony  of  the  passage  only  concerns  Anytus  to  the  same  degree 

1  Note  again  the  exact  correspondence  of  the  Socratic  argument  for  the 
identity  of  virtue  and  knowledge  with  Kant's  argument  for  the  thesis  that 
the  only  unconditional  good  is  the  "  good  will."  Kant's  further  proposal  to 
make  conformity  with  the  bare  form  of  a  universal  imperative  the  direct  and 
sufficient  criterion  of  right  action  might  be  said  to  be  simply  a  reckless  develop- 
ment of  one  side  of  the  Socratic  ethics,  its  "  intellectualism,"  in  unreal  isolation 
from  its  "  eudaemonism." 

3  It  might  be  objected,  is  not  this  selection,  here  assumed  to  be  impossible, 
actually  proposed  as  the  very  foundation  of  the  "  ideal  state  "  in  the  Republic  ? 
The  answer  is  No.  In  the  Republic  it  is,  of  course,  recognized  that  endowment 
counts  for  something,  and  therefore  there  is  an  early  initial  selection  of  pro- 
mising future  "  guardians."  But  educational  tradition  counts  for  much 
more  ;  hence  the  length  at  which  the  problem  of  the  creation  of  a  right 
educational  tradition  is  discussed,  and  the  provision  for  promotions  and 
degradations  at  all  stages  according  as  the  subject  under  education  justifies 
Qr  belies  his  early  "  promise/' 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  141 

as  the  whole  of  the  Athenian  public  who  respect  and  trust  him. 
It  is  clearly  meant  that,  to  the  measure  of  his  intelligence,  Anytus 
is  an  able  and  public-spirited  man  who  deserves  the  trust  he  receives. 
This  defect,  one  which  he  shares  with  the  whole  Athenian  public, 
is  simply  that  he  is  an  esprit  borne.  He  has  the  average  Athenian 
democratic  prejudice  against  men  who  are  "  too  clever/'  the 
intelligentsia,  and  the  average  Athenian's  incapacity  for  ever  calling 
his  own  prejudices  in  question,  and  it  is  just  because  he  is  such  a 
"  representative  man  "  that  the  public  trust  him.  The  purpose  of 
bringing  him  in  is  clearly  to  make  us  realize  the  violence  of  the 
Athenian  prejudice  against  the  "  intellectuals/1  and  the  inability 
of  even  a  well-to-do  and  "  educated  "  public  man  to  discriminate 
between  Socrates  and  the  "  intellectuals  by  profession.1'  If 
Socrates  could  be  so  misconceived  by  the  "  leaders  of  public  opinion," 
we  understand  how  he  came  to  be  prosecuted  without  needing  to 
impute  his  fate  to  anything  worse  than  honest  stupidity.) 

If  you  wish  a  young  man  to  learn  a  science  such  as  medicine  or  an 
accomplishment  such  as  flute-playing,  to  whom  do  you  send  him  ? 
You  always  select  a  teacher  who  claims  to  be  a  professional  expert, 
and  for  that  very  reason  charges  a  fee  for  his  instructions  ;  you 
would  never  think  of  putting  him  under  a  mere  "  amateur  "who 
does  not  make  a  profession  of  imparting  his  own  skill.  It  should 
seem,  then,  that  statesmanship,  the  science  of  the  right  conduct  of 
affairs  and  the  right  manage  of  life  must,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  be 
learned  from  the  specialists  who  claim  to  have  made  a  profession 
of  teaching  its  principles,  and  consequently,  like  all  professionals, 
charge  a  fee — that  is,  from  the  "  sophists,  as  men  call  them." 
Anytus  has  the  profoundest  horror  of  the  whole  profession ;  they 
are,  he  says,  as  every  one  can  see,  mere  depravers  and  corrupters 
of  all  who  frequent  their  lectures.  Yet  it  is  difficult  to  accept  this 
view  of  them.  It  would  be  a  unique  fact  that  any  class  should 
make  a  paying  profession  of  visibly  spoiling  the  materials  entrusted 
to  it.1  In  point  of  fact,  Protagoras  made  a  considerable  fortune 
by  the  trade  of  "  teaching  goodness,"  and  he  exercised  it  for  over 
forty  years.  Thus  there  was  plenty  of  time  for  him  to  be  found 
out  in,  but  he  never  was  found  out,  and  his  high  reputation  has 
survived  him  to  this  day,  and  he  is  not  the  only  example  in  point.2 
Anytus  is  quite  sure,  though  he  is  thankful  he  has  never  in  his  life 
had  to  do  with  a  sophist,  that  the  sophist  is  a  designing  scoundrel, 

1  E.g.  the  medical  profession  would  not  continue  to  provide  anyone  with 
a  living  wage  if  medical  men  really  killed  off  their  patients.  In  real  life  a 
"faculty"  of  Sangrados  would  be  "found  out."  Anytus  supposes  that  the 
"  sophists  "  have  been  found  out,  and  yet  contrive  to  grow  fat  on  their  quackery. 

2 1  think  we  are  bound  to  take  the  observations  about  Protagoras  (Meno, 
gid-e)  quite  seriously.  Socrates  seriously  means  that  the  lifelong  success 
of  Protagoras,  and  the  high  esteem  in  which  he  was  and  is  held,  show 
that  the  democratic  view  that  there  was  nothing  at  all  in  him,  that  he 
was  "  a  palpable  and  mischievous  impostor/'  is  far  too  simple  to  account 
for  the  facts.  Protagoras  may  not  have  been  all  he  supposed  himself  to  be, 
but  there  must  have  been  something  in  him  to  inspire  such  long-continued  trust 
and  veneration. 


142         PLATO:    THE   MAN  AND   HIS   WORK 

and  the  society  which  does  not  make  penal  laws  to  suppress  him  a 
silly  dupe.  But,  however  true  his  views  may  be — though  by  his 
own  showing  he  must  be  arriving  at  them  by  "  divination  " — they 
are  not  to  the  point.  The  question  is  not  who  are  the  corrupters 
of  youth,  but  who  are  the  "  teachers  of  goodness  "  from  whom  the 
young  may  learn  the  true  principles  of  the  conduct  of  life.  Anytus 
holds  that  we  need  specify  no  particular  professional  teachers  ;  the 
conduct  of  life  can  be  learned  from  any  "  decent  "  Athenian,  and 
he  has  learned  it  from  his  father,  who  learned  it  again  from  his. 
It  is  simply  a  matter  of  imbibing  an  hereditary  tradition — a  view 
illustrated  in  the  Protagoras  by  the  way  in  which  children  pick  up 
their  mother-tongue  or  their  father's  trade  without  any  formal 
teaching  or  apprenticeship  (Prolag.  3270  ff.).  To  doubt  the  possi- 
bility of  this  would  amount  to  denying  that  there  have  been  "  good 
men  "  in  Athens  (90^-93^). 

Socrates  does  not  deny  that  there  are  and  have  been  at  Athens 
men  who  are  "  good  at  citizenship  "  (ayaOol  ra  iroAmica),1  but  what 
he  does  doubt  is  whether  such  men  have  also  been  competent 
teachers  of  the  goodness  they  practise.  The  difficulty  is  that  the 
sons  of  these  men  have  all  proved  either  worthless  or  insignificant. 
Thus  they  clearly  did  not  teach  their  goodness  themselves  to  their 
sons,  and  it  is  notorious  that  even  those  of  them  who,  like 
Themistocles,  were  careful  to  have  their  sons  trained  in  mere  elegant 
accomplishments,  never  sent  them  to  anyone  for  special  education 
in  "  goodness."  The  obvious  inference  is  that  the  "  good  Athenians/' 
whom  Anytus  regards  as  competent  teachers  of  goodness,  do  not 
think  themselves  or  anyone  else  competent  to  teach  it  ;  they  must 
have  supposed  that  goodness  is  not  the  kind  of  thing  which  can  be 
taught.  Anytus  is  so  chafed  at  having  to  listen  to  such  unsparing 
criticism  of  the  eminent  figures  of  the  national  history  that  he  misses 
the  point  and  relapses  into  silence  with  an  angry  warning  to  Socrates 
that  the  Athenian  democracy  is  no  safe  abode  for  a  man  who  will 
not  learn  to  bridle  his  tongue,2 — a  plain  hint,  on  Plato's  part,  that 

1  It  has  been  suggested  by  Th.  Gomperz  that  these  words  are  meant  to 
soften  down  the  asperity  of  the  declaration  of  the  Gorgias  that  none  of  the 
great  figures  of  Athenian  democracy  was  a  true  statesman,  and  even  that  the 
chief  motive  of  Plato  in  writing  the  Meno  was  to  placate  a  public  opinion 
naturally  irritated  by  such  utterances.  This  seems  to  me  hopelessly  fanciful. 
(a)  There  is  really  no  "  recantation  "  in  the  Meno.  The  democratic  leaders 
had  been  denied  in  the  Gorgias  to  be  statesmen  on  the  ground  that  they  were 
empirics,  whereas  statesmanship  is  a  science.  According  to  the  Meno,  these 
same  leaders  are  so  convinced  that  their  own  "  goodness  "  is  not  teachable 
that  they  make  no  attempt  to  get  it  taught  to  their  sons.  This  is  just  the 
criticism  of  the  Gorgias  put  in  other  words,  (b)  In  one  respect  the  Meno 
goes  further  than  the  Gorgias.  That  dialogue  had  conceded  Athens  at  least 
one  genuine  statesman,  Aristides  "  the  just  "  (Gorgias,  5266).  In  the  Meno 
Aristides  figures  among  the  rest  of  the  famous  men  who  must  have  supposed 
that  goodness  cannot  be  taught,  since  he  never  had  it  taught-  to  his  son 
(Meno,  94^). 

*  Hannibal  Chollop's  advice  to  Mark  Tapley,  "  You  had  better  crack  us  up, 
you  had,"  is  much  the  same  as  that  Anytus  gives  to  Socrates,  and  in  both 
cases  the  warning  is  probably  not  meant  unkindly. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  148 

it  was  just  this  sort  of  unsparing  and  impartial  free  speech  about 
the  democracy  and  its  leaders  which  caused  the  mistaken  but 
intelligible  suspicion  of  incivisme  to  attach  to  the  philosopher 
(936-950).  That  Socrates  was  really  in  the  habit  of  employing 
these  criticisms  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  the  wry  same  use  of  the 
argument  about  statesmen  and  their  sons  occurs  both  in  the  Prota- 
goras and  in  the  Alcibiades, 

The  sophists  may,  in  any  case,  be  dismissed  from  the  discussion, 
since  Meno,  on  the  whole,  agrees  with  Anytus  that  they  cannot  teach 
goodness  and  thinks  it  a  point  in  favour  of  Gorgias  that  he  dis- 
claimed the  pretension.  In  fact,  most  men,  like  the  poet  Theognis, 
find  themselves  unable  to  make  up  their  minds  whether  goodness  is 
teachable  or  not.  They  say  "  Yes  "  and  "  No/'  according  to  their 
moods.  Goodness  is  thus  in  a  uniquely  unfortunate  position. 
The  claims  of  the  professional  teachers  are  generally  disbelieved, 
and  the  persons  whose  practice  is  generally  admired  cannot  make 
up  their  own  minds  whether  their  specialty  can  be  taught.  It  looks 
as  though  there  were  neither  teachers  nor  learners  of  goodness,  and 
consequently  that  it  is  not  a  thing  which  can  be  taught.  But  how, 
then,  is  it  ever  produced,  as  we  must  admit  that  it  is  ?  On  second 
thoughts,  we  see  a  way  out  of  the  difficulty.  Knowledge  is  not  the 
only  thing  which  is  beneficial  in  practice.  A  right  belief  (opOrj  8d£a) 
will  direct  practice  as  satisfactorily  as  genuine  knowledge.  A  guide 
who  had  a  right  belief  about  the  road  to  Larissa  would  take  you 
there  as  successfully  as  one  who  really  knew  the  way.  For  practical 
purposes,  then,  a  right  belief  is  as  good  as  knowledge — but  for  one 
trifling  drawback.  There  would  be  no  practical  difference,  if  you 
could  make  sure  that  a  man  will  always  retain  his  right  belief. 
But  beliefs  are  like  the  fabled  statues  of  Daedalus,  which  can  walk 
away  if  they  are  not  fastened  to  their  place.  The  statues  are  fine 
pieces  of  work,  but  their  price  is  naturally  low  if  they  are  loose. 
So  a  correct  belief  is  a  fine  thing,  if  it  will  only  stay  with  you,  but 
it  will  not  stay  long  unless  you  fasten  it  down  am'as  Aoy  tor/up  "  by 
thinking  out  the  reason  why  "  of  it  (980),  and  this  process  is  what 
we  have  already  called  "  being  reminded "  (dva/Av^cris).  When 
we  have  thought  out  the  "  reason  why,"  the  belief  becomes  know- 
ledge and  is  abiding.  We  may  apply  this  distinction  to  the  solution 
of  our  problem. 

The  "  eminently  good  men  "  of  Athens  plainly  do  not  owe  their 
usefulness  as  political  leaders  to  knowledge,  for  if  they  did,  they 
could  teach  "  statesmanship  "  to  others.  Themistocles  and  the 
rest  were  therefore  not  "scientific  statesmen/'  not  o-o^ot  (996) — 
the  conclusion  also  reached  in  the  Gorgias — and  it  is  absurd  to  think 
they  owed  all  their  achievements  to  accident.  Their  successes 
must  have  been  due  to  "  correct  opinions  "  (cv8o£ia,  996).  They 
were  much  on  a  level  with  givers  of  oracles  and  diviners,  who  often 
say  very  true  things  without  knowing  it  (since  the  responses  are 
delivered  in  a  sort  of  temporary  "frenzy").  Thus  we  may  class 
together  "  seers/'  poets,  and  statesmen,  as  beings  who  all  say  and 


144          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

do  brilliant  things  without  really  knowing  what  they  are  saying 
or  doing,  because  they  are  all  acting  in  a  state  of  "  possession," 
though  Anytus,  perhaps,  will  not  like  our  conclusion  (956-995)  ,1 
To  sum  up,  then  :  goodness  is  neither  inborn  nor  yet  learned  from 
teachers,  but  arises  from  a  happy  irrational  "  divine  possession  " 
(0€ip  /Wpa  avtv  vov),  unless,  indeed,  there  could  arise  a  statesman 
who  could  teach  statesmanship  to  others.  His  "  goodness  "  would 
be  to  that  of  other  men  what  substance  is  to  shadow.  We  must, 
however,  remember  that  our  conclusion  is  tentative  ;  we  cannot 
say  with  certainty  how  goodness  arises  until  we  have  answered  the 
still  outstanding  question  what  it  is.  In  the  meanwhile  Meno 
would  be  doing  Athens  a  service  if  he  could  make  Anytus  more  sym- 
pathetic with  our  point  of  view  (gge-iooc). 

The  full  meaning  of  these  last  remarks  only  comes  out  when  we 
read  them  in  the  light  of  the  Republic  and  Phaedo.  The  "  states- 
man who  can  make  another  a  statesman  "  is  just  the  philosopher- 
king  of  the  Republic,  where  the  crowning  achievement  of  the  "  ideal 
state  "  is  to  make  provision  for  the  permanent  teaching  of  a  states- 
manship which  is  science,  clear  intellectual  insight  into  fundamental 
moral  principles,  not  a  succession  of  "  inspired  "  adventures,  and 
the  provision  takes  the  form  of  a  system  of  thorough  education  in 
hard  scientific  thinking  which  culminates  in  the  direct  apprehension 
of  "  the  good/'  In  the  light  of  this  educational  scheme,  we  can 
see  that  the  main  object  of  the  concluding  argument  in  the  Meno 
is  to  distinguish  between  a  higher  and  a  lower  kind  of  goodness. 
The  higher  kind  is  that  which  the  Republic  calls  the  goodness  of  the 
philosopher,  and  it  is  based  upon  certain  and  assured  personal 
knowledge  of  the  true  scale  of  goods,  and  is  therefore  "  abiding." 
The  lower  kind,  which  is  at  best  a  "  shadow  "  of  true  goodness,  is 
based  on  "  opinions  "  which  are  true,  but  are  not  knowledge,  and 
therefore  not  to  be  counted  on  as  permanent ;  in  fact,  it  rests  on 
acceptance  of  a  sound  tradition  of  living  which  has  not  been  con- 
verted into  personal  insight  into  the  scale  of  goods.  This  is  all 
which  is  demanded  in  the  Republic  even  of  the  soldiers  of  the 
State  ;  their  goodness  is  loyalty  to  a  tradition  of  noble  living  in 
which  they  have  been  brought  up,  but  of  which  they  have  never 
even  asked  the  reason  why,  life  by  an  exalted  standard  of  "  honour." 
Since  there  are  sound  elements  in  the  moral  tradition  of  any 
civilized  community,  it  is  possible  for  an  Athenian  statesman  in 
whom  the  best  traditions  of  his  city  are  inbred  to  "  profit  "  the 
State  by  goodness  of  this  inferior  kind,  "  popular  goodness,"  as  the 
Phaedo  calls  it,  But  security  for  permanent  continuance  in  well- 
doing is  only  to  be  had  when  a  sound  traditional  code  of  conduct 
has  been  converted  into  "  knowledge  "  by  understanding  of  the 

1  Socrates  regards  the  achievements  of  a  Themistocles  or  a  Pericles  as 
''wizardry,"  but  he  does  not  mean  this  as  a  compliment.  "Possession" 
was  popularly  regarded  as  a  kind  of  disease,  and  we  have  only  to  go  to  Aristo- 
phanes to  see  what  the  current  estimate  of  xpWWSoL  an^  QCOUL&VTW  was. 
The  effect  of  his  classification  is  much  that  which  might  be  produced  to-day  by 
speaking  together  of  "  ventriloquists,  mediums,  and  cabinet  ministers." 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  145 

lc  reason  why,"  that  is  by  personal  insight  into  the  character  of 
good  and  personal  understanding  of  the  place  of  each  of  the 
"  goods  "  of  life  in  the  hierarchy  of  good.  Thus  the  true  states- 
man would  be  the  Socratic  philosopher  who  understands  the 
principle  that  the  "  tendance  of  the  soul "  is  the  supreme  business 
of  both  individual  and  State,  and  judges  soundly  of  the  nature  of 
the  "  spiritual  health  "  at  which  the  "  tendance  "  aims.  Of  course, 
we  readily  see  that  "  philosophic  goodness,"  being  thus  identical 
with  knowledge  of  true  good,  must  be  "  teachable,"  if  you  go  to 
work  the  right  way,  whereas  a  "  goodness  "  which  does  not  repose 
on  apprehension  of  principles  cannot  be  taught ;  it  can  only  be 
"  imbibed  "  by  habit uat ion  in  conformity  to  a  tradition.  The 
vacillation  of  mankind  in  their  attitude  to  the  teachability  of 
virtue  is  thus  to  be  explained  by  the  ambiguity  of  the  word  "  good- 
ness "  ;  men  are  dimly  aware  that  real  goodness  depends  on  grasp 
of  intelligible  principles  and  thus  ought  to  be  teachable,  but  they 
confuse  this  real  goodness  with  its  shadow,  loyalty  to  an  established 
tradition  qua  established,  and  common  experience  shows  that  this, 
however  it  is  to  be  secured,  cannot  be  secured  by  teaching.  The 
contributions  of  the  dialogue  to  the  theory  of  knowledge,  the  ex- 
position of  the  doctrine  of  "  reminiscence  "  and  of  the  principles 
of  method,  with  all  their  importance,  are  meant  to  be  secondary 
to  this  main  result ;  the  account  of  pre-existence  and  immortality, 
again,  is  strictly  subordinate  to  the  theory  of  ai/a'/x^crts  itself. 
It  would  be  a  complete  misunderstanding  to  find  the  main  purport 
of  the  dialogue  in  these  things,  though  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt 
that  they  were  connected  in  the  personal  Welt-Anschauung  of 
Socrates  with  his  main  tenet,  the  supreme  worth  of  the  i/^?/  and 
its  specific  good,  knowledge. 


See  further : 

RITTER,  C. — Platon,  i.  391-449  (Gorgias),  476-484  (Meno). 
RAEDER,    H. — Platons    philosophische    Entwickelung,    111-125 

(Gorgias),  130-137  (Mend). 
THOMPSON,  W.  H. — The  Gorgias  of  Plato. 
NETTLESHIP,  R.  L. — Plato's  Conception  of  Goodness  and  the  Good 

(Lectures  and  Remains,  i.  238-394). 
DIES,  A. — Autour  de  Platon,  ii.  414-418,  462-469. 
STEWART,  J.  A. — Myths  of  Plato,  1-76  (Introduction),  114-132 

(The    Gorgias    Myth)  ;     Plato's    Doctrine    of   Ideas,    24-29 

(Meno),  29-34  (Gorgias). 
STENZEL,  J. — Platon  der  Erzieher,  147-178. 


CHAPTER    VII 

SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  :    EUTHYPHRO,  APOLOGY, 

CRITO 

I  HAVE  reserved  these  well-known  dialogues  for  considera- 
tion at  this  point  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  is  difficult  to 
separate  them  from  the  Phaedo ;  thus  it  is  natural  to  make 
the  treatment  of  them  the  immediate  prelude  to  a  study  of  the 
four  great  works  in  which  Plato's  dramatic  genius  shows  itself 
most  perfect.  I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  I  regard  the  whole 
series  of  dialogues  which  centre  round  the  trial  and  death  of  Socrates 
as  uninterruptedly  following  one  another  in  order  of  composition. 
As  I  have  already  explained,  I  do  not  feel  satisfied  that  we  are  safe 
in  saying  more  on  the  question  than  that  the  slighter  works  we  are 
considering  must,  at  least  in  the  main,  be  regarded  as  earlier  than 
the  four  great  dramatic  dialogues.  It  is  possible,  perhaps  even 
probable,  that  at  any  rate  the  Apology  may  have  been  written 
before  several  of  the  works  we  have  already  dealt  with,  but  the 
probability  need  not  affect  our  treatment  if  it  is  true,  as  the  present 
analysis  tries  to  show,  that  there  is  no  serious  variation  in  the 
doctrine  of  Plato's  dialogues  until  we  come  to  the  series  unmistak- 
ably shown  by  style  to  be  later  than  the  Republic.  In  treating  of 
the  whole  series  of  these  "  dialogues  of  the  trial  and  imprisonment  " 
I  shall  avail  myself  fully  of  the  commentaries  of  Professor  Burnet 
(Euthyphro,  Apology,  Crito,  1924;  Phaedo,  1911) ;  this  will  make  it 
possible  to  aim  at  a  brevity  which  I  should  have  been  only  too  glad 
to  secure  for  some  other  parts  of  this  book. 

i.  Euthyphro. — On  all  questions  connected  with  the  scene  and 
personages  of  the  dialogue,  see  Burnet's  Introductory  Note,  to  which 
I  would  only  append  the  following  remarks.  It  is  not  certain  that 
the  Euthyphro  of  our  dialogue  is  the  person  of  the  same  name  whom 
we  have  encountered  in  the  Cratylus,  though  this  is  possible.  If 
the  two  men  are  one  and  the  same,  we  shall  clearly  have  to  think  of 
Euthyphro  as  now  in  middle  age  and  his  father  as  a  man  of  some 
seventy-five  or  more.  To  my  own  mind,  the  tone  of  the  conversa- 
tion is  consistent  with  these  suppositions  and  inconsistent  with 
regarding  Euthyphro  as  in  any  sense  young.  (He  is  a  familiar 
figure  in  the  ecclesia  which  he  often  addresses.)  I  fully  agree  with 
Burnet  that  the  supposed  proceedings  by  Euthyphro  against  his 
father  as  a  murderer  must  be  historical  fact ;  the  situation  is  too 

bizarre  to  be  a  natural  fiction.    Also  I  think  it  clear  that  legally 

146 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  147 

Euthyphro  had  no  case  and  was  probably  non-suited  by  the 
Basileus,  but  I  would  add  that  in  all  probability  Euthyphro  himself 
counted  on  this  issue.  His  object,  as  he  explains  at  4^,  is  to  clear 
himself  from  the  religious  pollution  incurred  by  being  in  any  way 
accessory  to  a  </>ovos.  If  he  files  an  information  against  his  father, 
even  with  full  knowledge  that  it  will  be  dismissed  on  technical 
grounds,  he  has  done  all  that  a  scrupulous  conscience  can  require. 
Any  possible  "  pollution  "  will  henceforth  rest  not  on  him  but  on 
the  authorities,  and  he  would  probably  feel  himself  free  for  the 
future  to  live  in  ordinary  family  relations  with  his  father.  This 
is  presumably  what  he  wished  to  do.  We  need  not  suppose  that 
he  expects  or  desires  any  grave  consequences  to  happen  to  the  old 
gentleman.  As  to  the  main  purpose  of  the  dialogue,  again,  I  think 
Burnet  is  clearly  right.  As  both  Plato  and  Aeschines  represent, 
Socrates  had  lived  in  association  with  religious  ascetics  and  mystics 
of  the  Orphic  type  ;  every  one  also  knew  that  he  had  been  formally 
convicted  of  some  kind  of  religious  innovation.  The  natural 
inference  would  have  been  that  he  was  himself  a  sectary  much  of  the 
same  type  as  Euthyphro,  as  Euthyphro  seems  to  suppose.  It  was 
a  duty  of  piety  to  his  memory  to  make  it  clear  that  his  views  on 
religion  were  very  different  from  those  of  a  sect  who  found  the 
"  deep  things  of  God  "  in  stories  like  those  of  the  binding  of  Cronus 
and  the  mutilation  of  Uranus — tales  which  had  nothing  to  do  with 
the  official  worship  of  Athens  and  were  repulsive  to  the  ordinary 
Athenian.  It  is  equally  clear  that  Euthyphro  is  not  intended,  as 
has  often  been  said,  to  represent  "Athenian  orthodoxy,"  i.e.  the 
attitude  of  the  dicasts  who  voted  for  the  conviction  of  Socrates, 
since,  as  Burnet  points  out,  he  instinctively  takes  the  side  of 
Socrates  as  soon  as  he  has  heard  the  nature  of  the  charge  against 
him,  and  classes  Socrates  and  himself  together  as  theologians 
exposed  to  the  unintelligent  derision  of  the  "  vulgar."  x 

Ostensibly  the  problem  of  the  dialogue  is  to  determine  the  real 
character  of  OO-IOTT/S,  "piety,"  or  as  we  should  probably  say  now, 
"  religion,"  that  part  of  right  conduct  which  is  concerned  with 
man's  duty  to  God.  As  usual,  no  final  result  is  expressly  arrived 
at,  but  the  interest  lies  in  the  comparison  of  two  different  con- 
ceptions of  what  "  religion  "is.  The  conclusion  to  which  we  seem 
to  be  coming,  but  for  an  unexpected  difficulty,  is  that  religion  is 
the  "  art  of  traffic  between  man  and  gods,"  or  the  art  of  receiving 
from  the  gods  and  giving  to  them  (Euthyphro,  iqd,  e).  On  the  face 
of  it,  this  is  a  view  of  religion  thoroughly  in  keeping  with  the  more 
sordid  side  of  the  ancient  State  cultus,  which  was  very  much  regulated 

1  See  the  full  treatment  of  all  this  in  Burnet,  op.  cit.  pp.  2-7.  As  to  the 
ordinary  Athenian  estimate  of  the  Hesiodic  stories  about  Uranus  and  Cronus, 
see  Aristophanes,  Clouds,  904,  Isocrates,  xi.  38-40.  How  far  the  Athenians 
were  from  taking  Cronus  seriously  is  sufficiently  shown  by  the  simple  fact  that 
Kpbvot  is  Attic  for  "  old  Methusalem  "  or  "  Rip  van  Winkle."  Even  the 
allusion  of  Aeschylus,  Ag.  168  ff.,  has  a  touch  of  contempt  for  the  unnamed 
being  who  is  now  "  down  and  out"  (rpm/mfcoj  otx^r cu  rvx&v)  and  the  "  bully  " 
who  preceded  him  (ra^/idx^  Bpdafi 


148          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

on  the  do  ut  des  principle.  It  exactly  hits  off,  for  example,  the 
spirit  of  religio  as  understood  in  the  early  days  of  the  Roman 
republic.  Hence  it  is  not  surprising  that  more  than  one  editor 
(Adam,  Burnet)  should  have  found  the  real  point  of  the  dialogue 
in  a  hint  thrown  out,  but  not  lollowed  up,  a  little  earlier  (Euthyphro, 
130),  that  religion  should  rather  be  thought  of  as  the  co-operation  of 
man  with  God  towards  some  noble  result  (wdyKaXov  cpyoy)  which 
is  left  unspecified.  It  is  at  least  certain  that  the  making  of  this 
point  is  one  of  the  main  objects  of  the  discussion,  and  that  the  view 
is  shown  to  arise  directly  out  of  the  application  to  religion  of  the 
notion  of  "  tendance  "  (Oepairfia),  so  fundamental  in  the  Socratic 
ethics.  But  I  think  it  would  probably  be  mistaken  to  suppose 
that  the  other  formula  is  intended  to  be  rejected  as  conveying 
a  selfish  and  sordid  conception  of  religion.  In  the  sense  put  upon 
it  by  ordinary  Athenian  practice,  and  apparently  by  Euthyphro 
himself,  that  religion  consists  in  knowing  how  to  perform  a  ritual 
worship  which  will  procure  tangible  returns  for  the  worshipper, 
the  formula  is,  no  doubt,  sordid  enough  and  wholly  at  variance  with 
the  conception  of  God  and  the  service  of  God  attributed  to  Socrates 
throughout  the  dialogues.  But  this  interpretation  is  not  the  only 
one  which  could  be  put  on  the  phrase.  If  we  think  rightly  of  the 
blessings  for  which  it  is  proper  to  pray,  it  will  be  a  worthy  con- 
ception of  religion  that  it  is  an  intercourse  between  man  and  God 
in  which  we  offer  "  acceptable  sacrifice  "  and  receive  in  return  the 
true  goods  of  soul  and  body.1  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  both  that 
"  praying  and  sacrificing  aright  "  are  oo-tor^  and  that  60-101-779, 
since  it  is  virtue  or  a  part  of  virtue,  is  in  the  Socratic  view  an  eVionJ/^ 
or  T€xrq,  an  application  of  knowledge  to  the  regulation  of  practice. 
Plato  himself,  who  deals  with  the  regulation  of  institutional  religion 
at  length  in  the  Laws,  would  have  had  nothing  in  principle  against 
such  a  formula,  rightly  interpreted.  The  early  Academy  seem  to 
have  been  right  in  including  among  their  definitions  of  "piety" 
(cvcre/?cia)  alternative  formulae  which  are  obviously  conflations 
of  the  different  suggestions  of  our  dialogue,  "  a  faculty  of  the 
voluntary  service  of  the  gods  ;  right  belief  about  honouring  the 
gods  ;  the  science  of  honouring  the  gods."  2  Hence  I  do  not  feel 
at  liberty  to  treat  the  two  suggestions  about  the  nature  of  religion 
as  meant  to  be  exclusive  of  one  another. 

A  very  brief  analysis  of  the  argument  will  enable  us  to  re- 

1  Cf.  the  model  of  an  acceptable  prayer  offered  by  Socrates,  Phaedrus, 
2jgc,   and    the   conception  of    dai/novcs  as    the    middlemen    in    the   "  traffic 
between  man  and  God"  in  the  speech  of  Diotima  reproduced  by  Socrates  in 
Symposium,  2020. 

2  [Plat.]  Def.  4120  14,  Sfoafus  OcpcnrevTtK^  Oe&v  tKofotos'  irepl  Oe&v  TI/JLTJS  vw6\r)\J/is 
6p6J)'  tTriffTJijLL'y)  irepl  Oe&v  TIJULTJS.     Cf.  the  definition  of  ayveiu  (ibid.  414^  12),  TT?S 
0eov  T(^J  /card  <f>fotv  Oepcnrcla,  and  of  d<noi>  (ibid.  415^1  g],  OepAirevfJui  0eou  Apetrrbv 
0€y.     That  the  Academic  definitions  of  our  Plato  MSS.  in  the  main  belong 
to  the  earliest  days  of  the  Academy  is  shown  by  the  frequent  appeals  made 
to  them  in  Aristotle,  especially  in  the  Topics.     In  some  cases  the  testimony 
of  Aristotle  enables  us  to  refer  a  definition  specifically  to  Speusippus  or 
Xenocrates  as  the  author. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  149 

discover  in  the  Euthyphro  the  principal  points  of  both  ethical  and 
metaphysical  doctrine  with  which  we  are  already  familiar. 

The  act  for  which  Euthyphro  is  arraigning  his  father,  we  must 
remember,  is  specifically  an  offence  against  religious  law,  not  a 
civil  wrong,  and  Euthyphro  does  not  profess  to  be  in  any  way 
actuated  by  motives  of  humanity  or  regard  for  civil  right.  He  is 
afraid  of  incurring  religious  "  pollution  "  by  living  in  household 
relations  with  a  "  sacrilegious  person,"  and  wishes  to  safeguard 
himself.  It  is  implied  that,  the  average  Athenian,  who  is  shocked 
at  his  procedure,  is  ignorant  of  or  indifferent  to  the  religious  law 
in  which  Euthyphro  considers  himself  an  expert.  Obviously,  then, 
as  a  "  doctor  in  theology  "  he  may  be  presumed  to  know  what  we 
might  call  "  canon  law  "  in  its  entirety,  not  merely  the  paragraphs 
of  it  which  deal  with  homicide.  Hence  Socrates,  as  a  person 
shortly  to  be  accused  of  irreligion,  appeals  to  him  as  an  expert  for 
an  answer  to  the  question  what  "  piety  "  (TO  cvo-cjSe?)  or  "  religious 
duty  "  (TO  oo-iov)  is  in  its  genuine  character.  There  must  be  some 
one  character  which  belongs  to  all  action  which  is  "  religiously 
right  "  (oo-ioi/),  and  an  opposite  character  which  is  shown  in  all 
action  which  is  religiously  wrong.  There  must  be  a  definition  of 
"  religious  obligation/'  and  we  want  to  know  what  it  is.  It  is 
noticeable  that  this  common  character  of  the  "  religiously  right  " 
is  at  the  outset  spoken  of  as  a  single  tSe'a  (Euthyphro,  $d)  and  subse- 
quently as  an  cToo?  (6d)  and  an  ouo-ta  (ua).  This  is  the  language 
familiar^  to  us  as  technical  in  the  so-called  Platonic  "  theory  of 
Forms,'1  but  it  is  represented  as  understood  at  once  by  Euthyphro 
without  any  kind  of  explanation.  It  seems  quite  impossible  to 
escape  the  conclusion  that  from  the  very  first  Plato  represented 
Socrates  as  habitually  using  language  of  this  kind  and  being  readily 
understood  by  his  contemporaries.1 

Like  so  many  of  the  interlocutors  in  these  early  dialogues  of 
Plato,  Euthyphro  at  first  confuses  definition  with  the  enumeration 
of  examples.  "  Religious  duty  "  is  to  proceed  against  the  party 
guilty  of  an  offence  against  religion,  whether  it  be  a  homicide  or  a 
sacrilegious  theft,  or  any  other  such  crime,  without  being  deterred 
by  any  regard  for  the  ties  of  blood  ;  to  neglect  this  duty  is  "  irre- 
ligious "  (5d-e).  We  have  the  best  of  examples  for  this,  that  of 
Zeus  himself  who  "  chained  "  his  own  father.  Of  course,  if  this 
statement  is  taken  to  be  more  than  a  production  of  instances,  it 
would  be  delightfully  "  circular/1  since  it  makes  religious  duty 
amount  to  active  opposition  to  irreligion.  Socrates  prefers  to 
regard  the  statement  as  a  mere  illustration  and  simply  repeats 
his  request  for  an  account  of  the  "  one  form  "  in  virtue  of  which 

1  There  is  indeed  an  important  point  on  which  Socrates  is  represented  as 
needing  to  explain  himself  in  the  Phaedo  ;  he  has  to  explain  at  some  length 
how  the  theory  of  Forms  bears  on  the  problem  of  "  coming  into  being  and 
passing  out  of  being."  We  may  readily  believe  that  this  would  need  some  ex- 
plaining to  most  persons,  but  the  meaning  of  the  words,  ISta,  elSos,  and  the 
reality  of  the  existence  of  "  forms,"  is  simply  presupposed  in  the  Phaedo,  as 
elsewhere,  without  any  explanation  or  justification. 
6 


150          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

all  religious  duties  are  religious.  This  leads  to  a  first  attempt  at 
definition  :  "  the  religious  is  what  is  pleasing  to  the  gods,  the 
irreligious  what  is  not  pleasing  to  them"  (6e).  This  is,  in  form,  a 
good  definition  ;  whether  it  is  sound  in  substance  remains  to  be 
seen.  The  difficulty  is  that,  according  to  Euthyphrp  himself,  dis- 
sensions and  enmities  exist  among  the  gods.1  Now  it  is  not  every 
disagreement  which  leads  to  quarrels  and  enmities.  A  difference  of 
opinion  about  number,  size,  or  weight  is  readily  settled  by  an 
appeal  to  counting,  measuring,  or  weighing.  It  is  when  we  come  to 
disagreement  about  moral  questions — "  right  and  wrong,  fine  and 
ugly,  good  and  bad  " — that  it  is  hard  to  find  a  standard  by  which  to 
settle  the  disagreement,  and  this  is  why  it  is  regularly  differences  of 
this  kind  which  lead  to  quarrels  and  factions  among  us2  (jc-d). 
We  may  fairly  reason  that  if  the  gods  quarrel  and  fight,  it  is  over 
the  same  questions  ;  they  quarrel  about  right  and  wrong,  and  each 
party  will  be  pleased  by  what  it  regards  as  right  and  offended  by 
what  it  thinks  wrong.  Thus  what  pleases  one  god  may  offend 
another,  and  the  same  act  will  be,  in  that  case,  both  religious  and 
irreligious  (So).  Cronus,  for  example,  can  hardly  be  supposed  to 
approve  of  Euthyphro's  present  proceedings. 

Euthyphro's  way  of  meeting  the  difficulty  is  to  commit  in  an 
undisguised  form  the  circle  already  implied  in  his  original  state- 
ment. There  are  points,  he  urges,  on  which  all  the  gods  would 
agree  ;  they  would  all  agree,  for  example,  that  wrongful  homicide 
ought  not  to  go  unpunished.  (Thus  he  suggests  that  the  definition 
might  run  that  religious  acts  are  those  which  the  gods  approve 
unanimously,  with  the  explanation  that  the  class  "  acts  unani- 
mously approved  by  the  gods  "  is  identical  with  the  class  of  rightful 
acts.)  But  the  suggestion  makes  matters  no  better.  No  one,  not 
even  the  defendant  in  a  prosecution  for  homicide,  ever  denies  that 
wrongful  homicide,  or  any  other  wrongful  act,  ought  to  be  punished. 
The  issue  at  stake  is  always  which  of  the  two  parties  is  in  the  wrong 
and  what  is  the  precise  character  of  the  wrong  committed.  If  the 

1  These  "  wars  in  heaven  "  refer  principally  to  the  stories  of  the  dethrone- 
ment of  Cronus  and  the  Titans  and  the  war  of  the  gods  with  the  giants,  to 
which  allusion  has  already  been  made.  They  are  part  of  the  Orphic  and  the 
Hesiodic  theogonies.  Socrates  does  not  believe  such  stories  (Euthyphro,  6a-c) 
and  it  is  easy  to  show  that  they  were  not  taken  seriously  by  Athenians  in 
general,  but  Euthyphro  has  expressly  avowed  his  belief  in  them  and  still 
stranger  tales  (66),  and  it  is  he  who  is  offering  the  definition.  Hence  the 
objection  is  perfectly  valid  against  him. 

*  The  passage  is  noteworthy.  Plato  is  fond  of  assimilating  the  use  of  a 
true  "  scale  of  values  "  to  the  employment  of  number,  measure,  and  weight. 
We  may  fairly  conjecture  with  Burnet  that  the  suggestion  comes  from 
Socrates.  Knowledge  of  good,  by  enabling  us  to  estimate  correctly  the  relative 
worth  of  different  "  goods,"  would  reduce  our  heated  quarrels  about  our 
"  rights  "  to  a  problem  in  "  moral  arithmetic."  There  is  much  truth  in  this. 
In  the  bitterest  of  such  quarrels  both  parties  often  sincerely  wish  for  no 
more  than  their  "  fair  due."  The  trouble  is  that  they  cannot  agree  on  the 
question  how  much  that  is.  Compare  Leibniz's  hope  that  a  perfected 
"  symbolic  logic"  would  reduce  all  philosophical  disputes  to  the  working  of 
a"  calculation." 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  151 

gods  are  at  variance,  then,  their  difference  cannot  be  on  the 
question  whether  a  wrongful  act  should  be  punished,  but  on  the 
very  different  question  what  acts  are  wrongful.  How  do  we  know, 
for  example,  that  different  gods  might  not  be  of  different  mind 
about  the  Tightness  or  wrongfulness  of  the  step  Euthyphro  is 
now  taking  ?  This,  however,  is  only  a  minor  difficulty.  We  may 
allow  Euthyphro  to  put  his  definition  in  the  amended  form,  "  The 
religious  is  that  which  the  gods  approve  and  the  irreligious  that 
which  they  disapprove  unanimously/1  But  we  still  have  to  ask 
the  graver  question,  "  Is  a  religious  act  religious  because  the  gods 
approve  it,  or  do  they  approve  it  because  it  is  religious  ?  "  (86-ioa). 
(The  question  is  one  which  has  played  a  prominent  part  in 
ethical  controversy  in  later  days.  It  amounts  to  asking  whether 
acts  of  piety,  or  more  generally  virtuous  acts,  derive  their  character 
of  being  right  from  the  mere  fact  of  being  commanded,  or  are  com- 
manded because  they  are  antecedently  intrinsically  right.  Are  the 
"  commandments  of  God  "  arbitrary  ?  Is  moral  obligation  created 
by  the  imposition  of  a  command  ?  This  is,  in  effect,  the  thesis  of 
both  Hobbes  and  Locke,  and  is  what  Cudworth  is  denying  in  his 
treatise  on  Eternal  and  Immutable  Morality,  when  he  sets  himself 
to  argue  that  acts  are  good  or  bad  "  by  nature  "  and  not  by  "  mere 
will."  The  same  issue  reappears  in  a  different  terminology  in  the 
objection  taken  against  Hutcheson's  doctrine  of  an  "  implanted 
moral  sense  "  by  those  who  urged  that  on  the  theory  in  question 
our  Creator  might  have  given  us  an  inverted  "  moral  sense,"  and 
then  the  promotion  of  human  misery  would  have  been  our  highest 
duty.) x  The  point  is  too  fine  to  be  taken  at  once  by  a  man  of 
Euthyphro's  type,  and  therefore  has  to  be  explained  at  a  length 
which  we  find  superfluous.  The  difficulty  hardly  exists  for  us, 
because  we  are  accustomed  from  childhood  to  the  distinction  be- 
tween the  active  and  passive  "  voices  "  of  a  verb.  In  the  time  of 
Plato  there  was,  as  Burnet  reminds  us,  no  grammatical  termin- 
ology ;  the  very  distinction  between  a  verb  and  a  noun  is  not 
known  to  have  been  drawn  by  anyone  before  Plato  himself,  and 
that  in  a  late  dialogue,  the  Sophistes.  The  point  to  be  made  is 
the  simple  one  that  a  definition  of  an  ouo-ta  cannot  properly  be 
given  by  means  of  a  verb  in  the  passive  voice  (Burnet,  loc.  cit.). 
That  is,  it  is  no  answer  to  the  question  what  something  is,  to  be 
told  what  some  one  or  something  else  does  to  it.  In  more  scholastic 
terminology,  a  formula  of  this  kind  would  be  a  definition  by  means 
of  a  mere  "  extrinsic  denomination,"  and  would  throw  no  light 
on  the  quiddity  of  the  definiendum.2  (It  must  be  remembered  that 

1  The  problem  was  also  a  prominent  one  in  the  age  of  Scholasticism.  It 
is  against  the  view  that  obligation  is  created  by  command  that  St.  Thomas 
(S.C.G.  iii.  122)  says  that  fornication  is  not  sufficiently  proved  to  be  sinful 
by  alleging  that  it  is  an  "  injury  to  God."  "  For  we  only  offend  God  by 
doing  what  is  against  our  own  good."  It  therefore  still  remains  to  show 
that  the  conduct  in  question  is  "  against  our  own  good." 

1  Of  course  such  definitions  are  common  enough  ;  e.g.  you  could  not  define 
"  trustee  "  except  by  a  verb  in  the  passive  voice  or  its  equivalent.  But  what 


152         PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

in  a  question  of  moral  science  we  are  not  concerned  with  a  purely 
nominal  definition,  like  those  of  mathematics,  the  mere  interpreta- 
tion of  a  new  symbol  by  a  combination  of  symbols  already  familiar. 
The  definition  of  a  character  such  as  oViov  is  inevitably  a  real 

definition,  and  this  is  why  Socrates  calls  it  a  discourse  about  an 

»  '  \ 

ouo-ta.) 

The  principle  to  be  laid  down  is  that  when  something  happens 
to,  or  is  done  to,  a  thing  there  is  always  a  correlated  person  or 
thing  who  is  the  doer.  Thus  if  a  thing  is  carried,  or  is  seen,  there 
is  some  one  or  something  who  carries  or  sees  that  thing.  And  when 
we  use  a  "  passive  "  participle  or  adjective  to  characterize  any- 
thing, we  do  so  "because  something  is  being  done  to  the  thing  by 
something  else.  (Thus,  it  is  meant,  if  a  thing  is  being  seen  by 
some  one  it  is  a  "  thing  seen  "  or  visible  (opw/xevov),  but  you  could 
not  argue  that  because  a  thing  is  visible  some  one  must  actually 
be  seeing  it.1)  In  other  words,  a  passive  participle  or  adjective 
of  passive  sense  is  always  a  denominatio  extrinseca.  Now  a  thing 
which  is  liked  or  approved  (<j[>i\ovju.evov)  comes  under  this  rule  ; 
"it  is  not  because  it  is  a-thing-approved  that  some  one  ap- 
proves it ;  it  is  because  some  one  actually  approves  it  that  it  is 
a-thing-approved"  (T.OC.)  But  this  consideration  is  fatal  to  our 
proposed  formula,  if  the  formula  be  taken  as  a  definition  of 
TO  oViov.  If  "  all  the  gods  "  approve  the  "  religious  act,"  that,  as 
Euthyphro  concedes  at  once,  is  because  the  act  is  "  religious  "  ; 
its  character  as  o<ru>v  is  the  cause  of  their  approbation.  The 
"  extrinsic  denomination  "  thing  -  approved  -  by  -  the  -  gods,  on 
the  other  hand,  only  belongs  to  TO  6Viov  as  a  consequence  of 
the  fact  that  the  gods  approve  it.  Thus  the  formula  does  not 
tell  us  what  the  character  on  the  ground  of  which  the  gods 
approve  certain  acts  is  (its  ovo-t'a),  but  only  something  which 
happens  to  these  acts,  namely,  that  the  gods  approve  them; 
it  tells  us  an  "affection"  (?ra0os)  of  the  "religious,"  not  its 
quiddity  (na).2 

Thus  we  have  to  begin  the  work  of  looking  for  a  definition  of 
the  "  religious  "  over  again.  Our  definitions  keep  running  away 
from  us,  like  the  mythical  statues  of  Daedalus,  the  reputed  ancestor 
you  are  really  defining  in  this  case  is  a  relation,  the  relation  of  the  trustee  to 
the  "  truster."  In  the  case  of  rb  &ffiov  we  are  attempting  to  define  a 
quality  (irA0os)>  and  it  is  no  definition  of  this  quality  to  say  that  "  the  gods 
like  it." 

1  Berkeley,  it  is  true,  seems  sometimes  to  be  arguing  as  though  we  could 
infer  from  the  fact  that  a  thing  is  visible,  the  further  fact  that  some  one  is 
always  seeing  it.  But  even  he  would  hardly  have  argued  that  if  a  thing  is 
eatable,  some  one  must  be  eating  it. 

1  It  is  tacitly  assumed  that  if  the  gods  approve  x,  y,  z  .  .  .  they  do  so 
for  an  intelligible  reason.  There  is  some  character  common  to  x,  y,  z  over 
and  above  the  "  extrinsic  denomination  "  of  being  in  fact  approved,  and  this 
character  is  the  ground  of  the  approbation.  On  the  use  of  the  words  otota, 
wdOos  (the  most  general  name  for  anything,  mode,  quality,  relation,  etc.,  which 
can  be  asserted  of  a  subject),  see  Burnet's  notes,  loc.  cit.  The  way  in  which 
the  terms  are  used  without  explanation  implies  that  they  are  part  of  an 
already  familiar  logical  terminology. 


SOCRAT1C  DIALOGUES  158 

of  Socrates.1     Socrates  must  have  inherited,  much  against  his  will, 
a  double  portion  of  his  ancestor's  gift,  for  it  seems  that  he  can 
bestow  mobility  on  other  men's  "  products  "  as  well  as  on  his  own. 
But  he  will  try  to  do  what  he  can  to  remedy  the  trouble.    At  this 
point  (120)  the  discussion  makes  a  fresh  start— a  start,  we  may  note, 
due  to  the  direct  suggestion  of  Socrates,  whose  part  in  the  dialogues 
is  by  no  means  so  exclusively  that  of  a  mere  critic  of  others  as  is 
sometimes  fancied.    What  is  the  relation  of  ™  oo-tov  (religion)  to 
oiKatoo-vvy    (duty,    obligation,    morality   in    general)?      We    both 
admit  that  whatever  is  religious  (oo-tov)  is  "  dutiful  "  or  "  right  " 
(OIKCLIOV) ;  can  we  convert  the  proposition  simpliciter  and  say  that 
whatever  is  right  is  religious  ?     I.e.  is  all  duty  duty  to  God  ? 
Euthyphro  has  the  difficulty  which  seems  to  beset  all  beginners  in 
logic  in  seeing  that  the  universal  affirmative  proposition  does  not 
admit  of  simple  conversion,  and  the  point  has  to  be  made  clear 
to  him  by  examples.    All  reverence  (atSws)  is  fear,  but  it  is  not 
true  that  all  fear  (e.g.  fear  of  illness)  is  reverence.     All  odd  integers 
are  numbers,  but  all  numbers  are  not  odd.    Reverence  is  a  "  part  " 
of  fear  as  "  odd  number  "  is  of  number.     In  the  more  developed 
logical  terminology  of  Aristotle,  the  thing  would,  of  course,  be 
expressed  by  saying  that  reverence  and  odd  number  are  species 
(etSr;)  of  the  genera  fear  and  number,  but  Plato,  who  sits  loose  to 
terminology,  except  when  it  is  needed  for  the  purpose  immediately 
in  hand,  habitually  uses  the  word  "  part "  (/*O/HOV,  /IC/DOS)  for  what 
we  still  call  the  membra  dividentia  of  a  logical  "  division."    When 
the  point  has  been  explained  to  him,  Euthyphro  at  once  answers 
that  TO  OO-IQV  is  only  one  part  of  TO  SiWoi/ — that  is,  in  modern 
language,  that  duty  to  God  is  not  the  whole  of  the  duty  of  man,  but 
one  specific  branch  of  it.    Thus,  like  the  mass  of  mankind,  he 
believes  in  a  plurality  of  distinct  "  virtues.1'     Man  has,  e.g.,  a  certain 
set  of  "  duties  to  God,"  and  another  distinct  set  of  duties  to  his 
fellow-men,  and  it  would  follow  that  you  might  specialize  in  one  of 
these  branches  of  duty  but  neglect  the  others.     You  might  be 
strong  in  "  religion  "  but  weak,  e.g.,  in  honesty,  like  the  legendary 
Welshman  who  "  had  a  wonderful  gift  in  prayer  but  was  an  awful 
liar.1'    From  the  Socratic  point  of  view,  this  would  be  impossible. 
All  virtue  is  knowledge  of  good,  and  consequently  any  one  real 
virtue,  if  you  live  up  to  it,  will  prove  to  cover  the  whole  of  human 
conduct.    The  "  content  "  of  morality  and  that  of  religion  would 
thus  alike  be  the  whole  sphere  of  human  conduct,  and  it  would  be 
quite  impossible  in  principle  to  distinguish  a  man's  "  religious  " 
from  his  "  moral "  duties.   At  bottom,  the  reason  why  the  Euthyphro 
ends  negatively  is  the  same  as  that  which  accounts  for  the  formally 
negative  result  of  the  Laches  or  Charmides,  the  fact  that  genuine 
"  goodness  "  is  a  unity. 

1  For  the  point  of  the  jest,  see  Burnet,  loc.  cit.  It  would  be  spoilt  if  there 
were  any  truth  in  the  later  story  that  Socrates  was  actually  the  son  of  a 
sculptor  and  had  practised  the  calling  himself,  as  any  intelligent  reader  ought 
to  see. 


154          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

This  is  suggested  at  once  for  us  in  izd.  If  "  religion  "  is  a 
"  part  "  of  morality,  we  must  go  on  to  ask  "  which  "  part  it  is; 
i.e.,  to  use  the  technical  phrase  which  meets  us  as  such  for  the  first 
time  in  the  Theaetetus,  we  must  ask  for  the  "  difference  "  which 
marks  off  "  religious  "  duties  from  the  rest  of  our  duties.  We 
may  suggest  that  TO  Suctuov  can  be  divided  into  two  species,  the 
"  cult  "  or  "  service  "  (OepaTreta)  of  the  gods  and  the  cult  or  service 
of  man  ;  the  former  will  be  religion  (120).  The  thought  is  that  all 
morality  is  service,  and  that  service  falls  under  two  mutually 
exclusive  heads,  the  "  service  of  God,"  and  "  the  service  of  man/'  a 
view  still  widely  popular.  (From  Socrates'  point  of  view,  of  course, 
the  view  would  be  false ;  you  cannot  serve  man  without  in  the 
very  act  serving  God,  nor  serve  God  without  serving  man.) 

To  follow  the  argument  to  which  this  third  attempt  at  a  defini- 
tion gives  rise,  we  have  to  remember  that  the  word  Otpavtta  was 
in  use  in  two  special  connexions.  It  was  used  of  the  cult  of  a 
deity  by  his  worshipper  (cp.  our  objectionable  use  of  the  phrases 
"  divine  service/'  "  Sunday  services  "),  or  of  a  great  man  by  his 
courtiers,  and  of  the  "  tending  "  of  men  or  animals  by  professionals 
such  as  physicians  and  grooms  (the  sense  of  the  word  from  which 
Socrates  developed  his  conception  of  the  "  tending  of  one's  soul  " 
as  the  supreme  business  of  life).  The  problem  is  to  determine  in 
which,  if  either  of  these  senses,  religion  is  to  be  called  the  "  service  " 
of  God.  If  we  start  with  the  second  sense,  that  in  which  the  pro- 
fessional trainer  of  hounds  or  oxherd  may  be  said  to  "  tend  "  or 
"  serve  "  the  hounds  or  oxen,  we  see  that  the  aim  of  such  tendance 
is  always  to  make  the  "  tended  "  better,  to  get  the  dogs  or  oxen 
into  the  pink  of  condition  and  keep  them  so.  But  we  cannot 
suppose  that  religion  is  the  service  of  God  in  this  sense.  No  one 
would  say  that  by  performing  his  "  religious  duties  "  he  "  makes  his 
gods  better  "  (i^a-c) .  We  must  mean  "  service  "  in  the  very  different 
sense  in  which  slaves  are  said  to  "serve  "  or  "  tend  "  their  owner. 
Now  the  "  service  "  of  a  slave  consists  in  acting  as  an  instrument 
or  "  understrapper  "  in  carrying  out  his  owner's  business ;  it  is  a 
form  of  VTTT; pcriKT/,  "  co-operating  as  a  subordinate  with  a  superior 
for  the  achievement  of  some  result  "  (13^). 

Now  we  can  say  at  once  what  the  result  to  which  the  slave  of  a 
medical  man  contributes  under  his  master's  direction  is ;  it  is  the 
curing  of  the  master's  patients.  So  the  slave  of  a  builder  contri- 
butes as  a  subordinate  to  the  construction  of  a  ship  or  a  house.  If, 
then,  "  serving  God "  means  contributing  as  an  underworker 
contributes  to  the  business  of  his  superior,  if  it  is  "  co-operation 
as  an  instrument,"  what  is  the  great  work  to  which  we  contribute 
"  under  the  gods  "  ?  (130).  (No  answer  is  given  to  the  question  in 
our  dialogue.  None  could  be  given  by  a  man  like  Euthyphro  who 
keeps  his  morality  and  his  religion  in  separate  "  water-tight  com- 
partments, "and  Socrates  naturally  does  not  answer  his  own  question. 
But  it  is  not  hard  to  discover  from  other  dialogues  what  the  Socratic 
answer  would  be.  The  great  business  of  man,  we  kno.w,  is  to  "  tend  " 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  155 

his  own  soul,  and  so  far  as  he  can  the  souls  of  all  who  come  into 
contact  with  him,  to  "  make  them  as  good  as  possible."  We  shall 
find  him,  in  the  Phaedo  and  elsewhere,  describing  this  course  of  life 
as  "  assimilation  to  God"  (6/Woxns  few).  Thus  we  shall  not  go  far 
wrong  if  we  say  that  the  "  great  and  glorious  work  of  God  "  is  to  be 
the  source  of  order  and  good  to  the  universe,  and  that  we  "  contri- 
bute under  God  "  to  that  work  in  the  degree  to  which  we  bring 
order  and  good  into  the  little  "  world  "  of  our  own  personal  life 
and  that  of  the  society  to  which  we  belong.  Such  an  answer  would, 
of  course,  presuppose  the  "  unity  of  the  virtues,"  and  break  down 
all  barriers  between  the  service  of  man  and  the  service  of  God, 
morality  and  religion  ;  it  would  make  irreligion  a  breach  of  morality 
and  laxity  of  morals  an  offence  against  religion.) 

Euthyphro 's  inability  to  follow  the  thought  of  Socrates  throws 
him  back  on  what  had  all  along  been  his  implied  position,  the  position 
of  the  fanatic  who  divorces  religion  from  morality.  "  If  a  man 
knows  how  to  please  the  gods  by  his  words  of  prayer  and  his  acts 
of  sacrifice — that  is  religion,  and  that  is  what  makes  private  families 
and  public  commonwealths  prosperous  "  (14^).  In  briefer  phrase, 
religion  is  "  a  science  of  sacrificing  and  praying  "  (140) .  (Euthyphro, 
of  course,  takes  the  word  "  science  "  employed  by  Socrates  to 
mean  simply  correct  knowlege  of  the  ritual  to  be  observed.)  Now 
in  sacrificing  we  give  something  to  the  gods  and  in  prayer  we  ask 
something  from  them.  So  we  may  finally  put  Euthyphro's  thought 
into  this  definition  (the  fourth  and  last  of  the  dialogue),  "Religion 
is  the  science  of  asking  the  gods  for  things  and  giving  things  to 
them  "  (14^).  Now  the  right  way  of  asking  will  be  to  ask  for  what 
we  really  need,  and  the  right  way  of  giving  will  be  to  give  the  gods 
what  they  want  of  us,  and  thus  religion  turns  out  to  be  "  an  art  of 
traffic  between  men  and  gods  "  (fjjuropiKYj  r€\vrj  #eots  K<U  di/flpowrots 
vap  dXA.7yXwj/,  i^e).  But  traffic  is,  of  course,  a  transaction  between 
two  parties  for  mutual  advantages  ;  one  "  cannot  be  buyer  and 
seller  too."  What  one  party  to  the  traffic  between  gods  and  men 
gets  out  of  the  transaction  is  obvious ;  the  gods  send  us  all  the  good 
things  we  enjoy.  But  what  "  advantage  "  (<o<£cAi'a)  do  they  get 
from  us  ?  No  "  profit,"  says  Euthyphro,  but  "  honour  and  thanks 
and  gratitude"  (n^  r€  *a!  ycpa  KCU  xapts,  I5a)-  "The  religious 
act  "thus  turns  out  to  be  "that  which  is  grateful  (xcxapto-ftcVov)  to 
the  gods,"  and  this  brings  us  back  to  the  very  definition  we  have 
already  had  to  reject,  that  "  the  religious  "  is  TO  rots  0€ois  <£t'A.oi/,  "  what 
the  gods  approve  "  (150) ;  so  that  we  are  no  nearer  knowing  what 
religion  is  than  when  we  began  our  discussion. 

As  I  have  said,  the  gentle  satire  on  the  unworthy  conception  of 
religion  as  a  trade-enterprise  carried  on  by  God  and  man  for  their 
mutual  benefit  ought  not  to  blind  us  to  the  fact  that  the  definition 
of  it  as  knowing  how  to  ask  from  God  and  how  to  make  a  return  to 
Him  is  capable  of  being  understood  in  a  genuinely  Socratic  sense. 
The  very  introduction  into  this  formula  of  cmon/fLi;  as  the  genus 
of  religion  should  indicate  that  it  contains  a  suggestion  we  are 


156          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

meant  to  follow  out.  "  Imitation,"  says  the  proverb,  "  is  the 
sincerest  form  of  flattery."  And  we  may  add  that  the  "  imitation 
of  God  "  shown  in  a  life  devoted  to  the  "  tendance  of  the  soul "  is 
the  one  acceptable  Tirf  and  the  true  thanksgiving  for  the  goods  we 
receive  from  God.  So  understood,  the  formula  that  religion  is 
asking  the  right  things  from  God  and  making  the  right  return  does 
not  contradict  but  coincides  with  the  other  formula  that  it  is  co- 
operation as  agents  "  under  God  "  in  a  great  and  glorious  "  work." 

2.  Apology. — The  Apology  is  too  well  known  to  require  any 
elaborate  analysis,  though  it  must  not  be  passed  over  without  some 
remarks  on  points  of  general  interest.  Apart  from  its  strictly 
historical  interest  as  a  professed  faithful  reproduction  of  the  actual 
language  of  Socrates  at  the  memorable  trial,  it  has  a  philosophical 
interest  as  a  picture  of  the  life  of  "  tendance  of  the  soul  "  adopted 
with  full  consciousness  and  led  at  all  costs  to  its  appropriate  and 
glorious  end.  What  is  depicted  is  the  life  of  a  "  martyr  "  of  the 
best  type  as  seen  from  within  by  the  martyr  himself ;  the  object 
of  the  picture  is  to  make  us  understand  why  the  martyr  chooses 
such  a  life  and  why  the  completion  of  his  career  by  the  martyr's 
death  is  a  corona  and  not  a  "  disaster."  In  our  more  commonplace 
moods  we  are  accustomed  to  think  of  martyrdom  as  a  highly  dis- 
agreeable duty  ;  perhaps  it  must  not  be  shirked,  but  we  feel  that, 
to  be  made  tolerable  to  our  imagination,  it  must  be  "  made  up  "  to 
the  martyr  by  an  "  exaltation  "  to  follow  it.  Plato  means  us 
rather  to  feel  that  the  martyrdom  is  itself  the  "  exaltation  "  : 
in  cruce  gaudium  spiritus ;  ambula  ubi  vis  .  .  .  non  invenies 
altiorem  mam  supra,  nee  securiorem  viam  infra,  nisi  viam  sanctae 
crucis.  The  Apology  is  the  Hellenic  counterpart  of  the  second 
book  of  the  Imitatio. 

For  the  considerations  which  make  it  certain  that  in  substance 
Plato  has  preserved  the  actual  speech  of  Socrates  (which,  as  he  lets 
us  know,  he  himself  heard),  see  Burnet's  Introductory  Note  and  the 
works  referred  to  there.  We  must,  of  course,  understand  that, 
like  all  the  circulated  versions  of  celebrated  speeches  (those  of 
Aeschines  and  Demosthenes  in  the  matter  of  the  "  Crown,"  for 
example),  the  published  speech  is  supposed  to  have  been  "  revised  " 
in  accord  with  the  canons  of  prose- writing.  Plato  has,  no  doubt, 
done  for  the  defence  of  Socrates  what  men  like  Demosthenes  did 
for  their  own  speeches  before  they  gave  them  to  the  world.  At  the 
same  time  we  clearly  have  no  right  to  assume  that  the  process  of 
revision  and  polishing  involves  any  falsification  of  fundamental 
facts.  That  what  we  possess  is  in  substance  a  record  of  what 
Socrates  actually  said  is  sufficiently  proved  by  the  single  considera- 
tion that,  though  we  cannot  date  the  circulation  of  the  Apology 
exactly,  we  can  at  least  be  sure  that  it  must  have  been  given  to  the 
world  within  a  few  years  of  the  actual  trial,  and  would  thus  be  read 
by  numbers  of  persons,  including  both  devoted  admirers  of  the 
philosopher  and  hostile  critics  (and  presumably  even  some  of  the 
judges  who  had  sat  upon  the  case),  who  would  at  once  detect  any 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  157 

falsification  of  such  recent  facts.1  It  should  also  be  added  that 
even  the  subtle  art  by  which  Socrates,  while  professing  to  be  a  mere 
"  layman  "  in  forensic  oratory,  actually  makes  his  speech  conform 
to  precedent  in  its  general  structure,  an  art  most  readily  appreciated 
by  following  Burnet's  careful  analysis,  is  certainly  not  a  mere 
stylistic  "  improvement  "  by  Plato.  The  Gorgias  and  Phaedrus 
would  be  mere  mystifications  if  it  were  not  the  fact  that,  for  all 
his  contempt  for  the  ideals  of  contemporary  "  rhetoric/'  Socrates 
was  quite  familiar  with  its  recognized  methods  and  principles. 
Indeed,  the  Apology  might  be  said  to  afford  an  ironical  illustration 
of  the  paradox  of  the  Gorgias  about  the  uses  which  may  legitimately 
be  made  of  rhetorical  devices.  Socrates  is  in  the  position  of  an 
accused  party,  and  he  makes  a  "defence  "  which  has  been  felt  from 
the  time  of  Xenophon  onward  to  be  something  very  much  like  an 
avowal  of  guilt.  This  is  exactly  in  accord  with  the  principles  of 
the  Gorgias.  Socrates  is  accused  of  an  offence,  and  in  the  eyes  of 
an  average  Athenian,  though  not  in  his  own,  he  has  done  what 
amounts  to  the  commission  of  that  offence.  Consequently  he  uses 
impressive  eloquence,  not  to  veil  the  facts  but  to  put  their  reality 
in  the  clearest  light.  He  is,  and  for  many  years  has  been,  a  "  sus- 
pected character,"  and  the  whole  "  defence  "  consists  in  insisting 
on  the  point  and  explaining  that  the  suspicion  has  been  inevitable. 
Even  the  act  of  which  an  ordinary  advocate  would  have  made  the 
most  as  evidence  of  "  sound  democratic  sentiments/'  Socrates' 
defiance  of  the  order  of  the  "  Thirty  "  in  the  affair  of  Leon  (Apol. 
32c-d),  is  deliberately  introduced  by  a  previous  narrative  of  ap 
event  of  which  such  an  advocate  would  have  been  careful  to  say 
nothing,  or  as  little  as  possible,  Socrates'  opposition  to  the  %xos 
at  the  trial  of  the  Arginusae  generals.  Thus  what  might  have  been 
used  by  a  man  like  Lysias  to  make  an  acquittal  morally  certain  is 
actually  employed  by  Socrates  as  an  opportunity  to  warn  the 
court  that  they  must  expect  from  him  no  sacrifice  of  conviction  to 
"democratic  sentiments."  From  the  point  of  view  of  a  Lysias, 
Socrates  must  have  been  "  throwing  away  the  ace  of  trumps  "  by 
using  the  story  of  his  defiance  of  the  Thirty  as  he  does. 

The  very  singular  historical  circumstances  of  the  trial  of  Socrates 
have  been  better  explained  in  Professor  Burnet's  notes  to  his 
edition  of  the  Apology  and  the  chapter  on  the  "  Trial  "  in  Greek 
Philosophy,  Part  I.,  than  anywhere  else.  I  shall  therefore  refer 
the  reader  to  those  works  for  full  discussion,  contenting  myself  with 
an  indication  of  the  points  which  seem  most  important. 

Though  the  actual  prosecutor  was  Meletus,  every  one  knew  that 
the  real  instigator  of  the  whole  business  was  Anytus,  one  of  the  two 

1  In  particular,  it  is  quite  unthinkable  that  Plato  should  have  invented 
the  few  words,  addressed  to  friends  and  supporters  after  the  court  had  voted 
the  penalty  of  death,  with  which  the  Apology  closes.  Modern  writers,  who 
think  it  "  impossible  "  that  Socrates  should  have  spoken  after  sentence  had 
been  pronounced,  are  simply  transferring  the  procedure  of  a  modern  European 
court  of  justice  to  the  Athens  of  the  fifth  century.  For  the  opportunity  the 
case  would  give  fpr  the  making  of  the  remarks,  see  Burnet,  Apology,  p.  161. 


158  PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

most  admired  and  trusted  leaders  of  the  restored  democracy. 
Since  Anytus  was  in  one  and  the  same  year  assisting  the  prosecution 
of  Socrates  but  helping  the  defence  of  Andocides  on  the  very  same 
charge  of  "  irrelig^on,"  we  cannot  suppose  motives  of  fanaticism 
to  have  had  anything  to  do  with  his  action.  We  may  fairly  suppose 
that  what  he  attributed  to  Socrates  was  the  "  corruption  of  the 
young  men/'  and  that  this  meant  exercising  an  influence  hostile 
to  the  temper  of  unquestioning  loyalty  to  the  democracy.  That 
this  crime,  if  it  is  a  crime,  was  one  of  which  Socrates  was  guilty  can 
be  proved  from  the  Apology  itself,  where  his  capital  point  is  that  he 
is  ready  to  encounter  the  hostility  of  the  TrA^os  or  of  any  one  else 
at  the  bidding  of  conscience.  Such  criticisms  of  the  heroes  of  the 
old  democracy  as  we  read  in  the  Gorgias  and  Meno  are  additional 
evidence,  though,  in  fact,  a  "  practical  politician  "  like  Anytus 
would  need  no  evidence  beyond  the  notorious  intimacies  between 
the  philosopher  and  men  like  Alcibiades,  Critias,  and  Charmides. 
But  there  was  a  reason  why  Anytus  could  neither  put  his  real  case 
forward  without  disguise  of  some  kind  nor  appear  as  the  actual 
prosecutor,  and  this  reason  has  rightly  been  insisted  on  by  Burnet. 
The  worst  "  offences  "  of  Socrates  had  been  committed  under  the 
old  democracy  and  all  open  reference  to  them  was  banned  by 
the  Act  of  Oblivion  forbidding  all  questioning  of  citizens  for  any- 
thing done  before  the  archonship  of  Euclides.  Anytus  had  himself 
been  one  of  the  foremost  promoters  of  this  Act  and  could  therefore 
neither  himself  prosecute,  nor  instigate  anyone  else  to  prosecute,  acts 
covered  by  this  amnesty.  It  was  necessary  to  put  forward  some 
further  pretext  for  proceeding  and  to  find  a  nominal  prosecutor 
who  would  make  the  pretext  the  main  charge  in  his  indictment. 
This  explains  why,  to  judge  from  the  Apology,  the  precise  nature 
of  the  "  corruption  of  the  young  "  by  Socrates  was  left  so  much  in 
the  dark  that  we  only  discover  what  is  meant  by  reading  rather 
carefully  between  the  lines  of  the  defence.  It  also  explains  the 
selection  of  "  irreligion  "  as  the  accusation  to  be  pressed  home  and 
of  Meletus  as  the  nominal  prosecutor.  Burnet  is  plainly  right  in 
holding  that  it  is  most  improbable,  since  the  name  Meletus  is  a 
rare  one,  that  there  should  have  been  two  men  of  that  name,  one  of 
whom  prosecuted  Socrates  and  another  Andocides  for  the  same 
offence  in  the  same  year.  If,  as  is  probable,  the  prosecutor  in  both 
cases  was  the  same  man,  and  the  speech  "  against  Andocides  " 
preserved  to  us  under  the  name  of  Lysias  that  delivered  by  Meletus 
in  the  prosecution  of  Andocides — whether  it  is  a  composition  of 
his  own,  or  one  written  by  Lysias  to  be  spoken  "  in  character/1 
we  see  at  once  why  Meletus  was  selected.  The  speech  against 
Andocides  is  that  of  a  sincere  but  hopelessly  crazy  fanatic — the 
very  man  to  make  the  right  sort  of  tool  for  a  political  intrigue  just 
because  he  combines  absolute  honesty  with  the  simplicity  of  a  half- 
wit. Such  a  man  would  throw  himself  heart  and  soul  into  the 
prosecution  of  an  impie,  none  the  less  effectively  because,  as  is 
dear  from  the  line  taken  by  Socrates  in  his  defence,  neither  he  nor 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  159 

anyone  else  knew  precisely  what  the  "  impiety  "  consisted  in. 
(It  is  also  worth  notice  that  according  to  Andocides  Meletus  was 
one  of  the  party  who  executed  the  illegal  arrest  of  Leon,  in  which 
Socrates  refused  to  be  concerned,  and  thus,  as  a  man  who  had 
contracted  the  pollution  of  <£oVos,  ought  to  have  been  in  the  dock 
himself  on  the  very  charge  he  was  bringing  against  less  guilty  folk. 
That  Socrates  disdains  to  make  a  point  of  this  is  strictly  in  keeping 
with  his  character.)  As  to  the  meaning  of  the  "  impiety  "  charged 
against  Socrates,  all  that  we  learn  from  the  Apology  is  that  Socrates 
regards  it  as  having  something  to  do  with  the  caricatures  of  his 
earlier  scientific  pursuits  in  the  Clouds  and  other  comedies,  where 
men  of  science  in  general  are  represented  as  having  no  respect  for 
the  gods  of  the  current  official  worships.  No  doubt  this  statement 
is  correct,  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  there  must  have  been  something 
more  behind  the  indictment  of  Socrates.  The  fact  that  Andocides 
was  tried  on  the  same  charge  about  the  same  time  for  a  ritual  offence 
and  found  it  necessary  in  his  defence  to  go  into  the  whole  old 
scandal  of  the  "  mutilation  of  the  Hermae  "  and  the  "  profanation 
of  the  mysteries  "  seems,  as  Burnet  has  urged,  to  give  us  the  key 
to  the  secret.  Alcibiades  and  other  prominent  men  among  the 
associates  of  Socrates  had  been  deeply  implicated  in  the  affair 
of  the  "  mysteries,"  and  this  would,  no  doubt,  be  in  the  minds  of  all 
the  judges.  Socrates  makes  no  allusion  to  the  matter  in  his  de- 
fence, but  this  only  proves  what  we  should  expect  from  the  whole 
tenour  of  his  life,  that,  even  in  defending  himself  on  a  capital  charge, 
he  was  scrupulous  to  observe  the  spirit  of  the  law  by  which 
offences  before  the  archonship  of  Euclides  had  been  "  amnestied." 
Meletus  is  likely  to  have  been  less  cautious. 

We  cannot  well  acquit  Anytus  of  having  stooped  to  instigate 
a  proceeding  in  which  he  was  ashamed  to  take  the  principal  part, 
and  of  having  used  a  tool  whom  he  must  have  despised.  But  this 
is  no  more  than  has  often  been  done  by  politicians  who,  as  the 
world  goes,  are  counted  high-minded.  His  object  was  simply  to 
frighten  away  from  Athens  a  person  whose  influence  he  believed  to 
be  undesirable,  much  as  Dutch  William  resorted  to  trickery  to 
frighten  King  James  out  of  England — an  act  for  which  he  is  eulogized 
by  Macaulay.  Socrates  might  have  preserved  his  life  by  going 
away  before  trial,  as  it  was  customary  to  do  when  there  was  any 
doubt  about  acquittal.  Indeed  Plato  is  careful  to  let  us  see  that 
even  when  the  case  came  into  court,  escape  would  have  been  easy. 
The  verdict  of  guilty,  even  after  the  uncompromising  speech  of  the 
accused  had  been  delivered,  was  only  obtained  by  a  small  majority. 
We  may  safely  infer  that  an  opposite  verdict  could  pretty  certainly 
have  been  secured  by  a  little  deference  to  popular  opinion,  a  little 
adroit  silence  about  one  or  two  incidents  and  stress  on  others — 
such  as  the  excellent  military  record  of  the  accused — with  a  few 
words  of  regret  for  the  past  and  promise  of  cautious  behaviour  in 
future.  Even  without  any  of  this,  it  is  clear  that  if  Socrates  had 
chosen  to  propose  a  moderate  fine  as  a  sufficient  penalty,  the  offer 


160          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

would  have  been  accepted.  (Not  to  mention  that  he  could  readily 
have  escaped  during  his  unexpected  month  of  detention  in  custody, 
and  that  public  opinion  would  not  have  blamed  him.)  The  accusers 
had  no  wish  to  have  the  guilt  of  any  man's  blood  at  their  doors  ; 
Socrates  himself  forced  their  hand.  Without  any  desire  for  a 
martyrdom,  they  had  created  a  situation  in  which  there  must  in- 
evitably be  one,  unless  the  other  party  would  compromise  with  his 
conscience,  and  a  martyrdom  Socrates  determined  they  should 
have.  This  is  what  he  means  (Apology,  396)  by  saying  that  both 
sides  must  abide  by  their  TI/A^/XCU  Socrates  holds  in  conscience 
that  his  conduct  has  been  that  of  a  public  benefactor,  his  opponents 
that  it  amounts  to  crime  worthy  of  death.  They  would  like  a 
confession  from  himself  that  their  estimate  is  correct ;  if  by  act  or 
word  he  would  admit  this,  they  are  willing  not  to  inflict  the  penalty. 
They  do  not  wish  to  inflict  death,  but  they  do  wish  for  the  ad- 
mission that  it  is  deserved.  //  it  is  deserved,  says  Socrates,  let  it 
be  inflicted  ;  you  shall  be  compelled  to  "  have  the  courage  of  your 
opinions.11 

In  dealing  with  the  analysis  of  the  Apology  we  have  to  start  by 
understanding  that  the  real  and  serious  defence  of  Socrates,  which 
is  made  to  rest  on  his  conviction  of  a  special  divine  mission  to  his 
fellow-countrymen,  does  not  begin  until  we  reach  page  280.  What 
goes  before  (ApoL  170-270)  is  introductory  matter,  and  is  concerned 
with  two  preliminary  points,  the  explanation  of  the  prejudices 
which  have  grown  up  about  Socrates  (180-246),  and  a  proof  that 
the  accuser  himself  cannot  say,  or  at  any  rate  dares  not  say,  what 
he  really  means  by  his  charges  (246-270).  Throughout  the  whole 
of  the  preliminary  pages  we  must  expect  to  find  abundant  traces  of 
the  whimsical  humour  which  the  enemies  of  Socrates  in  Plato  call 
his  "  irony  "  ;  at  every  turn  we  have  to  allow  for  the  patent  fact 
that  he  is  "  not  wholly  serious  "  ;  the  actual  defence  of  his  conduct 
through  life,  when  we  reach  it,  is  pure  earnest.  (It  is  important 
to  call  attention  to  this,  since  the  well-known  narrative  of  the 
part  played  by  the  Delphic  oracle  in  the  life  of  the  philosopher 
belongs  to  the  preliminary  account  of  the  causes  of  the  popular 
misconceptions  about  him,  and  has  to  be  taken  with  the  same 
allowance  for  his  native  humour  as  the  account  of  the  burlesques 
on  him  by  the  comic  poets.  The  claim  to  be  conscious  of  a  special 
mission,  imposed  not  by  "  the  gods,"  nor  by  "  Apollo/1  but  "  by 
God,"  comes  from  the  actual  defence.  The  two  things  have  very 
little  to  do  with  one  another,  and  are  treated  in  very  different 
tones ;  nothing  but  misconception  can  come  of  the  attempt  to 
confuse  them.  Similarly  the  point  of  the  "  cross-examination  "  of 
Meletus  has  repeatedly  been  missed  by  commentators  who  have 
not  seen  that  the  whole  passage  is  humorous,  though  with  a  humour 
which  is  deadly  for  its  victim.) 

(a)  Plea  for  an  Impartial  Hearing  and  Explanation  of  the  Existing 
Prejudices  unfavourable  to  the  Speaker. — The  speech  opens  in  a 
very  usual  way  with  an  apology,  mainly  playful,  for  the  speaker's 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  161 

unacquaintance  with  the  diction  of  the  courts,  and  a  request  to  be 
allowed  to  tell  his  story  in  his  own  way  (ija-i8d).  The  one  piece 
of  downright  earnest  in  this  exordium  is  the  insistence  that  the 
supreme  business  of  "  oratory  "  is  to  tell  the  truth  —  a  business  in 
which  tb*  speaker  may  claim  to  be  more  than  a  match  for  his 
accusers.  Like  every  one  who  wishes  for  an  impartial  hearing,  he  is 
first  bound  to  remove  any  prejudices  the  audience  may  have  con- 
ceived against  him.  It  will  not  be  enough  to  deal  with  the  attempts 
the  prosecution  has  just  made  to  create  such  prejudices  ;  there  is 
a  more  inveterate  prejudice  dating  from  old  days  ;  the  judges  who 
are  to  decide  the  case  have  heard  long  ago  that  Socrates  is  a  "  clever 
man  "  who  "  busies  himself  about  things  aloft  and  under  the  earth, 
and  makes  the  weaker  cause  appear  the  stronger  "  —  the  double 
accusation  of  being  a  physicist  and  being  an  "  eristic,1'  which  is, 
in  fact,  made  in  the  Clouds  of  Aristophanes.  "  Intellectuals  "  of 
this  type  are  popularly  suspected  of  disregard  of  the  gods  ;  the 
charges  were  made  in  comedies  which  many  of  the  judges  must  have 
seen  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  in  boyhood,  when  impressions 
are  easily  made  ;  they  have  never  received  any  rejoinder;  what  is 
more,  they  have  been  repeated  since  of  malice  prepense  l  by  a  host 
of  anonymous  slanderers,  and  it  is  these  vague  prejudices  rather 
than  the  accusations  of  the  present  prosecutors  that  are  likely  to 
stand  in  the  way  of  a  fair  trial  (iSa-e). 

The  sufficient  answer  to  all  this  is  that  Socrates  is  not  responsible 
for  the  nonsense  he  is  made  to  talk  in  the  Clouds.  His  judges  them- 
selves must  know  whether  they  ever  heard  him  discourse  on  such 
topics.  But  he  is  careful  to  add  that  he  means  no  disparagement 
to  knowledge  of  this  kind  ;  if  it  exists.2  Neither  is  it  true  that 
he  has  ever  made  a  "  profession  "  of  "  educating  men  "  ;  i.e.  he 
is  not  one  of  the  professional  teachers  of  "  goodness,"  though, 
again,  he  is  far  from  disparaging  so  splendid  a  calling.  If  he 
really  could  "  teach  goodness,"  he  says  humorously,  he  would  not, 
like  Evenus,  do  it  for  a  paltry  five  minae.  He  would  know  how 
se  faire  valoir  (20  fc). 

How  then  has  he  got  the  name  for  being  "  clever  "  or  "  wise  "  ? 
Here  comes  in  the  well-known  tale  of  the  Delphic  oracle  and  its 
response  to  Chaerephon,  that  no  man  living  was  wiser  than  Socrates. 
Socrates  says  that  he  was  at  first  staggered  by  this  pronouncement, 
and  set  to  work  to  prove  Apollo  of  Delphi  —  never  a  persona  grata  at 
Athens,  for  excellent  reasons  —  a  liar.  With  this  view  he  went  round 
looking  for  a  wiser  man  than  himself  in  the  various  sections  of 
society.  He  began  with  the  "statesmen/1  but  soon  found  that 
though  they  fancied  themselves  very  wise,  they  certainly  had  no 


Kal  $taj8o\S,  i  Sd.  It  is  implied  that  there  was  no  real  ill-feeling  on 
the  part  of  the  comic  poets  who  started  these  stories.  They  meant  no  more 
than  fun.  We  can  see  for  ouiselves  that  this  is  true  of  Aristophanes. 

2  Apol.  IQC.  As  Burnet  points  out,  loc.  cit.%  what  is  said  here  is  quite  in 
keeping  with  the  representation  of  the  Phaedo  that  Socrates  was  deeply  in- 
terested in  all  these  matters  in  early  life,  until  he  discovered  that  he  "  had  no 
head  for  them  "  (an  expression  itself  to  be  taken  playfully). 


162          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

wisdom.  Next  he  tried  the  poets  with  much  the  same  result.  He 
found  that  they  were  hopelessly  incapable  of  explaining  what  they 
meant  in  their  finest  work ;  this  showed  that  the  poet,  like  a 
possessed  person,  speaks  under  the  influence  of  a  genius  and  inspira- 
tion of  which  he  is  not  master.1  Finally,  he  turned  to  the  artisans  ; 
they  were  less  disappointing  than  "  statesmen  "  and  poets,  since 
it  turned  out  that  they  did  know  something.  They  knew  their 
own  trades.  Unfortunately  they  fancied  that  because  they  knew 
their  trades,  they  must  equally  be  competent  to  judge  of  the  greatest 
questions  (e.g.,  no  doubt,  as  Burnet  has  said,  how  to  govern  an 
empire).*  It  seemed  then  as  though  the  Delphic  god  was  not 
lying  after  all ;  he  was  merely  speaking  in  riddles,  the  notorious 
trick  of  his  trade.  He  meant  to  say  that  human  wisdom  is  such  a 
sorry  affair  that  the  wisest  man  is  one  who,  like  Socrates,  knows 
that  he  does  not  know  anything  to  boast  of  (Apol.  2oa-2$b). 

Naturally  enough,  the  victims  of  this  experiment  did  not  take 
it  any  too  kindly,  and  the  matter  was  made  worse  by  the  young 
folk,  sons  of  wealthy  and  leisured  citizens,  who  accompanied 
Socrates,  "  without  any  pressing  on  his  part  "  (avrd/xaroi,  230 ;  i.e., 
they  were  not  in  any  sense  "  pupils  "),  for  the  sport  to  be  got  out 
of  the  thing,  and  even  tried  to  practise  the  trick  themselves.  Their 
victims,  of  course,  complain  that  Socrates  is  the  ruin  of  the  young 
people.  When  they  are  asked  how  he  ruins  them,  shame  prevents 
the  reply,  "  By  exposing  the  ignorance  of  us  older  men,'1  and  so 
they  fall  back  on  the  old  charges  against  scientific  men  in  general, 
the  accusation  of  irreligion  and  "  making  the  weaker  case  the 
stronger."  The  present  prosecutors  are  the  mere  mouthpieces 
of  this  idle  talk  (230-246). 

(b)  Direct  Reply  to  Meletus. — Socrates  now  turns  to  the  charges 
actually  brought  against  him  by  the  prosecution,  with  which  he 
deals  very  curtly.  The  humour  of  the  situation  is  that  the  prose- 
cutor cannot  venture  to  say  what  he  means  by  either  of  his  charges 
without  betraying  the  fact  that,  owing  to  the  "  amnesty,"  the 
matters  complained  of  are  outside  the  competency  of  the  court. 
What  he  really  means  by  the  "  corruption  of  the  young  "  is  the 
supposed  influence  of  Socrates  on  Alcibiades,  Critias,  Charmides, 
and  others  who  have  been  false  to  the  democracy ;  the  charge  of 
irreligion  is  connected  with  the  scandals  of  the  year  415.  But  to 
admit  this  would  be  to  invite  the  court  to  dismiss  the  case.  Hence, 
when  Meletus  is  pressed  to  explain  what  he  means,  he  has  to  take 
refuge  in  puerile  nonsense.  The  judges  could  understand  the 
situation  and,  no  doubt,  enjoy  it  amazingly ;  many  modern  com- 
mentators have  been  badly  perplexed  by  the  "  sophistical "  char- 
acter of  Socrates'  reasoning  simply  because  they  have  not  set  them- 

1  As  Burnet  says,  loc.  cit.t  Euripides  would  be  about  the  first  of  the  "  trage- 
dians "  to  whom  Socrates  would  apply  his  test.  We  have  seen  already  that 
Socrates  held  the  "  modern  "  view  of  poetry  as  dependent  on  "  inspiration." 

1  Compare  Mr.  Chesterton's  mot  about  "  the  authority  which  obviously 
attaches  to  the  views  of  an  electrical  engineer  "  on  the  existence  of  God  or  the 
immortality  of  the  soul. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  168 

selves  to  realize  the  difficulty  of  Meletus'  position.  They  have 
missed  the  irony  of  Socrates'  pretence  that  a  prosecutor  who  is 
fanatically  in  earnest  is  merely  playing  a  stupid  practical  joke. 

Meletus  professes  to  have  detected  Socrates  depraving  the 
young.  If  he  has,  clearly  he  must  be  able  to  say  who  improve 
them.  Under  pressure,  Meletus  has  to  fall  back  on  the  view  that 
any  good  Athenian  improves  the  young  by  his  association  with 
them  (because  his  influence  is  exerted  in  favour  of  the  moral  tradi- 
tion of  society,  exactly  as  we  have  found  Anytus  maintaining  in  the 
Meno,  and  shall  find  Protagoras  explaining  more  at  length  in  the 
dialogue  called  after  him).  Socrates  stands  alone  in  making  young 
people  worse  by  his  influence  on  them  (250).  Now  this  is  contrary 
to  all  analogy  ;  if  you  consider  the  case  of  horses  or  other  domestic 
animals,  you  find  that  they  are  improved  by  only  a  few,  the  pro- 
fessionals who  understand  the  art  of  training  them  ;  they  are 
spoiled  when  entrusted  to  anyone  else.  Moreover,  a  man  must 
be  very  dull  not  to  see  that  he  would  be  acting  very  much  against 
his  own  good  by  depraving  the  very  persons  among  whom  he  has 
to  live.  No  one  would  do  such  a  thing  on  purpose  (the  Socratic 
doctrine  that  "  no  one  does  evil  voluntarily  ").  If  a  man  makes  so 
grave  an  error  involuntarily,  the  proper  course  is  not  to  prosecute 
him  but  to  open  his  eyes  to  his  mistake.  But  Meletus,  by  prose- 
cuting Socrates,  makes  it  clear  that  he  thinks  him  capable  of  the 
absurdity  of  purposely  trying  to  deprave  the  very  persons  whose 
depravity  would  expose  him  to  risk  of  harm  at  their  hands  (250-266). 

Again,  in  what  particular  way  does  Socrates  "  deprave  "  his 
young  friends  ?  No  open  allusion  to  the  facts  really  meant  being 
permissible,  Meletus  has  to  fall  back  on  the  reply  that  the  de- 
pravation consists  in  incitement  to  the  religious  offence  alleged  in 
the  indictment.  Socrates  sets  the  example  of  irreligion  (266).  This 
brings  us  to  the  consideration  of  this  accusation  on  its  own  account. 
Socrates  professes  to  be  quite  unable  to  understand  what  can  be 
meant  by  the  statement  that  he  "  does  not  worship  the  gods  of 
the  city  but  practises  a  strange  religion.1  If  Meletus  means  any- 

1  As  to  this  accusation,  see  Burnet,  he.  cit.  It  is  quite  certain  on  linguistic 
grounds  that  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  that  Socrates  01)  po/tffec  rods  fleofo  oDs  17 
7r6Xis  yo/ilfei  is  that  he  does  not  conform  to  the  cultus,  does  not  "  worship  " 
the  official  gods,  not  that  "  he  does  not  believe  in  their  existence. 'V  Aristoph- 
anes is  punning  on  this  sense  of  the  word  voidfav  when  he  makes  Socrates 
explain  to  Strepsiades  that  fyu?  6eol  voiu<rfi  ofl/c  ftm  ("the  gods  are  not  legal 
tender  here  ").  It  is  certain  also  that  in  the  additional  clause  £re/>a  5£  5at/*6i>ta 
jccupd,  8aip6vta  is  adjective,  not  substantive,  and  that  the  sense  is  therefore, 
"  but  practises  certain  other  unfamiliar  religious  observances."  The  meaning 
of  this  is  made  clearer  by  comparison  with  the  Clouds,  where  Socrates  is 
represented  as  combining  the  functions  of  a  scientific  man  with  those  of 
president  of  a  conventicle  of  ascetics.  It  was  true  that  the  Ionian  men  of 
science  used  the  word  0e6s  in  a  wholly  non-religious  way  for  whatever  they 
took  to  be  the  primary  body  (this  is  why  in  the  Clouds  Socrates  swears  by 
Respiration  and  Air,  and  prays  to  "  the  Clouds  "),  and  also  that  Socrates  was 
an  associate  of  Orphic  and  Pythagorean  ascetics,  like  Telauges  in  the  dialogue 
of  Aeschines  called  by  that  name,  who  had  a  religion  of  their  own  not 
officially  recognized  by  the  State.  So  far  there  is  an  intelligible  basis  for  the 


164         PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

thing,  he  must  presumably  mean  that  Socrates  is  an  atheist. 
(Meletus  does  not  really  mean  this,  and  Socrates  knows  that  he 
does  not  mean  it.  But  he  cannot  explain  what  he  really  means 
without  risking  the  collapse  of  his  case,  and  Socrates  is  fully  entitled 
to  embarrass  him  for  his  own  and  the  court's  amusement.  He 
despises  the  charge  too  much  to  take  it  seriously.)  If  this  is  what 
he  means,  and  he  dares  not  explain  that  it  is  not,  his  charge  refutes 
itself.  A  man  cannot  be  both  an  atheist  and  the  votary  of  a 
"  strange  religion  "  ;  to  make  an  accusation  of  this  kind  is  simply 
wasting  the  time  of  the  court  1  (260-270). 

(c)  The  Vindication  of  Socrates'  Life  and  Conduct  (280-35^.  — 
We  come  at  last  to  Socrates'  serious  defence  of  his  character,  not 
against  the  frivolous  charges  on  which  he  is  being  ostensibly  tried 
but  against  grave  misconceptions  of  old  standing.  He  is  well 
aware  that  his  life  is  at  stake,  a  thing  which  has  happened  to  many 
a  good  man  in  the  past  and  will  happen  again.  But  there  is  nothing 
dishonourable  in  such  a  situation.  A  man's  part  is  to  stand  loyally, 
in  the  face  of  all  risks,  to  the  part  which  he  has  judged  to  be  the  best 
for  himself,  or  to  which  his  commander  has  ordered  him.  Socrates 
himself  has  acted  on  this  principle  in  his  military  career,  when  his 
superior  officers  have  commanded  him  to  face  dangers.  Still 
more  is  it  his  duty  to  be  loyal  to  the  command  of  God  which,  as  he 
is  persuaded,  has  enjoined  him  to  "  spend  his  life  in  devotion  to 
wisdom  and  in  examining  himself  and  his  fellows  "  (280).  The 
real  atheism  would  be  to  disobey  the  divine  command.  Dis- 
obedience would  be  a  known  evil,  but  the  death  with  which  he  is 
threatened  if  he  does  not  disobey  may,  for  all  he  knows,  be  the 
greatest  of  good.  Hence  if  he  were  offered  acquittal  on  the  condi- 
tion of  abandoning  "  philosophy,"  with  certain  death  as  the  alter- 
native, he  would  refuse  acquittal.  For  God  is  more  to  be  obeyed 
than  any  human  law-court.  For  that  reason,  so  long  as  life  is 
in  him,  Socrates  will  never  cease  urging  on  every  man  the  duty  of 
"  care  for  wisdom  and  truth  and  the  good  of  his  soul  "  and  the 
relative  unimportance  of  care  for  health  or  fortune.  That  is  God's 
commission  to  him,  and  if  Athens  only  knew  it,  his  "  service  " 
ia)  2  of  God  is  the  greatest  'blessing  that  could  befall  the 


reference  to  the  Saiju.6via  KO.IV&.  But  it  is  still  unexplained  what  ground  ther$  is 
for  saying  that  Socrates  does  not  worship  the  gods  of  the  city,  and  it  is  this  part 
of  the  charge  on  which  Socrates  fastens.  It  seems  to  me  that  Burnet  is  right 
in  supposing  that  what  is  really  meant  is  the  old  affair  of  the  "  profanation 
of  the  mysteries."  The  "  psephismof  Diopithes  "  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
matter.  All  "  psephisms  "  before  the  year  of  Euclides  were  invalidated 
(Andocides  i.  86). 

1  Formally,  the  argument  is  rather  more  elaborate.  A  man  who  concerns 
himself  with  rd  dcu/iopta  (the  **  supernatural,"  as  we  might  say)  must  believe 
that  there  are  Salpove*  ("  supernatural  beings  ")  ;  these  Sal/Movis  are  either 
themselves  '*  gods  "  or  are  the  "  offspring  of  gods,"  and  in  either  case,  a  man 
who  believes  in  them  cannot  be  an  atheist.  This  is  pure  persiflage,  but  it 
is  as  good  as  Meletus  and  his  backer  Anytus  deserve. 

*  Compare  what  has  been  already  said  in  connexion  with  the  Euthyphro 
about  the  conception  of  religion  as  serving  God  in  the  production  of  a  irdyic  aXw 
Socrates  pleads  that  his  whole  life  has  been  dedicated  to  this  work. 


SOCftATlC  DIALOGUES  165 

whole  community  (30*2).  If  he  "  corrupts  the  young  "  at  all,  it 
must  be  by  preaching  to  them  his  unchanging  conviction  that 
"it  is  not  wealth  which  makes  worth  (ager*?),  but  worth  makes 
wealth  and  all  else  good."  His  present  speech  is  not  made  to 
save  his  own  life — Anytus  and  Meletus  may  procure  his  death,  but 
the  really  dreadful  thing  is  not  to  lose  your  life  but  to  take  a  life 
wrongfully  (the  thesis  of  the  Gorgias) — he  would  save  his  fellow- 
citizens  from  misusing  the  gift  God  has  bestowed  on  them,  and  is 
not  likely  to  give  them  a  second  time,  a  gadfly  whose  buzzing 
prevents  that  high-bred  but  somnolent  animal  "the  People  "  from 
drowsy  sloth  (300-310). 

It  may  be  asked  why  a  man  with  such  a  mission  has  never 
attempted  to  act  as  a  public  monitor  and  adviser.1  Well,  the  fact 
is  that  the  "  mysterious  something  "  which  has  warned  Socrates 
ali  his  life  against  "  unlucky  "  proceedings  has  always  checked  any 
attempt  to  take  part  in  public  life.  Et  pour  cause  :  a  democracy 
(w\rj6os)  soon  puts  an  end  to  anyone  who  defies  its  humours  in  the 
cause  of  right.  Hence  it  was  a  condition  of  the  exercise  of  the 
mission  that  it  should  be  exercised  on  individuals,  not  on  the  multi- 
tude (310-320).  In  fact,  Socrates  has  only  twice  been  called  upon 
by  his  mission  to  come  into  conflict  with  authority,  once  when  he 
withstood  the  popular  sentiment  by  refusing  to  be  accessory  to  the 
unconstitutional  steps  taken  against  the  generals  after  Arginusae, 
and  once,  more  recently,  when  he  disregarded  the  illegal  command 
of  the  "  Thirty  "  to  arrest  Leon.  In  both  cases  he  ran  a  great 
personal  risk,  and  in  the  second,  might  well  have  lost  his  life  but  for 
the  downfall  of  the  "  Thirty  "  (yza-e).  As  for  the  charge  of  de- 
moralizing his  "pupils,"  he  has  never  had  any  "pupils/1  though 
he  has  never  refused  to  communicate  his  convictions  freely  to  every 
one  (33^-6)  as  his  mission  required  of  him.2  He  is  ready  to  summon 
the  parents  and  elder  brothers  of  the  young  men  who  have  associated 
with  him  as  witnesses  that  none  of  them  have  been  made  worse 
by  his  companionship  (33^-34^). 

The  defence  is  now,  in  substance,  concluded,  and  we  have 
reached  the  point  at  which  it  was  customary  to  make  an  appeal 

1  The  implication  is  that  a  man  of  the  remarkable  gifts  of  Socrates,  who 
carefully  abstains  from  putting  them  openly  at  the  service  of  the  community, 
though  he  is  believed  to  have  employed  them  freely  for  the  service  of  men 
like  Alcibiades,  must  be  a  formidable  anti-democratic  conspirator. 

*  Note  that  in  denying  that  he  ever  had  /xaflijra/,  Socrates  is  still  referring 
to  the  suspicion  connected  with  his  relations  with  prominent  persons  who 
ire  now  dead.  From  Isocrates  xi.  3,  we  learn  that  the  pamphleteer  Polycrates 
made  it  a  principal  charge  that  Alcibiades  had  been  Socrates*  pupil,  just  as 
Aeschines  the  orator  (i.  173)  says  the  same  thing  about  Critias.  Isocrates 
relates  that  Alcibiades  had  never  been  "  educated  "  by  Socrates,  thus  agreeing 
with  Plato  and  Xenophon  (Mem.  i.  2,  12  ff.).  Socrates  is  too  scrupulously 
observant  of  the  "  amnesty  "  to  explain  himself,  but  it  is  Alcibiades  and 
Critias,  not  younger  unknown  men  like  Plato  and  Aeschines  of  Sphettus, 
whom  he  means  by  his  supposed  "  disciples."  The  reference  to  the  "  divine 
sign  "  at  3ic  is  playful,  like  other  allusions  of  the  kind  in  Plato.  The  real 
reason  why  Socrates  took  no  part  in  active  politics  is  the  one  he  goes  on  to 
give,  that  he  knew  the  hopelessness  of  such  an  attempt 


166          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

to  the  clemency  of  the  court  for  the  sake  of  one's  family  and 
connexions.  Socrates  declines  to  follow  the  usual  course,  not 
because  he  has  not  dependents,  friends,  and  relatives  to  whom 
he  is  bound  by  natural  ties,  but  because  the  procedure  would 
be  unworthy  of  his  character  and  an  attempt  to  seduce  the 
court  from  its  duty.  That  would  be  a  real  "  impiety.11  The 
issue  must  now  be  left  in  the  hands  of  God  and  the  judges 


The  object  of  the  pages  which  follow  (360-386)  is  to  explain  why 
Socrates  did  not,  after  conviction,  secure  his  life  by  proposing  a 
moderate  fine  as  an  alternative  penalty,  as  he  clearly  could  have 
done.    This  must  have  been  felt  as  a  real  difficulty  by  common- 
place persons  even   among  the  philosopher's  friends,  as  we  see 
from  the  absurd  explanation   given   by  Xenophon   (Apol.   1-8) 
that  Socrates  deliberately  provoked  his  own  execution  in  order  to 
escape  the  infirmities  of  old  age.     It  has  to  be  explained  that  his 
real  motive  was  a  worthy  one.    To  propose  any  penalty  whatever 
would  amount  to  admitting  guilt,  and  Socrates  has  already  told 
the  court  that  he  regards  himself  as  a  minister  of  God  for  good  to 
his  countrymen.    Hence  he  cannot  in  consistency  propose  any 
treatment  for  himself  but  that  of  a  distinguished  public  benefactor, 
a  place  at  the  public  table  (o-tV^o-ts  cV  Trpvrai/ei'w).    It  should  be  noted 
that,  strictly  speaking,  this  is  the  TWO-IS  which  Socrates  offers  as  an 
alternative  to  the  death-penalty  demanded  by  the  accusers.    The 
whimsical  mood  has  returned  on  him  after  the  intense  earnestness 
of  the  defence  of  his  life  and  character.    He  urges  that  as  he  regards 
himself  as  a  benefactor  he  can  only  propose  the  treatment  of  a 
benefactor  for  himself.    The  subsequent  offer  to  pay  the  trifling 
sum  of  a  mina  (only  raised  to  one  of  thirty  minae  at  the  urgent 
instance  of  friends)  is  made  with  the  full  certainty  that  the  court, 
which  has  just  heard  Socrates'  real  opinion  of  his  deserts,  will 
reject  it.     The  real  issue  is  not  whether  a  prophet  of  righteousness 
is  a  major  or  a  minor  offender,  but  whether  he  is.  a  capital  traitor 
or  the  one  true  "  patriot,"  and  Socrates  is  determined  that  the  court 
shall  not  shirk  that  issue,  as  it  would  like  to  do.     (As  to  the  sum  of 
thirty  minae  which  Socrates'  friends  offer  to  pay  for  him,  one  should 
note  (a)  that  in  Epistle  xiii.  Plato,  writing  a  generation  later,  mentions 
it  to  Dionysius  II  as  a  good  dowry  for  anyone  but  a  very  rich  man 
to  give  his  daughter  and  that  this  estimate  is  borne  out  by  a  careful 
examination  of  all  the  references  to  dowries  in  the  fourth-century 
orators,  (b)  that,  though  Plato  and  Apollodorus  are  joined  with 
Crito  as  "  security,"  the  main  burden  of  payment  would,  no  doubt, 
fall  on  the  wealthy  Crito.    The  family  of  Plato  are  not  likely  to 
have  been  particularly  well  off  just  after  the  failure  of  the  revolu- 
tion in  which  its  most  prominent  members  had  taken  the  losing 
side.1    As  we  see  from  the  speeches  of  Lysias  belonging  to  this 

1  Cf.  what  Xenophon  makes  Charmides  say  about  his  own  finances  at 
Symp.  29  fi.,  where  there  seems  to  be  an  (anachronistic)  allusion  to  the  effects 
of  the  "  Decelean  "  war. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  let 

period,  the  downfall  of  Athens  in  404  had  been  followed  by  a  wide- 
spread commercial  crisis.  Socrates'  friends  are  making  what,  in 
the  circumstances,  must  have  been  a  very  strenuous  effort  to  save 
him.  This  is  why  they  "  ask  for  time  "  instead  of  offering  to  pay 
money  down.1) 

In  the  concluding  remarks  of  the  speech  made  after  the  voting 
on  the  penalty,  note  in  the  first  place  how  clearly  it  is  recognized 
that  Socrates  has  forced  the  issue,  and  that  he  could  have  secured 
his  acquittal  by  simply  "  asking  for  quarter"  (38^-396).  This  is, 
of  course,  true  of  every  typical  martyr.  Martyrdom  is  dying  when 
you  could  escape  if  you  would  compromise  a  little  with  your  con- 
science ;  in  this  sense  every  martyr  forces  the  issue.  Anytus  would 
rather  not  have  killed  Socrates,  just  as  the  average  Roman  pro- 
consul would  rather  not  have  condemned  Christians,  or  as  Bonner 
(as  appears  even  from  the  partial  accounts  of  his  enemies)  would 
much  rather  not  have  sent  Protestants  to  the  stake.  But  it  is  not 
the  business  of  the  martyr  to  make  things  easy  for  the  forcer  of 
consciences. 

In  the  impressive  words  of  encouragement  directed  to  his 
supporters  (39^-410),  the  important  thing  to  note  is  that,  contrary 
to  the  absurd  opinion  of  many  nineteenth-century  writers,  Socrates 
makes  his  own  belief  in  a  blessed  life  to  come  for  the  good  perfectly 
plain.  The  best  proof  of  this  is  that  to  which  Burnet  has  appealed, 
comparison  of  his  language  with  the  brief  and  hesitating  phrases 
in  which  the  Attic  orators  are  accustomed  to  allude  to  the  state  of 
the  departed.  In  this  respect  the  Apology  agrees  completely  with 
the  Phaedo,  when  we  allow  for  the  fact  that  in  the  former  Socrates 
is  speaking  to  a  large  audience,  most  of  whom  would  not  share  his 
personal  faith.  No  one  but  a  convinced  believer  would  have  said 
half  what  he  is  made  to  say  about  his  "  hope  "  (not  to  mention 
that  the  "  divinity  "  of  the  soul  is  at  bottom  the  reason  why  the 
"  tendance  "  of  it  is  so  much  more  important  than  that  of  the  body, 
and,  as  Rohde  long  ago  observed,  to  the  Greek  mind  "  immortality  " 
and  "divinity"  are  equivalents).  The  specific  allusions  of  410. 
to  Hesiod,  Musaeus,  Orpheus  and  the  Orphic  judges  of  the  dead, 
also  make  it  clear  that  Socrates'  convictions  are  not  meant  as 
simply  inferences  from  "  natural  theology  "  ;  we  have  to  see  in 
them  the  influence  of  the  Orphic  religion,  though  the  Euthyphro 
and  the  second  book  of  the  Republic  show  that  Socrates  thought 
very  poorly  of  the  ordinary  run  of  "  professing  "  Orphics  in  his 
own  time. 

3.  Crito. — The  Euthyphro  and  Apology  between  them  have  made 
us  understand  what  Socrates  meant  by  religion,  and  why  his  sense 
of  duty  to  God  forbade  him  either  to  evade  prosecution  or  to  pur- 
chase his  life  by  any  concessions.  There  is  still  one  question 
connected  with  his  death  to  which  the  answer  remains  to  be  given. 
Owing  to  unexpected  circumstances,  a  month  elapsed  between 

1  This  is  implied  in  the  mention  of  "  security  "  (ai/rol  5'  tyyva<r0at,  386). 
Socrates  could  clearly  have  paid  down  the  "  one  mina  "  of  which  be  had  spoken. 


168          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

condemnation  and  execution.  His  friends  took  advantage  of  this 
delay  to  provide  means  of  escape ;  Socrates  might  still  have  avoided 
drinking  the  hemlock  if  he  would  have  walked  out  of  his  prison,  but 
he  refused.  Why  was  this  ?  No  one  would  have  thought  the 
worse  of  him,  and  there  would  have  been  no  question  of  a  compro- 
mise with  the  leaders  of  the  democracy.  Persons  who  held  with 
Socrates  himself  that  the  whole  proceedings  against  him  had  been 
frivolous,  and  that  he  had  been  condemned  for  an  offence  which  he 
had  not  committed,  by  a  court  which  had  no  competence,  might 
fairly  be  puzzled  to  know  why  he  thought  it  a  duty  to  refuse  the 
means  of  escape.  This  is  the  point  to  be  cleared  up  in  the 
Crito.  The  explanation  depends  on  an  important  distinction  which 
the  ordinary  man  to  this  day  finds  it  hard  to  draw.  The 
condemnation  was  in  point  of  fact,  as  Socrates  himself  insisted, 
iniquitous.  He  was  quite  innocent  of  any  real  impiety.  But  it 
was  strictly  legal,  as  it  had  been  pronounced  by  a  legitimate  court 
after  a  trial  conducted  in  accord  with  all  the  forms  of  law.  And  it 
is  the  duty  of  a  good  citizen  to  submit  to  a  legal  verdict,  even  when 
it  is  materially  false.  By  standing  a  trial  at  all,  a  man  "  puts 
himself  on  his  country,1'  and  he  is  not  entitled  to  disregard  the 
decision  to  which  he  submits  himself,  even  if  his  country  makes  a 
mistake.  The  "  country  "  is  entitled  to  expect  that  the  legally 
pronounced  sentence  of  a  legitimate  court  shall  be  carried  into  effect ; 
there  would  be  an  end  of  all  "  law  and  order  "  if  a  private  man  were 
at  liberty  to  disregard  the  judgment  of  the  courts  whenever  he 
personally  believed  it  to  be  contrary  to  fact. 

Even  so,  there  is  a  further  point  to  be  considered.  We  have 
seen  that,  strictly  speaking,  the  court  was  not  competent  to  take 
account  of  the  offences  which  the  prosecutors  really  had  in  mind, 
and  that  Socrates  shows  himself  aware  of  this  in  the  Apology  when 
he  cross-examines  Meletus.  It  might,  then,  be  urged  that  if  Socrates 
had  escaped  he  would  not  have  been  disregarding  the  decision  of  a 
competent  court ;  is  it  wrong  to  disrespect  the  sentence  of  an  in- 
competent  one  ?  Two  things  need  to  be  remembered :  (a)  the 
court  thought  itself  competent,  and  Athenian  law  made  no  provision 
for  the  quashing  of  its  findings  as  ultra  vires  ;  (b)  this  being  so, 
for  an  individual  man  who  had  all  his  life  set  the  example  of  strict 
and  complete  compliance  with  the  vopoi  of  the  city  to  follow  his 
private  judgment  on  the  question  of  the  competency  of  the  court 
would  have  been  to  stultify  the  professions  of  a  lifetime.  Plato 
himself,  in  the  same  situation,  Adam  says,  would  probably  have 
chosen  to  escape.  This  may  be,  but  the  second  consideration  just 
mentioned  would  not  have  applied  to  Plato  in  399.  A  young  man 
of  under  thirty,  whose  most  important  relatives  had  just  four  years 
before  lost  their  lives  in  the  cause  of  "  oligarchy/1  could  not  be 
considered  as  having  thrown  in  his  lot  definitely  with  the  demo- 
cracy and  its  vo/xot ;  his  position  would  have  been  really  different 
from  that  of  an  old  man  of  the  Periclean  age.  The  argument,  used 
by  Socrates,  that  to  have  neglected  the  opportunity  to  settle  else- 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  169 

where  is  equivalent  to  a  compact  to  live  by  the  fo'/zos  of  the  city, 
would  have  been  inapplicable  to  a  younger  man  who,  in  fact,  had 
never  had  the  option  in  question.  Thus,  in  the  last  resort,  there 
is  a  "  subjective  "  and  personal  element  in  the  considerations 
which  lead  Socrates  to  feel  that  he  would  be  belying  his  whole  past 
by  escaping.  Plato's  object  is  not  to  lay  down  a  categorical  im- 
perative for  the  guidance  of  all  the  wrongfully  condemned,  but  to 
throw  light  on  the  motives  of  an  individual  great  man.  (Whether 
Plato  would  himself  have  chosen  to  escape,  if  he  had  been  placed  in 
the  same  situation  in  his  own  seventieth  year,  is  another  question. 
Much  would  depend  on  his  view  as  to  the  work  which  might  re- 
main to  him  to  do  elsewhere.) 

The  dramatic  mise-en-scene  is  necessarily  exceedingly  simple. 
The  conversation  is  tete-d-tete  between  Socrates  in  his  apartment  in 
the  prison  of  the  Eleven  and  Crito,  unless  we  count  the  "  Laws  " 
into  whose  mouths  the  last  word  of  the  argument  is  put  as  an 
unseen  third  party  to  the  talk.  The  time  is  in  the  "  small  hours  " 
before  dawn,  while  it  is  still  dark.  Crito,  who  brings  the  news  that 
the  "  sacred  vessel "  on  whose  return  Socrates  will  have  to  die 
has  just  been  sighted  off  Sunium,  has  been  some  time  watching 
Socrates  as  he  sleeps,  when  Socrates  wakes  from  a  strange  dream 
and  the  conversation  ensues.  Crito  fears  that  Socrates,  whose 
sentence  will  be  executed  the  day  after  the  vessel  reaches  port, 
has  only  one  more  night  to  live  ;  Socrates,  on  the  strength  of  his 
dream,  expects,  as  turned  out  to  be  the  fact,  that  the  boat  will  not 
make  so  quick  a  voyage  and  that  his  death  will  be  deferred  another 
day.  (In  his  interpretation  he  evidently  takes  the  "  fair  and 
comely  woman  "  of  440  for  the  "  fetch  "  of  the  approaching  vessel, 
and  her  "  white  garments  "  for  its  gay  white  sails.)  This  brief 
introduction  leads  straight  to  the  conversation  in  which  Crito  puts 
the  case  for  escape,  to  which  Socrates  replies  point  for  point. 
(a)  The  friends  of  Socrates  will  suffer  in  reputation  if  he  persists 
in  dying.  It  will  be  supposed  that  they  were  too  mean  to  find 
the  money  necessary  for  corrupting  his  jailers.  The  answer  is  that 
"  decent  folk  "  will  know  better  than  to  think  anything  of  the  sort, 
and  what  the  "  many  "  think  does  not  matter  (44^).  (b)  Un- 
fortunately it  does  matter  what  the  "  many  "  think.  The  power 
of  popular  prejudice  is  shown  only  too  plainly  by  the  present  posi- 
tion of  Socrates  himself.  Answer :  the  "  many  "  are  powerless 
to  do  much  in  the  way  of  either  good  or  ill,  for  they  can  neither 
make  a  man  wise  nor  make  him  a  fool ;  hence  it  matters  very  little 
what  they  do  to  him  (44^).  (c)  Perhaps  Socrates  is  really  thinking 
of  the  interests  of  his  friends,  who  will  be  exposed  to  "  blackmailers  " 
(<rvKo<t>dvTai) l  if  he  breaks  prison,  and  be  forced  to  pay  these  persons 
to  hold  their  tongues.  He  need  not  consider  that  point ;  his 
friends  are  in  duty  bound  to  take  the  risk  and,  besides,  these  worthies 


against  the  "  public.*' 


170          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

are  not  very  expensive  to  satisfy.  If  Socrates  has  a  delicacy  about 
exposing  Crito  to  the  risk,  his  "foreign"  friends,  Simmias,  Cebet>, 
and  others,  are  ready  to  open  their  purses  (450-6)  -1  He  need  have 
no  difficulty  in  finding  an  abode  where  he  will  be  made  welcome. 
Crito  himself  has  relations  with  powerful  men  in  Thessaly  who 
would  honour  his  friend  and  act  as  his  protectors  (45^)  (d)  Besides, 
it  is  not  even  morally  right  that  Socrates  should  throw  away  his 
life.  That  would  be  gratifying  the  very  men  who  have  prosecuted 
him.  Also  it  would  be  deserting  his  family,  and  an  honourable 
man  has  no  right  to  disregard  his  obligations  to  his  children.  Thus 
refusal  to  escape  will  look  like  a  display  of  unmanly  cowardice  in 
both  Socrates  and  his  friends  (450-460). 

Socrates  begins  his  formal  reply  by  saying  that  all  through  life 
it  has  been  his  principle  to  act  on  his  deliberate  judgment  of  good. 
He  cannot  feel  that  the  judgments  he  expressed  in  his  defence 
before  the  court  are  in  any  way  affected  by  the  result  of  the  trial. 
If  he  is  to  take  Crito's  advice,  he  must  first  be  convinced  that  there 
is  something  unsound  in  these  principles  ;  it  is  useless  to  work  on 
his  imagination  by  setting  up  bugbears.  The  strength  of  Crito's 
case  all  through  has  lain  in  the  appeal  to  "  what  will  be  thought 
of  us."  Now  formerly  we  both  held  that  it  is  not  every  opinion 
nor  the  opinions  of  every  man  which  matter.  Socrates  is  still  of 
the  same  mind  about  this,  and  so,  as  he  has  to  confess,  is  Crito. 
We  should  attach  weight  to  the  opinion  of  those  who  know  (the 
<t>p6vifjioi),  and  disregard  the  opinion  of  those  who  do  not.  For 
example,  in  the  matter  of  bodily  regimen  the  physician  and  the 
trainer  are  the  experts  who  know,  and  their  approval  or  disapproval 
ought  to  count,  whereas  a  man  who  followed  by  preference  the 
approvals  and  disapprovals  of  the  "  many,"  who  are  laymen  in 
such  matters,  would  certainly  suffer  for  it  in  bodily  health.  The 
same  principle  applies  to  matters  of  right  and  wrong,  good  and  bad, 
such  as  the  question  we  are  now  considering,  whether  it  will  be 
right  or  good  for  Socrates  to  break  prison.  We  have  not  to  take 
into  account  the  opinions  of  the  "  many,"  but  those  of  the  one 
expert,  if  there  is  such  a  man,  by  neglecting  whose  advice  we  shall 
injure  "  that  which  is  made  better  by  right  but  depraved  by  wrong." 
(That  is,  the  soul  ;  the  argument  is  from  the  standing  analogy 
between  health  in  the  body  and  moral  goodness  in  the  soul.) 

Further,  we  agree  that  if  a  man  has  ruined  his  physical  con- 
stitution by  following  the  opinions  of  the  "  many  "  and  disre- 
garding those  of  the  medical  expert,  life  with  a  ruined  physique 


1  The  point  is  that  "  aliens  "  would  run  no  risks  from  the  o 
because  they  could  get  out  of  Attic  territory  in  a  few  hours.  The  purpose  for 
which  Simmias  is  said  to  have  brought  money  at  456  4  is  not  to  appease  the 
ffVKofdrrcu,  from  whom  a  Theban  could  suffer  no  trouble.  From  the  Phaedo, 
Simmias  appears  to  have  spent  the  month  between  the  trial  and  death  of 
Socrates  at  Athens,  but  this  need  not  exclude  a  journey  to  Thebes  to  procure 
money  to  pay  the  warders  who  were  to  connive  at  Socrates'  escape.  Hence, 
as  I  now  see,  I  was  wrong  in  my  Varia  Socratica  in  supposing  that  Meletus  is 
one  of  the  persons  meant  by  the  reference  to  blackmailers. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  171 

is  not  worth  preserving.  But  "  that  in  us,  whatever  it  is,  in  which 
wickedness  and  righteousness  have  their  seat  "  is  not  less  but  more 
precious  than  the  body.  (Much  less,  then,  is  life  worth  preserving 
if  this  —  that  is,  the  soul  —  is  vitiated.)  Crito  has  therefore  raised  a 
wrong  question.  We  ought  to  ask  not  what  '*  the  many  "  will 
think  of  Socrates1  behaviour  or  that  of  his  friends,  but  what  will 
be  thought  by  the  man  who  "  understands  "  right  and  wrong. 
True,  the  "  many  "  can  put  you  to  death  if  you  disagree  with  them  ; 
but  then  another  principle  which  both  Socrates  and  Crito  hold 
as  strongly  since  the  recent  trial  as  before  it  is  that  the  all-important 
thing  is  not  to  live  but  to  live  a  good  life,  and  that  living  a  good  life 
means  the  same  thing  as  living  aright  (&Kcua>s).  The  real  question 
to  be  answered  then  is,  "  Would  it  be  right  for  me  to  take  my  leave 
of  this  place  without  a  public  discharge  ?  "  All  the  other  considera- 
tions which  Crito  has  raised  are  irrelevant  (466-48^). 

Again,  we  both  still  retain  our  old  conviction  that  to  commit 
a  wrong  is,  in  all  conditions,  a  bad  thing  for  the  man  who  commits 
it  (the  thesis  of  the  Gorgias).  It  follows  that  we  must  hold,  con- 
trary to  the  opinion  of  the  "  many/'  that  a  man  must  never  repay 
wrong  by  retaliatory  wrong  (avTa8u<£v),  and  therefore  that  we 
must  never  repay  ill-treatment  by  ill-treatment  (avrtKaKovpytiv 
KCIKWS  TTuVxovTa).  In  a  word,  no  treatment  received  from  another 
ever  justifies  wronging  him  or  treating  him  ill,  though  this  is  a 
conviction  so  opposed  to  the  code  of  the  "  many/'  that  those  who 
accept  and  those  who  reject  it  cannot  even  discuss  a  problem  of 
practice  with  one  another  (OVK  CO-TI  KOIVJJ  ftovX^,  49^).  Socrates 
and  Crito  can  only  discuss  the  course  Socrates  is  to  adopt  because 
they  agree  about  this  initial  principle  (490-2). 

Next,  ought  a  man,  on  these  principles,  to  keep  his  word  when 
he  has  given  it  (assuming  that  what  he  has  promised  to  do  is  in  se 
morally  right),1  or  may  he  break-  it  ?  Of  course,  he  must  keep  it. 
Our  immediate  problem,  then,  reduces  to  this.  If  Socrates  leaves 
the  prison  without  a  public  discharge,  will  he,  or  will  he  not,  be 
wronging  the  very  party  whom  he  ought  to  be  most  careful  not  to 
wrong  ?  Will  he  be  keeping  a  right  and  lawful  pledge,  or  will  he  be 
violating  it  ?  Let  us  consider  what  the  Laws,  or  the  State,  might 
have  to  say  if  they  could  take  us  in  the  act  of  "  making  our  lucky  " 
(/xcXXovo-iv  d7ro8i8pao-K€iv).  This  appeal  to  the  personified  figure 
of  the  State  or  the  Laws  is,  as  Burnet  says,  in  principle  a  Platonic 
"  myth/'  Its  function  is  the  same  as  that  played  in  other  dialogues 
by  the  vision  of  the  Judgment  to  come.  That  is,  it  does  not  carry 
the  argument  further,  but  brings  it  home  powerfully  to  the  imagina- 
tion. Artistically  the  function  of  the  picture  is  to  evoke  a  mood  of 
ideal  feeling  adequate  to  the  elevation  of  the  ethical  demands  of 


6vTa,  490.  This  is  inserted  to  exclude  a  promise  to  do  what  is 
impermissum  in  se.  Socrates'  view  is  that  a  promise  to  do  what  is  in  itself 
illicit  is  null  and  void.  But  we  see  in  the  sequel  that  the  tacit  "  compact  " 
by  which  Socrates  is  pledged  to  the  rfaoi  or  writ  of  Athens  involves 
nothing  but  what  is  strictly  licitum. 


172          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Socraticism  on  the  conscience,  to  arouse  unconditional  "  reverence  " 
for  the  dignity  of  the  moral  law  as  that  which  demands  and  justifies 
the  philosopher's  martyrdom.  So  far,  and  no  further,  it  acts  as 
the  sight  of  the  Crucifix  does  on  a  Christian.  The  conception  of 
society  implied,  as  something  too  obvious  to  need  explanation,  is 
the  same  which  underlies  all  the  versions  of  the  doctrine  of  "  social 
contract,"  a  doctrine  naturally  familiar  to  the  members  of  a  society 
which  knew  from  its  own  experience  how  legislation  is  made.  But 
it  gives  us  the  fundamental  truth  of  the  theory  of  "  contract  "  un- 
contaminated  with  any  element  of  historical  error  about  the  first 
origins  of  "  society/'  The  thought  is  that  a  man  who  has  cast  in 
his  lot  with  the  community  by  accepting  its  "  social  system  "  all 
through  life  has  tacitly  bound  himself  to  support  the  organization 
on  which  the  social  order  depends,  and  cannot  in  honour  go  back 
from  his  pledge  for  the  sake  of  his  personal  convenience.  This  is 
what  is  really  meant  by  the  much-misrepresented  doctrine  of 
"  passive  obedience,"  and  it  is  interesting  to  remark  that  Socrates 
thus  combines  in  himself  the  "  nonconformist's "  reverence  for 
"  conscience  "  and  the  "  non-juror's  "  reverence  for  the  "  powers 
that  be."  He  is  the  one  absolutely  consistent  "  conscientious 
objector"  of  history,  because,  unlike  most  such  "  objectors,"  he 
respects  the  conscience  of  TO  KOWQV  as  well  as  his  own. 

The  Laws  might  complain  that  Socrates  would  by  an  Evasion 
be  breaking  his  own  "  compact,"  and  that  without  the  excuse  that 
the  compact  had  been  made  under  duress,  or  obtained  by  false 
representation  or  without  sufficient  time  for  consideration.1  He  has 
had  a  life  of  seventy  years  for  reflection  and  in  all  this  time  has 
never  attempted  to  adopt  a  new  domicile,  but  has  absented  himself 
less  than  almost  any  other  citizen  from  Athens.  Thus  he  cannot 
plead  any  of  the  recognized  excuses  for  regarding  his  assent  to  live 
under  the  laws  of  the  city  as  anything  but  free  and  deliberate. 
(Of  course  the  meaning  is  not  that  Socrates  could  have  been 
"  naturalized  "  in  some  other  community ;  but  he  might  have 
chosen  to  live  as  a  resident  alien  under  the  protection  of  another 
society,  or  as  a  colonist  at  e.g.  Amphipolis  or  Thurii.)  The  whole 
course  of  his  life  bears  silent  witness  that  he  has  accepted  the 
system  of  institutions  into  which  he  had  been  born,  and  it  is  an 
integral  part  of  the  system  that  an  Athenian  citizen  shall  respect 
the  decisions  of  the  duly  constituted  courts.  He  is  not  at 
liberty  to  reject  the  jurisdiction  because  in  his  own  opinion  the 
decision  of  a  court  does  him  a  material  wrong  (SQC).  To  run 
away  to  escape  the  execution  of  the  court's  sentence  would  be 
following  up  the  exalted  speeches  he  made  before  the  judges  by 
the  conduct  of  the  paltriest  of  eloping  slaves.  If  he  does  break 
his  "  compact,"  what  good  can  he  expect  to  accrue  to  his  connexions 
or  himself  ?  His  family  and  friends  will  certainly  run  the  risk  of 

1  Force  majeure,  fraudulent  misrepresentation,  insufficient  time  for  con- 
sideration, are  thus  recognized  as  the  three  conditions  which  might,  severally 
or  conjointly,  make  a  promise  void. 


SOCRATIC  DIALOGUES  178 

banishment  or  loss  of  property.  As  for  himself,  suppose  he  makes 
his  escape  to  a  neighbouring  city  such  as  Thebes  or  Megara,  which 
have  good  institutions,  and  where,  as  we  know,  he  would  find  warm 
friends,  he  must  be  looked  on  by  all  honest  citizens  as  an  enemy, 
who  has  defied  one  society  and  may  be  expected  to  do  the  same  by 
another,  and  thus  will  fairly  be  under  the  suspicion  of  being  a 
"  corrupt er  "  of  the  young  who  may  associate  with  him.  If,  to 
avoid  such  reproach,  he  takes  refuge  in  a  disorderly  and  lawless 
community,  what  kind  of  life  does  he  propose  to  lead  ?  For  very 
shame,  he  cannot  continue  his  professions  of  devotion  to  "  goodness 
and  law  "  with  his  own  conduct  staring  him  in  the  face.  Even  in 
so  lawless  a  society  as  that  of  Thessaly,  he  might  for  a  while  live 
under  the  protection  of  Crito's  connexions  there,  and  they  might 
find  the  story  of  his  successful  escape  from  prison  an  excellent  joke, 
but  he  must  expect  to  hear  the  painful  truth  about  his  behaviour 
as  soon  as  he  offends  anyone.  Even  if  he  escapes  that  disgrace 
by  making  himself  a  general  toady,  his  life  will  be  that  of  a 
"  trencherman  "  and  parasite,  and  what  will  become  of  all  his 
fine  professions  about  right  and  goodness  ?  As  for  the  final  appeal 
which  Crito  had  made  to  his  parental  affections,  what  good  will 
such  an  existence  do  to  his  children  ?  Does  he  propose  to  bring 
them  up  as  hangers-on  in  Thessaly  ?  If  they  are  to  grow  up  as 
free  men  and  citizens  at  Athens,  will  his  friends  neglect  them  more 
because  he  has  removed  to  the  other  world  than  they  would  if  he 
had  removed  to  Thessaly  ?  Besides,  the  plea  will  be  useless  when 
life  is  over  at  last  and  a  man  has  to  stand  before  the  judges  of  the 
dead.  If  Socrates  abides  execution  now,  he  will  have  a  good  defence 
before  that  tribunal.  He  will  appear  as  an  innocent  victim  of  the 
injustice  not  of  law,  but  of  individuals  who  have  abused  law  for 
his  destruction.1  If  he  does  not,  he  will  have  to  answer  for  having 
done  what  lay  in  him  to  shake  the  authority  of  law  itself,  and  must 
expect  to  have  the  law  itself  against  him  in  the  next  world  as  well 
as  in  this.  It  is  this  appeal  which  rings  in  the  ears  of  Socrates  and 
makes  him  deaf  to  the  voice  of  Crito,  nor  can  Crito  find  anything 
to  set  against  it.  We  must,  therefore,  be  content  to  follow  the 
path  along  which  God  is  leading  us  (500-540). 
See  further : 

BURNETT. — Euthyphro,  Apology,  Crito.     (Oxford,  1924.) 

RIDDELL. — Apology  of  Plato.     (Oxford,  1867.) 

BURNET. — Early  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  Chapter  IX.  180-192. 

RITTER,  C.—Platon,  i.  363-390. 

RITTER,  C.—Sokrates.     (Tubingen,   1931-) 

TAYLOR,  A.  E.— Socrates.     (London,  1932.) 

1  546.  This  is,  in  fact,  the  fundamental  distinction  on  which  Socrates 
founds  his  whole  argument.  When  a  man  is  legally  but  wrongly  convicted 
of  an  offence  he  has  not  committed,  the  wrong  is  inflicted  not  by  the  law,  but 
by  the  persons  who  have  misused  the  law.  Anytus,  not  the  law,  has  done 
Socrates  a  wrong.  But  the  prison-breaker  is  doing  what  he  can  to  make  the 
whole  social  system  ineffective.  His  conduct  is  a  direct  challenge  to  the 
authority  of  law  itself. 


CHAPTER    VIII 
THE  PHAEDO 

WE  are  now  to  consider  the  group  of  four  great  dialogues 
which  exhibit  Plato's  dramatic  art  at  its  ripest  perfection. 
It  may  fairly  be  presumed  that  they  all  belong  to  one  and 
the  same  period  of  his  development  as  a  writer,  a  view  borne  out 
by  a  cautious  and  sane  use  of  the  available  "  stylometric  "  evidence. 
Outwardly  they  have  all  the  same  form,  that  of  a  conversation 
supposed  to  have  taken  place  before  a  numerous  audience  and 
subsequently  described  either  by  Socrates  himself  (Protagoras, 
Republic),  or  by  one  of  the  original  auditors  (Phaedo,  Symposium). 
We  have  already  found  Plato  using  this  difficult  literary  form  for 
comparatively  short  dialogues  (e.g.  Charmides,  Euthydemus),  but  it 
is  a  more  arduous  task  to  keep  it  up  successfully  throughout  a  work 
of  considerable  compass  ;  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  dialogues  which 
there  is  other  reason  for  thinking  later  than  the  Republic,  it  is  only 
adopted  once  (in  the  Parmenides),  and  there  is  a  formal  explanation 
of  its  abandonment  in  the  Theaetetus.  This  is  good  reason  for 
thinking  that  Plato's  great  achievements  in  this  kind  belong  neither 
to  his  more  youthful  nor  to  his  later  period  of  literary  activity,  but 
to  his  prime  of  maturity  as  a  writer  (which  need  not,  of  course, 
coincide  with  his  ripest  maturity  as  a  thinker).  I  do  not  think  there 
is  any  satisfactory  method  of  dating  the  four  dialogues  themselves 
in  the  order  of  their  composition.  We  may  reasonably  presume 
that  the  Republic,  as  the  work  of  greatest  range  and  compass  among 
them,  must  have  taken  longest  to  write,  and  was  the  last  to  be 
completed.  It  also  contains  what  looks  like  a  concealed  reference 
to  the  Phaedo  (Rep.  6116  10),  though  the  fact  is  by  no  means 
certain.1  Now  there  is  one  consideration  which  perhaps  allows 
us  to  fix  an  approximate  date  in  Plato's  life  for  the  writing  of  the 
Republic.  In  Ep.  vii.  3266,  where  Plato  is  describing  the  state  of 
mind  in  which  he  paid  his  first  visit  to  Italy  and  Sicily,  he  says  that 
he  had  been  driven  to  state,  in  a  eulogy  of  genuine  philosophy 
(cVcuvwv  TTJV  opOrjv  <t>i\o<ro<t>(av) ,  that  humanity  will  never  escape 
its  sufferings  until  either  true  philosophers  occupy  political  office 

1  The  '•  other  arguments  "  (AXXoi  \6yoi)  for  immortality  referred  to  in 
passing  may  mean  those  which  Plato's  readers  would  know  from  the  Phaedo, 
but  they  may  equally  well  mean  those  which  readers  of  Socratic  literature 
would  know  to  be  current  among  Orphics  or  Pythagoreans  generally.  Thut 
the  words  cannot  be  pressed  as  an  argument  for  the  priority  of  the  Phaedo, 

«74 


THE  PHAEDO  175 

or  political  "  rulers,"  by  some  happy  providence,  turn  to  philo- 
sophy. It  seems  impossible  not  to  take  this  as  a  direct  allusion  to 
Republic  vi.  4996,  where  the  same  thing  is  said,  almost  in  the  same 
words,  as  part  of  a  "  eulogy  "  of  true  philosophy.  Since  Plato 
also  says  (Ep.  vii.  3240)  that  he  was  about  forty  years  old  at  the 
time  of  his  voyage,  this  seems  to  give  us  387  B.C.  as  an  approximate 
date  for  the  writing  of  the  Republic,  or,  at  least,  of  its  central  and 
most  difficult  section,  and  we  are  led  to  think  of  his  dramatic 
activity,  culminating  in  the  four  great  "  reported  dialogues,"  as 
marking  the  late  thirties  of  his  life.  Beyond  this,  so  far  as  I  can 
see,  we  have  no  means  of  going.  We  cannot  tell,  for  example, 
whether  the  Phaedo  is  earlier  or  later  than  the  Symposium,  or  either 
earlier  or  later  than  the  Protagoras.  My  own  reason  for  taking  the 
Phaedo  before  the  other  two  is  simply  that  it  connects  outwardly 
with  the  events  of  Socrates'  last  day,  and  consequently  illustrates 
the  same  side  of  his  thought  and  character  as  the  three  dialogues 
we  have  just  examined. 

As  in  the  case  of  these  three  dialogues,  I  must  be  content  to  a 
considerable  extent  to  refer  my  reader  to  Professor  Burnet's  com- 
mentary for  treatment  of  details.  The  scene  of  the  conversation 
is  laid  at  Phlius,  where  Phaedo  of  Elis,  apparently  on  his  way  home 
from  Athens,  relates  the  story  of  the  last  hours  of  Socrates  to  a 
party  of  Phliasian  admirers  of  the  philosopher  who  have  not  yet 
had  any  account  of  the  details.  The  one  member  of  this  party  who 
is  named  is  Echecrates,  independently  known  to  us  as  a  Pythagorean. 
Hence  Burnet  is  probably  not  far  wrong  in  supposing  the  story  to 
be  told  in  the  "  meeting-house  "  of  the  local  Pythagoreans.  The 
surroundings  will  thus  harmonize  with  the  general  tone  of  the  con- 
versation, in  which  the  two  principal  interlocutors  are  also  pupils 
of  an  eminent  Pythagorean,  Philolaus.  It  should  be  noted  that 
these  two  speakers,  Simmias  and  Cebes,  are  both  represented  as 
young,  and  that  they  evidently  belong  to  the  group  of  Pythagoreans 
in  whom  the  religious  side  of  the  original  movement  has  been  com- 
pletely overshadowed  by  the  scientific.  It  is  Socrates  who  has  to 
recall  them  to  the  very  conceptions  which  are  at  the  root  of  Pytha- 
gorean religion,  and  persuade  them  that  their  scientific  "  develop- 
ments "  are  inconsistent  with  the  foundations  of  that  religion.  We 
need  also  to  be  alive  in  reading  the  Phaedo  to  two  important  facts 
which  are  sometimes  forgotten.  One  is  that  Socrates  himself  is 
very  careful  to  qualify  his  assent  to  the  main  tenet  of  the  Orphic 
and  Pythagorean  faith,  the  deathlessness  of  the  soul,  by  cautious 
reserve  as  to  the  details  of  the  eschatology  in  which  that  faith  has 
found  expression.  He  is  sure  that  he  will  leave  this  world  to  be 
with  God  ;  he  is  very  far  from  sure  about  the  rest  of  the  Orphic 
scheme  of  rewards  and  punishments.  The  other  is  that  we.  must 
not  take  the  Phaedo  by  itself  for  a  complete  expression  of  the  whole 
spirit  of  Socraticism.  It  sets  Socrates  before  us  in  the  last  hours 
of  his  life,  and  dwells  on  just  the  side  of  his  thought  and  character 
which  would  be  sure  to  be  most  prominent  in  the  given  situation, 


176          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

but  we  should  misconceive  his  doctrine  if  we  did  not  integrate  the 
picture  of  the  Phaedo  with  such  a  representation  of  the  philosopher 
in  the  midst  of  life  as  we  get,  for  example,  in  the  Protagoras,  where 
the  underlying  body  of  doctrine  is  identical  but  the  situation  wholly 
different  and  the  emphasis  correspondingly  different.  Probably 
the  directest  way  to  an  understanding  of  the  influence  and  per- 
sonality of  Socrates  would  be  to  read  and  meditate  these  two  great 
dialogues  together,  interpreting  each  in  the  light  of  the  other.  (It 
is  worth  observing  that  Aristotle  seems  to  have  done  something  of 
the  kind.  His  views  about  the  philosophy  of  Socrates  as  a  whole 
seem  to  be  derived  chiefly  from  the  Phaedo ;  when  he  has  occasion, 
in  his  own  Ethics,  to  discuss  the  Socratic  theses  about  the  conduct 
of  life,  it  is  demonstrable  that  the  unnamed  source  of  his  informa- 
tion is  primarily  the  Protagoras.) 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Plato  intends  the  reader  to  take  the 
dialogue  as  an  accurate  record  of  the  way  in  which  Socrates  spent 
his  last  hours  on  earth,  and  the  topics  on  which  he  spoke  with  his 
intimate  friends  in  the  face  of  imminent  death.  This  is  indicated, 
for  example,  by  the  care  shown  to  give  a  full  list  of  the  names  of 
the  persons  present.  Most  of  these  were  probably  still  living  when 
the  Phaedo  was  circulated  ;  it  is  quite  certain  that  this  was  the  case 
with  some  of  them,  e.g.  Euclides  and  Terpsion,  who,  as  we  see  from 
the  Theaetetus,  were  still  alive  and  active  thirty  years  later ;  Phaedo, 
the  actual  narrator,  who  is  represented  in  the  dialogue  as  still  a 
mere  lad;  Aeschines  of  Sphettus,  and  others.  Though  Plato  is 
careful  to  mention  and  account  for  his  own  absence,  it  is  quite 
certain  that  he  must  have  been  fully  informed  of  the  facts,  since 
the  statement  that  he  spent  some  time  after  the  death  of  Socrates 
with  Euclides  and  Terpsion  at  Megara  comes  to  us  on  the  excellent 
authority  of  his  own  pupil  Hermodorus.  We  are  therefore  bound 
to  accept  his  account  of  Socrates'  conduct  and  conversation  on  the 
last  day  of  his  life  as  in  all  essentials  historical,  unless  we  are  willing 
to  suppose  him  capable  of  a  conscious  and  deliberate  misrepresenta- 
tion recognizable  as  such  by  the  very  persons  whom  he  indicates  as 
the  sources  of  his  narrative.  This  supposition  is  to  my  own  mind 
quite  incredible,  and  I  shall  therefore  simply  dismiss  it,  referring 
the  reader  who  wishes  for  discussion  of  it  to  the  full  Introduction 
to  Burnet's  edition  of  the  dialogue. 

The  purpose  of  the  dialogue  is  not  quite  accurately  described 
by  calling  it  a  discourse  on  the  "  immortality  of  the  soul."  To  us 
this  suggests  that  the  main  object  of  the  reasoning  is  to  prove  the 
soul's  endless  survival,  and  nothing  more.  But  to  the  Greek  mind 
aOavaa-ia  or  a<t>0apcria  regularly  signified  much  the  same  thing  as 
"  divinity,"  and  included  the  conception  of  ingenerability  as  well 
as  of  indestructibility.  Accordingly,  the  arguments  of  the  dialogue, 
whatever  their  worth  may  be,  aim  at  showing  that  our  souls  never 
began  to  be  quite  as  much  as  at  proving  that  they  will  never  cease 
to  be.  But  neither  of  these  positions  is  the  main  point  of  the 
reasoning.  The  subject  of  the  dialogue  is  better  indicated  by  the 


THE  PHAEDO  177 

name  used  by  Plato  himself  in  Ep.  xiii.  3630,  where  it  is  said  to  be 
"  the  discourse  of  Socrates  about  the  ^vxy."  The  immediate  and 
principal  object  of  the  whole  conversation  is  the  justification  of  the 
life  of  "  tendance  of  the  soul  "  by  insisting  on  the  divinity  of  the 
human  soul,  and  on  "  imitation  of  God  "  as  the  right  and  reasonable 
rule  of  conduct ;  the  immunity  of  the  soul  from  death  is  a  mere 
consequence,  though  an  important  consequence,  of  this  inherent 
divinity.  The  argument  is,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  phrase,  a  moral 
one ;  the  worth  and  dignity  of  the  soul  afford  reasonable  grounds 
for  hoping  that  death  is,  to  a  good  man,  entrance  on  a  better  life, 
an  "  adventure  "  which  he  may  face  with  good  comfort — the 
summary  of  the  whole  matter  given  by  Socrates  himself  at  114^-1150. 

A  possible  misconception  which  would  be  fatal  to  a  real  under- 
standing of  the  dialogue  is  to  look  upon  the  members  of  the  series 
of  arguments  for  immortality  as  so  many  independent  substantive 
"  proofs,"  given  by  the  author  or  the  speaker  as  all  having  the  same 
inherent  value.  Any  careful  study  will  show  that  they  are  meant 
to  form  a  series  of  "  aggressions  "  to  the  solution  of  a  problem,  each 
requiring  and  leading  up  to  the  completer  answer  which  follows  it. 
In  particular,  Plato  is  careful,  by  skilful  use  of  dramatic  by-play 
and  pauses  in  the  conversation,  to  let  us  see  what  he  regards  as  the 
critical  points  in  the  argument.  These  pauses  are  principally  two, 
that  which  occurs  at  S&c-Sga,  where  the  narrative  is  interrupted 
by  a  short  dialogue  between  Phaedo  and  Echecrates,  and  950-1000, 
where  Socrates  relates  the  story  of  his  early  difficulties  with  the 
physical  "  philosophy  "  of  Empedocles,  Diogenes,  and  others.  It  is 
evidently  meant  that  the  two  outstanding  difficulties  which  must 
be  faced  by  the  philosophical  defender  of  the  doctrine  of  immortality 
are  the  "  epiphenomenalist  "  theory  of  consciousness  and  the 
"  mechanical  theory  of  nature/1  the  one  represented  for  us  in  the 
Phaedo  by  the  "  objection  "  of  Simmias,  and  the  other  by  that  of 
Cebes. 

As  I  shall  point  out  later  on,  Plato  himself  in  the  Laws  specifies 
just  these  theories  as  being  at  the  root  of  all  irreligious  philo- 
sophizing, and  it  would  still  be  true  to  say  that  to-day  they  con- 
stitute the  speculative  basis  for  most  of  the  current  denials  of  human 
immortality.  We  are  thus  directed  to  find  in  the  Phaedo  a  state- 
ment of  the  position  of  Socrates  on  these  two  perennial  issues  ;  for 
Plato's  own  personal  attitude  towards  them  we  need  to  look  primarily 
to  the  express  refutation  of  the  "  unbeliever  "  in  the  tenth  book  of 
the  Laws.  The  background  presupposed  in  one  refutation  is  the 
science  of  the  fifth  century,  that  of  the  other  is  the  Academic  science 
of  the  fourth,  but  both  agree  in  the  assertions  (a)  that  mental  life 
is  not  the  effect  of  bodily  causes,  and  that  physical  reality  itself — 
"  coming  into  being  and  passing  out  of  being  " — is  not  explicable 
in  purely  mechanical  terms.  This — apart  from  the  impressive 
picture  of  the  fortitude  of  the  true  philosopher  in  the  moment  of 
death — is  the  main  lesson  of  the  Phaedo. 

The  immortal  narrative  must  be  passed  over  in  the  present 


178          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

connexion  with  just  one  word.  It  may  not  be  superfluous  to 
associate  ourselves  with  Burnet 's  protest  against  the  absurd  charge 
of  "  hardness  "  as  a  husband  which  has  been  brought  against 
the  dying  Socrates.  It  is  clear  that  his  wife  and  infant  son  are 
supposed  to  have  spent  the  last  night  of  his  life  with  him  in  the 
prison.  They  are  conducted  home  at  the  opening  of  the  discourse 
(6oa)  for  the  reason  at  which  Socrates  himself  hints  later  on  (117$), 
because  Xanthippe  is,  naturally  enough,  on  the  verge  of  a  "  nervous 
breakdown,"  and  Socrates  desires  to  spare  both  her  and  himself. 
The  children  and  the  "ladies  of  the  family  "  reappear  again  at  the 
end  (n6b)  for  a  final  interview  in  the  presence  of  no  witness  but 
Crito,  the  oldest  friend  of  the  family,  and  we  are  expressly  told  that 
the  interview  was  a  lengthy  one.  Phaedo  cannot  describe  this 
eminently  private  scene,  because  he  had  not  witnessed  it,  but  it  is 
the  mere  fact  that  he  was  not  present  which  has  given  rise  to  mis- 
understanding (assisted,  perhaps,  by  the  incapacity  of  modern 
sentimentalists  to  understand  the  reticence  of  all  great  art). 

THE  ARGUMENT  OF  THE  DIALOGUE 
I.  STATEMENT  OF  THE  MAIN  THESIS  (606-706) 

The  main  issue  of  the  dialogue  is  made  to  emerge  in  a  simple 
and  natural  way  from  the  remark  of  Socrates  that  the  genuine 
"  philosopher  "  is  one  who  is  ready  and  willing  to  die,  though  he 
would  regard  it  as  "  criminal "  to  put  an  end  to  his  own  life  (6ic). 
(That  is,  he  trusts  that  death  is  the  entrance  on  a  better  state, 
but  holds  that  we  may  not  force  the  door ;  we  must  wait  for  it 
to  be  opened  to  us  in  God's  good  time.  The  Pythagorean  origin  of 
the  absolute  veto  on  suicide  is  indicated  by  the  allusion  to  Philolaus 
at  6id.)  This  may  seem  a  paradox,  but  it  is  intelligible  if  we  con- 
ceive of  man  as  a  "  chattel "  (KT^O)  of  God,  just  as  a  slave  is  a 
"  chattel  "  of  his  owner,  and  therefore  has  no  right  to  dispose  of 
his  own  life,  as  it  does  not  belong  to  him.  Socrates  would  not  like 
to  commit  himself  entirely  to  the  Orphic  dogma  that  while  we  are 
in  the  body  we  are  "in  ward/'  i.e.  undergoing  penal  servitude  for 
ante-natal  sin,  but  he  thinks  it  at  least  adumbrates  this  truth  that 
"  we  men  are  chattels  of  the  gods"  (626), l  and  therefore  may  not 
dispose  of  ourselves  as  we  please.  (The  kind  of  K-HJ/xa  ("  chattel  ") 
meant  is  clearly  a  8ouXos,  who  is,  as  Roman  lawyers  put  it,  in  the 

1  For  the  doctrine  in  question  see  in  particular  the  important  fragment  of 
Clearchus  the  Peripatetic  quoted  by  Burnet  loc.  cit.  I  think  it  clear  that  the 
(ppovpd  means  "  house  of  detention,"  not  "  post  of  military  duty."  To  the 
passages  making  for  the  former  interpretation  quoted  by  Burnet  add  Plutarch, 
de  sera  numinis  vindicta,  554^.  The  diroSi&pdffKetv  of  626  5  exactly  suits  a 
prisoner  "  breaking  prison,"  but  not  a  sentry  leaving  his  post,  for  which  we 
should  need  ai/ro^oXftV.  Socrates'  refusal  to  commit  himself  to  the  "  mystical  " 
dogma  is  important.  It  makes  it  clear  a  t  the  start  that,  in  spite  of  all  ap- 
pearances to  the  contrary,  it  is  no  part  of  the  object  of  the  dialogue  to  prove 
"  pre-existence  "  and  "  transmigration. " 


THE  PHAEDO  179 

dominium  of  his  owner  and  therefore  has  no  "  proprietary  rigfyt  " 
in  his  own  body.)     Yet  in  saying  this  we  seem  to  be  merely  replacing 
one  paradox  by  another.     If  we  are  the  "  chattels  "  of  the  gods, 
that  means  that  we  are  under  the  "  tendance  "  of  good  and  wise 
owners  who  know  what  is  best  for  us  much  better  than  we  do  our- 
selves.    Death  would  seem  to  mean   being  released  from  this 
tendance  and  left  to  look  after  ourselves.    Surely  a  wise  man 
would  think  such  an  emancipatio  a  thing  to  be  dreaded  (exactly, 
that  is,  as  a  shrewd  slave  would  be  very  unwilling  to  be  "freed" 
from  a  first-rate  owner  and  left  to  fend  for  himself  (62^)).    The 
paradox  would  be  a  very  real  one  if  Socrates  were  not  convinced 
that  after  death  one  will  equally  be  under  the  care  of  good  and  wise 
gods,  and  perhaps — though  of  this  he  is  not  equally  sure  (630) — in 
the  company  of  the  best  men  of  the  past.    This  is  the  faith  (cAm's) 
which  gives  him  courage  to  face  death,  and  he  will  try  to  impart 
it  to  his  friends.     Thus  the  thing  to  be  proved  is  primarily  not  the 
"  natural   immortality "   of   the   soul.     A   proof   of   immortality, 
taken  by  itself,  would  not  be  adequate  ground  for  facing  death  in 
a  hopeful  spirit.     It  would  be  quite  consistent  with  holding  that 
we  only  leave  this  world  to  find  ourselves  in  a  much  worse  one. 
What  is  really  to  be  proved,  if  possible,  is  that  "  the  souls  of  the 
just  are  in  the  hand  of  God  "  after  death  as  much  as  before. 
Socrates,  like  all  great  religious  teachers,  rests  his  hopes  for  the 
unseen  future  in  the  last  resort  on  the  goodness  of  God,  not  on  the 
natural  imperishability  of  the  human  ^v^r/.     (So  in  the  Timaeus 
faa-b),  it  is  the  goodness  of  the  Creator's  will  which  guarantees  the 
immortality  even  of  the  "created  gods,"  i.e.  the  stars.)     What 
is  to  be  shown,  in  fact,  is  that  the  faith  and  hope  with  which  the 
"  philosopher  "  faces  death  is  the  logical  consequence  and  supreme 
affirmation  of  the  principles  by  which  he  has  regulated  his  whole 
life.    To  lose  faith  when,  you  come  to  die  would  be  to  contradict 
the  whole  tenour  of  your  past  life ;  for,  though  the  world  may  not 
know  it,  the  life  of  "  philosophy  "  itself  is  nothing  but  one  long 
"rehearsal1*    (/ucAen?) l    of    dying    (640).     Possibly,    indeed,    the 
"  world  "  would  say  that  it  does  know  this  well  enough ;  it  knows 
very  well  that  "  philosophers  "  are  "  morbid  "  creatures  who  are 
only  half  alive,  and  that  it  serves  them  right  to  eliminate  them 
(a  plain  allusion  to  the  Aristophanic  caricature  of  the  ^/oovrurrat  as 

1  Not  "  meditation  "  of  death.  /ueXlrii  means  the  repeated  practice  by 
which  we  prepare  ourselves  for  a  performance.  It  is  used  of  the  "  practising  " 
of  a  man  training  for  an  athletic  contest,  and  again  of  the  "  learning  by  heart  " 
of  such  a  thing  as  a  speech  which  you  have  procured  from  a  \oyoypd<f>os  and 
want  to  have  "  perfect  "  when  the  time  for  deliverance  comes.  No  doubt, 
then,  it  was  also  the  word  for  an  actor's  "  study  "  of  his  "  part."  (Cf.  ripttition 
as  used  of  the  rehearsals  of  a  play  or  a  symphony  in  French.)  The  thought  is 
thus  that  "  death  "  is  like  a  play  for  which  the  philosopher's  life  has  been  a 
daily  rehearsal.  His  business  is  to  be  perfect  in  his  part  when  the  curtain 
goes  up.  Note  that,  as  Burnet  says  (Phaedo,  646  3  n.,  E.G.Ph.*,  278  n.  i),  it  is 
implied  throughout  the  argument  that  "  philosophy  "  has  the  special  sense, 
which  is  clearly  Pythagorean,  of  devotion  to  science  as  a  way  to  the  salvation 
of  the  soul. 


180          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

living  "  ghosts  ").  Only  the  world  is  mistaken  on  one  small  point ; 
it  does  not  understand  the  sense  in  which  the  philosopher  uses  the 
word  "  death, ".and  that  is  what  we  must  explain  (64^.  It  is  all 
the  more  necessary  to  attend  to  the  explanation  that  it  is  really  the 
key  to  the  whole  of  the  Phaedo,  and  that  its  significance  has  been 
often  misapprehended  by  both  admirers  and  critics  down  to  our 
own  time  as  completely  as  by  the  (5?]/iog  of  Thebes  or  Athens.1 

To  put  the  matter  quite  simply,  death,  as  every  one  under- 
stands, is  the  "  release  "  of  the  soul  from  the  body  ;  in  other 
words,  it  is  the  achievement  of  the  soul's  independence.  Now 
we  can  see  that  what  the  philosopher  has  been  aiming  at  all  his 
life  long  is  just  to  make  the  soul,  as  completely  as  he  can,  inde- 
pendent of  the  fortunes  of  the  body.  We  can  see  this  from  the 
following  considerations:  (a)  The  philosopher  sets  no  great  store 
on  the  gratifications  of  physical  appetite,  and  disregards  the 
"  tendance  of  the  body  "  in  general  (fine  clothes  and  foppery) 
"  beyond  what  is  needful."  2  What  he  "  tends  "  is  the  soul,  and 
that  is  why  the  "  mass  of  men  "  think  him  as  good  as  a  ghost  or 
corpse  (640-65^).  (b)  In  his  pursuit  of  knowledge  he  finds  the 
limitations  of  the  body  a  hindrance  to  him  in  more  ways  than  one, 
and  is  always  doing  his  best  to  escape  them.  He  soon  discovers 
the  grossness  and  untrustworthiness  of  our  senses,  even  of  the  two 
most  acute  of  them,  sight  and  hearing,  and  tries  to  arrive  at  truth 
more  accurate  and  certain  than  any  which  the  evidence  of  sense 
could  furnish.  This  is  why  he  trusts  to  thinking  rather  than  to 
sense  ;  but  in  thinking  the  soul  is  independent  of  the  body  in  a 
way  in  which  she  is  not  independent  in  sensation.  (This  is,  of  course, 
strictly  true.  Socrates  would  probably  be  thinking  primarily 
of  the  danger  of  trusting  to  a  "  figure  "  in  mathematics,  a  danger 
which  will  be  mentioned  a  little  further  on.  It  is  equally  true  that, 
even  in  our  own  times,  when  the  scientific  man  is  so  abundantly 
supplied  with  "  instruments  of  precision,"  we  have  always  to  allow 
for  a  margin  of  unknown  error  in  all  conclusions  depending  on  data 
derived  from  sense-perception  ;  absolute  accuracy  and  certainty 
can  only  be  obtained,  if  at  all,  in  "  pure  "  science  which  makes 
no  appeal  to  sense,  even  for  its  data.)  So  pleasurable  or  painful 
excitement  derived  from  the  body  also  gravely  interferes  with  the 
prosecution  of  truth.  (One  is  hampered  in  one's  scientific  work 
when  one's  head  aches  or  one's  liver  is  out  of  order.)  (c)  The 
supreme  objects  of  our  studies,  "  the  right,"  "  the  good,"  "  the 
beautiful,"  "  figure,"  "  health,"  in  short,  the  "  reality "  (oucrt'a) 
investigated  by  any  science  is  always  something  which  none  of  the 

1  Socrates'  point  is  that — to  use  the  language  of  Christian  mystics — the 
"  world  "  confuses  a  dying  life  with  a  living  death.  The  "  philosopher  "  is 
out  for  "  dying  into  life  "  ;  the  world  thinks  he  is  making  his  existence  a 
death  in  life,  but  it  is  really  the  worldling  who  is  "  dead  while  he  lives." 

1  64*.  Kaff  foot  ^  TroXXi)  dvAyicr)  avr&v.  This  is  inserted  to  show  that 
Socrates  has  no  sympathy  with  the  gratuitous  slovenliness  of  persons  like  the 
Telauges  of  A  esc  bines'  dialogue  or  his  own  companion  Antisthenes.  He  does 
not  regard  "  dirt "  as  a  mark  of  godliness. 


THE  PHAEDO  181 

senses  perceives,  and  the  less  we  depend  on  any  of  them — the  less, 
that  is,  we  substitute  "  sensing  "  for  "  thinking  "  in  our  science — 
the  nearer  we  come  to  apprehending  the  object  we  are  really  study- 
ing (6^d-66a).1  Having  all  these  considerations  in  mind,  we  may 
fairly  take  a  "  short  cut  "  (aiy)cwros)  to  the  conclusion  that  so  long 
as  we  have  the  body  with  us  it  will  always  be  a  hindrance  to  the 
apprehension  of  "  reality  "  (TO  dA^flcs)  as  it  is.  At  the  best  we  lose 
much  valuable  time  by  being  obliged  to  take  care  of  the  body. 
If  it  gets  out  of  condition,  our  quest  of  "  the  real "  (TO  ov)  is  even 
more  hindered.  Bodily  wants  and  the  passions  connected  with 
them — which,  incidentally,  are  the  causes  of  business  and  war, 
the  two  great  occupations  of  the  "  active  life  " — leave  us  hardly 
any  opportunity  or  leisure  for  the  pursuit  of  knowledge.  And  even 
in  the  scanty  time  we  are  able  to  devote  to  the  things  of  the  mind, 
the  body  and  its  needs  are  constantly  "  turning  up  "  and  diverting 
our  attention.  Thus  the  man  who  is  really  "  in  love  with  know- 
ledge "  must  confess  that  his  heart's  desire  is  either  only  to  be 
won  after  death,  when  the  soul  has  achieved  her  independence  of 
her  troublesome  partner,  or  not  at  all.  While  we  are  in  the  body, 
we  make  the  nearest  approach  to  our  supreme  good  just  in  propor- 
tion as  we  accomplish  the  concentration  of  the  soul  on  herself  and 
the  detachment  of  her  attention  from  the  body,  waiting  patiently 
until  God  sees  fit  to  complete  the  deliverance  for  us.  When  that 
happens,  we  may  hope,  having  become  unmixed  and  undiluted 
intelligence,  to  apprehend  undiluted  reality.  Meanwhile  the  life 
of  thinking  itself  is  a  progressive  purifying  of  intelligence  from  the 
alien  element  and  a  concentration  of  it  on  itself.  The  philosopher 
is  the  only  type  of  man  who  makes  it  the  business  of  his  life  to 
accomplish  this  purgation  and  concentration  and  so  to  win  spiritual 
independence.  This  is  why  we  may  call  his  life  a  "  rehearsal  of 
death,"  and  why  unwillingness  to  complete  the  process  would  be 
ridiculous  in  him  (66c-686).  The  conception  set  before  us  in  these 
pages  is  manifestly  the  Hellenic  counterpart  of  the  "  mystical  way  " 
of  Christianity.  The  underlying  ideas  of  both  conceptions  are 

1  That  is,  the  object  studied  by  any  science  is  always  what  Socrates  calls 
an  eTSos  or  I6ta,  though  the  technical  term  is  not  yet  introduced.  It  is 
important  to  note  the  immediate  and  emphatic  assent  of  Simmias  to  this 
statement  (65^).  He  is  clearly  supposed  to  have  learned  all  about  the  matter 
from  his  Pythagorean  teachers.  The  examples  are  taken  from  ethics  (SLxaiov, 
dya&6vt  Ka\6v),  mathematics  (ptycOos),  medicine  (vyleta,  texts)-  Of  course  you 
can  see  pcytOrj,  but  it  is  quite  true  that  you  cannot  see  ftfryeOot.  So  you 
can  see  or  draw  approximately  elliptical  lines,  but  you  cannot  even  approxi- 
mately draw  "  the  general  conic  "  or  "  the  curve  of  the  third  order."  If  you  did 
try  to  draw  them  and  relied  on  some  characteristic  of  your  figure  as  a  property 
of  the  curve  on  no  better  evidence  than  that  of  your  eyes,  you  would  soon 
be  led  into  error  about  the  "  reality  "  you  are  investigating.  A  thorough 
empiricist  would  have  to  go  to  much  wilder  extremes.  He  would,  for  example, 
have  to  hold  that  it  is  quite  uncertain  whether,  if  you  only  went  on  counting 
long  enough,  you  might  not  come  on  two  odd  integers  without  an  even  one 
between  them,  or  on  a  highest  prime  number,  or  even  on  an  integer  which  is 
neither  odd  nor  even.  These  things  are  actually  maintained  by  some  empiri- 
cist mathematicians,  but  they  would  be  the  death  of  ^a 
7 


182          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

that  there  is  a  supreme  good  for  man  which,  from  its  very  nature, 
cannot  be  enjoyed  "  in  this  life."  The  best  life  is  therefore  one 
which  is  directed  to  fitting  ourselves  for  the  full  fruition  of  this 
"  eternal  "  good  beyond  the  limits  of  our  temporal  existence. 
In  both  cases  this  means  that  the  highest  life  for  man  while  on 
earth  is  a  "  dying  life,"  a  process  of  putting  off  the  old  man  with 
the  affections  and  the  lusts  and  becoming  a  "  new  creature." 
The  constant  presence  of  this  aim  makes  the  life  of  devotion  to 
science,  as  conceived  by  Socrates  and  his  friends,  a  genuine  via 
crucis.  And  they,  like  the  Christian  mystics,  conceive  of  the  best 
life  as  one  of  contemplation,  not  of  action.  The  ultimate  aim  of 
the  "  philosopher  "  is  not  to  do  things,  but  to  enjoy  the  vision  of  a 
reality  to  which  he  grows  like  as  he  looks  upon  it,  the  ideal  already 
expressed  in  the  apologue  of  the  "  three  lives  "  popularly  ascribed 
to  Pythagoras.  We  must  be  careful,  however,  to  guard  ourselves 
against  two  insidious  misconceptions.  For  all  the  stress  laid  on 
"  purification  "  of  the  mind  from  contact  with  the  body,  we  must 
not  suppose  that  Socrates  is  thinking  of  a  life  of  mere  negative 
abstentions. 

The  whole  point  of  the  insistence  on  unremitting  preoccupation 
with  thinking  as  the  philosophic  form  of  "  purgation  "  is  that  the 
object  of  the  renunciation  of  the  philosopher  is  to  make  his  life 
richer ;  by  "  purification  "  from  external  preoccupations,  his 
intelligence  becomes  more  and  more  intense  and  concentrated, 
just  as,  e.g.,  alcohol  becomes  more  potent  the  more  nearly  your 
specimen  is  "  pure  "  alcohol.  Nor  must  one  suppose  that  the 
contemplative  life,  because  it  is  not  directed  ultimately  on  action, 
is  one  of  indolence  or  laziness.  Socrates,  who  claims  in  our  dialogue 
to  have  spent  his  whole  life  "  in  philosophy/'  was  busy  from  morning 
to  night  with  his  "  mission."  Probably,  when  we  remember  the 
way  in  which  Plato  in  the  seventh  Epistle  insists  on  the  political 
character  of  his  own  original  ambitions  and  on  his  lifelong  con- 
viction that  the  business  of  the  philosopher  among  men  is  to  be  a 
statesman,  we  may  infer  that  he  would  not  himself  at  any  time 
have  subscribed  to  the  doctrine  of  the  vita  contemplativa  without 
a  great  deal  of  cxplanat  ion  and  reservation.  Even  the  Pythagoreans 
who  formulated  the  doctrine  had  stood  alone  among  the  scientific 
schools  in  playing  an  important  part,  as  a  society,  in  the  politics 
of  the  early  fifth  century.  They  only  became  a  merely  scientific 
society  when  their  political  activities  had  been  crushed  by  revolu- 
tion. But  it  may  well  be  that  the  ablest  men  of  action  feel  even 
more  strongly  than  the  rest  of  us  that  the  "  conduct  of  business," 
the  carrying  on  of  commerce,  governing,  and  fighting  cannot  be 
its  own  justification.  To  be  everlastingly  "  meddling  "  seems  an 
end  not  worthy  the  dignity  of  human  nature  ;  at  bottom  we  all 
want  not  to  do  something  but  to  be  something.  To  make  "  doing 
things  "  your  ultimate  object  is  merely  to  take  "  Fidgety  Phil  who 
couldn't  keep  still"  as  your  model  of  manly  excellence.  It  has 
been  said  with  truth  that  the  great  "practical  reforms"  which 


THE  PHAEDO  183 

have  proved  of  lasting  value  have  mostly  been  the  work  of  men 
whose  hearts  were  all  the  time  set  on  something  different. 

If  a  man,  then,  plays  the  craven  when  death  comes,  we  may  be 
sure  he  is  no  true  "lover  of  wisdom,"  but  a  "  lover  of  the  body/' 
which  is  as  much  as  to  say  a  man  whose  heart  is  set  on  wealth 
(a  <£iAoxpi7/xaT09)  or  on  "  honours  "  (a  $iA<m/xos),  or  both  at  once 
(68c.  This  direct  allusion  to  the  Pythagorean  "  three  lives  "  is, 
of  course,  intentional.)  On  the  other  hand,  the  philosopher  will  be 
marked  by  eminent  courage  and  eminent  "  temperance  "  in  the 
popular  sense  in  which  the  word  means  control  over  one's  physical 
appetites.  In  fact,  when  we  come  to  reflect,  there  is  something 
paradoxical  about  the  courage  and  temperance  of  the  rest  of  man- 
kind. They  are  courageous  in  the  face  of  danger  because  courage 
serves  to  protect  them  against  death,  which  they  fear  as  the  worst 
of  evils.  Thus  their  very  valour  is  rooted  in  a  sort  of  cowardice. 
(As  an  Indian  says  of  the  English  in  one  of  Kipling's  tales,  "they 
are  not  afraid  to  be  kicked,  but  they  are  afraid  to  die.")  And  the 
decent  (icoayuoi)  among  them  keep  their  lusts  in  hand  because  they 
think  they  will  get  more  pleasure  by  doing  so  than  by  giving  way, 
so  that  "  slavery  to  pleasure  "  is  the  source  of  what  they  call  their 
"  temperance."  But  the  truth  is  that  real  virtue  is  not  a  business 
of  exchanging  pleasures  and  pains  against  one  another.  Wisdom 
is  the  true  "  coin  of  the  realm  "  for  which  everything  else  must  be 
exchanged,  and  it  is  only  when  accompanied  by  it  that  our  so- 
called  "  virtues  "  are  genuine  goodness  (a\r)0r)s  aptrrj).  Without 
it,  the  kind  of  goodness  which  is  based  on  the  "  calculus  of  pleasure 
and  pain  "  is  no  more  than  a  painted  show  (a-KLaypa^ta)  .l  The 
Orphic  saying  is  that  "  many  carry  the  narthex  but  few  are  real 
paKxoi,"  and  we  might  apply  tin's  to  our  purpose  by  taking  the 
"real  J&IKXOS,"  who  genuinely  feels  the  "god  within,"  to  mean  the 
true  philosopher.  Of  these  chosen  few  Socrates  has  all  his  life 
tried  to  become  one ;  with  what  success  he  may  know  better  in  a 
few  hours  (686-69*). 2 


II.  THE  ARGUMENTS  FOR  IMMORTALITY 

In  substance,  what  has  gone  before  contains  Socrates'  vindica- 
tion of  his  attitude  in  the  face  of  death.  But,  as  Simmias  remarks, 
the  whole  vindication  has  tacitly  assumed  that  there  is  an  here- 
after. Now  most  men  find  it  very  hard  to  believe  that  the  soul 

1  690  6-c  3.  On  the  text  and  grammar  of  this  sentence,  which  have 
undergone  much  corruption,  see  Burnet,  loc.  cit.,  where  it  is  also  pointed  out 
that  <TKiaypa<f>ta  does  not  mean  an  "  imperfect  outline,"  but  a  stage-painting  in 
which,  e.g.>  a  flat  surface  is  made  to  look  like  the  fa9ade  of  a  temple.  The 
point  is  not  that  "  vulgar  "  goodness  is  "  imperfect  "  but  that  it  is  illusory. 

8  In  this  context  Socrates'  claim  can  hardly  be  understood  to  mean  less 
than  that  he  had  been  a  "  follower  of  the  way."  We  cannot  well  believe 
that  Plato  invented  this,  still  less  that  he  had  anything  to  do  with  "  the  way  " 
himself. 


184          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

is  not  "  dispersed  like  smoke  "  when  a  man  dies,  and  Simmias 
shares  their  difficulty.  To  complete  his  "  case  "  Socrates  must 
therefore  satisfy  us  that  the  soul  continues  to  be,  and  to  be  intelli- 
gent after  the  death  of  the  "man."  Accordingly  he  now  proceeds 
to  produce  three  considerations  which  point  to  that  conclusion. 
It  is  not  said  that  they  are  demonstrative.  Simmias  had  asked 
only  for  TTI'OTIS  (conviction),  not  for  demonstration,  and  Socrates 
professes  no  more  than  to  consider  whether  immortality  is  "  likely  " 
(ei/cds)  or  not.  In  point  of  fact,  the  first  two  proofs  are  found  to 
break  down  and  the  third,  as  Burnet  observes,  is  said  by  Socrates 
(10766)  to  need  fuller  examination.  Thus  it  is  plain  that  Plato 
did  not  mean  to  present  the  arguments  as  absolutely  probative  to 
his  own  mind.  The  argument  he  does  find  convincing  and  develops 
at  great  length  in  the  Laws  is  put  briefly  into  the  mouth  of  Socrates 
in  the  Phaednis,  but  no  mention  is  made  of  it  here.1 

(a)  THE  FIRST  ARGUMENT  (700-77^.— This  argument  itself 
falls  into  two  parts,  a  (yoc-y2e)  and  ft  (720-77^  ;  the  two  have  to 
be  considered  in  conjunction  to  make  anything  which  can  be  called 
a  proof,  and  what  they  go  to  prove  is  not  "  immortality  "  but 
merely  that  the  soul  continues  to  be  "  something  "  after  death. 
It  is  not  simply  annihilated.  This,  of  course,  is  only  the  first  step 
to  establishing  what  is  really  in  question,  the  persistence  of  in- 
telligence beyond  the  grave. 

(a)  First  Reason  for  holding  that  the  Soul  is  not  simply  anni- 
hilated at  Death  (700-720) .— There  is  an  ancient  doctrine  (it  is, 
in  fact,  Orphic)  of  rebirth,  according  to  which  a  soul  which  is  born 
into  this  world  is  one  which  has  come  back  from  "  another  world  " 
to  which  men  go  at  death.  This,  if  true,  would  establish  our  point. 
To  look  at  the  matter  from  a  more  general  point  of  view,  we  see 
that  the  world  is  made  up  of  "  opposites  "  (eVavria) — such  as  hot, 
cold ;  great,  small ;  good,  bad.  Now  if  a  thing  "  becomes  bigger  "  it 
must  have  first  been  "  smaller,"  if  it  becomes  hotter  it  must  have 
been  cooler,  if  it  becomes  "  better  "  it  must  have  been  "  worse/' 
and  so  on.  So  we  may  say  universally  that  whatever  comes  to  be, 
comes  to  be  "  out  of  its  opposite/'  and  that  to  correspond  to  each 
pair^of  opposites,  there  are  two  antithetical  processes  of  "  becom- 
ing." Hot  and  cold  are  opposites,  and  similarly  there  are  the  two 
processes  of  contrasted  sense,  "  becoming  hotter,"  "  becoming 

1  It  is  the  argument  from  the  "  self-moving  "  character  of  the  soul 
( Phaedrus,  245^  5-2460  2,  Laws,  x.  8936  6-896^  4).  Why  is  nothing  said  of  this 
argument  in  the  Phaedo  ?  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  reason  is  that  the 
argument  is  an  invention  of  Plato's  own  and  that  he  had  not  thought  of 
it  when  he  wrote  the  Phaedo.  I  do  not  think  this  likely,  since  the  argument  is 
really  in  principle  that  of  Alcmaeon  of  Crotona,  and  is  thus  much  older  than 
Socrates  (Aristotle,  de  Anima,  A2.  4053  30),  I  should  suggest  a  different 
explanation.  The  argument  starts  from  the  reality  of  motion.  But  this 
would  have  been  denied  by  the  Eleatic  Eu elides  and  Terpsion,  and  Socrates 
wishes  to  base  his  reasoning  on  premisses  his  company  will  admit.  We 
must  remember  also  that  Euclides  and  his  friend  were  very  probably  the 
persons  from  whom  Plato  derived  most  of  his  knowledge  of  the  last  hours  of 
bocratet 


THE  PHAEDO  185 

cooler."  All  this  will  apply  to  the  case  of  life  and  death.  Being 
alive  and  being  dead  are  opposites,  just  as  being  awake  and  being 
asleep  are.  And  we  have  agreed  that  everything  comes  to  be 
"  out  of  its  opposite/'  The  living  must  come  from  the  dead,  and 
the  dead  from  the  living,  and  thus  here,  as  elsewhere,  there  will  be 
two  opposed  processes,  corresponding  to  the  two  opposed  condi- 
tions of  being  alive  and  being  dead.  We  see  and  have  a  name  for 
one  of  these  processes,  that  by  which  a  living  being  becomes  dead  ; 
we  call  it  dying.  But  there  must,  on  our  principle,  also  be  an 
antithetic  process  of  "  coming  to  life  "  which  terminates  in  actual 
birth.  In  fact,  if  the  whole  process  were  not  cyclical,  life  would 
ultimately  perish,  and  there  would  be  only  a  dead  universe  left. 
Thus  the  drift  of  the  argument  is  simply  to  confirm  the  "  ancient 
doctrine  "  of  rebirth  by  showing  that  it  is  only  one  case  of  the 
universal  natural  law  of  cyclical  "  recurrence/1  The  illustrations 
from  the  alternation  of  sleep  and  waking  seem  to  show  that  Socrates 
is  thinking  primarily  of  the  way  in  which  this  "  law  of  exchange  " 
had  been  assumed  as  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  philosophy 
of  Heraclitus,  with  whom  death  and  life,  sleeping  and  waking, 
are  explicitly  co-ordinated  (Her.  Fr.  64,  77,  123,  Bywater).  But 
the  general  conception  of  the  world  as  made  up  of  "  opposites  " 
which  are  generated  "  out  of  one  another  "  was,  of  course,  a  common- 
place of  the  earliest  Greek  physical  science  (cf.  Burnet,  E.G.Ph.3, 
p.  8).  Socrates'  Pythagorean  auditors,  in  particular,  would  be  at 
once  reminded  of  their  own  table  of  "  opposites  "  by  reasoning  of 
this  kind. 

(It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  reasoning  is  neither  cogent  nor,  if  it 
were,  probative  of  what  we  want  to  prove.  As  Aristotle  was  after- 
wards to  explain  more  fully,  the  whole  conception  of  the  generation 
of  opposite  "  out  of  "  opposite  is  vitiated  by  an  ambiguity  in  the 
phrase  "  out  of."  A  thing  which  grows  cool  has  previously  been 
warmer,  but  it  is  not  true  that  "  heat  "  is  a  stuff  or  matter  out  of 
which  "  cold  "  is  made.  In  Aristotelian  language,  the  thing  which 
grows  cool  has  lost  the  "  form  "  of  "  the  hot  "  and  acquired  the 
"  form  "  of  the  cold  ;  the  original  "  form  "  has  not  itself  been  made 
into  an  "  opposite  "  form.  Again,  it  is  simply  assumed,  without 
warrant,  that  cyclical  alternation  is  the  universal  law  of  all  pro- 
cesses. To  us  there  is  no  absurdity  in  the  view  that  living  organisms 
should  finally  vanish,  or  that  differences  of  temperature  should 
cease  to  exist.  If  the  "  principle  of  Carnot  "  could  be  taken  to 
be  true  without  any  restriction,  we  should  have  to  regard  these 
consequences  as  inevitable.  For  the  purposes  of  Socrates,  however, 
it  is  sufficient  that  the  reasoning  should  be  based  on  assumptions 
which  would  be  granted  as  common  ground  by  his  audience ;  it 
is  not  necessary  that  they  should  be  admitted  by  anyone  else. 
Still,  even  when  his  assumptions  are  granted,  nothing  follows  so 
far  beyond  the  bare  admission  that  the  soul  which  has  passed  from 
this  world  to  the  other,  and  will,  in  turn,  come  back  from  the  other 
world  to  this,  has  some  sort  of  reality  in  the  interval ;  it  has  not 


186          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

become  a  mere  nothing.  To  admit  so  much  would,  of  course,  be 
compatible  with  the  crudest  kind  of  materialism,  and  would  do 
nothing  to  justify  the  conviction  Socrates  means  to  defend,  the 
belief  that  the  soul  which  has  won  its  independence  has  passed  to 
a  "  better  "  life.1  Hence  the  necessity  for  a  combination  of  this 
line  of  reasoning  with  that  which  is  next  introduced.) 

(ft)  The  Argument  from  the  Doctrine  of  Reminiscence  (720-77^. — 
Cebes  observes  that  we  might  have  reached  our  conclusion,  in- 
dependently of  the  doctrine  of  recurrence,  by  arguing  from  Socrates* 
habitual  position  that  what  we  call  "  learning  "  a  truth  is  really 
being  "  put  in  mind  "  of  something  we  had  forgotten.  If  this  is 
true,  we  must  at  one  time  have  known  all  that  in  this  life  we  have 
to  be  "  reminded  "  of.  Our  souls  must  have  existed  "  before  we 
were  men/'  and  presumably  therefore  may  continue  to  exist  when 
we  have  ceased  to  be  men.  (This  argument,  if  sound,  brings  us 
nearer  to  the  conclusion  we  want,  since  it  goes  to  prove  that  the 
soul  not  only  was  "  something  "  but  was  fully  intelligent  before  it 
had  been  conjoined  with  the  body.)  The  main  argument  for  this 
doctrine  of  reminiscence,  we  are  told,  is  the  one  already  considered 
in  the  Meno,  that  a  man  can  be  made  to  give  the  true  solution  of  a 
problem  by  merely  asking  him  appropriate  questions,  as  we  see 
particularly  in  the  case  of  problems  of  geometry.2  The  answer  is 
produced  from  within,  not  communicated  by  the  questioner. 

1  Note  that  Socrates  himself  in  the  end  throws  over  the  principle  of  universal 
cyclical  recurrence.  His  "  hope  "  is  that  the  final  destiny  of  the  righteous 
soul  is  to  be  with  the  gods  and  to  live  endlessly  "  apart  from  the  body  " 
(114^).  This  would  be  a  swallowing  up  of  death  by  life  just  as  impossible  on 
the  principle  of  recurrence  as  the  universal  reign  of  death.  He  is,  in  fact, 
borrowing  from  two  pre-philosophical  traditions,  that  of  endless  "  reincarna- 
tion "  and  that  of  the  soul  as  a  fallen  divinity  destined  to  regain  its  forfeited 
place  among  the  gods.  These  traditions  are  not  really  concordant  with  one 
another,  and  it  is  the  second  which  really  represents  his  personal  faith. 

*  £dv  rts  M  rA  Si.aypdiuiij.ara  ayy  (736)  may  mean  literally  "  if  one  shows  the 
man  a  diagram,"  but  since  dtaypd^ara  sometimes  means  simply  "  geometrical 
proofs  "  (e.g.  Xenophon,  Mem.  iv.  7,  3,  where  the  Svo-ffvvera  diaypd/mpaTa  seem 
to  mean  simply  "  intricate  demonstrations  "),  probably  we  should  not  press 
the  literal  sense  of  the  word  here.  It  is  an  interesting  point  that  though 
Cebes  knows  all  about  the  doctrine  and  attaches  importance  to  it,  Simmias, 
who  appears  later  on  as  having  gone  further  than  Cebes  in  dropping  the 
religious  side  of  Pythagoreanism,  has  forgotten  it.  I  think  we  may  infer  two 
things  from  the  passage,  (a)  The  doctrine  of  reminiscence  was  not  originated 
by  either  Socrates  or  Plato,  since  Cebes  knows  both  what  it  is  and  what  is  the 
recognized  "  proof  "  of  it.  It  is  presumably  a  piece  of  old  Pythagoreanism 
which  the  "  advanced  "  members  of  the  school  had  dropped  or  were  dropping 
by  the  end  of  the  fifth  century.  (This  explains  why  we  never  hear  anything 
about  it  in  Plato's  later  writings.)  (6)  I  suggest  that  the  connexion  with 
immortality  comes  about  in  this  way.  To  judge  from  the  Orphic  plates  found 
at  Thurii  and  elsewhere,  the  original  idea  was  that  what  the  soul  has  to  be 
reminded  of  is  her  divine  origin  and  the  dangers  she  will  have  to  surmount 
on  her  way  back  to  the  abode  of  the  gods.  The  Orphic  plates  are,  in  fact, 
buried  with  the  votaries  to  serve  them  as  a  kind  of  Baedeker's  guide.  The 
conversion  of  this  piece  of  primitive  theology  into  a  theory  of  the  a  priori 
character  of  mathematics  will  be  part  of  the  spiritualization  of  old  theological 
traditions  due  to  the  mathematician-saint  Pythagoras. 


THE  PHAEDO  18? 

Hence  the  answerer  is  plainly  in  possession  of  the  truth  which  the 
questioner  elicits.  Socrates  points  out  that  the  conclusion  might 
be  reached  by  a  simple  consideration  of  what  we  call  "  association." 
When  you  see  an  article  belonging  to  an  intimate  friend,  you  not 
only  see  the  article,  but  think  of  the  owner,  and  that  is  what  we 
mean  by  saying  that  the  coat  or  whatever  it  is,  "  reminds  "  us 
of  its  owner  ("  association  by  Contiguity  ").  Again,  when  you 
see  a  portrait,  you  think  of  or  "  are  reminded  "  of  the  original 
("  association  by  Resemblance  ").  Thus  you  may  be  "  reminded  " 
of  something  both  by  what  is  unlike  it  ("  Contiguity  ")  and  by  what 
is  like  it  ("  Resemblance  ").  In  the  second  case  we  also  note  whether 
the  likeness  is  complete  or  not  (e.g.  whether  the  portrait  is  a  good 
one  or  a  bad  one). 

Well,  then,  let  us  consider  a  precisely  parallel  case.  In  mathe- 
matics we  are  constantly  talking  about "  equality  " — not  the  equality 
of  one  stone  to  another  stone,  or  of  one  wooden  rod  to  another 
wooden  rod,  but  of  the  "  just  equal  "  (avro  TO  to-ov),  which  is  neither 
wood  nor  stone — and  we  know  that  we  mean  something  by  this  talk. 
But  what  has  put  the  thought  of  the  "  just  equal  "  into  our  minds  ? 
The  sight  of  equal  or  unequal  sticks,  or  something  of  the  kind.  And 
we  note  two  things,  (a)  The  "  just  equal  "  is  something  different 
from  a  stick  or  a  stone  which  is  equal  to  another  stick  or  stone  ; 
we  see  the  sticks  or  stones,  we  do  not  see  "  mathematical  equality." 
(b)  And  the  so-called  equal  sticks  or  stones  we  do  see  are  not  exactly, 
but  only  approximately,  equal.  (Even  with  instruments  of  pre- 
cision we  cannot  measure  a  length  without  having  to  allow  for  a 
margin  of  error.)  Thus  plainly  the  objects  about  which  the  mathe- 
matician reasons  are  not  perceived  by  the  eye  or  the  hand  ;  the 
thought  of  them  is  suggested  to  him  by  the  imperfect  approximations 
he  sees  and  touches,  and  this  suggestion  of  B  by  A  is  exactly  what 
we  mean  by  "  being  reminded  of  B  by  A."  But  A  cannot  remind 
us  of  B  unless  we  have  already  been  acquainted  with  B.  Now  from 
the  dawn  of  our  life  here,  our  senses  have  always  been  thus  "  remind- 
ing us  "  of  something  which  is  not  directly  perceptible  by  sense 
(i.e.  perception  has  always  carried  with  it  estimation  by  an  "  ideal  " 
standard).  Hence  our  acquaintance  with  the  standards  themselves 
must  go  back  to  a  time  before  our  sensations  began,  i.e.  to  a  time 
before  our  birth.  We  have  argued  the  case  with  special  reference 
to  the  objects  studied  by  the  mathematician,  but  it  applies  equally 
to  all  other  "ideal  standards/'  like  those  of  ethics,  the  good,  the 
right ;  in  fact,  to  everything  which  Socrates  and  his  friends  called  a 
"  form."  The  only  alternative  to  supposing  that  we  had  ante- 
natal acquaintance  with  these  "  forms  "  would  be  to  say  that  we 
acquired  it  at  the  moment  of  birth.  But  this  is  absurd,  since  we 
are  quite  agreed  that  we  bring  none  of  this  knowledge  into  the 
world  with  us ;  we  have  to  recover  it  slowly  enough  from  the  hints 
and  suggestions  of  the  senses.  We  conclude  then  that  if  "  the 
kind  of  being  we  are  always  talking  about,"  that  is  the  "  forms," 
exist,  and  if  they  are  the  standard  by  which  we  interpret  all  our 


188          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

sensations,  it  must  be  equally  true  that  our  souls  also  existed  and 
were  actively  intelligent  before  our  birth  (?6d-e).  (One  should 
note  several  things  about  the  way  in  which  the  doctrine  of  the 
"  forms  "  is  introduced  into  this  argument.  For  one  thing,  we 
see  that  there  is  no  room  in  the  theory  for  "  innate  ideas  "  in  the 
strict  sense  of  the  word,  and  that  there  is  no  question  of  a  knowledge 
acquired  independently  of  experience.  The  whole  point  of  the 
argument  is  that  we  should  never  be  "  put  in  mind  "  of  the  "  forms/' 
but  for  the  suggestion  of  the  senses.  Again,  the  most  important 
feature  of  the  process  of  "  being  reminded  "  is  that  sense-per- 
ceptions suggest  standards  to  which  they  do  not  themselves  con- 
form. The  same  visual  sensations  which  suggest  the  notion 
"  straight  "  to  me,  for  example,  are  the  foundation  of  the  judgment 
that  no  visible  stick  is  perfectly  straight.  The  "  form  "  is  thus 
never  contained  in,  or  presented  by,  the  sensible  experience  which 
suggests  it.  Like  the  "  limit  "  of  an  infinite  series,  it  is  approxi- 
mated but  never  reached.  These  two  considerations,  taken  together, 
show  that  the  theory  does  full  justice  to  both  parts  of  the  Kantian 
dictum  that  "  percepts  without  concepts  are  blind,  concepts  without 
percepts  are  empty.11 1  We  may  also  note,  as  Burnet  has  done, 
that  the  stress  laid  on  the  point  that  the  sensible  thing  always  falls 
short  of  a  complete  realization  of  the  "  form  "  means  that  sensible 
things  are  being  treated  as  "  imitations "  (fjn^ara)  of  the 
"  form/'  a  view  we  know  from  Aristotle  to  have  been  Pythagorean. 
It  is  quite  untrue  to  say  that  the  "  imitation  "  formula  only  appears 
in  Plato's  latest  dialogues  as  an  improvement  on  his  earlier  formula 
of  "  participation."  In  the  Phaedo  itself  Socrates  starts  with  the 
conception  of  things  as  "  imitating  "  forms  ;  "  participation  " 
will  only  turn  up  at  a  later  stage  in  the  argument.) 

Simmias  is  particularly  delighted  with  this  argument  precisely 
because,  as  he  says,  it  proves  the  ante-natal  existence  of  the  soul 
to  be  a  consequence  of  the  doctrine  of  Forms,  and  that  he  regards 
as  the  most  clear  and  evident  of  all  truths  (770).  (This  delight, 
by  the  way,  would  be  quite  unintelligible  on  the  theory  that  the 
doctrine  was  an  invention  of  Plato.)  But,  as  he  goes  on  to  say 
after  a  moment's  reflection,  to  prove  that  the  soul  "  arose  "  before 
our  birth  is  not  to  prove  that  it  will  survive  death,  and  it  is  against 
the  fear  of  death  that  Socrates  has  to  provide  an  antidote. 
Formally,  as  Socrates  says,  the  point  would  be  established  if  we 
take  arguments  (a)  and  (J3)  together,  (ft)  has  proved  the  pre- 

1  It  is  very  important  to  remember  that  on  the  theory  there  are  no  "  forms  " 
except  those  which  sense-experience  suggests,  or,  to  use  the  language  which 
will  meet  us  later  in  the  dialogue,  there  are  no  "  forms  "  which  are  not  "  partici- 
pated in  "  by  sensible  particulars.  The  "  forms  "  are  not  Kantian  "  things 
in  themselves."  But  equally  the  "  form  "  is  not  "  the  sensible  thing  rightly 
understood,"  for  the  first  fact  you  discover  about  any  sensible  thing,  when 
you  begin  to  understand  it,  is,  in  Socrates'  phrase,  that  "this  thing  is  trying 
(£oCXrrcu)  to  be  so-and-so,  but  not  succeeding"  (74^).  This  implies  a  "  real- 
istic "  metaphysic ;  from  the  point  of  view  of  "  nominalism/'  "  terminalism," 
or  "  conceptuaiism,"  the  whole  doctrine  is  nonsense. 


THE  PHAEDO  189 

existence  of  the  soul,  (a)  will  prove — on  the  assumption  that  the 
alternate  cycle  of  birth  and  death  is  endless — that  the  souls  of  the 
dead  must  continue  to  exist  in  order  that  men  may  continue  to  be 
born.  But  the  "  child  in  us  "  which  is  afraid  of  the  dark  is  not 
to  be  quieted  so  readily,  and  we  must  try  the  effect  of  a  more  potent 
"  charm  "  on  him  (jja-j8b). 

(b)  SECOND  ARGUMENT  FOR  IMMORTALITY  (786-84^). — This 
argument  goes  much  more  to  the  root  of  the  question,  since  it  is 
based  not  on  any  current  general  philosophical  formula,  but  on 
consideration  of  the  intrinsic  character  of  a  soul.  In  Aristotelian 
language,  the  first  proof  has  been  "  logical/'  the  second  is  to  be 
"  physical."  The  reasoning  adopted  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  the 
familiar  arguments  of  later  metaphysicians  who  deduce  the  im- 
mortality of  the  soul  from  its  alleged  character  as  a  "  simple  sub- 
stance," the  "  paralogism  "  attacked  by  Kant  in  the  Critique  oj 
Pure  Reason.  The  "  proof,"  as  Kant  knew  it  from  the  writings  of 
men  like  Wolff  and  Moses  Mendelssohn,  is  a  mere  ghost  of  that 
offered  in  the  Phaedo.  Socrates'  point  is  not  that  the  soul  is  a 
"  simple  substance," — he  had  not  so  much  as  the  language  in  which 
to  say  such  a  thing — but  that  it  is,  as  the  Orphic  religion  had  taught, 
something  divine.  Its  "  deiformity,"  not  its  indivisibility,  is  what 
he  is  anxious  to  establish  ;  the  indivisibility  is  a  mere  consequence. 
Hence  he  is  not  affected  by  Kant's  true  observation  that  discerption 
is  not  the  only  way  in  which  a  soul  might  perish.  No  doubt  it 
might  perish,  as  Kant  said,  by  a  steady  diminution  of  the  intensity 
of  its  vitality,  if  it  were  not  divine,1  but  what  is  divine  in  its  own 
nature  is  in  no  more  danger  of  evanescence  than  of  discerption. 

Simmias  had  spoken  of  the  possible  "dissipation  "of  the  soul 
at  death.  Now  what  sort  of  thing  is  liable  to  dissipation  and  what 
not  ?  Obviously  it  is  the  composite  which,  by  its  own  nature,  is 
liable  to  be  dissipated ;  the  incomposite,  if  there  is  such  a  thing, 
should  be  safe  from  such  a  fate.  And  it  is  reasonable  to  hold  that 
whatever  maintains  one  and  the  same  character  in  all  circumstances 
is  incomposite,  what  is  perpetually  changing  its  character  is  com- 
posite. Thus  for  the  crude  contrast  between  the  "  simple  "  and 
the  composite,  we  substitute  the  more  philosophical  antithesis 
between  the  permanent  and  the  mutable.  (This  takes  us  at  once 
to  ground  where  Kant's  criticism  would  not  affect  us.  If  the  soul 
is,  in  any  sense,  immutable,  it  is  so  far  secured  against  the  lowering 
of  intensity  of  which  Kant  speaks.)  In  the  kind  of  being  of  which 
we  speak  in  our  scientific  studies,  the  being  we  are  always  trying 
to  define — the  "  forms,"  in  fact — we  have  a  standard  of  the  abso- 
lutely immutable.  "  Just  straight,"  "just  right,"  •"  just  good," 
are  once  and  for  all  exactly  what  they  are,  and  are  invariable. 

1  And  yet,  does  not  Kant's  argument  rest  on  the  erroneous  assumption 
that  if  a  series  has  the  lower  limit  o,  o  must  actually  be  a  term  of  the  series  ? 
But  he  is  at  least  right  in  saying  that  survival  as  a  "  bare  monad  "  would  not 
be  the  kind  of  immortality  from  the  thought  of  which  any  man  could  derive 
hope  or  comfort. 


190          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

But  the  many  things  which  we  call  by  the  same  names  as  the 
"  forms  "  are  in  perpetual  mutation.  (The  "  good  "  man  loses  his 
goodness,  the  "  handsome  "  garment  its  beauty,  and  so  on.)  Now 
these  latter  mutable  things  are  all  things  you  can  touch  or  see  or 
apprehend  by  one  or  other  of  the  senses ;  the  immutable  "  standards  " 
are  one  and  all  apprehensible  only  by  thought  (8<avoias  /\oyioy*a>). 
This  suggests  that  we  may  recognize  two  types  of  objects,  each  type 
having  a  pair  of  characters — the  invisible  and  immutable,  and  the 
visible  and  mutable.1  Also  we  are  agreed  that  we  have  a  body  and 
have  a  soul.  To  which  of  our  types  does  each  of  these  belong? 
Clearly  the  body  can  be  seen,  the  soul  is  invisible  (of  course  "  seen  " 
and  "unseen  "  are  being  used  here  per  synecdochen  for  "sensed,"  "not 
sensed,"  respectively).  In  respect  of  this  character  there  can  be  no 
doubt  of  the  type  to  which  each  belongs.  What  about  the  other  pair 
of  contrasted  characters  ?  As  we  said  before,  when  the  soul  relies 
on  the  sense-organs  in  her  investigations  she  finds  the  objects  she 
is  studying  perpetually  shifting,  and  loses  her  own  way  (TrXavarat) 
among  them.  When  she  relies  on  her  native  power  of  thinking 
and  attends  to  objects  which  are  strictly  determinate  and  un- 
changing, she  finds  her  way  among  them  without  uncertainty  and 
confusion,  and  it  is  just  this  condition  of  the  soul  we  call  "  wisdom  " 
or  intelligence  (^oi^o-is) .  This  would  indicate  that  the  soul 
herself  belongs  more  truly  to  the  type  with  which  she  is  most  at 
home,  the  immutable,  whereas  the  body  certainly  belongs  to  the 
mutable.2 

Again,  in  the  partnership  of  soul  and  body,  it  is  the  soul  which 
is  rightly  master  and  the  body  servant  (the  thought  which  the 
Academy  crystallized  in  the  definition  of  man  as  a  soul  using  a 
human  body  as  its  instrument).  Now  it  is  for  the  divine  to  com- 
mand and  rule,  for  the  mortal  to  serve  and  obey  ;  hence  it  is  the 
soul  in  us  which  plays  the  divine,  the  body  which  plays  the  mortal 
part.  (This  brings  us  at  last  to  the  point  on  which  Socrates  really 
means  to  insist,  the  "  deiformity  "  or  "  kinship  with  God  "  of  the 

1  This  is  identical  at  bottom  with  Dr.  Whitehead's  recent  distinction 
between  "  objects  "  and  "  events,"  e.g.  between  "  Cambridge-blue  "  and 
"  Cambridge-blue-here-and-now."  Dr.  Whitehead,  I  think,  does  not  expressly 
say  that  it  is  only  events  which  can  be  "  sensed,"  but  that  is  really  implied  in 
his  language.  I  see  "  Cambridge-blue-occurring-here-and-now  "  ;  the  object 
"  Cambridge-blue,"  which  does  not "  happen,"  is  suggested  to  me  by  my  sensa- 
tion of  what  is  "  happening  ".  I  recognize  it,  am  "  put  in  mind  of  it  "  by  the 
event  which  happens.  Cf.  Principles  of  Natural  Knowledge,  p.  81  :  "  Objects 
are  entities  recognized  as  appertaining  to  events  ;  they  are  the  recognita  amid 
events.  Events  are  named  after  the  objects  involved  in  them."  This  is 
precisely  the  doctrine  of  "  forms  "  and  of  "  recollection." 

*  Of  course  it  is  not  said  that  the  soul  is  absolutely  immutable.  This 
would  not  be  true  ;  we  can  change  even  our  most  deeply  cherished  scientific 
and  moral  convictions.  But  it  is  true  that,  by  contrast  with  the  body,  the 
.soul  emerges  as  the  relatively  immutable.  My  intellectual  and  moral  con- 
victions do  not  undergo  "  adaptive  "  modifications  to  a  changing  environment 
with  the  readiness  shown  by  my  organism.  My  body,  for  instance,  will  adapt 
itself  to  a  great  climatic  change  more  readily  than  my  mind  to  a  society  with 
a  different  morality  or  religion  from  my  own. 


THE  PHAEDO  191 

soul.  In  view  of  the  standing  Greek  equation  of  "  immortal  " 
with  "  divine,1'  the  formal  inference  to  the  immortality  of  the 
soul  follows  as  a  matter  of  course.) 

The  soul,  then,  is  relatively  the  permanent  and  divine  thing 
in  us,  the  body  the  merely  human  and  mutable.  We  should 
therefore  expect  the  body  to  be  relatively  perishable,  the  soul  to  be 
either  wholly  imperishable  or  nearly  so.  And  yet  we  know  that, 
with  favourable  circumstances,1  even  a  dead  body  may  be  pre- 
served from  corruption  for  ages,  and  there  are  parts  of  the  body 
which  seem  all  but  indestructible.  Much  more  should  we  expect 
that  a  soul  which  has  made  itself  as  far  as  possible  independent  of 
the  mutable  body,  and  has  escaped  by  death  to  the  divine  and 
invisible,  will  be  lifted  above  mutability  and  corruption.  But  if  a 
soul  has  all  through  life  set  its  affections  on  bodily  things  and  the 
gratifications  of  appetite,  it  may  be  expected  to  hanker  after  the 
body  even  when  death  has  divorced  them,  and  be  dragged  down 
into  the  cycle  of  births  again  by  this  hankering.  We  may  suppose 
that  the  place  in  the  animate  system  into  which  it  is  reborn  is 
determined  by  the  nature  of  its  specific  lusts,  so  that  each  soul's 
own  lusts  provide  it  with  its  appropriate  "  hell,"  the  sensual  being 
reborn  as  asses,  the  rapacious  and  unjust  as  beasts  of  prey,  and 
so  forth.  The  mildest  fate  will  be  that  of  the  persons  who  have 
practised  the  "  popular  goodness  "  misnamed  temperance  and 
justice  without  "  philosophy  "  (i.e.  of  those  who  have  simply 
shaped  their  conduct  by  a  respectable  moral  tradition  without  true 
insight  into  the  good,  or,  in  Kantian  phrase,  have  lived  "  according 
to  duty,"  though  not  "  from  duty  ").  These,  we  may  suppose, 
are  reborn  as  "social  creatures,"  like  bees  and  ants,  or  as  men 
again,  and  they  make  "  decent  bodies  "  as  mankind  goes.  The 
attainment  of  "  divinity  "  or  "  deiformity  "  is  reserved  for  the 
man  who  has  resolutely  lived  the  highest  of  the  three  lives,  that  of  the 
"  lover  of  wisdom,"  and  subdued  his  lusts,  not  like  the  "  lover  of 
wealth  "  from  fear  of  poverty,  nor  like  the  "  lover  of  honour  "  from 
concern  for  his  reputation,  but  from  love  of  good.  This  explains 
the  reason  why  the  lover  of  wisdom  lives  hard.  It  is  because  he 
knows  that  what  a  man  comes  to  feel  pleasure  and  pain  about  be- 
comes his  engrossing  interest.  To  find  your  joy  and  woe  in  the 
gratifications  of  the  body  means  to  come  to  be  bound  up  with  its 
fortunes,  and  this  bars  the  way  to  deification  and  binds  you  down 
to  the  wheel  of  birth.  It  is  for  the  sake  of  this  supreme  good, 
"  deification,"  that  the  lover  of  wisdom  denies  "  the  flesh."  To 
consent  to  its  motions  would  be  to  act  like  Penelope,  who  unwove 
by  night  what  she  had  spent  the  day  in  weaving.  Now  a  man 
whose  whole  life  has  been  an  aspiration  to  rise  above  mutability 
to  deiformity  will  be  the  last  person  to  fear  that  the  new  and  abiding 


lThe  meaning  of  tv  rotai/r^  wpg.  (Soc)  has  been  much  disputed.  From  a 
comparison  with  Tim.  24^  6,  Phileb.  266  i,  Critias,  me  5,  1  take  the  meaning  to 
be  "  climate,"  though  I  cannot  produce  another  example  of  the  singular  of 
that  sense. 


192          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

deiform  self  which  is  being  built  up  in  him  will  be  unbuilt  by  the 
event  of  death.1 

(I  make  no  apology  for  having  drawn  freely  on  the  character- 
istic language  of  Christian  mysticism  in  expounding  this  argument. 
Under  all  the  real  differences  due  to  the  Christian's  belief  in  the 
historical  reality  of  the  God-man,  the  ideal  of  Socrates  and  the 
Christian  ideal  are  fundamentally  identical.  The  central  thought 
in  both  cases  is  that  man  is  born  a  creature  of  temporality  and 
mutability  into  a  temporal  and  mutable  environment.  But,  in 
virtue  of  the  fact  that  there  is  a  something  "  divine  "  in  him,  he 
cannot  but  aspire  to  a  good  which  is  above  time  and  mutability, 
and  thus  the  right  life  is,  from  first  to  last,  a  process  by  which  the 
merely  secular  and  temporal  self  is  re-made  in  the  likeness  of  the 
eternal.  If  we  understand  this,  we  shall  be  in  no  danger  of  suppos- 
ing that  Socrates  is  merely  anticipating  the  jejune  argument  from  the 
indivisibility  of  a  "  simple  substance/'  or  that  the  Kantian  polemic 
against  Wolffian  rationalism  seriously  affects  his  reasoning.  The 
thought  is  that  the  real  nature  of  the  soul  has  to  be  learned  from  a 
consideration  of  the  nature  of  the  specific  "  good  "  to  which  it 
aspires.  A  creature  whose  well-being  consists  in  living  for  an 
"  eternal  "  good  cannot  be  a  mere  thing  of  time  and  change.  In  this 
sense,  the  morality  of  the  Platonic  dialogues,  like  all  morality 
which  can  command  an  intelligent  man's  respect,  is  from  first  to 
last  "  other-worldly/' ) 

FIRST  INTERLUDE  (84^-856). — At  this  point  the  thread  of  the 
argument  is  broken  ;  a  general  silence  ensues,  but  Simmias  and 
Cebes  are  observed  to  be  whispering  together,  as  though  they  were 
not  quite  satisfied.  Artistically  the  break  serves  the  purpose  of 
lowering  the  pitch  of  the  conversation  and  relieving  the  emotional 
strain.  It  also  has  a  logical  function.  Impressive  as  the  moral 
argument  for  immortality  is,  there  are  scientific  objections  to  it  of 
which  we  have  so  far  heard  nothing,  and  these  deserve  to  be  care- 
fully stated  and  adequately  met,  since  we  cannot  be  called  on  to 
accept  any  view  of  man's  destiny,  however  attractive,  which  contra- 
dicts known  scientific  truth,  nor  is  Socrates  the  man  to  wish,  even 
in  the  immediate  presence  of  death,  to  acquiesce  in  a  faith  which  is 
not  a  reasonable  faith.  That  would  be  simple  cowardice  (840).  He 
has  just  broken  out  into  his  "swan-song,"  and  like  the  swans,  his 
fellow-servants  of  the  Delphic  (?  Delian)  god,  he  sings  for  hope 
and  joy,  not  in  lamentation.  He  is  therefore  robust  enough  in 
his  faith  to  be  only  too  ready  to  hear  and  consider  any  objections. 

OBJECTIONS  OF  SIMMIAS  AND  CEBES  (850-880). — Simmias  thinks, 
like  a  modern  "  agnostic/'  that  certainty  about  our  destiny  may  be 
unattainable.  He  would  at  heart  like  to  be  able  to  appeal  to 

1  Like  Spinoza,  but  without,  like  him,  being  hampered  by  a  naturalistic 
metaphysic,  Socrates  holds  that  the  man  who  lives  best  has  the  soul  of  which 
the  greatest  part  is  eternal,  i.e.  the  more  thoroughly  you  live  the  philosophic 
life,  the  less  is  the  personality  you  achieve  at  the  mercy  of  circumstance,  even 
if  the  circumstance  is  the  change  we  call  death. 


THE  PHAEDO  198 


"  revelation  "  (a  Ao'yo?  fleios,  85^)  on  such  a  question,  but  agrees 
that,  in  the  absence  of  a  revelation,  one  should  resolutely  examine 
all  human  speculations  on  the  problem,  and  adopt  that  which  will 
stand  close  scrutiny  best.  The  difficulty  he  feels  about  Socrates' 
reasoning  is  that  what  he  has  said  about  the  soul  and  the  body 
might  equally  be  said  about  the  "  melody  "  of  a  musical  instru- 
ment and  the  strings  which  make  the  music.  The  strings  are 
visible  and  tangible  bodies,  are  composite  and  perishable,  the  music 
is  invisible,  incorporeal,  and  "  divine."  But  it  would  clearly  be 
absurd  to  argue  that,  for  this  reason,  the  music  still  exists  and 
sounds  "  somewhere  "  when  the  instrument  is  broken.  Now  it 
is  "  our  belief  "  that  the  body  is  like  a  musical  instrument  whose 
strings  are  its  ultimate  components,  the  hot,  cold,  moist,  and  dry, 
and  that  the  soul  is  the  music  this  instrument  gives  out  when  these 
'  strings  "  are  properly  tuned.  If  this  is  so,  we  may  grant  that 
the  soul  is  "  divine/'  like  all  beauty  and  proportion,  but  we  must 
also  grant  that  disease  and  other  disturbances  of  the  constitution 
of  the  organism  break  the  strings  of  the  instrument  or  put  them 
out  of  tune,  and  this  makes  it  impossible  to  argue  that  because  the 
debris  of  the  broken  instrument  continues  to  exist  after  the  fracture, 
a  fortiori  the  music  must  persist  still  more  immutably  (850-86^). 

Cebes  has  a  different  objection.  He  does  not  attach  much 
importance  to  the  epiphenomenalism  of  Simmias,  but  he  complains 
that  nothing  has  really  been  proved  beyond  "  pre-existence,"  which 
has  been  all  along  regarded  as  guaranteed  by  the  doctrine  of 
"reminiscence."  Even  if  we  grant  that  the  soul,  so  far  from  being 
a  mere  resultant  of  bodily  causes,  actually  makes  its  own  body, 
this  only  shows  it  to  be  like  a  weaver  who  makes  his  own  cloak. 
In  the  course  of  his  life  he  makes  and  wears  out  a  great  many  cloaks, 
but  when  he  dies  he  leaves  the  last  cloak  he  has  made  behind  him, 
and  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  argue  that  he  cannot  be  dead  because 
the  cloak  which  he  made  is  still  here,  and  a  man  lasts  longer  than  a 
cloak.  So  the  soul  might  make  and  wear  out  a  whole  succession  of 
bodies  —  indeed,  if  it  is  true  that  the  body  is  always  being  broken 
down  by  waste  of  tissue  and  built  up  again  by  the  soul,  something 
of  this  sort  happens  daily.  But  even  if  we  go  so  far  as  to  assume 
that  the  soul  repeatedly  makes  itself  a  new  body  after  the  death 
of  an  old  one,  it  may  be  that,  like  the  weaver,  it  exhausts  its  vigour 
sooner  or  later,  and  so  will  make  a  last  body,  after  the  death  of  which 
the  soul  will  no  longer  exist.  And  wre  can  never  be  sure  that  the 
building  up  of  our  present  body  is  not  the  last  performance  of  such 
a  worn-out  soul,  and  consequently  that  the  death  we  are  now 
awaiting  may  not  be  a  complete  extinction  (S6e-S8b). 

These  objections,  Phaedo  says,  struck  dismay  into  the  whole 
company,  with  the  single  exception  of  Socrates.  For  they  appeared 
to  dispose  of  the  whole  case  for  immortality,  and,  what  was  worse, 
they  made  the  hearers,  who  had  been  profoundly  impressed  by 
Socrates'  discourse,  feel  that  they  would  never  be  able  to  put  any 
confidence  in  their  own  judgment  again,  if  what  had  seemed  to  be 


194          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

completely  proved  could  be  so  easily  disposed  of.  Plato  is  careful 
to  interrupt  the  narrative  at  this  point  still  more  completely,  by 
allowing  Echecrates  to  add  that  he  sympathizes  with  the  general 
consternation,  since  he  too  has  hitherto  been  strongly  convinced 
that  the  soul  is  the  "  attunement  "  of  the  body  and  is  therefore 
anxious  to  know  how  Socrates  met  the  difficulty  (SSc-e). 

The  purpose  of  all  this  by-play  is  to  call  attention  to  the  critical 
importance  of  the  two  problems  which  have  just  been  raised.  We 
are,  in  fact,  at  the  turning-point  of  the  discussion.  The  "  moral  " 
argument  based  on  the  divinity  of  the  soul,  as  proved  by  the  char- 
acter of  the  good  to  which  it  aspires,  has  been  stated  in  all  its  im- 
pressiveness,  and  we  have  now  to  consider  whether  "  science  "  can 
invalidate  it.  To  use  Kantian  language,  we  have  seen  what  the 
demand  of  "  practical  reason  "  is,  and  the  question  is  whether  there 
is  an  insoluble  conflict  between  this  demand  and  the  principles  of 
the  "speculative  reason,"  as  Echecrates  and  the  auditors  of 
Socrates  fear,  or,  in  still  more  familiar  language,  the  question  is 
whether  there  is  or  is  not  an  ultimate  discord  between  "  religion  " 
and  "  science." 

As  to  the  source  and  purport  of  the  two  objections  it  may  be 
enough  to  say  a  very  few  words.  That  of  Simmias,  as  is  indicated 
by  the  remarks  of  Echecrates,  is  represented  by  Plato  as  based  on 
the  medical  and  physiological  theories  of  the  younger  Pythagoreans. 
It  is  a  natural  development  from  the  well-known  theory  of  Alcmaeon 
that  health  depends  on  the  Ivovoptrj  or  "  constitutional  balance  " 
between  the  constituents  of  the  organism.  The  comparison  with 
the  "  attunement  "  of  the  strings  of  a  musical  instrument  would  be 
suggested  at  once  by  the  Pythagorean  discovery  of  the  simple 
ratios  corresponding  to  the  intervals  of  the  musical  scale.  From 
this  to  the  conclusion  that  "  mind  "  is  the  tune  given  out  by  the 
"  strings  "  of  the  body,  the  music  made  by  the  body,  is  a  very  easy 
step ;  and  since  we  now  know  that  Philolaus,  the  teacher  of  Cebes 
and  Simmias,  had  specially  interested  himself  in  medicine,  we  may 
make  a  probable  conjecture  that  we  are  dealing  with  his  doctrine 
(which  is  also  that  of  his  contemporary  Empedocles,  Frs.  107,  108). 
Since  the  same  doctrine  appears  in  Parmenides  (Fr.  16),  it  was 
clearly  making  its  way  among  the  Pythagoreans  by  the  beginning 
of  the  fifth  century,  though  it  is,  of  course,  quite  inconsistent  with 
their  religious  beliefs  about  re-birth  in  animal  bodies :  (on  all  this, 
see  E.G.Ph*  295-296). 

In  principle  the  theory  is  exactly  that  of  modern  "  epiphe- 
nomenalism,"  according  to  which  "  consciousness  "  is  a  mere  by- 
product of  the  activities  of  the  bodily  organism,  the  "  whistle," 
as  Huxley  said,  given  off  by  the  steam  as  it  escapes  from  the  engine. 
A  satisfactory  refutation  of  it  must  ipso  facto  be  a  refutation  of  the 
whole  epiphenomenalist  position. 

The  source  of  the  difficulty  raised  by  Cebes  is  different.  His 
allusion  to  the  alternation  of  waste  and  repair  in  the  organism  at 
once  suggests  a  Heraclitean  origin ;  he  is  thinking  of  the  view  of 


THE  PHAEDO  195 

Heraclitus  that  the  apparent  stability  of  "  things  "  lasts  just  so 
long  as  the  antithetical  processes  of  the  "  way  up  "  and  the  "  way 
down  "  balance  one  another,  and  no  longer.  (For  the  evidence 
of  Heraclitean  influences  on  fifth-century  Pythagoreanism,  see 
E.G.Ph*  Index,  s.v.  Hippasos ;  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I.,  87-88.) 
How  "  modern  "  Cebes'  point  is  will  best  be  seen  by  reflecting 
that  the  Heraclitean  theory  of  "  exchanges  "  is  really  a  dim  antici- 
pation of  the  modern  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy.  The 
argument  is,  in  effect,  one  quite  familiar  in  our  own  times.  If  we 
reject  epiphenomenalism  and  admit  interaction  between  mind  and 
body,  it  is  argued  that  the  mind  must  part  with  "  energy  "  in 
acting  on  the  body,  and  Cebes,  like  a  modern  physicist  appealing 
to  the  principle  of  Carnot,  holds  that  this  loss  of  energy  cannot  be 
made  good  indefinitely.  A  time  will  come  when  the  effective 
energy  of  the  \lrvxj  has  been  wholly  dissipated.  Thus  his  criticism, 
like  that  of  Simmias,  is  precisely  of  the  kind  which  a  man  of  science 
is  tempted  to  urge  against  the  belief  in  immortality  in  our  own  day. 
The  one  difference  between  the  two  positions  is  that  the  objection 
of  Simmias  is  primarily  that  of  a  biologist,  the  difficulty  of  Cebes 
is  that  of  a  physicist.  Cebes  may  also  be  said  in  a  way  to  be  antici- 
pating Kant's  criticism  of  the  argument  from  the  "simplicity11  of 
the  soul.  His  conception  of  the  soul  as  perishing  by  wearing  out 
her  stock  of  vitality  answers  pretty  closely  to  Kant's  conception  of 
a  gradual  sinking  of  the  "intensity"  of  "consciousness"  to  the 
zero-level. 

SOLUTION  OF  THE  SCIENTIFIC  DIFFICULTIES  (880-1020). — This 
section  of  the  dialogue  falls  into  three  subdivisions.  There  is  first 
a  preliminary  discourse  by  Socrates  intended  to  warn  us  against 
being  disgusted  with  serious  thinking  by  the  occurrence  of  diffi- 
culties and  so  led  into  mere  "  irrationalism,"  next  a  discussion  of 
the  difficulty  of  Simmias,  and  then  a  longer  treatment  of  the  much 
more  fundamental  problem  raised  by  Cebes,  this  last  subdivision 
receiving  a  special  narrative  introduction  of  its  own. 

(a)  The  Warning  against  Misology  (Sga-gic). — Socrates,  alone 
of  the  company,  shows  himself  calm  and  even  playful  in  the  presence 
of  the  bolt — or  rather  bolts — just  shot  from  the  blue.  The  "  argu- 
ment," at  any  rate,  shall  be  "  raised  again,"  if  he  can  perform  the 
miracle.  But  whether  he  succeeds  or  not,  he  would  at  least  utter 
a  solemn  warning  against  "  misology,"  irrationalism.  Distrust  of 
reason  arises  much  in  the  same  way  as  misanthropy,  distrust  of  our 
fellows.  The  commonest  cause  of  misanthropy  is  an  unwise  con- 
fidence based  on  ignorance  of  character.  When  a  man  has  re- 
peatedly put  this  ignorant  confidence  in  the  unworthy  and  been 
disillusioned,  he  often  ends  by  conceiving  a  spite  against  mankind 
and  denouncing  humanity  as  radically  vicious.  But  the  truth  is 
that  exalted  virtue  and  gross  wickedness  are  both  rare.  What  the 
disillusioned  man  ought  to  blame  for  his  experience  is  his  own 
blind  ignorance  of  human  nature.  So  if  a  man  who  has  not  the 
art  of  knowing  a  sound  argument  from  an  unsound  one  has  found 


190          PLATO :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

himself  repeatedly  misled  by  his  blind  trust  in  unsound  "  discourses/' 
there  is  a  real  danger  that  he  will  lay  the  blame  on  the  weakness 
of  our  intellectual  faculties  and  end  as  a  mere  irrationalist.1  To 
avoid  this  fate,  when  we  find  our  most  cherished  convictions  appar- 
ently breaking  down  under  criticism  we  must  lay  the  blame  not 
on  the  inherent  untrust worthiness  of  "  discourse  "  but  on  our  own 
rashness  in  committing  ourselves  to  an  uncriticized  position.  We 
will  therefore  reconsider  our  case  and  try  to  meet  the  objections 
which  have  been  brought  against  us,  in  the  spirit  of  men  who  are 
contending  honestly  for  truth,  not  for  an  argumentative  victory. 

(#)  The  Objection  of  Simmias  removed  (gic-g^a). — In  the  first 
place,  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  the  difficulty  raised  by  Simmias  is 
incompatible  with  his  own  professed  principles.  He  avows  himself 
satisfied  now  by  what  had  been  already  said  that  knowledge  is 
"  reminiscence/'  and  that,  consequently,  our  souls  existed  before 
they  wore  our  present  bodily  guise.  Plainly  that  cannot  be  the 
case  if  the  soul  is  an  "  epiphenomenon/1  the  melody  given  out  by 
the  body,  the  "  whistle  of  the  engine/'  to  recur  to  Huxley's  version 
of  the  same  doctrine.  The  musical  instrument  must  pre-exist  and 
its  strings  be  screwed  up  to  the  right  pitch  before  the  melody  can 
be  there.  We  may  assert  either  that  all  knowledge  is  "  reminis- 
cence "  or  that  the  soul  is  an  epiphenomenon  ;  we  must  not  assert 
both  propositions  at  once.  And  Simmias  himself  has  no  doubt 
which  of  the  two  positions  has  the  better  claim  to  acceptance. 
The  doctrine  of  "  reminiscence  "  has  been  deduced  from  the 
"  postulate  "  (u7ro0c(m)  of  the  reality  of  the  "  forms,"  a  principle 
which  Simmias  has  all  through  accepted  as  certain.  The  epi- 
phenomenalist  theory  of  the  soul  rests  on  nothing  more  than  a 
plausible  analogy,  and  we  all  know  how  deceptive  such  analogies 
can  be — in  geometry,  for  example  (92^). 

(There  is  real  point  in  Socrates'  argumentum  ad  hominem,  inde- 
pendently of  the  assumption  of  pre-existence.  We  may  compare 
the  story  of  W.  G.  Ward's  crushing  reply  to  Huxley,  who  had  just 
explained  mental  life  to  his  own  satisfaction  by  epiphenomenalism 
plus  the  laws  of  association,  "  You  have  forgotten  memory,"  i.e. 
the  fundamental  fact  of  the  recognition  of  the  past  as  past.  As 
Huxley  had  to  admit,  his  scheme  could  give  no  account  of  recog- 
nition, and  without  presupposing  recognition  it  would  not  work.) 

But  the  epiphenomenalist  theory  is  not  merely  incompatible 
with  our  unproved  postulate  about  "  forms  "  ;  it  is  also  demon- 
strably  false  on  independent  grounds.  There  are  two  things  which 
are  characteristic  of  every  "  attunement  "  or  "  melody  "  ;  every 
"  attunement  "  is  completely  determined  by  its  constituents,  and 
no  "  attunement  "  admits  of  degrees.  If  a  pair  of  vibrating  strings 

1  The  description  of  the  misologist  would  equally  cover  both  the  case  of 
the  man  who  ends  in  pure  scepticism  and  that  of  the  man  who  takes  refuge 
in  a  blind  faith  in  what  he  openly  avows  to  be  irrational.  Socrates  stands  for  a 
fides  quaerens  intellectum  against  both  "  universal  doubt  "  and  indifferentism 
and  blind  ndeism  or  "  voluntarism."  Hence  the  partisans  of  the  one  call  him 
a  "  dogmatist,"  those  of  the  other  an  "  intellectualist." 


THE  PHAEDO  197 

have  one  determinate  ratio,  the  interval  their  notes  make  will  be 
the  fourth,  and  cannot  possibly  be  anything  else  ;  if  they  have 
another  determinate  ratio,  the  interval  will  be  the  fifth,  and  so  on. 
Again,  a  string  either  is  "  in  tune  "  or  it  is  not,  and  there  is  no  third 
alternative,  Between  any  pair  of  notes  there  is  one  definite  in- 
terval ;  they  make  that  interval  exactly  and  they  make  no  other. 
C  and  Gfr,  for  example,  make  an  interval  as  definite,  though  not  as 
pleasing,  as  C  and  G.  "  No  attunement  is  more  or  less  of  an  attune- 
ment  than  any  other."  What  inferences  about  the  soul  would 
follow  from  these  two  considerations,  if  the  soul  is  an  "  attune- 
ment "  ?  It  would  follow  at  once  from  the  second  thesis  that  no 
one  soul  can  be  more  or  less  of  a  soul  than  any  other.  But  we  have 
to  reckon  with  the  recognized  fact  that  some  souls  are  better  or 
worse  than  others.  Now  there  seems  to  be  a  real  analogy  between 
goodness  and  being  "  in  tune/'  and  between  badness  and  being 
"  out  of  tune."  Either  then  we  should  have  to  express  this  differ- 
ence by  saying  that  one  "  attunement  "  (the  good  soul)  is  more 
"  attuned  "  than  another  (the  bad  soul),  and  our  own  admissions 
forbid  us  to  say  this  ;  or  we  must  say  that  the  good  soul  not  only 
is  an  "  attunement  "  but  has  a  second  further  "  attunement  " 
within  itself,  and  this  is  manifestly  absurd.  If  a  soul  is  an  "  attune- 
ment," we  can  only  say  that  every  soul  is  as  much  an  "  attunement  " 
as  any  other,  and  this  amounts  to  saying  that  no  one  soul  is  morally 
better  or  worse  than  another,  or  even  that  all  souls,  since  all  are 
precise  "  attunements,"  are  perfectly  good.  But  this  denial  of 
differences  of  moral  worth  is  manifestly  ridiculous.  The  argument 
is,  then,  that  epiphenomenalism  is  incompatible  with  the  recognition 
of  differences  of  moral  worth,  and  that  these  differences  are  certainly 
real.  A  theory  which  conflicts  with  the  first  principles  of  ethics 
must  be  false,  since  these  principles  are  certain  truth. 

(The  argument,  though  stated  in  a  way  unfamiliar  to  us,  is 
precisely  that  which  weighs  with  men  who  are  in  earnest  with 
ethics  against  a  philosophy  like  Spinoza's.  Though  Spinoza  does 
not  make  "  consciousness  "  depend  causally  on  the  organism,  for 
practical  purposes  his  theory  of  the  independent  "  attributes  " 
works  out  in  the  same  way  as  epiphenomenalism.  The  tyvxn,  though 
not  causally  dependent  on  the  constituents  of  the  organism,  is 
supposed  to  be  mathematically  determinable  as  a  function  of  them. 
Consequently,  just  as  Simmias  has  to  allow  that  no  "  attunement  " 
is  more  or  less  an  "  attunement  "  than  any  other,  Spinoza  holds 
a  rigidly  nominalist  doctrine  about  "  human  nature."  There  is 
really  no  such  thing  as  a  "  human  nature  "  of  which  Peter  or  Paul 
is  a  good  specimen,  but  Nero  a  very  bad  one.  Nero  is  not,  properly 
speaking,  a  bad  specimen  of  a  man  ;  he  is  a  perfect  specimen  of  a 
Nero.  To  say  that  he  may  be'  a  perfect  Nero,  but  is  a  very  bad 
man,  is  judging  by  a  purely  arbitrary  and  "  subjective  "  standard. 
(See  Ethics,  Part  L,  Appendix,  Part  IV.,  Preface.)  But,  if  this  is 
so,  Spinoza  is  undertaking  an  impossible  task  in  writing  a  treatise 
on  the  good  for  man  and  the  way  to  obtain  it.) 


198          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Again,  we  have  to  consider  the  consequences  of  the  thesis  that 
an  "  attunement  "  is  a  determinate  function  of  its  constituents. 
Given  the  constituents,  the  musical  "  interval  "  between  them  is 
also  once  and  for  all  completely  given.  Now  the  most  potent  fact 
about  our  moral  life  is  that  it  is  a  conflict  or  struggle  between  an 
element  whose  rightful  function  is  to  dominate  and  direct,  and  a 
second  whose  place  is  to  obey  and  be  directed.  The  soul  is  con- 
stantly repressing  the  desires  for  gratification  of  appetites  connected 
with  the  body.  (It  is  not  meant,  of  course,  that  the  whole  of  moral 
discipline  consists  in  subduing  such  elementary  appetites  ;  they  are 
taken  as  examples  because  they  are  the  simplest  and  most  obvious 
illustration  of  a  principle.)  The  moral  life  is  a  process  of  subjugation 
of  the  "  flesh  "  and  its  desires  to  the  "  godly  motions  of  the  spirit." 
The  "spirit"  which  dominates  the  "flesh"  clearly  cannot  be  itself 
just  the  "  attunement  "  or  "  scale  "  constituted  by  the  ingredients 
of  the  "  flesh."  If  this  were  so,  the  state  of  soul  at  any  moment 
should  be  simply  the  resultant  and  expression  of  our  "  organic  " 
condition  at  that  moment,  and  there  should  be  no  such  experience 
as  the  familiar  one  of  the  division  of  "  spirit  "  or  "  judgment  " 
against  "  flesh "  or  "  appetite."  (Here,  again,  the  criticism  is 
conclusive  for  a  serious  moralist  against  all  forms  of  epipheno- 
menalism.  The  epiphenomenalist  is  tied  by  his  theory  to  a  "  one- 
world  "  interpretation  of  human  experience  ;  morality  presupposes 
a  "  two-world  "  interpretation.  Its  very  nature  is  to  be  a  "  struggle  " 
between  a  higher  and  a  lower.  If  man  were  merely  a  creature  of 
time,  or  again  if  he  were  simply  eternal,  the  struggle  could  not  arise  ; 
its  tremendous  reality  is  proof  that  man's  soul  is  the  meeting-place 
of  the  two  orders,  the  temporal  and  the  eternal,  and  this,  of  itself, 
disposes  of  the  simpliste  theory  of  human  personality  as  a  simple 
function  of  the  passing  state  of  the  "  organism  "  or  the  "  nervous 
system."  The  epiphenomenalist  psychophysics  merely  ignore  the 
most  important  of  the  "  appearances  "  which  a  true  account  of 
moral  personality  ought  to  "  save."  Like  all  the  arguments  of  the 
dialogue,  this  reasoning,  of  course,  presupposes  the  objective 
validity  of  moral  distinctions  ;  to  the  denier  of  that  vTrotfeo-is  it  will 
bring  no  conviction.) 

(y)  The  Difficulty  of  Cebes  discussed  (95a-i02«). — As  has  been 
said  already,  the  difficulty  raised  by  Cebes  is  of  a  much  more  serious 
kind  than  that  of  Simmias.  As  the  subsequent  history  of  psychology 
has  proved,  epiphenomenalism  is  after  all  a  thoughtless  and  in- 
coherent theory  based  on  hopelessly  misleading  analogies  and  in- 
competent to  take  account  of  the  obvious  facts  of  mental  life.  The 
theory  on  which  Cebes  is  relying  is  a  very  different  matter  ;  he  is 
appealing  to  the  first  principles  of  a  <c  mechanical  "  philosophy  of 
nature.  Put  in  modern  language,*  his  contention  comes  to  this, 
that  the  action  of  mind  on  body  presupposed  in  ethics  cannot  be 
reconciled  with  the  principles  of  natural  science  except  by  supposing 
that  mind  "  expends  energy  "  in  doing  its  work  of  "  direction." 
If  this  expenditure  of  energy  goes  on  without  compensation,  a 


THE  PHAEDO  19& 

time  must  come  when  the  available  energy  of  the  mind  is  exhausted. 
Thus  the  issue  raised  is  at  bottom  that  which  is  still  with  us,  of  the 
universal  validity  of  the  postulates  of  a  mechanical  interpretation 
of  nature. 

Does  the  guiding  influence  of  intelligence  on  bodily  movement 
come  under  the  scope  of  the  two  great  laws  of  the  Conservation 
and  the  Degradation  of  Energy  ?  If  it  does,  we  must  look  with 
certainty  to  the  disappearance  of  our  personality  after  the  lapse  of 
some  finite  duration  ;  if  it  does  not,  the  principles  of  mechanics 
are  not  of  universal  application.  The  development  of  Energetics 
in  the  nineteenth  century  has  enabled  us  to  state  the  problem  with 
a  precision  which  would  have  been  impossible  not  merely  to  Plato, 
but  even  to  Descartes  or  Leibniz,  but  in  principle  the  problem  itself 
has  remained  the  same  under  all  these  developments  ;  Socrates 
in  this  part  of  the  Phaedo  is  dealing  with  the  very  question  which 
is  the  theme,  for  instance,  of  James  Ward's  Naturalism  and 
Agnosticism. 

The  importance  of  the  problem  demands  that  we  should  formu- 
late it  with  very  special  care.  We  may  state  it  thus.  Granting  the 
"  real  distinction  of  mind  from  body,"  it  is  possible  that  in  every 
act  of  intercourse  with  the  body  the  mind  parts  with  energy  which 
it  cannot  recover  ;  if  that  is  so,  its  progress  to  destruction  begins 
with  its  very  first  entrance  into  contact  with  a  body,  and  the  com- 
pletion of  the  progress  is  only  a  matter  of  time  (95^).  Now  in 
discussing  this  problem  we  are  driven  to  face  a  still  more  funda- 
mental one,  the  question  of  "  the  causes  of  coming  into  being  and 
passing  out  of  being  "(950),  that  is,  the  question  of  the  adequacy  of 
the  whole  mechanical  interpretation  of  Nature.  Socrates'  object 
is  to  persuade  his  friends  that  no  single  process  in  Nature  is  ade- 
quately explained  by  the  mechanical  interpretation.  He  can 
most  readily  carry  them  with  him  by  first  giving  an  account  of  his 
own  personal  mental  history  and  the  reasons  why  he  gave  up  the 
mechanical  philosophy  in  early  manhood.  This  brings  us  to  the 

SECOND  INTERLUDE  (95e-io2a). — The  Origin  of  the  Socratic 
Method. — (For  the,  to  my  mind,  overwhelming  evidence  that  the 
narrative  which  follows  is  meant  by  Plato  as  a  strictly  historical 
account  of  the  early  development  of  Socrates  I  must  refer  to  Burnet's 
detailed  notes  in  his  edition  of  the  dialogue.  The  main  point  is 
that  the  general  state  of  scientific  opinion  described  can  be  shown 
to  be  precisely  that  which  must  have  existed  at  Athens  in  the  middle 
of  the  fifth  century,  and  cannot  well  have  existed  anywhere  else 
or  at  any  later  time.  The  "  scientific  doubts  "  of  which  Socrates 
speaks  are  all  connected  with  two  special  problems — the  reconciliation 
of  Milesian  with  Pythagorean  cosmology,  and  the  facing  of  the 
contradictions  Zeno  had  professed  to  discover  in  the  foundation  of 
Pythagorean  mathematics.  It  is  assumed  that  the  system  of 
Anaxagoras  is  the  last  great  novelty  in  physics,  and  there  are  clear 
references  to  those  of  Diogenes  of  Apollonia  and  of  Archelaus. 
This  fixes  the  date  to  which  Plato  means  to  take  us  back  down  to  the 


200          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

middle  of  the  fifth  century,  a  consideration  which  disposes  at  once 
of  the  preposterous  suggestions  that  the  narrative  is  meant  as  a 
description  either  of  Plato's  own  mental  development  or  of  the 
development  of  a  "  typical  "  philosopher.  Of  course,  Plato  cannot 
tell  us  at  first-hand  what  Socrates  was  doing  and  thinking  more  than 
twenty  years  before  his  own  birth,  but  he  has,  at  least,  taken  care 
that  his  story  shall  be  in  accord  with  historical  probabilities,  and 
we  may  fairly  presume  that  some  of  the  information  employed  in 
constructing  it  came  to  him  directly  from  Socrates  himself.  Thus 
we  have  as  much  evidence  for  its  accuracy  as  we  can  have  for 
that  of  any  narrative  of  events  related  by  a  narrator  born  a  quarter 
of  a  century  after  the  period  he  is  describing.1) 

The  general  drift  of  the  narrative  is  as  follows.  As  a  young 
man,  Socrates  had  felt  an  enthusiasm  for  "  natural  science  "  and 
made  himself  acquainted  with  the  biological  theories  of  the 
Milesians,  the  Heracliteans,  Empedocles,  the  psychology  of 
Alcmaeon,  the  flat-earth  cosmologies  of  the  lonians  and  the  spherical- 
earth  cosmologies  of  the  Italian  Pythagoreans,  as  well  as  with  the 
mathematical  subtleties  of  Zeno  about  the  "unit "  and  the  nature 
of  addition  and  subtraction.  The  result  of  all  this  eager  study  was 
to  induce  a  state  of  dubitatio  de  omnibus ;  so  far  from  discovering 
the  cause  of  all  processes,  Socrates  was  led  to  feel  that  he  did  not 
understand  the  "  reason  why  "  of  the  simplest  and  most  everyday 
occurrences.  At  this  point  he  fell  in  with  the  doctrine  of  Anaxagoras 
that  "  mind  "  is  the  one  cause  of  order  everywhere.  The  doctrine 
appealed  to  him  at  once,  from  its  teleological  appearance.  If  all 
the  arrangements  in  the  universe  are  due  to  intelligence,  that  must 
mean  that  everything  is  "  ordered  as  it  is  best  it  should  be,"  and 
Socrates  therefore  hoped  to  find  in  Anaxagoras  a  deliverer  from  all 
scientific  uncertainties.  He  expected  him  to  solve  all  problems  in 
cosmology,  astronomy,  and  biology  by  showing  what  grouping  of 
things  was  best,  and  consequently  most  intelligent.  But  when  he 
read  the  work  of  Anaxagoras,  he  found  that  its  performance  did 
not  answer  to  its  promise.  Anaxagoras  made  no  use  of  his  principle 
when  he  came  to  the  details  of  his  cosmology  ;  he  merely  fell  back 
on  the  same  sort  of  mechanical  causes  ("  airs  "  and  "  waters  ") 
as  the  rest  of  the  cosmologists.  Like  them,  he  made  the  fatal 
mistake  of  confusing  a  cause,  or  causa  principalis,  with  "  that  with- 
out which  the  cause  would  not  act  as  a  cause/'  causae  concomitantes 
or  "  accessory  conditions.11  This  was  much  as  though  a  man  should 
say  that  the  reason  why  Socrates  is  now  sitting  quietly  awaiting 
death,  instead  of  being  in  full  flight  for  Thebes  or  Megara,  is  the 
condition  of  his  sinews,  muscles,  and  bones.  The  real  reason  is 

1  The  autobiographical  pages  of  our  dialogue  are  thus  the  ancient  counter- 
part of  Descartes'  Discours  de  la  mtthode  pour  bien  conduire  sa  raison  with 
the  interesting  differences,  (i)  that  though  both  philosophers  are  concerned  to 
simplify  philosophy  by  getting  rid  of  a  false  and  artificial  method,  Descartes' 
object  is  to  revive  the  very  "mechanical"  interpretation  of  nature  which 
Socrates  rejected,  and  (2)  that  Socrates  left  it  to  the  piety  of  another  to  do  for 
his  mental  history  what  Descartes  did  for  himself. 


THE  PHAEDO  201 

that  he  judges  it  good  to  abide  by  the  decision  of  a  legally  consti- 
tuted court ;  if  he  judged  otherwise,  if  he  thought  flight  the  more 
reasonable  course,  his  bodily  mechanism  would  be  in  a  very  different 
condition.  Of  course,  if  he  had  not  this  apparatus  of  bones  and 
sinews  and  the  rest,  he  could  not  follow  up  his  judgment,  but 
it  remains  true  that  it  is  his  judgment  on  the  question  which 
really  determines  whether  he  shall  sit  still  or  run.  This  is  pre- 
cisely what  we  mean  by  saying  that  Socrates  acts  rw,  rationally 
or  intelligently. 

The  disappointment,  Socrates  says,  confirmed  his  opinion  that 
he  was  "  no  good  "  (d<£w)s  ws  ovfev  XPW0-) 1  a^  natural  science, 
and  must  try  to  find  some  way  out  of  his  "  universal  doubt  "  by 
his  own  mother-wit,  without  trusting  to  "  men  of  science/'  each  of 
whom  only  seemed  to  be  able  to  prove  one  thing — that  all  the  others 
were  wrong.  His  description  of  the  "  new  method  "  reveals  it  to 
us  at  once  as  that  which  is  characteristic  of  mathematics.  It  is  a 
method  of  considering  "  things  "  by  investigating  the  \6yoi  or 
"  propositions "  we  make  about  them.  Its  fundamental  char- 
acteristic is  that  it  is  deductive.  You  start  with  the  "  postulate/' 
or  undemonstratcd  principle,  which  you  think  most  satisfactory 
and  proceed  to  draw  out  its  consequences  or  "  implications " 
(av/A/fotWra),  provisionally  putting  the  consequences  down  as 
"  true,"  and  any  propositions  which  conflict  with  the  postulate 
as  false  (loofl).  Of  course,  as  is  made  clear  later  on,  a  "  postulate  " 
(v-n-oOecTLs)  which  is  found  to  imply  consequences  at  variance  with 
fact  or  destructive  of  one  another  is  taken  as  disproved.  But  the 
absence  of  contradiction  from  the  consequences  of  a  "  postulate  " 
is  not  supposed  to  be  sufficient  proof  of  its  truth.  If  you  are  called 
on  by  an  opponent  who  disputes  your  postulate  to  defend  it,  you 
must  deduce  the  postulate  itself  from  a  more  ultimate  one,  and 
this  procedure  has  to  be  repeated  until  you  reach  a  postulate  which 
is  "  adequate  "  (1010  i),  that  is,  which  all  parties  to  the  discussion 
are  willing  to  admit.  (We  hear  more  of  this  part  of  the  method  in 
Rep.  vi.  510-511,  where  we  discover  that  the  ideal  goal  of  the  method 
is  to  deduce  the  whole  of  science  from  truths  which  are  strictly 
self-evident,  but  nothing  is  said  of  this  in  the  Phaedo.)  The  most 
important  special  rule  of  the  method,  however,  is  that,  also  insisted 
on  by  Descartes,  that  a  proper  order  must  be  observed.  We  are 
not  to  raise  the  question  of  the  truth  of  a  "  postulate  "  itself  until 
we  have  first  discovered  exactly  what  its  consequences  are.  The 

1  Of  course  this  is  said  humorously.  It  is  the  man  who  can  discourse 
learnedly  about  "  airs  "  and  "  waters  " — we  might  say  about  "  electrons  " 
and  "  electric  fields  " — and  yet  ignores  the  distinction  between  "cause"  and 
"  accessory  conditions  "  who  is  really,  from  Socrates'  point  of  view,  d$vfys  o>s 
ottev  XP^MO-  for  the  work  of  hard  thinking.  Later  on  (99^),  Socrates  calls 
the  method  he  fell  back  on  a  5etfre/>os  TrXoOs,  or  "  second-best  "  course.  As 
the  phrase  originally  refers  to  taking  to  the  oars  when  the  wind  prevents 
using  the  sails,  the  suggestion  is  that  Socrates'  method  is  "second-best" 
rather  in  being  slower  and  harder  than  the  slap-dash  dogmatism  of  the  physi- 
cists than  in  leading  to  inferior  results. 


202          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

confusion  of  these  two  distinct  problems  is  the  great  error  of  the 
dvrtXoytKot  (loie).  In  spite  of  his  humorous  depreciation  of 
his  proceeding  as  that  of  an  amateur,  Socrates  has  evidently,  like 
Descartes,  reflected  carefully  on  the  nature  of  geometrical  method, 
and,  like  him,  he  is  proposing  to  introduce  the  same  method  into 
scientific  inquiry  in  general.  An  illustration,  he  says,  may  be  given 
by  considering  his  own  familiar  practice  of  "  postulating  "  such 
"  forms  "  as  "  the  good/'  "  beauty/1  and  the  rest.  He  intends,  in 
a  few  minutes,  to  show  that  if  this  "  postulate  "  is  made,  the  im- 
mortality of  the  soul  will  follow  as  an  implication  (ioo&).  (There 
is  no  question  of  proving  the  "  postulate  "  itself,  as  the  whole 
company  are  ready  to  concede  it.)  At  this  point  we  leave  the 
autobiographical  narrative  and  pass  to  an  application  of  the 
"  postulate "  of  "  forms "  to  the  theory  of  causation,  which 
is  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the  final  argument  for  immortality 
(iooc-i02a). 

What  Socrates  intends  to  explain  is  what  we  have  learned  from 
Aristotle  to  call  "  formal  "  causality,  but  he  has  no  technical 
terminology  ready  to  hand  and  therefore  makes  his  meaning  clear 
by  examples.  If  we  ask  why  something  is  beautiful,  we  may  be  told 
in  one  case,  "because  it  has  a  bright  colour/'  in  another  "because 
it  has  such-and-such  a  shape/1  The  point  that  Socrates  wants  to 
make  is  that  such  answers  are  insufficient.  There  must  ultimately 
be  one  single  reason  why  we  can  predicate  one  and  the  same  char- 
acter, beauty,  in  all  these  cases.  Having  a  bright  colour  cannot  be 
the  cause  of  beauty,  since  the  thing  we  call  beautiful  on  the  strength 
of  its  shape  may  not  be  coloured  at  all ;  having  a  particular  shape 
cannot  be  the  cause  of  beauty,  since  we  pronounce  things  which 
have  not  that  shape  to  be  beautiful,  on  the  strength  of  their  colour, 
and  so  on.  Hence  Socrates  says  he  rejects  all  these  learned  ex- 
planations and  sticks  to  the  simple  one  that  universally  the  reason 
why  anything  is  beautiful  is  that  "  beauty  "  is  "  present  to  it/' 
or  that  it  "  partakes  of  "  beauty.  The  thought  is  that  whenever 
we  are  justified  in  asserting  the  same  predicate  univocaUy  of  a 
plurality  of  logical  subjects,  the  predicate  in  every  case  names  one 
and  the  same  "  character."  It  is  these  characters  which  Socrates 
calls  "  forms."  We  might  call  them  "  universals  "  if  we  bear  two 
cautions  carefully  in  mind.  They  are  not  to  be  supposed  to  be 
"  ideas  in  our  minds  "  or  anything  of  that  sort ;  they  are  realities 
of  which  we  think.  Also,  as  the  case  of  "  beauty  "  is  well  adapted 
to  show,  a  "  form  "  may  be  "  present  "  to  a  thing  in  very  varying 
degrees.  A  thing  may  be  very  beautiful,  or  it  may  be  only  very 
imperfectly  beautiful,  and  it  may  well  be  that  nothing  is  super- 
latively and  completely  beautiful.  We  should  also  note  that  the 
precise  character  of  the  relation  which  Socrates  calls  "  presence  " 
or  "  participation  "  or  "  communication  "  (gotiwyta)  is  nowhere 
explained,  and  his  hesitation  about  the  name  for  this  relation  (lood) 
may  perhaps  mean  that  he  feels  that  there  is  an  unsolved  problem 
involved  by  his  "  postulate."  There  obviously  is  such  a  problem. 


THE  PHAEDO  208 

We  naturally  ask  ourselves  at  once  what  else  a  particular  sensible 
thing  is,  besides  being  a  complex  of  "  forms  "  or  "  characters/' 
As  far  as  the  Phaedo  goes,  we  are  not  told  that  the  thing  is  any  more 
than  a  "  bundle  of  universals."  The  attempt  to  say  what  else  it 
is  has  played  a  prominent  part  in  later  philosophy.  Plato's  answer 
has  to  be  collected  with  difficulty  from  Aristotle's  scattered  notices 
of  his  informal  oral  discourses.  Aristotle  and  the  mediaeval 
Aristotelians  tried  to  answer  the  same  question  by  their  doctrine 
of  "  matter  "  and  "  form/'  Scotus  by  the  difficult  doctrine  of 
haecceitas.  But  there  is  no  evidence  that  Socrates  had  any  answer 
to  the  difficulty.  The  immediate  point  is  simply  that  if  we  admit 
the  existence  of  "  forms/'  we  must  say  in  every  case  that  the 
"  cause  "  or  "  reason  "  why  a  predicate  ft  can  be  asserted  of  a 
thing  a  is  that  a  corresponding  "  form  "  B  "  is  present  "  to  a,  or 
that  a  "  partakes  of  "  the  "  form  "  B.  How  it  has  come  to  do  so 
is  a  different  question,  and  we  must  not  suffer  ourselves  to  be  led 
away  on  a  false  trail.  (The  question  is,  e.g.,  "  Why  is  this  thing  now 
beautiful  ?  What  do  I  mean  by  calling  it  so  ?  not,  What  had  to 
be  done  to  it  before  I  could  call  it  so  ?  ) l 

We  might  seem  here  to  have  lost  sight  of  the  insistence  on 
teleology  which  had  marked  Socrates'  comments  on  Anaxagoras, 
but  there  is  really  a  close  connexion  between  "  end  "  and  "  formal 
cause,"  as  Aristotle  was  to  show  at  length.  To  say  that  the  primary 
problem  is  always  to  explain  what  a  thing  is  by  reference  to  its 
"  form  "  carries  the  implication  that  we  have  to  explain  the  origins 
and  rudimentary  phases  of  things  by  what  the  things  are,  when  they 
are  at  last  there,  not  to  explain  what  they  are  by  discoursing  on 
their  origins,  and  this  is  precisely  what  we  mean  by  taking  a 
"  teleological  "  point  of  view.  But  it  would  take  us  too  far  away 
from  the  Phaedo  to  discuss  the  full  implications  of  such  teleology.2 

At  the  point  we  have  reached,  the  narrative  of  Phaedo  is  once 
more  broken  in  order  that  Echecrates,  as  a  mathematician,  may 
express  his  high  approval  of  Socrates'  doctrine  of  method  (which,  in 
fact,  is  pretty  plainly  inspired  by  the  example  of  Zeno  in  his  famous 
polemic,  the  point  of  which  was  to  show  that  there  must  be  some- 
thing amiss  with  the  "  postulates "  of  the  early  Pythagorean 

1  The  importance  of  Socrates'  warning  against  substituting  some  other 
problem  for  that  of  the  formal  cause  is  well  illustrated  by  the  perpetual 
confusion  in  our  own  times  between  explaining  what  a  thing  is  and  theorizing 
about  its  origin.     Thus  we  are  incessantly  being  offered  speculations  about  the 
way  in  which  morality  or  religion  or  art  may  have  originated  as  if  they  were 
answers  to  the  question  what  art  or  religion  or  morality  is. 

2  One  obvious  implication  may  just  be  mentioned.    As  the  earlier  stages  in 
our  own  life  can  only  be  fully  explained  in  the  light  of  what  we  were  then 
going  to  be,  so  to  explain  a  man's  life  as  a  whole  we  need  to  know  not  only 
what  he  is  now,  but  what  he  may  yet  grow  to  be.     Thus  the  problem  of  our 
ultimate  destiny  is  strictly  relevant  to  the  ethical  problem  proper,  on  what 
principles  we  ought  to  regulate  our  present  conduct.     It  is  idle  to  say  that  it 
"  makes  no  difference  to  ethics  "  whether  the  soul  is  immortal.     It  ought  to 
make  all  the  difference,  just  as  it  makes  all  the  difference  to  the  rules  of  the 
nursery  that  babies  do  not  remain  babies. 


204          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

geometers,  since  they  could  be  shown  to  lead  to  pairs  of  contra- 
dictory implications).    We  then  embark  formally  on  the 

(c)  THIRD  (AND  FINAL)  PROOF  OF  IMMORTALITY  (io2a-io7&). — 
The  "  forms  "  had  entered  incidentally  into  both  the  proposed 
proofs  which  have  been  already  examined.  In  this  final  proof  we 
are  offered  a  direct  deduction  of  immortality  from  the  fundamental 
postulate  that  the  "  forms  "  exist.  This  marks  the  argument  as 
intended  to  be  the  climax  of  the  whole  reasoning,  since  the  proof,  if 
successful,  must  be  recognized  as  complete  by  Cebes  or  any  one 
else  who  regards  the  reality  of  the  "  forms  "  as  the  basis  of  his 
whole  philosophy. 

We  have,  in  the  first  place,  to  stipulate  for  an  unusual  accuracy 
of  expression  which  is  necessary  if  we  are  to  avoid  fallacy.  We 
commonly  speak,  for  example,  of  one  man  as  taller  or  shorter  than 
another.  We  say  Simmias  is  taller  than  Socrates  but  not  so  tall  as 
Phaedo.  On  the  face  of  it  this  looks  as  though  we  were  calling 
Simmias  at  once  tall  and  short,  and  therefore  asserting  the  simul- 
taneous presence  in  him  of  two  "  opposed  "  Forms.  But  all  we 
really  mean  is  that  Simmias  happens  to  be  relatively  taller  than 
Socrates  and  shorter  than  Phaedo.  It  is  not  "  in  virtue  of  being 
Simmias  "  (en  sa  qualite  de  Simmias)  that  these  things  can  be  pre- 
dicated of  him.  The  distinction  here  taken  is  that  between  essential 
and  accidental  predication  since  made  familiar  to  us  all  by  Aristotelian 
logic.  Or,  in  scholastic  terminology,  it  is  the  distinction  between 
an  intrinsic  and  an  extrinsic  denomination.  The  point  has  to  be 
made,  because  the  force  of  the  argument  now  to  be  produced  depends 
on  the  fact  that  it  deals  entirely  with  essential  predication. 

This  being  premised,  we  may  go  on  to  assert  (a)  that  not  only 
will  no  "  form/1  e.g.  magnitude,  combine  with  an  opposed  "  form," 
but  further,  "  the  magnitude  in  us  will  never  admit  the  small " 
(i02d).  That  is,  not  only  can  we  dismiss  at  once  as  false  such 
assertions  as  that  "  virtue  is  vice,"  "  unity  is  plurality,"  but  we 
can  also  equally  dismiss  any  proposition  in  which  a  subject,  other 
than  a  "  form,"  of  which  that  form  is  essentially  predicated,  is 
qualified  by  a  predicate  opposed  to  that  which  attaches  to  it 
essentially  in  virtue  of  the  "  form  "  under  consideration.  Thus,  if 
"  shortness  "  were  an  essential  predicate  of  Socrates,  we  could  say 
that  "  Socrates  is  tall  "  must  be  false  ;  it  is  only  because  a  given 
stature  is  an  "  accident  "  of  Socrates  that  it  is  possible  to  say  of  him 
at  one  date  that  he  is  short,  but  at  another  (when  he  has  grown) 
that  he  is  "  tall."  (Or  to  take  an  example  which  perhaps  illustrates 
the  point  even  better,  not  only  is  it  absurd  to  say  that  virtue  itself 
is  vice,  it  would  also  be  absurd  to  say  "  the  virtues  of  the  old  pagans 
were  splendid  vices,"  if  we  meant  such  a  phrase  as  anything  more 
than  a  rhetorical  exaggeration.)  When  a  "  form  "  opposite  to  that 
which  is  essential  to  a  certain  thing  "  advances  "  to  "  occupy  "  the 
thing,  the  original  "  form  "  cannot  subsist  side  by  side  with  its 
rival  in  joint  occupation  of  the  ground.  It  must  either  "  beat  its 
retreat "  (\>ir€K%<i>pclv)  or  t>e  "  annihilated "  (dTroAwAo/ai).  (The 


THE  PHAEDO  205 


metaphors,  including  that  indicated  in  the  last  phrase, 
are  all  military.)  And  this  statement  is  quite  consistent  with  that 
of  our  first  "  proof  "  about  the  generation  of  "  opposites  "  from  one 
another.  For  we  were  talking  then  about  "  opposite  things  " 
(Trpay/xara),  and  meant  that  a  thing  which  becomes  cool  must 
have  been  warm,  a  thing  which  becomes  big  must  have  been  small. 
Now  we  are  talking  about  the  predicates  or  characters  of  the  things, 
and  mean  that  hot  does  not  become  cold  nor  cold  hot.  The  two 
positions  are  thus  fully  compatible  with  each  other  (1036). 

(/3)  We  can  make  a  further  assertion  which  will  conduct  us 
straight  to  the  conclusion  we  want.  There  are  certain  things 
which  are  not  themselves  "  forms,"  but  of  which  participation  in 
a  given  form  is  an  essential  character.  Thus  fire  is  not  "  warmth  " 
nor  is  snow  "  cold."  But  fire  will  not  "  admit  "  the  form  "  cold," 
nor  snow  the  form  "  warmth."  Fire  is  never  cool  nor  snow  hot. 
As  we  said  already,  when  "  cold  "  attempts  to  "  occupy  "  fire,  or 
heat  to  "  occupy  "  snow,  an  essential  character  of  the  thing  must 
either  "  withdraw  "  or  be  "  annihilated,"  and  in  either  case  the 
thing,  the  fire  or  the  snow,  is  no  longer  the  thing  it  was.  But  we 
may  now  add  that  in  cases  like  that  of  fire  and  snow,  when  each 
of  a  pair  of  subjects  has  predicated  of  it  essentially  "  participation  " 
in  a  form  "  opposite  "  to  one  in  which  the  other  member  of  the  pair 
essentially  participates,  the  same  thing  will  occur.  Thus  "  cold  " 
is  essentially  predicated  of  snow  and  "  hot  "  of  fire.  And  we  may 
say  not  only  the  snow  will  "  retire  "  or  be  "  annihilated  "  rather 
than  allow  itself  to  be  "  occupied  "  by  heat,  but  further  that  snow 
will  not  abide  the  "  advance  "  of  fire.  It  melts  and  ceases  to  be 
snow  when  you  expose  it  to  fire.  (This  is  a  case  of  the  alternative 
of  "  annihilation."  The  snow,  so  to  say,  allows  itself  to  be  "  cut 
up  "  in  defence  of  its  "  position  "  when  the  forces  of  the  fire  make 
their  onslaught.)  So  again  the  number  "three"  is  not  the  same 
thing  as  "  the  odd,"  or  "  odd  number,"  since  there  are  many  other 
odd  numbers,  but  it  "  participates"  essentially  in  the  "  form  "  odd. 
(It  is  true  that  "  three  "  and  the  other  numbers,  unlike  fire  and 
snow,  are  also  themselves  spoken  of  freely  in  this  and  other  dialogues 
as  "  forms,"  but  Socrates  makes  no  difficulty  about  treating  the 
"  participation  "  of  a  sensible  thing  in  a  "  form  "and  the  "  participa- 
tion "  of  one  "  form  "  in  another  as  examples  of  the  same  relation. 
As  we  might  put  it  in  the  terminology  of  modern  "  logistic,"  he 
does  not  discriminate  between  the  relation  of  an  individual  to  a 
class,  and  the  relation  of  total  inclusion  between  one  class  and 
another.)  Consequently  "  whatever  is  occupied  "  by  the  "  form  " 
three  is  also  "occupied"  by  the  accompanying  "form"  odd  ;  the 
cardinal  number  of  every  "  triplet  "  is  an  odd  integer.  Hence  no 
triplet  will  allow  itself  to  be  "  occupied  "  by  the  "  form  "  even 
number.  You  cannot  make  an  even  triplet  (e.g.,  when  a  man's 
fourth  child  is  born,  the  class  "  children  of  So-and-so  "  does  not 
become  an  even  triplet  ;  it  ceases  to  be  a  triplet  as  well  as  to  be 
"  odd."  This  is  an  example  of  the  alternative  of  "  withdrawal  " 


206          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

or  "  retreat/1  since  "  oddness  "  is  not,  like  low  or  high  temperature, 
a  character  which  can  be  "  destroyed/1  The  whole  "  universe  " 
might  conceivably  be  reduced  to  a  uniform  low  temperature,  but 
not  the  number-series  to  a  series  with  all  its  terms  even.) 

We  now  apply  these  results  to  the  case  of  the  soul.  Life  is  a 
necessary  concomitant  of  the  presence  of  a  soul,  as  illness  is  of  the 
presence  of  fever,  or  heat  of  the  presence  of  fire.  A  soul  always 
brings  life  with  it  to  any  body  in  which  it  is  present.  Now  there 
is  an  "  opposite  "  to  life,  namely,  death.  Hence  we  may  say  that 
a  soul  will  never  allow  itself  to  be  occupied  by  the  opposite  of 
the  character  it  always  carries  with  itself.  That  is,  life  may  be 
essentially  predicated  of  the  soul  and  therefore  death  can  never  be 
predicated  of  it.  Thus  the  soul  is,  in  the  literal  sense  of  the  word, 
"  undying  "  (aiOdvaTos)  ;  that  is,  the  phrase  "  a  dead  soul  "  would 
be  a  contradictio  in  adjecto.  So  much  has  now  been  actually  de- 
monstrated (1050). 

Of  course  this  does  not  take  us  the  whole  of  the  way  we  wish  to 
go.  What  has  been  "  demonstrated,"  and  would  probably  not  be 
denied  by  anyone,  is  that,  properly  speaking,  "  death  "  is  a  process 
which  belongs  to  the  bodily  organism.  It  is  the  body  which  dies, 
speaking  strictly,  not  its  "  mind/'  But  to  prove  that  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  a  "  dead  soul,"  though  there  are  dead  bodies,  does 
not  prove  that  the  soul  oontinues  to  live  after  the  body  has  died, 
and  Socrates  is  well  aware  of  this.  His  demonstration,  on  his  own 
admission,  leaves  us  with  an  alternative  :  since  "  dead  "  cannot  be 
predicated  of  a  soul,  the  soul  must  either  be  annihilated  or  must 
"  retire  "  when  the  body  dies.  Socrates'  faith  is  that  the  second 
member  of  the  alternative  is  correct,  but  the  emphatic  "  so  much 
has  been  demonstrated  "  of  1050  8  seems  to  show  that,  when  all 
is  said,  this  remains  for  him  an  article  of  faith,  not  a  demonstrated 
proposition  of  science.  Our  decision  between  the  two  alternatives 
will  depend  on  the  question  whether  the  soul  is  not  only  "  undying  " 
but  "  imperishable  "  (di'u>\e#/>os).  If  it  is,  then  we  may  safely 
say  that  what  befalls  it  at  death  is  merely  "  withdrawal  elsewhere." 
He  is  not  actually  called  on  to  argue  this  fresh  point,  since  his 
auditors  at  once  assert  their  conviction  that  if  what  is  "  undying  " 
is  not  imperishable,  nothing  can  be  supposed  to  be  so,  whereas 
there  are,  in  fact,  imperishables,  such  as  God,  and  "  the  form  of 
life."  Thus,  in  the  end,  the  imperishability  of  the  soul  is  accepted 
as  a  consequence  of  the  standing  conviction  of  all  Greek  religion 
that  TO  a.Quiva.Tov  =TO  $ctov  =TO  atfrQapTov.  It  is  the  soul's  "  divinity  " 
which  is,  in  the  last  resort,  the  ground  for  the  hope  of  immortality, 
and  the  divinity  of  the  soul  is  a  postulate  of  a  reasonable  faith 
which  the  dialogue  never  attempts  to  "  demonstrate."  The  last 
word  of  Socrates  himself  on  the  value  of  his  demonstration  is  that  its 
"  primary  postulates  "  (i.e.  the  "  forms  "  and  the  divinity  of  the  soul) 
really  demand  further  examination  (1076  5). 

THE  PRACTICAL  BEARING  OF  THE  DISCUSSION  (lojc-ioSc). — 
This  brings  us  to  the  real  moral  of  the  dialogue.  As  we  have 


THE  PIIAEDO  207 

just  seen,  even  if  we  are  satisfied  with  the  deduction  of  immortality 
from  the  doctrine  of  "  forms,"  that  doctrine  itself  is  a  postulate  which 
is  not  exempt  from  reconsideration.  But  the  mere  admission  that 
the  hope  of  immortality  is  not  irrational  has  a  profound  significance 
for  the  conduct  of  life.  It  follows  that  the  "  tendance  of  the  soul  " 
is  incomparably  the  most  serious  of  human  interests,  and  the  danger 
of  neglecting  this  "  tendance  "  the  most  awful  to  which  we  can 
expose  ourselves.  If  death  ends  all,  it  may  not  matter  so  much 
what  sort  of  soul  a  man  has,  since,  in  a  few  years,  his  wickedness 
will  end  with  his  life.  But  if  the  soul  lives  for  ever,  it  takes  with 
it  into  the  unseen  world  nothing  but  its  own  intrinsic  character  for 
good  or  evil,  and  its  unending  future  depends  on  that.  This  is 
really  what  the  Orphic  stories  about  the  judgment  of  the  dead 
should  teach  us.  On  the  character  we  bring  with  us  into  the  unseen 
world,  our  company  there  will  depend,  and  our  happiness  and 
misery  will  depend  on  our  company.  As  in  the  Gorgias  and  Re- 
public, the  hope  of  immortality  is  thus  used  for  a  moral  purpose. 
The  value  of  faith  in  it  is  that  it  drives  home  the  question  what 
manner  of  men  we  ought  to  be,  if  there  is  an  endless  future  before 
us,  and  thus  invests  the  choice  for  moral  good  and  evil  with  an 
awful  importance  it  would  otherwise  not  have  (Phaedo  lojc  ;  Rep. 
6oSb,  6zib-d.  Plato  enlarges  on  the  same  theme  on  his  own 
account  at  Laws,  904^-9056).  In  the  end,  for  Socrates  and  Plato, 
no  less  than  for  Kant,  immortality  is  a  postulate  of  the  "  practical  " 
use  of  "reason."  * 

I  do  not  propose  to  make  this  chapter  longer  by  dwelling  either 
on  the  impressive  myth  in  which  Plato  fits  an  imaginative  picture 
of  the  future  lot  of  the  virtuous  and  the  vicious  into  a  framework 
supplied  partly  by  a  scheme  of  astronomy  which  seems  to  be  Pytha- 
gorean, and  possibly,  as  the  admiring  comment  of  Simmias  at  109^ 
suggests,  due  to  Philolaus,  and  subterranean  geography  which 
manifestly  comes  from  Empedocles,  or  on  the  famous  description 
of  the  last  earthly  moments  of  Socrates.  I  must  be  content  to 
refer  the  reader  to  Burnet's  commentary,  and,  for  a  study  of  the 
influence  of  the  picture  on  later  eschatology,  to  Professor  J.  A. 
Stewart's  Myths  of  Plato.  It  is  useless  to  discuss  the  question 
how  much  in  these  myths  of  the  unseen  represents  a  genuine  "  extra- 
belief  "  of  either  Socrates  or  Plato,  and  how  much  is  conscious 
"  symbolism."  Probably  neither  philosopher  could  have  answered 
the  question  himself.  But  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  Socrates 
regularly  accompanies  these  stories  with  the  warning  (e.g.  Phaedo, 
n^d)  that  no  man  of  sense  would  put  much  confidence  in  the 
details,  and  that  the  one  thing  of  serious  moment  is  that  we  should 

1  If  the  question  is  asked  whether  the  faith  defended  in  the  Phaedo  is  a 
belief  in  "  personal "  immortality,  I  can  only  reply  that,  though  the  language 
of  philosophers  was  not  to  acquire  a  word  for  "  personality  "  for  many 
centuries,  the  faith  of  Socrates  is  a  belief  in  the  immortality  of  his  ^i/xij,  and 
by  his  ^vxt  he  means  the  seat  or  suppositum  of  all  we  call "  personal  character," 
and  nothing  else.  "  Tendance  of  the  soul "  is  precisely  what  we  call  the 
development  of  "  moral  personality." 


208          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

live  as  befits  men  who  are  looking  for  a  city  that  does  not  yet  appear, 
and  that  the  real  object  of  "  tending  the  soul  "  is  to  make  us  fit  for 
citizenship  in  the  eternal  (Phaedo,  1156).  From  the  historical 
point  of  view,  the  supremely  interesting  feature  of  this  particular 
myth  is  that  it  is  an  attempt  to  get  into  one  picture  the  flat  earth 
of  the  old  Ionian  science  and  the  spherical  earth  of  the  Pythagoreans, 
as  Burnet  notes.  This  is  done  by  imagining  the  sphere  of  the  earth 
to  be  of  enormous  magnitude  and  to  contain  a  number  of  shallow 
depressions  like  that  of  the  Mediterranean  Each  of  these  de- 
pressions will  look  very  much  like  the  flat  earth  of  Anaximenes  or 
Anaxagoras  or  Democritus.  As  Burnet  says,  some  such  recon- 
ciliation of  the  two  cosmographies  may  have  suggested  itself  at 
Athens  in  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  to  some  one  ;  it  would 
be  absurd  to  suppose  that  it  could  ever  have  been  entertained  by 
contemporaries  of  Plato. 


See  further : 

BURNET. — Plato's  Phaedo    (Oxford,    1913)  ;    Greek  Philosophy, 

Part  /.,  Chapters  IX.-X. 
RITTER,  C. — Platon,  i.  532-586. 

RAEDER,  H. — Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung,  168-181. 
NATORP,  P. — Platons  Ideenlehre,  126-163. 
STEWART,  J.  A.—Myths  of  Plato,  77-111   (The  Phaedo  Myth)  ; 

Plato's  Doctrine  of  Ideas,  39-47. 

NOTE. — Plutarch's  essay  de  Genio  Socratis  is  rich  in  interesting 
traditions  about  Simmias  and  the  Pythagoreans  at  Thebes.  It  de- 
scribes Pelopidas  and  his  fellow-conspirators,  who  recaptured  the 
citadel  of  Thebes  from  the  Spartans  in  379,  as  meeting  for  their  enter- 
prise in  the  house  of  Simmias.  Plutarch,  as  a  Boeotian,  was  well  informed 
on  Theban  matters  and  his  story  presumably  has  historical  foundations. 


CHAPTER   IX 
THE  SYMPOSIUM 

THE  Symposium  is  perhaps  the  most  brilliant  of  all  Plato's 
achievements  as  a  dramatic  artist  ;  perhaps  for  that  very 
reason,  it  has  been  worse  misunderstood  than  any  other  of 
his  writings.  Even  in  its  own  day  it  was  apparently  quite  mis- 
apprehended by  Xenophon,  if  one  may  judge  by  the  tone  of  the  very 
inferior  imitation  of  it  in  his  own  piece  of  the  same  name.  Xenophon 
was  led  by  the  form  of  the  dialogue  to  suppose  that  it  is  meant  to 
deal  with  the  sexual  passion  and  to  pit  against  it  a  Symposium  of 
his  own,  which  has  as  its  climax  a  eulogy  of  the  pleasures  of  married 
life.  Our  own  and  the  last  generation,  with  the  poison  of  Romanti- 
cism in  their  veins,  have  gone  farther  and  discovered  that  the  dialogue 
anticipates  William  Blake's  "  prophecies  "  by  finding  the  key  to  the 
universe  in  the  fact  of  sex.  This  means  that  such  readers  have 
sought  the  teaching  of  the  Symposium  in  the  first  instance  in  the 
Rabelaisian  parody  of  a  cosmogony  put  very  appropriately  into 
the  mouth  of  Aristophanes.  The  very  fact  that  this  famous  speech 
is  given  to  the  great  ycXwroTrotos  should,  of  course,  have  proved  to 
an  intelligent  reader  that  the  whole  tale  of  the  bi-sexual  creatures 
is  a  piece  of  gracious  Pantagruelism,  and  that  Plato's  serious  purpose 
must  be  looked  for  elsewhere.  Similarly,  it  is  more  from  the  Sym- 
posium than  from  any  other  source  that  soul-sick  "  romanticists  " 
have  drawn  their  glorification  of  the  very  un-Platonic  thing  they 
have  named  "  platonic  love/'  a  topic  on  which  there  is  not  a  word 
in  this  or  any  other  writing  of  Plato.  We  must  resolutely  put 
fancies  like  these  out  of  our  heads  from  the  first  if  we  mean  to 
understand  what  the  real  theme  of  the  dialogue  is.  We  must 
remember  that  Eros,  in  whose  honour  the  speeches  of  the  dialogue 
are  delivered,  was  a  cosmogonic  figure  whose  significance  is  hope- 
lessly obscured  by  mere  identification  with  the  principle  of  "  sex." 
We  must  also  remember  that  the  scene  is  a  festive  one,  and  that 
the  tone  of  most  of  the  speeches  is  consequently  more  than  half 
playful,  and  rightly  so,  as  the  gaiety  of  the  company  is  meant  to 
set  off  by  contrast  the  high  seriousness  of  the  discourse  of  Socrates. 
It  is  there  that  we  are  to  find  Plato's  deepest  meaning,  and  when 
we  come  to  that  speech  we  shall  find  that  the  "  love  "  of  which  he 
speaks  the  praises  is  one  which  has  left  sexuality  far  behind,  an 
amor  mysticus  which  finds  its  nearest  modern  counterpart  in  the 
writers  who  have  employed  the  imagery  of  Canticles  to  set  forth 
the  love  of  the  soul  for  its  Creator. 

SOI 


210          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

In  form  the  dialogue  is  an  indirectly  reported  drama.  The 
actual  narrator,  Apollodorus  of  Phalerum,  a  friend  of  Socrates  (who 
is  mentioned  at  Apol.  386  as  one  of  the  persons  who  offered  to  give 
security  for  a  fine  of  thirty  minae,  and  at  Phaedo  iijd  as  breaking 
into  hysterical  tears  when  Socrates  drained  the  hemlock,  and  again 
by  Xenophon  as  a  constant  attendant  on  the  master,  at  Mem.  iii. 
ii,  17),  repeats  to  some  friends  the  story  of  the  banquet  held  in 
honour  of  the  first  tragic  victory  of  the  poet  Agathon.  Apollo- 
dorus is  too  young  to  have  been  present,  but  had  the  story  direct 
from  an  eyewitness,  Aristodemus,  of  the  deme  Cydathenaeum, 
apparently  the  same  person  as  the  Aristodemus  whom  Xenophon 
makes  Socrates  take  to  task  (Mem.  i.  I,  4)  for  his  neglect  of  public 
worship.  The  time  of  narration  is  supposed  to  be  "  a  good  number 
of  years  "  (1720)  after  Agathon's  retirement  from  Athens.  When 
that  was  we  do  not  know,  except  that  it  was  after  the  production 
of  Aristophanes'  Thesmophoriazusae  (411)  and  before  that  of  the 
Frogs  (405),  so  that  the  actual  narration  must  be  supposed  to  be  given 
some  time  in  the  last  few  years  of  the  fifth  century.  The  real  object 
of  introducing  all  these  particulars  seems  to  be  to  remind  us  that 
Plato  himself  could  not  have  been  present  at  the  banquet,  and 
does  not  therefore  pretend  to  guarantee  the  historical  accuracy  of 
the  narrative  in  detail. 

It  is  more  interesting  to  remark  the  careful  way  in  which  the 
spirit  of  the  time  is  kept  up  in  the  account  of  the  banquet  itself. 
Not  only  is  the  occasion  itself,  the  first  public  victory  of  a  new  poet, 
a  festive  one,  but  the  year  is  one  in  which  the  temper  of  the  Imperial 
city  itself  was  exceptionally  joyous  and  high.  The  date  is  only  a 
few  months  before  the  sailing  of  the  great  Armada  which  was 
confidently  expected  to  make  the  conquest  of  Sicily  a  mere  stepping- 
stone  to  unlimited  expansion,  possibly  to  the  conquest  of  Carthage 
(Thuc.  vi.  15)  ;  the  extraordinary  tone  of  v/fyus  characteristic  of 
Alcibiades  in  the  dialogue  becomes  much  more  explicable  when  we 
remember  that  at  the  moment  of  speaking  he  was  the  commander- 
designate  of  such  an  enterprise  and  drunk  with  the  ambitions 
Thucydides  ascribes  to  him  quite  as  much  as  with  wine.  We  note 
that  Aristophanes  also  is  depicted  as  he  must  have  been  at  the  height 
of  his  powers,  when  the  Birds  and  the  Lysistrata  were  yet  to  be 
written,  not  as  the  broken  man,  whom  Plato  might  have  known 
personally,  who  could  sink  to  the  tiresome  dirtiness  of  the 
Ecclesiazusae.  In  a  few  months'  time  the  whole  situation  was 
changed  by  the  scandal  about  the  Hermae  and  the  profanation 
of  the  mysteries  ;  Alcibiades  was  an  exile  at  Sparta,  bent  on  ruining 
the  city  which  had  disgraced  him,  and  there  is  good  reason  to  think 
that  at  least  two  other  speakers  in  our  dialogue  (Eryximachus  and 
Phaedrus)  were  badly  implicated  in  the  same  affair.7  For  the 
8^0?  itself,  the  year  may  be  said  to  have  been  the  crisis  of  its  fate. 
It  had  staked  its  all  on  a  great  aggressive  bid  for  Weltmacht  and  the 
bid  failed.  The  city  never  recovered  the  loss  of  men  and  material ; 
1  For  the  evidence  see  Burnet,  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  190-191. 


THE  SYMPOSIUM  211 

the  commander  of  whom  she  had  made  a  deadly  enemy  was  the 
man  who  taught  the  thick-witted  Spartans  where  to  deal  her  the 
wound  which  would,  in  the  end,  prove  fatal.  It  is  part  of  Plato's 
consummate  art  that  he  hints  at  nothing  of  this.  He  fixes  the 
mood  of  the  time  and  of  the  man  of  the  time,  "  flown  with  insolence 
and  wine,"  with  complete  objectivity  and  without  after-thought, 
as  a  background  to  set  off  the  figure  of  "  philosophy  "  incarnated  in 
Socrates.1 

INTRODUCTION  (1720-1780). — Aristodemus,  then,  related  that, 
the  day  after  Agathpn's  victory,  he  met  Socrates  in  very  unusual 
"  festal  array,"  on  his  way  to  Agathon's  dinner-party  and  accepted 
his  proposal  to  join  him.  On  the  way  Socrates  fell  into  one  of  his 
ecstasies  and  left  his  companion  to  enter  Agathon's  house,  where 
he  was  warmly  welcomed,  alone.  Agathon  knew  enough  of 
Socrates'  habits  not  to  be  startled  by  learning  that  he  was  standing 
"  tranced  "  in  the  doorway  of  the  next  house.  He  did  not  make 
his  appearance  until  dinner  was  half  over,  when  he  took  his  seat 
by  Agathon  in  the  gayest  of  humours.  When  the  dinner  was 
finished,  the  party  resolved,  on  the  advice  of  the  physician  Eryxi- 
machus,  that  there  should  be  no  enforced  deep  "  potting  "  and  no 
flute-playing.  They  would  entertain  themselves,  as  sensible  men 
should,  with  discourses.  Phaedrus,  another  member  of  the  party, 
had  often  remarked  on  the  singular  fact  that  though  so  many 
persons  and  things  have  been  made  subjects  of  eulogy,  no  one  has 
as  yet  made  an  adequate  eulogy  of  Eros.2  It  would  be  a  good  way 
of  spending  the  evening  if  each  member  of  the  party  would  deliver 
such  a  eulogy,  beginning  with  Phaedrus,  as  the  source  of  the  pro- 
posal. Socrates  fell  in  at  once  with  the  suggestion  which,  he 
declared,  suited  him  admirably,  as  the  "  science  of  love  "  was  the 
only  science  he  possessed. 

The  main  object  of  this  little  introduction  is  plainly  to  call  our 
attention  to  a  marked  feature  in  the  character  of  Socrates.  He  is  at 
heart  a  mystic  and  there  is  something  "  other-worldly  "  about  him. 
We  shall  hear  a  great  deal  more  about  this  later  on  from  Alcibiades 
when  he  describes  Socrates'  long  "  rapt  "  in  the  trenches  before 
Potidaea,  an  experience  which  may  have  had  a  great  significance 

1  I  do  not  think  it  necessary,  with  Mr.  R.  G.  Bury,  to  look  for  any  hidden 
meaning  in  the  references  made  by  Apollodorus  to  a  less  accurate  narrative  of 
the  scene  given  by  a  certain  Phoenix.  These  touches  are  intended  merely  to 
suggest  that  thfi  incidents  had  aroused  a  good  deal  of  interest  and  been  much 
talked  about.  I  do  not  believe  that  there  is  any  reason  to  suppose  that 
Plato  is  replying  to  charges  made  in  the  KaTarjyopla.  Sow/wlrou*  of  Polycrates 
anywhere  in  our  dialogue.  If  he  had  done  so,  we  should  probably  have  learned 
something  about  the  matter  from  Xenophon  or  from  the  Apologia  of  Lib- 
anius  (which  shows  signs  of  a  knowledge  of  Polycrates'  pamphlet). 

1  Mr.  Bury  naturally  reminds  us  that  there  is  a  chorus  about  Eros  in  the 
Antigone  and  another  in  the  Hippolytus.  But  the  ode  of  the  Antigone  (781- 
80 1 )  deals  with  the  ruin  and  havoc  Eros  causes  and  the  crimes  to  which  he 
prompts  even  "  the  just."  That  of  the  Hippolytus  (525-564)  is  similarly  a 
prayer  against  his  u  tyrannical  "  violence.  Neither  can  be  called  a  eulogy. 
Cf.  E.  Bevan,  Hellenism  and  Christianity t  pp.  93  ff. 


212          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

for  his  "  mission."  A  minor  experience  of  the  same  kind  is  intro- 
duced at  the  outset  to  prepare  us  for  this  narrative  and  for  the  high 
"  other-worldliness  "  of  Socrates1  own  discourse  on  Eros.  But, 
as  with  other  great  mystics,  Socrates'  other-worldliness  is  compatible 
with  being  a  "  man  of  the  world  "  in  the  best  sense  and  knowing 
how  to  adapt  himself  readily  to  the  mood  of  the  gayest  of  com- 
panies. (It  is  worth  noting  that  the  biographers  of  the  fervent 
"  ecstatic  "  St.  Francis  Xavier  dwell  on  precisely  the  same  com- 
bination of  qualities  as  part  of  the  secret  of  his  influence  over 
company  of  every  kind,  and  that  Xavier  himself,  in  his  instructions 
to  his  remplagants,  lays  almost  as  much  stress  on  the  importance  of 
knowing  how  to  win  men  by  being  "  good  company  "  as  on  that  of 
intense  secret  devotion.) 

Speech  of  Phaedrus  (ij$a-i8ob). — Phaedrus  is  known  to  us 
chiefly  from  the  part  he  plays  in  the  dialogue  called  after  him, 
where  he  appears  as  an  amateur  of  rhetoric  and  a  fervid  admirer 
of  the  fashionable  stylist  of  the  moment,  Lysias,  in  contradistinction 
to  Socrates,  who  regards  Lysias  as  intellectually  inferior  to  the,  as 
yet,  little  known  Isocrates.  Socrates  is  made  to  say  of  him  there 
(Phaedrus,  2426)  that  he  has  been  the  cause  of  more  "  discourses," 
either  by  delivering  them  himself  or  being  the  occasion  of  their 
delivery  by  other  men,  than  any  living  person,  if  we  leave  Simmias 
of  Thebes  out  of  account.  If  we  may  trust  the  list  of  names  in- 
serted in  Andocides  i.  15,  he  was  among  the  persons  accused,  a  few 
months  after  Agathon's  dinner,  of  having  "  profaned  the  mysteries  " 
(unless,  though  this  is  not  so  likely,  the  reference  is  to  some  other 
Phaedrus).  In  Lysias  xix.  15  he  is  said  to  have  fallen  into  poverty, 
but  "  not  through  vicious  courses."  There  is  a  well-known  epigram 
in  the  Anthology,  ascribed  to  Plato,  which  makes  him  an  epw/xcvos  of 
the  author,  but,  since  Phaedrus  was  a  man  in  416  when  Plato  was 
a  small  boy,  this  is  chronologically  impossible.1 

The  speech  of  Phaedrus  is  properly  made  jejune  and  common- 
place, for  a  double  reason.  As  a  point  of  art,  it  is  necessary  to 
begin  with  the  relatively  tame  and  commonplace  in  order  to  lead 
up  by  a  proper  crescendo  to  the  climax  to  be  reached  in  the  discourse 
of  Socrates.  And  the  triviality  and  vulgar  morality  of  the  dis- 
course is  in  keeping  with  the  character  of  the  speaker  as  depicted 
for  us  in  the  Phaedrus.  Phaedrus  understands  by  Eros  sexual 
passion,  and  particularly  passion  of  this  kind  between  two  persons 
of  the  same  sex.  At  Athens  these  relations  were  regarded  as 
disgraceful  both  by  law2  and,  as  the  next  speaker  in  our  dialogue 
will  remind  us,  by  general  opinion,  but  literature  shows  that  they 

1  Of  course  the  Phaedrus  of  the  epigram  might  be  another  person.  But 
when  we  find  Agathon  and  Phaedrus  figuring  in  an  Ipvrtfcfo  Xifyo?  by  Plato 
and  also  appearing  as  tpw^vot  in  epigrams  ascribed  to  Plato,  it  is  surely  most 
likely  that  the  epigrams  were  composed  and  fathered  on  Plato  by  some  later 
author  who  had  read  the  Symposium  and  forgotten  that  it  is  Socrates  and 
not  Plato  who  poses  playfully  there  as  an  tywTi/c6s. 

1  For  the  attitude  of  Attic  law  to  ircuSepaorfa,  the  great  source  of  informa- 
tion is  the  speech  of  Aeschines  against  Timarchus. 


THE  SYMPOSIUM  218 

were  in  fact  cultivated  particularly  by  the  "  upper  classes  "  as 
part  of  the  general  craze  for  imitation  of  Sparta.  It  is  important 
to  remember  that  all  such  aberrations  were  strongly  disapproved 
by  the  viri  Socratici.  The  present  dialogue  and  the  Phaedrus  are 
complete  evidence  for  the  theory  and  practice  of  Socrates  ;  Plato's 
attitude  in  the  Laws  is  the  same.  At  Laws  6366  it  is  made  a 
special  reproach  to  Sparta  to  have  set  an  example  of  such  "  corrup- 
tions," and  their  complete  suppression  in  a  really  moral  society  is 
taken  as  a  matter  of  course  at  S^id.1  Xenophon's  attitude  is  the 
same. 

The  argument  of  the  speech  is  that  Eros  is  entitled  to  honour 
on  two  grounds — (a)  his  noblesse,  as  proved  by  his  antiquity,  and 
(b)  the  advantages  he  bestows  on  us.  The.fireLpPintis_£Stablishfid 
by  an  appeal  to  Hesiod  and  the  cosmqgonists  generally,,  who  ^pre- 
suppose Eros — the  impulse_tQ  ^generation — as  an_  original  Jirst 
principle  of  the  universe.  It  is  brought  in  as  a  regular  common- 
place of  encomiasts,  who  are  fond  of  dwelling  on  the  "  pedigree  "  of 
their  hero.  (Socrates  regarded  this  pride  of  birth  as  pure  vanity 
as  he  tells  us  at  Theactet.  ij$a-b,  where  he  criticizes  the  common 
run  of  panegyrists  on  this  ground.)  The  second  point  is  supposed 
to  be  proved  by  the  argument  that  "  love  "  is  the  most  powerful  of 
incitements  to  ambition.  A  lover  will  do  anything  and  endure 
anything  to  win  the  admiration  of  his  "  beloved  "  and  avoid  dis- 
gracing himself  in  his  eyes.  (Note  then  that  Phaedrus  has  no 
conception  of  any  "  good "  surpassing  that  of  the  "  lover  of 
honours.11)  Hence  an  army  of  "  lovers/'  if  one  could  be  raised, 
would  be  invincible.  In  short,  the  great  service  which  Eros  renders 
to  men  is  that  he  inspires  them  with  /xeW  ("prowess").  (This 
was,  in  fact,  exactly  the  view  taken  in  Spartan  and  other  Dorian 
communities,  where  "  homo-sexual  love  "  in  its  coarsest  form  was 
encouraged  because  it  was  believed  to  contribute  to  military 
"  chivalry."  2)  The  point  is  illustrated  by  the  cases  of  Alcestis 
who  died  for  her  "  love  "  Admetus,  and  Achilles  who  died  for  his 
"  lover  "  Patroclus.  Heaven  rewarded  this  devotion  by  restoring 
Alcestis  to  life  3  and  translating  Achilles  to  the  "  isles  of  the  blest." 
Orpheus,  a  mere  "  chicken-hearted  "  musician,  was  not  allowed 
to  recover  his  Eurydice,  because  he  had  not  the  "  pluck  "  to 
die  for  her  but  sneaked  down  to  the  house  of  Hades  without 
dying.  In  substance,  then,  the  speech  simply  amounts  to  a 
defence  of  an  unnatural  practice  on  the  plea  of  its  military 
value.  It  is  an  apologia  for  the  theory  and  practice  of  Sparta. 

1  These  considerations  show  that  we  must  not  put  a  gross  interpretation 
on  the  passing  remark  of  Socrates  at  Rep.  468^.  The  reference  is  merely  to 
innocent  marks  of  affection  and  admiration  which  the  younger  people  are  to 
show  to  the  brave  soldier,  and  is  half  playful  in  tone. 

1  On  this  aspect  of  the  subject  see  in  particular  the  instructive  article  of 
Bethe  (Rheinisches  Museum,  Ixii.  438  fL). 

8  Symp.  1796.  Apart  from  the  play  of  Euripides,  which  Phaedrus  prob- 
ably has  in  his  mind,  this  is  the  first  reference  in  extant  Greek  literature  to 
the  famous  story. 

8 


214        PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

In  manner  it  is  a  poor  and  inadroit  "  encomium  "  of  a  common- 
place type.1 

Speech  of  Pausanias  (i8oc-i8$c). — Pausanias  is  virtually  an 
unknown  figure  to  us.  He  appears  also  in  the  Protagoras  (the 
supposed  date  of  which  must  be  roughly  some  twenty  years  before 
416),  in  company  with  Agathon,  then  a  mere  stripling,  and  Socrates 
is  there  made  to  say  playfully  that  he  should  not  be  surprised  if 
the  pair  are  "lovers"  (Prot.  315^).  Xenophon  has  dutifully 
worked  him  in  in  his  own  imitation  of  the  Symposium  (viii.  32), 
where  he  is  said  to  be  the  "  lover  of  the  poet  Agathon  "  and  to  have 
"  defended  homo-sexual  vice/' 2  This,  however,  is  merely  a  Platonic 
reminiscence.  Xenophon  has  taken  the  remark  of  Socrates  in  the 
Protagoras  with  dull  literalness  and  gone  on  to  attribute  to  Pausanias 
the  remark  about  an  "  army  of  lovers  "  actually  made  in  our 
dialogue  by  Phaedrus. 

The  speech  of  Pausanias,  unlike  that  of  Phaedrus,  really  does 
attempt  to  take  account  of  specifically  Athenian  moral  sentiment, 
and  is  much  more  elaborately  worked  out  in  point  of  form.  He  is 
dissatisfied  with  Phaedrus  on  moral  grounds,  because  he  has  drawn 
no  distinction  between  worthy  and  criminal  "love."  The  dis- 
tinction is  even  prefigured  in  mythology,  which  recognizes  a  differ- 
ence between  a  "  heavenly  "  Aphrodite,  daughter  of  Uranus  without 
any  mother,  and  a  "  vulgar  "  (TTCIV^/AOS)  Aphrodite,  daughter  of 
Zeus  and  Dione.  Since  Aphrodite  is  the  mother  of  Eros,  we  must 
consequently  distinguish  between  a  "  heavenly  "  and  an  earthly 
or  "  vulgar  "  Eros.  The  one  is  admirable,  the  other  not.  In  fact— 
so  far  Pausanias  agrees  with  Socratic  ethics — there  is  a  right  and  a 
wrong  in  all  human  activities,  and  consequently  there  must  be  a 
right  and  a  wrong  way  of  "  being  in  love.11 

The  "..low  'Ifonn^oflQY^hasjtwp  characteristics  :   (i)  its  object 
may  be  of  eiffier'sex,  and  (a)^hat  Tt  loves  in  that  object  is  the  body 
rather  than  the  soul,  and  this  is  why  the  vulgar  lover  prefers  his 
beloved    to    be  ,empty-Tiiea3eJ "J&o^fos)    and   ther^f^^n~ea^ 
qu8^^1The/r5eaveri^"_lpve  is  all  mas^ttnrmTlils'ccmpos^n. 
The  object  of  this  love  is  therefore  always  male  anoTtTie  passion  is  i 
free  from  "  grossness  "  (v/fyis).    It  is  directed  not  on  the  young) 
and  pretty  but  on  an  object  just  on  the  verge  of  manhood,  a  person 
whose  character  promises  assured  lifelong  friendship. 

To  this  distinction  corresponds  the  apparently  self-contra- 
dictory character  of  the  Attic  "  use  and  wont  "  in  respect  of  Eros. 
In  some  communities,  such  as  Elis  and  Boeotia,  the  "  vulgar  "  and 
the  more  refined  Eros  are  both  permitted,  in  the  Ionian  cities  both 
are  regarded  as  disgraceful.  This  is  because  Eleans  and  Boeotians 

1  Cf.  Bury,  Symposium,  p.  xxv.  But  he  is  unjust  to  the  "  sophists  "  in 
suggesting  that  it  is  a  fair  specimen  of  their  performances,  and  1  think  he 
would  be  nearer  the  mark  if  he  had  said  that  the  moral  standpoint  of  the 
speech  is  that  of  an  average  Spartan,  than  he  is  in  speaking  of  "  the  average 
citizen  "  of  Athens. 

1  For  another  clear  echo  of  our  dialogue,  cp.  Xen.  op.  cit.  ii,  26  with 
Symp,  igSc  3.  There  are  plenty  of  others. 


THE  SYMPOSIUM  215 

are  dull  and  stupid ;  lonians  have  been  inured  to  slavish  conformity 
to  institutions  which  serve  the  purposes  of  their  Persian  masters. 
Eros,  philosophy,  bodily  culture,  are  all  discouraged  by  the  Persians 
as  influences  unfavourable  to  acquiescence  in  despotism.  At 
Athens  and  Sparta  (this  last  statement  can  hardly  be  strictly  true) 
social  custom  is  not  so  simple.  Use  and  wont  are  divided  ;  public 
opinion  "  loves  a  lover  "  and  sympathizes  with  all  his  extravagances, 
but  the  young,  on  the  other  hand,  are  expected  to  resist  his  advances 
and  promises,  and  parents  and  relatives  take  all  possible  care  to 
protect  their  charges  against  them.  (Just  as  in  a  "  romantic  " 
society  it  is  thought  honourable  in  a  man  to  practise  "gallantry," 
but  the  point  of  female  honour  to  be  "  cruel  "  to  the  gallant.)  The 
explanation  of  this  apparent  contradiction  is  that  the  difficulties 
put  in  the  way  of  the  "  lover  "  are  intended  to  make  it  certain  that  he 
loves  with  the  higher  and  celestial  kind  of  Eros,  directed  to  the  soul, 
and  that  the  "  beloved  "  is  won  not  by  the  wealth  or  social  posi- 
tion of  the  lover  but  by  his  genuine  "  goodness  "  and  "  intelligence/' 
In  some  respects  the  speech  is  morally  on  a  higher  level  than 
that  of  Phaedrus.  It_is  a  real  contribution _to__the  discusslpii_tp 
introduce  as  fundamentaTijie,^^ 

ignoble  u  love?1 And  Pausanias  is  sp^jai;  foljowingji  right  instinct 
^HeipSESS^^thejib^le  ,frTove  "  ind^er^erit  of  obvious  physical 
jjrettiness  and  attractiveness  and  maintains  that  it^'^bje£t-Js^a 
consortium  totius  vitae  in^th£HIIes:Lsense  oftlie  words.  So  far  he  is 
irFaCCord"wTth  the  distinction  we  should  draw  ourselves  between 
the  love  that  is  little  more  than  a  sensual  weakness  and  the  love 
which  can  lead  to  a  "  marriage  of  true  minds."  To  this  extent,  I 
cannot  agree  with  the  disparaging  estimate  of  Mr.  Bury  (Symp. 
xxvii).  That  Pausanias  conceives  of  a  consortium  totius  vitae  as  only 
possible  between  a  younger  and  an  older  male  is  to  be  explained  by 
the  Attic  neglect  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  education  of  the 
womenfolk  of  the  citizens.  There  is  no  possibility  of  the  "  shared 
life  "  where  one  of  the  partners  is  an  intelligent  human  being  and 
the  other  a  spoilt  child  or  a  domestic  animal,  and  it  is  fair  to  re- 
member this  when  we  find  Pausanias  assuming  that  all  love  of 
women  belongs  to  the  ignoble  kind.  On  the  other  hand,  Pausanias' 
conception  of  the  noble  Eros  is  pitched  far  too  low.  As  his  inclusion 
of  Sparta  as  one  of  the  places  where  the  distinction  is  recognized 
would  be  enough  to  show,  he  quite  definitely  means  to  give  his 
approval  to  what  Socrates  and  Plato,  like  ourselves,  regard  as  not 
merely  "  guilty  "  but  "  unnatural,"  provided  that  it  is  made  the 
basis  for  a  permanent  life  of  intimate  devotion.  The  persons  on 
whom  he  bestows  unqualified  admiration  as  having  achieved  the 
perfection  of  human  excellence  are  just  those  whom  Socrates  is 
made  to  treat  in  the  Phaedrus  much  as  we  should  treat  the  "  knight  " 
who  is  spurred  to  chivalrous  exploits  by  a  love  which,  though 
"  sinful,"  is  not  merely  "  carnal."  (Unlike  Socrates,  Pausanias 
would  clearly  never  have  understood  why  Sir  Lancelot  came  short 
in  the  spiritual  quest  of  the  Sangraal.)  He  does,  indeed,  expect 


216          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

passion  to  be  "  sanctified  "  by  being  pressed  into  the  service  of 
"  goodness/1  but  his  conception  of  "  goodness/1  if  it  is  not  as  crude 
as  that  of  Phaedrus,  who  makes  it  equivalent  to  mere  "  prowess/'  is 
still  unspiritual.  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  who  "  slew  the 
tyrant  "  furnish  him  with  his  standard  of  "  noble  love  "  and  its 
services  to  man.  On  the  formal  merit  of  the  speech,  as  judged  by 
the  rules  of  "epidictic"  introduced  to  Athens  by  Gorgias,  see  the 
remarks  of  Mr.  Bury  in  his  edition  of  the  dialogue  (Introduction, 
xxvii-xxviii). 

Interlude  and  Speech  of  Eryximachus  (1850-1880). — We  must  not 
forget  that  we  are  listening  to  the  speeches  delivered  at  a  gay  party 
by  guests,  many  of  whom  are  in  a  merely  festive  humour.  The 

f-ave  moral  issues  which  have  been  raised  by  the  magnification  of 
ros  will  receive  their  proper  treatment  when  we  come  to  the  great 
discourse  of  Socrates,  but  before  Plato  can  so  much  as  introduce 
that,  he  must  raise  the  imaginative  level  of  the  conversation  to  a 
pitch  at  which  the  first  crude  glorification  of  "  passion  "  only 
survives  in  an  undertone.  Otherwise,  there  will  be  far  too  violent 
a  "  modulation  into  a  different  key."  This  function  of  desensualis- 
ing  the  imaginative  tone  of  the  dialogue  is  to  be  achieved  by  making 
the  speech  of  Socrates  follow  directly  on  one  by  Agathon,  which  is 
a  brilliant  but  passionless  and  fanciful  tissue  of  jewelled  conceits. 
Even  this  needs  to  have  the  way  prepared  for  it,  if  we  are  not  to  be 
conscious  of  too  violent  a  change  of  mood.  Hence  the  two  inter- 
posed speeches  of  Eryximachus  and  Aristophanes  with  the  little 
interlude  which  introduces  them.  The  tone  of  this  part  of  the 
dialogue  is  wholly  playful,  and  I  think  it  would  be  a  mistake  to 
regard  it  as  anything  more  than  a  delightful  specimen  of  "  Panta- 
gruelism."  The  numerous  persons  who  are  unhappily  without 
anything  of  the  Pantagruelist  in  their  own  composition  will  con- 
tinue, no  doubt,  to  look  for  hidden  meanings  in  this  section  of  the 
Symposium,  as  they  look  for  them  in  Rabelais,  and  with  much  the 
same  kind  of  success.  Fortunately,  we  need  not  imitate  them, 
any  more  than  we  need  take  Rabelais'  book  to  be  a  disguised 
treatise  on  the  "  new  monarchy." 

It  was  now,  we  are  told,  the  turn  of  Aristophanes  to  speak,  but 
as  he  was  impeded  by  a  hiccough,  the  physician  Eryximachus  under- 
took to  speak  out  of  order  as  well  as  to  prescribe  for  the  poet's 
"passing  indisposition."  Hidden  allusions  have  been  suspected 
in  this  simple  incident,  but  without  reason.  Aristophanes,  one 
of  the  sturdy  topers  of  the  party  (1766),  is  held  up,  when  his  turn 
to  speak  comes,  by  an  accident  which  is  a  small  joke  in  itself  ;  the 
medical  man  of  the  group,  who  also  happens  to  be  a  sober  soul 
(1760)  not  able  to  carry  much  liquor,  gives  him  professional  aid  and 
fills  up  what  would  otherwise  be  a  gap  in  the  evening's  programme. 
There  is  nothing  here  which  calls  for  a  "  serious  "  explanation. 

Eryximachus  is  presumably  the  same  person  as  the  Eryximachus 
who  was  implicated  in  the  business  of  the  "  profaning  of  the 
mysteries  "  (Andoc.  i.  35) ;  at  least,  there  was  a  certain  Acumenus 


THE  SYMPOSIUM  217 

who  was  also  among  the  denounced  (ibid.  i.  18),  and  the  name  is 
a  very  unusual  one,  so  that  it  looks  as  though  the  denounced  persons 
were  our  physician  and  his  father.  He  is,  we  might  almost  say, 
the  F.R.S.  of  Agathon's  party,  and  all  his  behaviour  is  strictly 
in  character.  He  announces  himself  from  the  first  as  a  very 
"  moderate  drinker/'  and,  as  Mr.  Bury  observes,  takes  his  departure 
later  on,  as  soon  as  the  scene  has  become  one  of  wild  revelry.  His 
speech  is  carefully  adapted  to  his  character  and  profession.  It  is, 
in  fact,  under  the  guise  of  a  panegyric  of  Eros,  a  little  discourse 
on  the  principles  of  "  science/'  especially  of  medical  science.  The 
scientific,  and  particularly  the  medical  man,  is  the  real  repository 
of  the  secrets  of  love.  The  style  of  the  speech  is  appropriately 
sober,  free  from  the  artifices  of  rhetoric  and  marked  by  a  plentiful 
use  of  professional  terminology.  We  may,  with  Mr.  Bury,  call 
him  a  "  pedant/1  if  we  do  him  the  justice  to  believe  that  the  pedantry 
is,  of  course,  part  of  the  fun  of  the  evening  and  is  presumably 
intentional.  The  learned  man  is  presumably  amusing  himself, 
as  an  eminent  man  of  science  might  do  to-day  in  an  after-dinner 
speech,  by  making  a  little  decorous  "  game  "  of  his  own  professional 
occupations.  I  see  no  need  to  suppose  that  Plato  intends  any  serious 
satire  on  the  "  science  "  of  the  speaker,  especially  as  it  represents 
the  views  of  the  Sicilian  medical  school,  the  very  type  of  biology 
from  which  both  Plato  and  Aristotle  draw  the  biological  analogies 
which  play  so  large  a  part  in  their  ethics. 

Eryximachus  opens  his  speech  by  giving  emphatic  assent  to 
the  distinction  between  a  good  and  a  bad  Eros,  but  protests  against 
looking  for  the  effects  of  these  contrasted  forces  exclusively  in  the 
souls  of  men.  -  They  can  be  traced  everywhere  in  the  structure  of 
the  universe,  no  less  than  in  the  human  organism.1  This  may  be 
illustrated  from  medicine.  The  healthy  and  the  diseased  con- 
stituents of  the  body  have  both  their  "  cravings  "  ;  there  are  whole- 
some appetitions  and  morbid  appetitions.  The  business  of  medical 
science  is  to  gratify  the  one  and  check  the  other.  We  might  define 
the  science  as  "  knowledge  of  the  body's  passions  for  repletion  and 
evacuation,"  and  the  man  who  can  tell  which  of  these  "  passions  " 
are  healthy  and  which  "  morbid,"  and  can  replace  the  morbid 
cravings  in  his  patient  by  healthy  ones,  is  the  complete  physician. 
The  body  is,  in  fact,  composed  of  "  opposites  "  which  are  at  strife 
with  one  another,  the  hot,  the  cold,  the  dry,  the  moist,  etc.  ;  medi- 
cine is  the  art  which  produces  "  love  and  concord  "  between  these 
opposites.  The  task  of  "  gymnastic/'  agriculture,  music,  is  pre- 
cisely similar,  and  this  may  be  what  Heraclitus  meant  by  saying, 
"It  is  drawn  together  in  being  drawn  apart/1  and  talking  of  the 
"  concord  of  opposites/'  though  his  language  is  inadequate,  since 
in  the  establishment  of  "  concord,"  the  previous  "  opposition  "  is 

1  1866,  Kdl  KO.T  dvOpu)irtva  Kal  Karb  Beta  irpdynara,  i.e.  not  only  in  biology  but 
in  physics.  The  6eta  here  gets  its  meaning  from  the  habit,  universal  in 
Ionian  science,  of  giving  the  name  0€6$  or  Oeot,  in  a  purely  secular  sense,  to 
the  assumed  primitive  body  or  bodies. 


218          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

cancelled  out  and  disappears.  In  music,  again,  we  can  distinguish 
the  "  good  "  and  the  "  bad  "  Eros.  The  "  good  Eros  "  is  exemplified 
by  those  scales  in  which  a  really  cultivated  taste  takes  pleasure, 
the  "  bad  "  by  those  which  tickle  the  fancy  of  the  vulgar.  So  in 
the  wider  world  of  the  physicist,  a  good  and  healthy  climate  is  a 
right  and  equable  "  temperament  "  (K/mo-ts)  of  heat  and  cold,  rain 
and  dry  weather,  a  bad  climate  is  an  instance  of  the  "  violent  " 
Eros  ;  it  is  an  unhealthy  "  blend  "  of  heat  and  cold,  dry  and  wet 
weather.  Astronomy  thus  is  another  science  of  "  love.'1  So, 
there  is  a  "  good  "  and  a  "  bad  "  Eros  of  gods  and  men  ;  a  religious 
and  an  irreligious  way  of  sacrificing  and  interpreting  signs  and 
portents,  and  the  professional  knowledge  of  the  priest  and  seer 
becomes  another  example  of  the  science  of  Erotics. 

Thus  the  point  of  the  speech  is  to  insist  on  the  cosmic  signi- 
ficance of  Eros.  The  underlying  thought  is  that  nature  is  every- 
where made  up  of  "  opposites,"  which  need  to  be  combined  or 
supplemented  by  one  another  ;  they  may  be  combined  either  in 
proportions  which  make  for  stability,  and  then  the  result  is  tem- 
perate climate,  health,  prosperity,  tranquillity,  or  in  proportions 
which  lead  to  instability,  and  the  result  is  then  cataclysms  of  nature, 
disease,  misfortune,  violent  and  unwholesome  excitement.  The 
business  of  science  in  all  cases  is  to  discover  the  proportions  upon 
which  the  "  good  "  results  depend.  The  sources  of  the  doctrine 
are  easily  indicated.  We  detect  the  influence  of  the  Heraclitean 
conception  of  the  balance  of  "  exchanges  "  as  the  explanation  of 
the  seeming  permanences  of  the  world-order,  the  Pythagorean 
doctrine  that  all  things  are  combinations  of  "  opposites,"  and  of  the 
special  biological  working  out  of  the  thought  which  is  characteristic 
of  the  philosophy  of  Empedocles,  the  founder  of  Sicilian  medicine. 
The  general  point  of  view,  as  German  scholars  have  pointed  out, 
is  much  like  that  of  some  of  the  treatises  of  the  Hippocratean 
corpus,  notably  the  Trcpt  SICU'TTJS  a',  in  which  the  attempt  is  made  to 
find  a  speculative  foundation  for  medicine  in  the  Heraclitean 
cosmology.  The  only  inference  we  are  entitled  to  draw  is  that  the 
main  ideas  of  Sicilian  medicine  could  be  presumed  to  be  generally 
known  to  cultivated  persons  at  Athens  in  the  last  third  of  the  fifth 
century,  as  is,  in  fact,  shown  abundantly  by  the  use  made  of 
analogies  based  upon  them  all  through  the  ethical  dialogues  of 
Plato  For  the  argument  of  the  Symposium  itself  the  chief  function 
of  the  speech  is  to  divert  attention  from  the  topic  of  sex,  as  must 
be  done  if  sex  itself  is  to  be  treated  with  the  necessary  philosophic 
detachment  in  the  discourse  of  Socrates,  and  to  call  attention  to 
the  universal  cosmic  significance  of  the  conception  of  the  recon- 
ciliation of  "  opposites  "  in  a  higher  "  harmony."  This  preludes 
to  the  discourse  of  Socrates,  where  we  shall  find  that  the  principle 
has  actually  a  supra-cosmic  significance.  Meanwhile,  the  intro- 
duction of  this  thought  of  Eros  as  a  "  world-building  "  principle 
provides  the  starting-point  for  the  brilliant  and  characteristic 
burlesque  cosmogony  put  into  the  mouth  of  Aristophanes. 


THE  SYMPOSIUM  219 

Speech  of  Aristophanes  (1890-1 93^ .^-To  the  general  reader, 
this  is  perhaps  the  best-known  section  of  the  whole  dialogue,  and 
one  of  the  best-known  passages  in  the  whole  of  Plato.  It  is  the 
more  important  to  avoid  misapprehending  its  purpose,  which  is 
simply  humorous  and  dramatic.  We  should  note  that  the  speech 
itself  is  introduced  by  a  thoroughly  Aristophanic  jest,  and  that  the 
poet  tells  us  in  so  many  words  that  he  means  to  live  up  to  his  pro- 
fession by  being  "  funny."  The  speech  itself  may  be  very  briefly 
summarized.  In  the  beginning  man  was  a  "  round  "  creature 
with  four  arms  and  four  legs  and  two  faces,  looking  different  ways, 
but  joined  at  the  top  to  make  a  single  head.  There  were  three 
"  sexes/'  if  we  can  call  them  so,  of  these  creatures,  the  double-male, 
double-female,  and  male-female,  the  first  derived  from  the  sun, 
the  second  from  the  earth,  the  third  from  the  moon,  which  is  at  once 
a  "  luminary  "  and  an  "earth."  But  as  yet  there  was  no  sexual 
love  and  no  sexual  generation.  The  race  procreated  itself  by  a 
literal  fertilization  of  the  soil.  These  creatures  were  as  masterful 
as  they  were  strong  and  threatened  to  storm  heaven  or  blockade 
it,  as  we  learn  from  the  old  traditions  about  the  "  giants."  As  a 
measure  of  safety,  Zeus  split  them  longitudinally  down  the  middle 
and  reconstructed  them  so  that  their  method  of  propagation  should 
henceforth  be  sexual.  Since  then,  man  is  only  half  a  complete 
creature,  and  each  half  goes  about  with  a  passionate  longing  to  find 
its  complement  and  coalesce  with  it  again.  This  longing  for  re- 
union with  the  lost  half  of  one's  original  self  is  what  we  call  "  love," 
and  until  it  is  satisfied,  none  of  us  can  attain  happiness.  Ordinary 
wedded  love  between  man  and  woman  is  the  reunion  of  two  halves 
of  one  of  the  originally  double-sexed  creatures  ;  passionate  attach- 
ment between  two  persons  of  the  same  sex  is  the  reunion  of  the 
halves  of  a  double-male  or  a  double-female,  as  the  case  may  be.  If 
we  continue  in  irreligion,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  Zeus  may  split  us 
again,  and  leave  us  to  hop  on  one  leg  with  one  arm  and  half  a  face. 

As  I  have  said,  the  brilliance  of  this  fanciful  speech  must  not 
blind  us  to  the  fact  that  it  is  in  the  main  comedy,  and  that  the  real 
meaning  of  the  dialogue  must  not  be  looked  for  in  it.  Plato  is 
careful  to  remind  us  that  the  speaker  is  a  professional  jester  ;  he  is 
too  good  an  artist  to  have  made  the  remark  without  a  purpose, 
or  to  have  discounted  the  effect  of  the  disccurse  of  his  hero  Socrates 
by  providing  his  dialogue  with  two  centres  of  gravity.  To  be  sure, 
there  are  touches  of  earnest  under  the  mirth  of  his  Aristophanes, 
as  there  always  are  under  the  wildest  fun  of  the  actual  historical 
Aristophanes.  There  is  real  tenderness  in  Aristophanes'  descrip- 
tion of  the  love-lorn  condition  of  the  creature  looking  for  its  lost 
"  half,"  and  a  real  appreciation  of  unselfish  devotion  to  the  comrade 
who  is  one's  "  second  self."  Aristophanes  shows  more  real  feeling 
than  any  of  the  speakers  who  have  been  heard  so  far.  It  is  also 
true  that  he  is  making  a  distant  approximation  to  the  conception, 
which  Socrates  will  develop,  of  love  as  the  longing  of  the  soul  for 
union  with  its  true  good.  But  the  distance  is  even  more  marked 


220          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

than  the  approximation.  The  goal  of  love,  as  Socrates  conceives 
it,  is  not  incorporation  with  a  mate  of  flesh  and  blood,  nor  even 
lifelong  "marriage"  with  a  "kindred  mind/'  but  the  Upos  ya/xos 
of  the  soul  with  the  "  eternal  wisdom  "  in  a  region  "  all  breathing 
human  passion  far  above."  The  passion  Aristophanes  describes 
is  that  which  finds  its  most  lapidary,  perhaps  its  most  perfect 
expression  in  Dante's  canzone  Cosl  nel  mio  parlar  voglio  esser  aspro, 
not  that  which  animates  the  Paradiso,  the  "  female  love  "  which 
Blake  would  have  us  give  up  before  we  can  see  "  eternity."  It  is 
in  keeping  with  this  that  Aristophanes,  like  Pausanias,  relegates 
the  love  of  men  for  women  to  the  lowest  plane,  on  the  ground  that 
the  woman  is  the  "weaker  vessel,"  the  "earthy"  ingredient  in  our 
original  composition,  thus  denying  the  Socratic  and  Platonic  tenet 
that  "  the  goodness  of  a  man  and  of  a  woman  are  the  same,"  and 
proves  his  point  by  the  allegation  (192^)  that  those  who  are  sensible 
of  female  attractions  show  themselves  inferior  in  "  politics."  (Like 
Pausanias,  he  has  no  conception  of  any  worthier  life  than  that  of  the 
"  lover  of  honours.") 

We  may  put  the  discourse  in  its  true  light  by  a  consideration 
of  its  obvious  sources.  In  the  first  place,  I  think  it  is  clear  that  in 
composing  the  speech  Plato  had  in  view  the  brilliant  burlesque  of 
an  Orphic  cosmogony  in  Aristophanes'  own  Birds  (693-703),  where 
also  Eros  is  the  great  primitive  cosmic  active  force.  From  the  Birds 
comes  again  the  suggestion  of  the  danger  that  the  gods  might  run 
if  the  turbulent  round-bodied  creatures  cut  off  the  supply  of  sacri- 
fices, the  very  method  by  which  the  birds  of  the  play  reduce 
Olympus  to  unconditional  surrender.  As  for  the  details  of  the 
story,  I  think  it  is  clear  that  they  are  a  humorous  parody  of 
Empedocles.  Creatures  in  whom  both  sexes  are  united  figure  in 
his  cosmology  (Fr.  61),  along  with  the  "  men  with  the  heads  of 
oxen  "  and  similar  monsters,  as  appearing  in  the  early  stages  of  the 
evolutionary  cycle  to  which  we  belong,  the  period  of  the  world's 
history  in  which  "  strife  "  is  steadily  disintegrating  the  "  sphere  "  by 
dissociating  the  complexes  into  their  constituent  "  roots."  This 
is  enough  to  provide  a  hint  for  the  construction  of  the  whole  narra- 
tive. We  know  that  the  theories  of  Empedocles  became  known  at 
Athens  in  the  fifth  century.  The  Phaedo  represents  Socrates  and 
his  friends  as  well  acquainted  with  them,  and  Aristotle  tells  us  that 
a  certain  Critias — we  may  safely  identify  him  with  Plato's  great- 
grandfather, the  Critias  of  the  Timaeus  and  Critias — had  expressly 
adopted  one  of  them,  the  view  that  "  we  think  with  our  blood."  * 
As  the  Clouds  and  Birds  are  enough  to  prove,  Aristophanes  was 
fairly  well  at  home  in  the  doctrines  of  the  men  of  science  of  whom 
he  made  fun,  and  it  is  quite  in  keeping  with  Plato's  dramatic 
realism  that  he  should  be  made  to  burlesque  Empedocles,  exactly 
as  he  has  burlesqued  Diogenes  and  the  Orphic  cosmologists  in  his 
extant  comedies.  It  is  from  this  humorous  burlesque  (carefully 
"  bowdlerized  "  to  suit  Christianized  ethics,  bien  entendu),  that  the 
lde  Anima,  40566. 


THE  SYMPOSIUM  221 

popular  misconceptions  about  so-called  "  platonic  love  "  seem  to 
have  taken  their  origin. 

There  are  now  only  two  members  of  the  party  who  have  still 
to  speak,  Agathon  and  Socrates.  A  little  by-play  passes  (1930-1940), 
which  has  no  purpose  beyond  that  of  enhancing  our  anticipation 
and  making  it  clear  that  their  speeches  are  to  be  the  "  event  "  of 
the  evening.  It  is  worth  noting  that  Plato  is  ready  on  occasion  to 
turn  the  humour  against  the  foibles  of  his  own  hero.  Socrates  is 
allowed,  after  his  fashion,  to  put  an  apparently  simple  question, 
simply  that  he  may  be  called  to  order  ;  if  he  were  not  checked,  the 
programme  would  be  ruined  by  the  substitution  of  a  dialectical 
discussion  for  a  eulogy.  To  be  sure,  when  it  comes  to  Socrates' 
turn  to  speak,  he  gets  his  way  after  all  and  we  are  plunged  into 
dialectic  whether  we  like  it  or  not ;  this  is  part  of  the  fun. 

The  two  speeches  marked  out  as  supremely  important  are 
wrought  with  even  more  art  than  any  of  those  which  have  preceded. 
In  form,  as  in  matter,  they  exhibit  the  tension  between  opposites 
which  is  the  life  of  a  drama  at  its  acutest  pitch.  Agathon  is  morally 
commonplace,  cold  in  feeling,  superficial  in  thought,  for  the  lack  of 
which  he  compensates  by  a  free  employment  of  all  the  artificial 
verbal  patterns  popularized  by  Gorgias;  his  encomium  is  a  suc- 
cession of  frozen  conceits  with  no  real  thought  behind  them — 
litter ature  in  the  worst  sense  of  the  word.  Socrates  is,  as  usual, 
simple  and  direct  in  manner  ;  he  begins  what  he  has  to  say  in  the 
usual  conversational  tone  of  his  "  dialectic/'  though,  before  he 
has  done,  the  elevation  of  his  thought  leads  to  a  spontaneous  eleva- 
tion in  style,  and  he  ends  on  a  note  of  genuine  eloquence  which 
leaves  all  the  "  fine  language  "  of  Agathon  hopelessly  in  the  shade. 
He  is  on  fire  with  his  subject,  but  with  the  clear,  white-hot  glow 
of  a  man  whose  very  passion  is  intellectual.  He  thinks  intensely 
where  Agathon,  and  fine  gentlemen  like  him,  are  content  to  talk 
prettily.  And  we  are  not  allowed  to  forget  that  Agathon 's  pro- 
fession is  the  "  stage  "  ;  he  is  the  "  actor/'  impressing  an  audience 
with  emotions  he  simulates  but  does  not  feel ;  Socrates  is  the 
genuine  man  who  "  speaks  from  the  heart  "  and  to  the  heart. 
(Note  the  adroit  way  in  which  this  point  is  worked  in  at  1946.) 

Speech  of  Agathon  (1940-1970). — The  whole  speech  is  a  masterly 
parody  of  the  detestable  "  prose-poetry  "  of  Gorgias,  as  will  readily 
be  seen  by  comparing  it  with  the  specimens  of  the  original  article 
which  time  has  spared  to  us.  It  may  be  summarized,  when  divested 
of  its  verbal  extravagances,  as  follows.  Previous  speakers  have 
ignored  the  main  point  which  a  eulogy  should  make  ;  they  have 
talked  about  the  gifts  of  Eros  to  men  rather  than  about  his  intrinsic 
qualities.  It  is  these  on  which  the  eulogist  should  dwell,  (i)  Eros 
is  the  most  beautiful  of  all  gods  ;  for  (a)  he  is  the  youngest  of  all, 
not  the  oldest  as  Phaedrus  and  his  cosmologists  pretend.  The 
"  wars  in  heaven  "  would  never  have  happened  if  Eros  had  held 
sway  then.  Also  he  is  eternally  fair  and  young  and  consorts  with 
youth,  not  with  "  crabbed  age/1  (b)  He  is  "  soft "  (dTraXos)  and 


222  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

tender,  and  that  is  why  he  makes  his  dwelling  in  the  tenderest 
place  he  can  find,  the  soul,  and  only  in  souls  whose  temper  is  yielding 
(/xaXa/coV).  (c)  He  is  "  pliant  "  (£y/>6s  TO  cl^os),  can  wind  his  way 
imperceptibly  in  and  out  of  the  inmost  recesses  of  the  soul. 
(d)  He  is  comely  and  lovely  and  bright  of  hue,  and  that  is  why  he 
will  not  settle  and  gather  honey  from  a  body  or  soul  which  is  "  past 
its  flower."  (2)  He  has  all  the  virtues  : J  (a)  justice,  for  he  neither 
does  nor  suffers  violence.  He  cannot  suffer  from  it,  for  love  is 
unconstrained,  and  he  never  inflicts  it,  for  all  things  are  his  willing 
slaves  and  nemini  volenti  fit  iniuria.  (b)  Temperance,  for  he 
"masters  all  pleasures"  (an  idle  verbal  quibble),  (c)  Valour,  for 
he  can  master  Ares,  the  "warrior  famoused  for  fights."  (d)  Wis- 
dom ;  he  is  the  author  of  mediciae,  as  Eryximachus  had  said  ;  he 
inspires  poetry  in  the  most  unpoetical  and  must  therefore  be  himself 
a  supreme  poet.  He  shows  his  wisdom,  further,  in  being  the  con- 
triver of  all  generation  and  the  teacher  of  all  crafts.  It  was  love, 
love  of  the  beautiful,  which  inspired  the  various  gods  who  were 
their  discoverers.  In  the  beginning,  when  necessity  held  sway, 
heaven  itself  was  a  place  of  horror  ;  the  birth  of  Eros  has  thus  been 
the  cause  of  all  that  is  good  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  In  short, 
Eros  is  the  giver  of  peace  among  men,  calm  in  air  and  sea,  tranquil 
sleep  which  relieves  our  cares,  mirth,  jollity — and  here  the  speech 
loses  itself  in  a  torrent  of  flowery  phrases,  which  "bring  down  the 
house,"  as  they  were  meant  to  do. 

We  see,  of  course,  as  Plato  means  that  we  shall,  the  barrenness 
of  thought  which  all  this  euphuism  cannot  conceal.  In  a  way,  the 
praise  of  Eros,  in  Agathon's  mouth,  has  "  lost  all  its  grossness,"  by 
transmutation  into  unmeaning  prettiness,  but  it  has  incidentally 
lost  all  its  reality.  The  discourse  has  all  the  insincerity  of  the  con- 
ventional petrarchising  sonneteer.  Like  the  sonneteering  tribe, 
Agathon  is  so  intoxicated  by  his  own  fine-filed  phrases,  that  he  is 
evidently  not  at  all  clear  which  Eros  he  is  belauding,  the  "  heavenly  " 
or  the  "  vulgar."  For  the  euphuist's  purpose,  this  really  does  not 
matter  much  ;  the  theme  of  his  discourse  is  to  him  no  more  than  a 
peg  on  which  to  hang  his  garlands  of  language.  There  had  been  real 
feeling,  under  all  the  burlesque  and  the  grossness,  in  the  speech  of 
Aristophanes  ;  from  Agathon  we  get  only  "  words,  words,  words/' 
Socrates  indicates  as  much  in  the  humorous  observations  which 
introduce  his  own  contribution  to  the  entertainment.  He  really 
began  to  be  afraid,  as  Agathon  grew  more  and  more  dithyrambic, 
that  he  might  be  petrified  and  struck  dumb  by  the  "  Gorgias'  head/' 
He  bethought  himself,  now  that  it  was  too  late,  that  he  had  been 
rash  in  undertaking  to  deliver  a  eulogy  at  all.  In  the  simplicity 
of  his  heart,  he  had  supposed  that  all  he  would  have  to  do  would 
be  to  say  the  best  which  could  be  truthfully  said  of  his  subject.  But 
it  now  appears  that  the  eulogist  is  expected  to  glorify  his  subject  at 
all  "  costs,"  regardless  of  truth.  This  is  more  than  Socrates  engaged 

1  Note  that  the  list  of  the  "  cardinal  virtues  "  is  taken  for  granted  as 
familiar.  Thus  it  is  no  discovery  of  Plato  or  of  Socrates. 


THE  SYMPOSIUM  228 

to  do,  or  can  do.  Like  Hippolytus  in  the  play,  he  is  "  unsworn  in 
soul,"  and  must  be  allowed  to  deliver  his  speech  in  his  own  artless 
fashion,  telling  the  truth  and  leaving  the  style  to  take  care  of  itself, 
or  the  result  may  be  a  ridiculous  collapse.  And  he  must  make  one 
more  little  stipulation.  Perhaps  Agathon  would  answer  one  or 
two  questions,  so  that  Socrates  may  know  where  to  make  a  be- 
ginning. Thus,  we  see,  the  philosopher  contrives  to  get  his  way 
after  all— we  are  to  have  "  dialectic/1  in  other  words,  thinking, 
as  well  as  fine  talking,  as  part  of  our  programme  (1986-1990). 

Dialectical  Interrogation  of  Agathon  by  Socrates  (1990-2010). — 
The  purpose  of  this  little  interlude,  as  Socrates  had  said,  is  to  make 
sure  that  his  own  encomium,  which  was  to  "  tell  the  truth/1  shall 
begin  at  the  right  starting-point.  In  other  words,  we  are  to  be 
brought  back  to  reality,  of  which  we  have  steadily  been  losing  sight. 
Eros,  "  love/'  "  craving/1  is  a  relative  term  ;  all  Eros  is  Eros  of 
something  which  is  its  correlate,  and  it  is  meant  that  this  correlate  is 
a  satisfaction.  This  would  be  clear  at  once  in  Greek,  but  is  a  little 
obscured  for  us  in  English  by  the  ambiguity  of  our  word  "love." 
In  English  there  are  at  least  three  quite  distinct  senses  of  the  word 
"  love,"  and  much  loose  sentimental  half-thinking  is  due  to  con- 
fusion between  them.  If  we  would  be  accurate,  we  must  distin- 
guish them  precisely.  There  is  (i)  "  love  of  complacency,"  the 
emotion  aroused  by  the  simple  contemplation  of  what  we  admire 
and  approve,  the  "  love  to  the  agent  "  of  which  the  moral-sense 
school  speak  in  their  accounts  of  moral  approval.  We  may  feel 
this  towards  a  person  wholly  incapable  of  being  in  any  way  affected 
for  good  or  bad  by  our  acts  or  affecting  us  by  his,  as  when  we  glow 
with  attachment  to  the  great  and  good  of  whom  we  have  read  in 
history.  There  is  (2)  "  love  of  benevolence,"  which  prompts  us 
to  confer  kindnesses  on  its  object  or  to  do  him  services.  This  love 
we  may  feel  to  the  good  and  the  evil  alike.  It  may  show  itself  as 
active  gratitude  to  a  benefactor,  as  pity  for  the  unfortunate  or  the 
sinful,  and  in  many  other  guises.  There  is  finally  (3)  "  love  of 
concupiscence,"  desirous  love,  the  eager  appetition  of  what  is 
apprehended  as  our  own  "  good."  It  is  only  this  desirous  love 
which  can  be  called  Ipws  in  Greek.1 

Eros,  then,  is  always  a  desirous  love  of  its  object,  and  that  object 
is  always  something  not  yet  attained  or  possessed.  Agathon  had 
said  that  "  love  of  things  fair  "  has  created  the  happiness  of  the 
gods  themselves.  But  if  Eros  "  wants  "  beauty,  it  must  follow  that 

1  Hence  when  Euripides  says  fyare,  TrcuSes,  /-oyr/xJs,  he  means  a  great  deal 
more  than  we  can  express  by  saying  "  love  your  mother."  He  means  that 
the  sons  of  such  a  mother  as  his  heroine  are  to  be  "  in  love  "  with  her  ;  she  is 
to  be  to  them  their  true  mistress  and  "  dominant  lady,"  as  Hector  in  Homer 
is  "  father  and  mother  "  to  Andromache.  One  might  illustrate  by  saying 
that  in  Christianity  God  is  thought  of  as  loving  all  men  with  "  love  of  ben- 
evolence," and  the  righteous  with  an  added  "  love  of  complacency/'  but  as 
loving  no  creature  with  "  love  of  concupiscence."  The  good  man,  on  the  other 
hand,  loves  God  with  love  of  concupiscence,  as  the  good  for  which  his  soul 
longs,  and  with  love  of  complacency,  but  could  hardly,  I  suppose,  be  said  to 
love  God  with  amor  benevolentiae.smce  we  cannot  do"  good  turns  "  to  our  Maker. 


224          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

he  does  not  yet  possess  it,  and  therefore  is  not  himself  "  ever  fair/ 
and  in  the  same  way,  if  he  "  wants  "  good,  he  cannot  himself  be 
good. 

At  this  point  Socrates  closes  his  conversation  with  Agathon  and 
enters  on  his  "  discourse/'  having  found  the  apxy  for  it.  The 
questioning  of  Agathon  is  no  piece  of  mere  verbal  dexterity.  It  is 
indispensable  that  we  should  understand  that  the  only  Eros  de- 
serving of  our  praises  is  an  amor  ascendens,  a  desirous  going  forth 
of  the  soul  in  quest  of  a  good  which  is  above  her.  And  this  going 
forth  must  begin  with  the  knowledge  that  there  is  something  we 
want  with  all  our  hearts  but  have  not  yet  got.  As  the  old  Evan- 
gelicals said,  the  first  step  towards  salvation  is  to  feel  your  need  of 
a  Saviour.  "  Blessed  are  they  which  hunger  .  .  .  for  they  shall  be 
filled/'  The  soul  which  is  to  be  love's  pilgrim  must  begin  by  feeling 
this  heart-hunger,  or  it  will  never  adventure  the  journey.  This  is 
the  dpx>7  demanded  by  Socrates  for  any  hohes  Lied  der  Liebe  which 
is  to  "  tell  the  truth." 

Speech  of  Socrates  (2oid-2i2c). — Though  Socrates  had  affected 
to  make  his  "  dialectic  "  a  mere  preliminary  to  the  "  discourse  "  he 
was  contemplating,  he  actually  contrives  to  turn  the  discourse  itself 
into  "  dialectic,"  genuine  thinking,  by  putting  it  into  the  mouth  of 
one  Diotima,  a  priestess  and  prophetess  of  Mantinea,  and  relating 
the  process  of  question  and  answer  by  which  the  prophetess  had 
opened  his  own  eyes  to  understand  the  true  mysteries  of  Eros. 
The  purpose  is  that  his  hearers  shall  not  merely  follow  his  words  and 
possibly  be  agreeably  affected  by  them,  but  shall  follow  his  thought. 
They  are  to  listen  to  the  "  conversation  of  his  soul  with  itself." 
At  the  same  time,  I  cannot  agree  with  many  modern  scholars  in 
regarding  Diotima  of  Mantinea  as  a  fictitious  personage  ;  still  less 
in  looking  for  fanciful  reasons  for  giving  the  particular  names  Plato 
does  to  the  prophetess  and  her  place  of  origin.  The  introduction  of 
purely  fictitious  named  personages  into  a  discourse  seems  to  be  a 
literary  device  unknown  to  Plato,  as  has  been  said  in  an  earlier 
chapter,  and  I  do  not  believe  that  if  he  had  invented  Diotima  he 
would  have  gone  on  to  put  into  the  mouth  of  Socrates  the  definite 
statement  that  she  had  delayed  the  pestilence  of  the  early  years 
of  the  Archidamian  war  for  ten  years  by  "  offering  sacrifice  "  at 
Athens.  As  the  Meno  has  told  us,  Socrates  did  derive  hints  for 
his  thought  from  the  traditions  of  "  priests  of  both  sexes  who  have 
been  at  pains  to  understand  the  rationale  of  what  they  do,"  and  the 
purpose  of  the  reference  to  the  presence  of  Diotima  at  Athens  about 
440  is  manifestly  not  merely  to  account  for  Socrates'  acquaintance 
with  her,  but  to  make  the  point  that  the  mystical  doctrine  of  the 
contemplative  "  ascent  "  of  the  soul,  now  to  be  set  forth,  was  one 
on  which  the  philosopher's  mind  had  been  brooding  ever  since  his 
thirtieth  year.  This,  if  true,  is  very  important  for  our  understand- 
ing of  the  man's  personality,  and  I,  for  one,  cannot  believe  that 
Plato  was  guilty  of  wanton  mystifications  about  such  things.  At 
the  same  time,  we  may  be  sure  that  in  reproducing  a  conversation 


THE  SYMPOSIUM  225 

a  quarter  of  a  century  old,  Socrates  is  blending  his  recollections 
of  the  past  with  his  subsequent  meditations  upon  it,  as  normally 
happens  in  such  cases.  He  sees  an  episode  which  had  influenced 
his  life  profoundly  in  the  light  of  all  that  had  come  out  of  it,  much 
as  St.  Augustine  in  later  life  saw  the  facts  of  his  conversion  to 
Christianity  in  a  changed  perspective,  as  we  are  able  to  prove  by 
contrasting  the  Confessions  with  the  works  composed  just  after  the 
conversion. 

To  all  intents  and  purposes,  we  shall  not  go  wrong  by  treating 
the  "  speech  of  Diotima  "  as  a  speech  of  Socrates.  We  can  best 
describe  the  purpose  of  the  speech  in  the  language  of  religion  by 
saying  that  it  is  the  narrative  of  the  pilgrimage  of  a  soul  on  the  way 
of  salvation,  from  the  initial  moment  at  which  it  feels  the  need  of 
salvation  to  its  final  "  consummation/'  In  spite  of  all  differences 
of  precise  outlook,  the  best  comment  on  the  whole  narrative  is 
furnished  by  the  great  writers  who,  in  verse  or  prose,  have  described 
the  stages  of  the  "  mystic  way  "  by  which  the  soul  "  goes  out  of 
herself,"  to  find  herself  again  in  finding  God.  In  substance,  what 
Socrates  is  describing  is  the  same  spiritual  voyage  which  St.  John 
of  the  Cross  describes,  for  example,  in  the  well-known  song  En  una 
noche  oscura  which  opens  his  treatise  on  the  Dark  Night,  and 
Crashaw  hints  at  more  obscurely  all  through  his  lines  on  The  Flaming 
Heart,  and  Bonaventura  charts  for  us  with  precision  in  the 
Itinerarium  Mentis  in  Deum.  The  Christian  writers  see  by  a 
clearer  light  and  they  have  an  intensity  which  is  all  their  own,  but 
the  journey  they  describe  is  recognizably  the  same — the  travel  of 
the  soul  from  temporality  to  eternity.  In  Greek  literature,  the 
speech,  I  think  we  may  fairly  say,  stands  alone  until  we  come  to 
Plotinus,  with  whom  the  same  spiritual  adventure  is  the  main 
theme  of  the  Enneads.  Unless  we  have  so  much  of  the  mystic  in 
us  as  to  understand  the  view  that  the  "  noughting  "  and  remaking 
of  the  soul  is  the  great  business  of  life,  the  discourse  will  have  no 
real  meaning  to  us  ;  we  shall  take  it  for  a  mythological  bellum 
somnium.  But  if  we  do  that,  we  shall  never  really  understand  the 
Apology  and  the  other  dialogues  which  deal  with  the  doctrine  of 
the  "  tendance  of  the  soul/'  a  simple-sounding  name  which  conceals 
exactly  the  same  conception  of  the  attainment  of  "  deiformity  " 
as  the  real  "  work  of  man."  In  the  Phaedo  we  have  had  the  picture 
of  a  human  soul  on  the  very  verge  of  attainment,  at  the  moment 
when  it  is  about  to  "  lose  itself  in  light."  In  the  Symposium  we 
are  shown,  more  fully  than  anywhere  else  in  Plato,  the  stages  by 
which  that  soul  has  come  to  be  what  it  is  in  the  Phaedo.  We  see 
with  Plato's  eyes  the  interior  life  of  the  soul  of  Socrates. 

The  desirous  soul,  as  was  already  said,  is  as  yet  not  "  fair  "  or 
"  good  "  ;  that  is  what  it  would  be  and  will  be,  but  is  not  yet. 
But  this  does  not  mean  that  it  is  "  foul  "  and  "  wicked."  There 
is  a  state  intermediate  between  these  extremes,  as  there  is  a  state 
intermediate  between  sheer  ignorance  and  completed  knowledge — 
the  state  of  having  true  beliefs  without  the  power  to  give  a  iusti- 


226          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 


fication  of  them  (avev  TOV  ?x€tv  ^-oyov  Sowai).  This  may  be  ex- 
pressed mythologically  by  saying  that  Eros  is  not  a  "  god/'  nor 
yet  a  "mere  mortal,"  but  a  8cu/xa>v  or  "  spirit/'  and  a  mighty  one 
(202d-e).  According  to  the  received  tradition,  "spirits"  stand 
half-way  between  mortality  and  divinity  ;  they  convey  men's 
prayers  to  the  gods,  and  the  commands,  revelations,  and  gifts  of 
the  gods  to  men  ;  intercourse  between  gods  and  men  has  them  as 
its  intermediaries.  Eros  is  one  of  these  "  spirits  "  (20  30).  His 
birth  answers  to  his  function.  He  is  the  child  of  Poros  son  of 
Metis  (Abundance,  son  of  Good  Counsel),  by  the  beggar-maid  Penia 
(Need),  conceived  in  heaven  on  the  birthday  of  Aphrodite,  and  he 
inherits  characters  from  both  his  parents.  He  is,  like  his  mother, 
poor,  uncomely,  squalid,  houseless,  and  homeless.  But  he  has  so 
much  of  the  father  about  him  that  he  has  high  desires  for  all  that  is 
"  fair  and  good/'  courage,  persistence,  endless  resourcefulness,  and 
art  in  the  pursuit  of  these  desires.  He  is  the  greatest  of  "  wizards 
and  wits  "  (Seivo?  yo'r/s  .  .  .  KCU  o-o<£toT77s),  he  "  pursues  wisdom 
all  his  life  long  "  (^tXoo-o^oiv  Sia  Travros  TOV  (3iov).  He  is  neither 
god  nor  mortal,  but  lives  a  "  dying  life,"  starving  and  fed,  and 
starving  for  more  again.1  He  is  your  one  "  philosopher  "  ;  gods 
do  not  aspire  to  "  wisdom,"  for  they  already  have  it,  nor  yet  "  fools," 
for  they  do  not  so  much  as  know  their  need  and  lack  of  it.  "  Philo- 
sophers," aspirants  after  wisdom,  of  whom  Eros  is  chief,  are  just 
those  who  live  between  these  two  extremes.2  They  feel  the  hunger 
for  wisdom,  the  fairest  of  things,  but  they  feel  it  precisely  because 
it  remains  unsatisfied.  The  conventional  representation  of  Eros 
as  the  "  ever  fair  "  is  due  to  a  simple  confusion  between  the  good 
aspired  to  and  the  aspirant  after  it  (2010-2046)  . 

When  the  thin  veil  of  allegory  is  removed,  we  see  that  what  is 
described  here  is  simply  the  experience  of  the  division  of  the  self 
characteristic  of  man,  when  once  he  has  become  aware  of  his  own 
rationality.  Rationality  is  not  an  endowment  of  which  man  finds 
himself  in  possession  ;  it  is  an  attainment  incumbent  on  him  to 
achieves  j  Spiritual  manhood  and  freedom  are  the  good  which  he 
must  reach  if  he  is  to  be  happy,  but  they  are  a  far-away  good,  and 
his  whole  life  is  a  struggle,  and  a  struggle  with  many  an  alternation 
of  success  and  failure,  to  reach  them.  If  he  completely  attained 
them,  his  life  would  become  that  of  a  god  ;  he  would  have  put  off 
temporality  and  put  on  an  eternity  secured  against  all  mutability. 
If  he  does  not  strive  to  attain,  he  falls  back  into  the  condition  of  the 
mere  animal,  and  becomes  a  thing  of  mere  change  and  mutability. 
Hence  while  he  is  what  he  is,  he  is  never  at  peace  with  himself  ; 
that  is  the  state  into  which  he  is  trying  to  grow.  It  is  true,  in  a 
deeper  sense  than  the  author  of  the  saying  meant,  that  der  Mensch 
ist  etwas  das  iiberwunden  werden  muss  (we  are  only  truly  men  in 
so  far  as  we  are  becoming  something  more).  (That  the  "  temporal  " 

1  The  /3/of  0iX<J<ro0oy,  we  might  say,  has  as  its  motto  quasi  morientes  et  ecce 
vivimus  ;  tanquam  nihil  habentes  et  omnia  possidentes. 

1  Cf  .  the  classification  of  rational  beings  ascribed  to  the  Pythagoreans, 
"  gods/1  "  men,"  "  beings  like  Pythagoras  "  (0i\&ro0oi).  Aristot.  Fr.  192,  Rose. 


THE  SYMPOSIUM  227 

in  us  which  has  to  be  put  off  is  always  spoken  of  by  Socrates  as 
"  ignorance  "  or  "  error,"  not  as  "  sin,"  has  no  special  significance, 
when  we  remember  his  conviction  that  the  supreme  function  of 
"  knowledge  "  is  to  command  and  direct,  to  order  the  conduct  of 
life  towards  the  attainment  of  our  true  good.) 

It  will  be  seen  that  Socrates  is  formally  deferring  to  the  dictum 
of  Agathon  about  the  proper  disposition  of  the  parts  of  an  encomium. 
He  has  dealt  with  the  question  what  the  intrinsic  character  of 
Eros  is  ;  he  now  proceeds  to  the  question  of  his  services  to  us 
(TWO.  xpei'av  lx€t  T°k  avflpwirois) .  What  is  it  that,  in  the  end,  is  the 
object  of  the  heart's  desirous  longing  ?  Good,  or — in  still  plainer 
words — happiness  (cu&u/Aoi/t'u) .  All  men  wish  happiness  for  its 
own  sake,  and  all  wish  their  happiness  to  be  "  for  ever."  (Weh 
spricht,  Vergeh  !  Dock  alle  Lust  will  Ewigkeit.)  Why,  then,  do  we 
not  call  all  men  lovers,  since  all  have  this  desirous  longing  ?  For 
the  same  reason  that  we  do  not  call  all  craftsmen  "  makers,"  though 
they  all  are  makers  of  something.  Linguistic  use  has  restricted 
the  use  of  the  word  TTOIIJTI/S  ("  maker  ")  to  one  species  of  maker, 
the  man  who  fashions  verse  and  song.  So  it  is  with  the  name 
"  lover  "  ;  all  desirous  longing  for  good  or  happiness  is  love,  but 
in  use  the  name  "  lover  "  is  given  to  the  person  who  longs  earnestly 
after  one  particular  species  of  happiness — TOKO?  eV  /caAcp  ("  pro- 
creation in  the  beautiful ") — whether  this  procreation  is  physical  or 

spiritual  (/ecu  Kara  TO  OXO/AO,  KOU  KCITO,  TT/V  t/^v^v,  206&). 

To  explain  the  point  more  fully,  we  must  know  that  maturity 
of  either  body  or  mind  displays  itself  by  the  desire  to  procreate  ; 
beauty  attracts  us  and  awakens  and  fosters  the  procreative  impulse, 
ugliness  inhibits  it.  And  love,  in  the  current  restricted  sense  of  the 
word,  is  not,  as  might  be  thought,  desire  of  the  beautiful  object, 
but  desire  to  impregnate  it  and  have  offspring  by  it  (desire  T>}S 
ycvvrjo-ctog  KCU  TOU  TOKOU  lv  /caXu>).  (It  is  meant  quite  strictly  that 
physical  desire  for  the  "  possession  "  of  a  beautiful  woman  is 
really  at  bottom  a  "masked"  desire  for  offspring  by  a  physically 
"  fine  "  mother  ;  sexual  appetite  itself  is  not  really  craving  for 
"  the  pleasures  of  intercourse  with  the  other  sex  "  ;  it  is  a  passion 
for  parenthood.)  And  we  readily  understand  why  this  desire  for 
procreation  should  be  so  universal  and  deep-seated.  It  is  an 
attempt  to  perpetuate  one's  own  being  "  under  a  form  of  eternity," 
and  we  have  just  seen  that  the  primary  desire  of  all  is  desire  to 
possess  one's  "  good  "  and  to  possess  it  for  ever.  The  organism 
cannot  realize  this  desire  in  its  own  individuality,  because  it  is  in 
its  very  nature  subject  to  death.  But  it  can  achieve  an  approxi- 
mation to  eternity,  if  the  succession  of  generations  is  kept  up. 
Hence  the  vehemence  of  the  passion  for  procreation  and  the  strength 
of  the  instincts  connected  with  mating  and  rearing  a  brood  in  all 
animals.  The  only  way  in  which  a  thing  of  time  can  approximate 
to  being  eternal  is  to  produce  a  new  creature  to  take  its  place  as  it 
passes  away.  Even  within  the  limits  of  our  individual  existence, 
the  body  "  never  continues  in  one  stay  "  ;  it  is  a  scene  of  unending 


228         PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

waste  made  good  by  repair.  Our  thoughts  and  emotions  too  do 
not  remain  selfsame  through  life.  Even  our  knowledge  does  not 
"abide  "  ;  we  are  perpetually  forgetting  what  we  knew  and  having 
to  " recover  "  it  again  by  /ucXeny  ("study,"  "rehearsal").  It  is 
only  by  giving  birth  to  a  new  individual  to  take  the  place  of  the  old 
that  the  mortal  can  "  participate  in  deathlessness  "  (2086)  .* 

The  passion  for  physical  parenthood,  however,  is  the  most 
rudimentary  form  in  which  the  desirous  longing  for  the  fruition  of 
good  eternal  and  immutable  shows  itself,  and  the  form  in  which 
Diotima  is  least  interested.  Her  main  purpose  is  to  elucidate 
the  conception  of  spiritual  parenthood.  If  we  turn  to  the  life  of  the 
"  love  of  honours  " — note  that  this  reference  (20  Sc)  implies  that  in 
what  has  been  said  about  the  physical  instincts  we  have  been  con- 
sidering the  "  body-loving  "  life — the  passion  for  "  fame  undying" 
which  has  led  Alcestis,  Achilles,  Codrus,  and  many  another  to 
despise  death  and  danger  is  just  another,  and  more  spiritualized, 
form  of  the  "  desirous  longing  for  the  eternal."  Thus,  just  as  the 
man  who  feels  the  craving  for  physical  fatherhood  is  attracted  by 
womankind  and  becomes  "  exceeding  amorous,"  so  it  is  with  those 
whose  souls  are  ripe  for  the  procreation  of  spiritual  issue,  "  wisdom 
and  goodness  generally  "  ;  the  mentally,  like  the  physically  adult 
looks  for  a  "  fair  "  partner  to  receive  and  bear  his  offspring  (2090-6). 
He  feels  the  attraction  of  fair  face  and  form,  but  what  he  is  really 
seeking  is  the  "  fair  and  noble  and  highly  dowered  "  soul  behind 
them.  If  he  finds  what  he  is  looking  for,  he  freely  pours  forth 
"  discourse  on  goodness  and  what  manner  of  man  the  good  man 
should  be,  and  what  conduct  he  should  practise,  and  tries  to 
educate  "  the  chosen  soul  he  has  found.  The  two  friends  are 
associated  in  the  "  nurture  "  of  the  spiritual  offspring  to  which  their 
converse  has  given  birth,  and  the  tie  is  still  more  enduring  than  that 
of  literal  common  parenthood,  inasmuch  as  the  offspring  which 
are  the  pledges  of  it  are  "  fairer  and  more  deathless."  Examples 
of  such  spiritual  progeny  are  the  poems  of  Homer  and  Hesiod,  and 
still  more  the  salutary  institutions  and  rules  of  life  left  to  succeeding 
ages  by  Lycurgus  and  Solon  and  many  another  statesman  of  Hellas 
or  "  Barbary  "  ;  some  of  these  men  have  even  been  deified  by  the 
gratitude  of  later  generations  (2095). a 

1  This  has  absurdly  been  supposed  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  doctrines  of 
the  Phaedo,  and  it  has  even  been  argued  that  the  Symposium  must  have 
been  written  before  Plato  discovered  the  doctrine  of  immortality  expounded 
there.  In  point  of  fact,  there  is  no  inconsistency.  According  to  both  dia- 
logues the  "  body  "  belongs  to  the  "  mortal "  element  in  us,  and  perishes 
beyond  recall.  Hence  man,  according  to  the  Phaedo,  is  strictly  mortal ;  what 
is  immortal  is  not  the  man,  but  the  "  divine  "  element  in  him,  his  ^vxt,  as 
has  already  been  explained.  There  is  not  a  word  in  the  Symposium  to  suggest 
that  the  $vxt  is  perishable.  Hence  no  inference  about  the  priority  of  the 
one  dialogue  to  the  other  can  be  based  on  comparison  of  their  teaching. 

*The  allusion  to  "temples"  erected  to  deified  statesmen  presumably 
refers  to  Oriental  communities  in  which  the  "  laws  "  were  traditionally  ascribed 
to  remote  "  divine  "  rulers.  The  Greeks  did  not  deify  their  legislators.  At 
Laws  624*1  the  Cretan  speaker,  indeed,  attempts  to  claim  Zeus  as  the  author 


THE  SYMPOSIUM  229 

The  desirous  longing  for  an  eternal  good,  however,  has  far 
higher  manifestations  than  these,  and  Diotima  will  not  take  it  on 
her  to  say  whether  Socrates  is  equal  to  making  the  ascent  to  them, 
though  she  will  describe  them,  and  he  must  try  to  follow  her.1 
(The  meaning  is  that-,  so  far,  we  have  been  talking  only  about  what 
is  possible  within  the  limits  of  the  two  lower  types  of  life  :  we  have 
now  to  deal  with  the  more  arduous  path  to  be  trodden  by  the 
aspirant  to  the  highest  life  of  all,  that  of  "  philosophy.1')  He  who 
means  to  pursue  the  business  in  earnest  must  begin  in  early  life 
by  being  sensible  to  bodily  beauty.  If  he  is  directed  aright,  he 
will  first  try  to  "  give  birth  to  fair  discourses  "  in  company  with 
one  comely  person.  But  this  is  only  the  beginning.  He  must 
next  learn  for  himself2  to  recognize  the  kinship  of  all  physical 
beauty  and  become  the  lover  of  "  all  beautiful  bodies.''  3  Then 
he  must  duly  recognize  the  superiority  of  beauty  of  soul,  even 
where  there  is  no  outward  comeliness  to  be  an  index  to  it.  He 
must  be  "in  love  "  with  young  and  beautiful  souls  and  try  to  bring 
to  the  birth  with  them  "  fair  discourses."  Next,  he  must  learn  to 
see  beauty  and  comeliness  as  they  are  displayed  in  ltririftvop,a.ra. 
and  vofuu,  avocations  and  social  institutions,  and  perceive  the 
community  of  principle  which  comely  avocations  and  institutions 
imply.  Then  he  must  turn  to  "  science "  and  its  intellectual 
beauties,  which  will  disclose  themselves  to  him  as  a  whole  wide 
ocean  of  delights.  Here  again,  he  will  give  birth  to  "  many  a 
noble  and  imposing  discourse  and  thought  in  the  copious  wealth  of 
philosophy  " — that  is,  he  will  enrich  the  "  sciences  "  he  studies  with 
high  discoveries. 

of  the  r6/*ot  of  Crete,  but  he  knows,  of  course,  that  the  traditional  author 
of  them  was  Minos,  who  was  not  a  god,  and  so  says  they  may  "  in  fairness  " 
be  credited  to  Zeus  (because,  according  to  Homer,  Minos  "  conversed  "  with 
Zeus). 

1  Much  unfortunate  nonsense  has  been  written  about  the  meaning  of 
Diotima's  apparent  doubt  whether  Socrates  will  be  able  to  follow  her  as  she 
goes  on  to  speak  of  the  "  full  and  perfect  vision  "  (rd  rAea  *ai  tiroTrrtKA,  2ioa  i). 
It  has  even  been  seriously  argued  that  Plato  is  here  guilty  of  the  arrogance  of 
professing  that  he  has  reached  philosophical  heights  to  which  the  "  historical " 
Socrates  could  not  ascend.  Everything  becomes  simple  if  we  remember 
that  the  actual  person  speaking  is  Socrates,  reporting  the  words  of  Diotima, 
Socrates  is  as  good  as  speaking  of  himself,  and  naturally,  Diotima  must  not 
say  anything  that  would  imply  that  he  is  already,  at  the  age  of  thirty,  assured 
of  "  final  perseverance."  In  the  Phaedo,  speaking  on  the  last  day  of  his  life 
to  a  group  of  fellow-followers  of  the  way,  Socrates  can  without  impropriety 
say  that  he  has  "  lived  as  a  philosopher  to  the  best  of  his  power." 

*  avrbv  KaravoTjo-ai,  2ioa  8.  The  aMv  seems  to  be  emphatic.  The  neces- 
sity for  a  "  director  "  (6  fjyotiuvo*)  is  admitted  for  the  first  step  of  the  progress 
only.  The  rest  of  the  way  must  be  trodden  at  one's  own  peril,  by  the  "  inner 
light."  Yet  there  is  a  return  to  the  conception  of  "  combined  effort  "  at 
2100  6,  M  rds  4irLffT^fJi,a^  dyayeiv. 

8  It  is  not  meant  that  this  widening  of  outlook  must  act  unfavourably  on 
personal  affection.  The  thought  is  that  intelligent  delight  in  the  beauty  of 
one  "  fair  body  "  will  lead  to  a  quickened  perception  of  beauty  in  others, 
just  as  genuine  appreciation  of  your  wife's  goodness  or  your  friend's  wit 
will  make  you  more,  and  not  less  alive  to  the  presence  of  the  same  qualities  in 
others. 


280          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Even  so,  we  have  not  reached  the  goal  so  far  ;  we  are  only  now 
coming  in  sight  of  it.  When  a  man  has  advanced  so  far  on  the 
quest  he  will  suddenly  descry  the  supreme  beauty  of  which  he  has 
all  along  been  in  search — a  beauty  eternal,  selfsame,  and  perfect, 
lifted  above  all  mutability.  It  is  no  "  body/'  nor  yet  even  a 
"  science- "  or  "  discourse  "  of  which  beauty  could  be  predicated, 
but  that  very  reality  and  substance  of  all  beauty  of  which  every- 
thing else  we  call  beauty  is  a  passing  "  participant  "  ;  the  unchang- 
ing light  of  which  all  the  beauties  hitherto  discerned  are  shifting 
reflections  (2116).  When  this  light  rises  above  his  horizon,  the 
pilgrim  of  Eros  is  at  last  "  coming  to  port."  The  true  "  life  for  a 
man  "  is  to  live  in  the  contemplation  of  the  "  sole  and  absolute 
Beauty  "  (0€a>/*cVa>  avro  TO  KaAoV),  by  comparison  with  which  all 
the  "  beauties  "  which  kindle  desire  in  mankind  are  so  much  dross. 
Only  in  intercouse  with  It  will  the  soul  give  birth  to  a  spiritual 
offspring  which  is  no  "  shadow "  but  veritable  "  substance/1 
because  it  is  now  at  last  "  espoused  "  to  very  and  substantial 
reality.1  This  and  only  this  is  the  true  achieving  of  "  immortality.11 
Such  was  the  discourse  of  Diotima,  and  Socrates  believes  it  himself 
and  would  fain  persuade  others  that  Eros  ("  desirous  longing")  is 
the  truest  helper  we  can  have  in  this  quest  after  immortality.  This 
is  what  he  has  to  offer  by  way  of  a  eulogy  on  the  "  might  and 
manhood"  of  Eros  (2i2&-c).2 

The  meaning  of  the  discourse  is  clear  enough.  In  the  earlier 
stages  of  the  "  ascent  "  which  has  just  been  described,  we  recognize 
at  once  that  "  tendance  of  the  soul  "  or  care  for  one's  "  moral 
being  "  which  Plato  regularly  makes  Socrates  preach  to  his  young 
friends  as  the  great  business  of  life.  That  the  work  of  "  tendance 
of  the  soul  "  must  go  further  than  the  development  of  ordinary  good 
moral  habits  and  rules,  that  it  demands  the  training  of  the  intellect 
by  familiarity  with  the  highest  "  science,"  and  that  the  task  of  the 
true  philosopher  is,  by  his  insight  into  principles,  to  unify  the 
"  sciences,"  and  to  bring  the  results  of  ripe  philosophical  thinking 
to  bear  on  the  whole  conduct  of  life,  is  the  same  lesson  which  is 
taught  us  in  the  Republic  by  the  scheme  propounded  for  the  educa- 
tion of  the  philosophic  statesman.  As  in  the  Republic,  the  study 
of  the  separate  sciences  leads  up  to  the  supreme  science  of  "  dial- 
ectic "  or  metaphysics,  in  which  we  are.  confronted  with  the  prin- 
ciples on  which  all  other  knowing  depends,  so  here  also  Socrates 
describes  the  man  who  is  coming  in  sight  of  his  goal  as  descrying 
"  one  single  science  "  of  Beauty  (210^  7).  And  in  both  cases,  in  the 
final  moment  of  attainment,  the  soul  is  described  as  having  got 
beyond  "  science  "  itself.  Science  here  passes  in  the  end  into 
direct  "  contact,"  or,  as  the  schoolmen  say,  "  vision,"  an  apprehen- 

1  Symp.  2i2a  4.  The  allusion  is  to  the  tale  of  Ixion  and  the  cloud  which 
was  imposed  on  him  in  the  place  of  Hera,  and  from  which  the  Centaurs  sprang. 
All  loves  but  the  last  are,  in  varying  degrees,  illusions. 

1  2126,  ^yKw/udfwv  rV  dfoa/jitv  *al  dvSpelav  rov  tpwot.  The  dvdpeta  is  specified 
because  the  pilgrimage  is  so  long  and  arduous  that  it  is  no  easy  thing  to  "  play 
the  man  "  to  the  end  of  it.  It  is  a  warfare  against ''  flesh  and  blood." 


THE  SYMPOSIUM  231 

sion  of  an  object  which  is  no  longer  "  knowing  about  "  it,  knowing 
propositions  which  can  be  predicated  cf  it,  but  an  actual  possession 
of  and  being  possessed  by  it.  In  the  Republic,  as  in  the  Symposium, 
the  thought  is  conveyed  by  language  borrowed  from  the  "  holy 
marriage  "  of  ancient  popular  religion  and  its  survivals  in  mystery- 
cults.  Here  it  is  "  Beauty  "  to  which  the  soul  is  mated ;  in  the 
Republic  it  is  that  good  which,  though  the  cause  of  all  being  and  all 
goodness,  is  itself  "  on  the  other  side  of  being."  * 

We  must  not,  of  course,  especially  in  view  of  the  convertibility 
of  the  terms  KaXov  and  ayaOov  which  is  dwelt  on  more  than  once  in 
our  dialogue,  be  misled  into  doubting  the  absolute  identity  of  the 
"  form  of  good  "  of  the  Republic  with  the  avro  TO  Ka\6v  of  the 
Symposium.  The  place  assigned  to  both  in  the  ascent  to  "  being 
and  reality  "  is  identical,  and  in  both  cases  the  stress  is  laid  on  the 
point  that  when  the  supreme  "  form  "  is  descried,  its  apprehen- 
sion comes  as  a  sudden  "  revelation/1  though  it  is  not  to  be  had 
without  the  long  preliminary  process  of  travail  of  thought,  and 
that  it  is  apprehended  by  "  direct  acquaintance/'  not  by  discursive 
"  knowledge  about  "it.  It  is  just  in  this  conviction  that  all  "  know- 
ledge about  "  is  only  preparatory  to  a  direct  scientia  visionis  that 
Socrates  reveals  the  fundamental  agreement  of  his  conception  with 
that  of  the  great  mystics  of  all  ages.  The  "  good  "  or  avro  TO  Ka\6v 
is,  in  fact,  the  ens  realissimum  of  Christian  philosophers,  in  which 
the  very  distinction  between  esse  and  essentia,  Sein  and  So-sein 
falls  away.  You  cannot  properly  predicate  anything  of  it,  because 
it  does  not  "  participate  "  in  good  or  any  other  "  form  "  ;  it  is 
its  own  So-sein.  Consequently,  the  apprehension  of  it  is  strictly 
"  incommunicable/'  since  all  communication  takes  the  form  of 
predication.  Either  a  man  possesses  it  and  is  himself  possessed 
by  it,  or  he  does  not,  and  there  is  no  more  to  be  said.  This  does 
not  mean  that  the  "  most  real  being  "  is  irrational,  or  that  by 
"  thinking  things  out  "  we  are  getting  further  away  from  it,  but  it 
does  mean  that  we  cannot  "  rationalize  "  it.  We  cannot  give  its 
constituent  "  formula/'  so  to  say,  as  we  could  that  of  an  ellipse 
or  a  cycloid.  You  might  spend  eternity  in  trying  to  describe  it,  and 
all  you  found  to  say  would  be  true  and  reasonable,  so  far  as  it 
goes,  but  its  full  secret  would  still  elude  you  ;  it  would  still  be 
infinitely  rich  with  undisclosed  mystery.  As  the  Christian  mystics 
say,  God  may  be  apprehended,  but  cannot  be  comprehended  by  any 
of  His  creatures.  That  is  why  He  is  "on  the  other  side  of  being." 
The  "  deiform  "  do  not  "  think  about  "  God,  they  live  Him.  This 
does  not  mean  that  "  myth  "  is  something  in  its  own  nature  superior 
to  scientific  truth,  a  misconception  on  which  Professor  Burnet  has 
said  all  that  is  necessary.  Because  "  vision  "  is  direct,  the  content 
of  a  "  tale  "  or  "  myth  "  cannot  really  convey  it.  A  "  tale  "  is  as 
much  a  mere  form  of  "  knowing  about  "  as  a  scientific  description, 
and  as  a  form  of  "  knowing  about  "  it  is,  of  course,  inferior.  In 

1  Rep.  5086  9.  For  the  metaphor  of  the  "  holy  marriage,"  cf.  e.g.  Rep. 
4906,  496*. 


232          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

fact,  all  the  mystics  insist  on  the  point  that  the  direct  vision  of 
supreme  reality  is  not  only  incommunicable,  it  cannot  even  be 
recalled  in  memory  when  the  moment  of  vision  has  passed.  You 
are  sure  that  you  "  saw  "  ;  you  cannot  tell  what  you  saw  even  to 
yourself.  This  is  the  real  reason  why,  as  Burnet  says,  Plato  never 
uses  "  mythical  "  language  about  the  "  forms,"  but  only  about 
things  like  the  soul,  which  he  regards  as  half  real,  partly  creatures 
of  temporality  and  change.  We  should  note,  however,  that  the 
supreme  reality  which  is  apprehended  in  the  culminating  vision  is 
never  said  in  Plato  to  be  God,  but  always  the  supreme  "  form." 
It  is  the  good  which  is  the  Platonic  and  Socratic  ens  realissimum. 

The  position  of  God  in  the  philosophy  of  both  seems  to  me 
ambiguous  and  not  fully  thought  out.  Formally,  Plato's  God  is 
described  in  the  Laws  as  a  perfectly  good  soul  (dpumy  i/^x7?)-  This 
ought  to  mean,  as  Burnet  clearly  holds  it  to  mean,  that  God  too  is 
only  half -real,  and  belongs  on  one  side  to  the  realm  of  the  mutable. 
I  confess  that  I  do  not  see  how  to  reconcile  such  a  position  with  the 
religious  insistence  on  the  eternal  and  immutable  character  of  God 
which  meets  us  everywhere  in  Plato.  We  could  not  meet  the 
difficulty  by  supposing  that  God  is  an  imaginative  symbol  of  the 
"  good,"  since  the  whole  point  of  Plato's  Theism  is,  as  we  shall  see, 
that  it  is  by  the  agency  of  God  that  the  "  participation  "  of  the 
creatures  in  the  good  is  made  possible.  Thus  God  is  not  identical 
with  the  good,  and  it  seems  equally  impossible  to  suppose  that  God 
is  simply  a  "  creature  "  participating  in  good.  I  can  only  suppose 
that  there  was  a  really  unsolved  conflict  between  the  Platonic 
metaphysics  and  the  Platonic  religion.  In  fact,  the  adjustment 
of  the  two  became  a  cardinal  problem  for  Plotinus  and  the  Neo- 
platonic  succession.1  We  shall  not  be  in  a  position  to  deal  with 
the  topic  properly  until  we  come  to  speak  of  Plato's  latest  written 
works  and  the  "  unwritten  doctrines  "  expounded  in  the  Academy. 
Plato  clearly  means,  in  spite  of  Diotima's  words  of  caution,  to 
present  Socrates  in  the  Symposium  as  a  man  who  has  in  his  supreme 
hours  attained  the  "  vision  "  for  himself,  and  for  that  very  reason 
impresses  his  fellow-men  by  his  whole  bearing  as  being  not  of  their 
world  though  he  is  in  it.  We  could  have  inferred  at  least  that 
he  was  steadily  treading  the  road  to  "  unification  "  with  the  supreme 
reality  from  the  close  correspondence  of  the  description  of  that 
road  by  Diotima  with  what  Plato  elsewhere  represents  as  his  hero's 
course  of  life.  But  naturally  enough,  Socrates  cannot  be  made  to 
boast  of  the  supreme  achievement  with  his  own  lips,  and  this  is 
why  Alcibiades,  the  most  brilliant  living  specimen  of  the  "  ambitious 
life,"  is  introduced  at  this  point.  We  are  to  gather  from  his  famous 
narrative  of  the  impression  Socrates  made  on  him  in  their  years  of 
close  intercourse,  and  the  hold  the  recollections  of  those  years  still 

1  The  Ncoplatonic  way  of  dealing  with  the  problem,  by  making  "  The 
One  "  the  source  from  which  vow  and  its  correlate  T&  voijrd  directly  emanate, 
definitely  subordinates  the  "forms"  to  God.  Through  Augustine  this  view 
passed  to  St.  Thomas  and  still  remains  part  of  Thomistic  pnilosophy 


THE  SYMPOSIUM  283 

have  on  his  conscience  and  imagination,  what  could  not  well  be  said 
in  any  other  way,  that  Socrates  has  "  seen/1  and  that  the  vision 
has  left  its  stamp  on  his  whole  converse  with  the  world.  Perhaps 
there  is  a  further  thought  in  Plato's  mind.  Socrates,  we  might 
say,  is  the  man  who  has  renounced  the  world  to  find  his  own  eternal 
"  life  "  ;  Alcibiades,  naturally  endowed  with  all  the  gifts  required 
for  "  philosophy/'  but  a  prey  to  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  and  the  eye 
and  the  pride  of  life,  is  the  man  who  might  have  "  seen  "  if  he 
would,  the  man  who  has  made  the  "  great  refusal  "  of  sacrificing 
the  reality  for  the  shadow.  He  has  chosen  for  the  world  and  has 
all  the  world  can  give.  We  are  made  to  look  on  the  two  types 
side  by  side,  and  to  listen  to  the  confession  of  the  triumphant 
worldling  in  the  full  flush  of  triumph,,  that  he  has  chosen  the  worser 
part.  On  the  panegyric  of  Socrates  by  Alcibiades  (2150-2226}  it 
is  not  necessary  to  dwell  here.  Its  importance  is  for  the  under- 
standing of  the  characters  of  Socrates  and  of  Alcibiades,  not  for 
any  contribution  it  makes  to  our  comprehension  of  the  Socratic  or 
the  Platonic  philosophy.  It  shows  us  Socrates  in  act  following  the 
route  of  the  pilgrimage  already  described  by  Diotima.  One  should, 
of  course,  note,  in  order  to  avoid  some  strange  misconceptions,  that 
the  famous  story  told  by  Alcibiades  of  his  own  "  temptation  "  of 
Socrates  (216^-219^)  is  meant  to  go  back  to  a  time  when  Alcibiades, 
who  fought  in  the  cavalry  before  Potidaea  in  431-30,  was  still  a 
mere  boy,  little  more  than  a  child  (2176).  We  must  date  the  events 
somewhere  between  440  and  435,  when  Socrates  would  be  in  the 
earlier  thirties.  This  being  so,  it  is  important  to  observe  that  even 
then  his  fame  for  wisdom  was  such  that  Alcibiades  could  think  no 
price  too  high  to  pay  for  the  benefit  of  "  hearing  all  that  he  knew," 
We  must  also,  of  course,  understand  that  Socrates  is  to  be  thought 
of  as  a  man  still  young  enough  to  feel  the  charm  of  beauty  in  its 
full  force,  and  to  feel  it  in  the  way  characteristic  of  the  society  of 
his  age,  but  too  full  of  high  thoughts  to  be  vanquished  by  "  the 
most  opportune  place,  the  strongest  suggestion  his  worser  genius 
can.11  He  moves  through  a  brilliant  and  loose-living  society  like  a 
Sir  Galahad,  not  because  he  is  not  a  man  of  genuine  flesh  and  blood, 
but  because  his  heart  is  engaged  elsewhere,  and  he  has  none  to  spare 
for  "  light  loves."  This  testimony,  coming  from  Plato,  is  enough 
to  dispose  once  and  for  all  of  the  later  gossip  of  Aristoxenus  and 
the  Alexandrians  who  collected  such  garbage.  We  must  also,  I 
think,  with  Burnet,  recognize  that  the  prominence  given  to  the 
account  of  Socrates'  "rapt  "  for  four-and-twenty  hours  at  Potidaea 
(zzoc-d)  is  intended  to  suggest  that  this  was  the  outstanding 
"  ecstasy  "  of  his  life,  and  left  an  ineffaceable  mark  on  his  whole 
future.  It  can  hardly  be  a  coincidence  that  the  earliest  "  mission- 
ary "  effort  of  Socrates  related  by  Plato,  his  attempt  to  convert 
Charmides,  is  dated  immediately  after  his  return  from  the  campaign 
of  Potidaea.1  For  the  rest,  Socrates'  remarkable  power  of  adapting 

1  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  130,  138-142  ;  E.R.E.  xi.  670,  col.  i.    Professor 
Burnet  has  fallen  into  an  oversight  in  the  first  of  these  passages  when  he  makes 


284          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

himself  in  appearance  to  the  tone  and  manner  of  the  world,  and 
yet  contriving  without  any  visible  effort  to  bring  with  him  the 
suggestion  of  being  all  the  while  in  constant  contact  with  the  other 
"  unseen  "  world  which  is  at  once  so  near  and  so  far  is  one  of  the 
best-known  characteristics  of  the  greatest  "  contemplatives  "  ;  the 
stress  laid  on  the  point  helps  to  strengthen  our  conviction  that  we 
are  presented  with  a  realistic  portrait  of  an  actual  man.  (The  same 
"  adaptability  "  is  noted  as  eminently  distinctive  of  Xavier  by  his  bio- 
graphers. Xavier  recalls  Socrates  too  by  the  "  gaiety  "  of  which  the 
biographers  speak  as  the  most  striking  feature  of  his  conversation.) 

On  the  description  of  the  scene  of  revelry  with  which  the 
"  banquet  "  ends,  I  need  only  make  one  remark.  We  are  told 
(22$d)  that  when  the  new  morning  broke,  Socrates,  Aristophanes, 
and  Agathon  were  the  only  persons  in  the  party  who  were  equal  to 
continuing  the  conversation,  and  that  Socrates  was  left  by  Aris- 
todenms  trying  to  convince  the  two  dramatists  that  the  man  who 
can  compose  a  tragedy  rcxvy,  "  by  his  art,"  can  also  compose  a 
comedy.  Much  ingenuity  has  been  wasted  on  the  interpretation  of 
this  remark,  and  it  has  even  been  supposed  to  be  a  kind  of  prophecy 
of  Shakespeare's  "  tragi-comedies,"  which  are  neither  tragedies, 
nor  yet  comedies  in  the  sense  in  which  we  give  that  name  to  the 
brilliant  personal  burlesques  of  the  Attic  "  old  comedians."  The 
real  meaning  lies  on  the  surface.  As  we  have  seen,  Socrates  dis- 
sented from  the  current  view  that  poets  are  o-o^ot  and  their  pro- 
ductions works  of  conscious  "  art."  He  held  that  they  depend  on 
"  genius  "  or  "  inspiration,"  and  cannot  themselves  explain  their 
own  happiest  inspirations.  His  point  is  thus  that  the  inability  of 
Agathon  to  compose  comedies  and  of  Aristophanes  to  write  tragedies, 
is  a  proof  that  neither  of  them  is  a  o-o^os,  working  with  conscious 
mastery  of  an  "  art."  Both  are  the  instruments  of  a  "  genius  " 
which  masters  them,  not  wielders  of  a  tool  of  which  they  are  masters. 
The  passage  sho'uld  really  be  quoted,  not  as  an  excuse  for  gush 
about  Shakespeare,  but  as  an  illustration  of  what  Socrates  says  in 
the  Apology  about  his  attempts  to  "  refute  the  oracle  "  by  finding 
a  0-0^09  among  the  poets  and  their  failure.  In  fact,  he  fails  here. 
His  two  auditors  are  half  asleep  after  their  night  of  merriment  and 
"  do  not  quite  take  the  point  "  (ou  <r<j>6$pa.  cirofuVovs  vvora£civf  223^  6). 

See  further : 

RITTER,  C. — Platon,  i.  504-531. 

RAEDER,  H. — Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung,  158-168. 

NATORP,  P. — Platons  Ideenlehre,  163-174. 

BURY,  R.  G. — Symposium  of  Plato.     (1909.) 

ROBIN,  L. — Platon,  Le  Banquet.     (Paris,  1929.) 

LAGERBORG,  R. — Platonische  Liebe.     (Leipzig,  1926.) 

STEWART,    J.    A. — The    Myths    of  Plato,    397-450    (The    Two 

Symposium  Myths)  ;    Plato's  Theory  of  Ideas,  Pt.  ii. 
STENZEL,  J. — Platon  der  Erzieher,  209-241. 

the  "  rapt  "  take  place  at  a  time  of  "  hard  frost."     The  time  was  high  summer 
(Symp.  22od  i). 


CHAPTER    X 
THE  PROTAGORAS 

IF  there  is  any  Platonic  dialogue  which  can  challenge  the 
claim  of  the  Symposium  to  be  its  author's  dramatic  chef 
d'ceuvre  it  is  the  Protagoras,  with  its  brilliant  full-length 
portrait  of  the  famous  Protagoras  and  its  mirthful  sketches  of  the 
two  minor  "  sophists/'  Prodicus  and  Hippias.  The  very  life-like- 
ness of  the  narrative  has  led  to  grave  misunderstanding  of  the 
philosophical  significance  of  the  dialogue.  It  has  been  assumed  that 
so  lively  a  work  must  be  a  youthful  composition,  and  this  has  led 
to  the  further  supposition  that  its  teaching  must  be  "  undeveloped/' 
as  compared  with  that  of  e.g.  the  Gorgias.  By  way  of  providing 
Plato  with  a  crude  "  early  ethical  doctrine/'  for  the  Gorgias  to 
correct,  it  has  then  been  discovered  that  the  Protagoras  teaches  the 
Hedonism  of  Bentham,  a  misconception  which  makes  the  right 
understanding  of  its  purpose  wholly  impossible.  We  shall  see, 
as  we  proceed,  that  the  dialogue  does  not  teach  Hedonism  at  all  ; 
what  it  does  teach  is  something  quite  different,  the  Socratic  thesis 
that  "  all  the  virtues  are  one  thing — knowledge,"  and  that  its 
philosophical  purpose  is  simply  to  make  it  clear  that  this  thesis  is 
the  foundation  of  the  whole  Socratic  criticism  of  life.  The  ab- 
surdity of  regarding  the  dialogue  as  a  juvenile  performance  is 
sufficiently  shown  by  the  perfect  mastery  of  dramatic  technique 
which  distinguishes  it.  No  beginner,  however  endowed  with  genius, 
produces  such  a  masterpiece  of  elaborate  art  without  earlier  experi- 
ences of  trial  and  failure.  He  has  first  to  learn  the  use  of  his  tools. 
And  it  is  worth  noting  that  Aristotle  must  have  regarded  the 
dialogue  as  a  particularly  ripe  and  masterly  exposition  of  the 
Socratic  moral  theory,  since  he  has  taken  directly  from  it  his  own 
account  in  the  Ethics  of  the  characteristic  doctrines  of  Socrates.1 

1  E.N.  11166  4,  Socrates  thought  that  courage  is  knowledge,  a  reference 
to  the  lengthy  treatment  of  this  point  at  Protag.  349^  ff.  (rather  than,  as 
suggested  by  Burnet  in  his  commentary  on  the  Ethics,  to  the  Laches) ;  1 1446  18, 
Socrates  held  that  all  the  "  virtues  "  are  (ppovfoas  (an  allusion  probably  to 
the  assertion  of  this  in  Protagoras  and  Phaedo) ;  11456  23  ft.,  Socrates  denied 
that  there  is  such  a  state  as  &K  pour  la  in  which  "  passion  "  commits  a  "  rape  " 
on  judgment,  dciv&v  y&p  ^TTKTT^AITJS  tvofow,  cl>s  yero  S.,  AXXo  n  Kpartlv  Kal  TrepiA/cetp 
airrty  d>$  avdpdirodov  (a  verbal  allusion  to  Protag.  352c) ;  11476  15,  otf5'  ai/'rr?  (sc.  ^ 
Kvpla  tviffr-fiw)  w€pl€\K€Tat.  &d  Tb  ir&Bos  (another  echo  of  the  same  passage) ; 
11640  24,  on  Protagoras'  method  of  charging  for  his  services,  looks  like  a  loose 
reminiscence  of  Protag.  3286  6-c  2  ;  E.N.  11096  6  is  a  plain  reminiscence  of 
Protag.  3250"  6  ;  E.E.  12290  15  is  a  direct  allusion  to  Protag.  360^  4,  as  is  also 
12300  7  ff.  ;  12466  34  echoes  Protag.  352$.  Though  Aristotle  never  names  the 
dialogue,  he  evidently  appreciated  its  importance. 

*35 


286          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

In  form,  the  dialogue  is  once  more  a  narrated  drama,  but,  like 
the  Republic,  with  a  slightly  less  complicated  formula  than  the 
Symposium.  Socrates  himself  gives  an  unnamed  friend,  with 
whom  he  meets  in  a  public  place  in  Athens,  an  account  of  a  brilliant 
company  from  whom  he  has  only  just  parted.  The  method  of 
indirect  narration  is  once  more  necessary,  because  Plato  wishes  to 
impress  it  on  us  that  the  date  of  the  gathering  was  before  his  own 
time.  From  the  jocular  opening  remarks  we  learn  that  Alcibiades 
is  only  just  becoming  old  enough  to  be  spoken  of  as  a  "  man." 
Since  Alcibiades  served  at  Potidaea  in  431,  this  will  take  us  back 
at  least  to  the  beginning  of  his  "  ephebate,"  which  cannot  be  put 
later  than  433,  and  is  more  naturally  put  at  least  a  year  or  two 
earlier.  (For  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  he  must 
have  been  called  out  for  a  hard  and  distant  service  as  soon  as  he 
had  the  minimum  age  qualification.)  Thus  we  are  at  a  period 
before  the  opening  of  the  Archidamian  war.  This  accounts  for  the 
presence,  on  the  most  friendly  terms,  of  distinguished  men  belong- 
ing to  states  shortly  to  be  official  enemies  of  Athens,  and  for  the 
complete  absence  of  any  hint  that  inter-state  relations  are  in  any 
way  disturbed.  (Hippias  of  Elis  could  hardly  be  made  to  glorify 
Athens  as  he  does  at  3360-338^,  and  to  preach  a  homily  on  the 
"  internationalism  "  of  Kultur  if  the  war-clouds  were  already  gather- 
ing.) The  time  is  thus  the  Periclean  age  ;  Athens  is  at  the  very 
height  of  her  opulence  and  glory,  and  Socrates  must  be  thought 
of  as  a  man  of  about  thirty-five.  Of  the  other  figures  in  the  drama, 
the  most  important,  Protagoras  of  Abdera,  is  an  older  man.  He 
says  (317^)  that  he  is  advanced  in  years  and  might  easily  be  the 
father  of  any  one  present,  and  subsequently  (320$)  alleges  his 
superior  age  as  a  graceful  excuse  for  conveying  his  views  in  a  fable, 
"  as  a  man  may  in  talking  to  his  juniors.1'  Thus  we  are  directed 
to  think  of  him  as  a  generation  or  so  older  than  Socrates,  and  there- 
fore a  man  at  any  rate,  approaching  sixty-five.1  Prodicus  and 
Hippias  will  be  roughly  men  of  Socrates'  age.  The  scene  is  laid 
in  the  house  of  the  famous  "  millionaire  "  Callias,  son  of  Hipponicus, 

1  This  would  throw  back  the  birth  of  Protagoras  to  some  time  not  very 
far  from  500  B.C.  and  make  him  a  contemporary  of  Anaxagoras.  The  Alex- 
andrian chronologists  made  him  some  fifteen  years  younger,  and  they  have 
mostly  been  followed  by  modern  writers.  It  seems  to  me,  as  to  Professor 
Burnet,  that  we  must  accept  Plato's  statement.  He  must  have  known 
whether  Protagoras  really  belonged  to  the  generation  before  Socrates,  and  could 
have  no  motive  for  misrepresentation  on  such  a  point.  All  through  the 
dialogue  the  advanced  age  of  Protagoras  is  kept  before  the  reader's  mind, 
so  that  Plato  is  not  simply  falling  into  an  oversight.  The  Alexandrians 
obviously  depend  on  one  of  their  usual  arbitrary  constructions.  The  founda- 
tion of  Thurii  (444)  was  their  regular  "  fixed  era  "  for  events  of  the  Periclean 
a^e,  and  as  Protagoras  was  known  to  have  had  to  do  with  legislating  for 
Thurii,  they  fixed  his  d*^  to  the  year  of  its  foundation.  The  restoration 
of  Protagoras  to  his  true  date  enables  us  finally  to  dispose  of  the  fable  of  his 
prosecution  (in  415  or  in  411)  for  "  impiety,"  a  story  which  bears  the  marks 
of  its  futility  on  its  face.  From  the  references  of  the  Meno  we  see  that  Pro- 
tagoras must  have  died  during  the  Archidamian  war,  and  that  he  ended  his 
life  in  high  general  repute. 


THE  PROTAGORAS  287 

of  whom  we  read  in  the  Apology  that  he  had  spent  more  money  on 
"  sophists  "  than  any  living  man.  He  must  be  supposed  to  be 
quite  young,  since  his  activity  as  a  man  of  affairs  begins  at  a  much 
later  date.  Aristophanes  makes  a  topical  joke  about  his  presence 
at  the  battle  of  Arginusae  and  his  renown  as  a  lady-killer  in  the 
Frogs1  (405  B.C.).  In  the  speech  of  Andocides  on  the  Mysteries 
he  figures  as  the  villain  of  the  story,  the  party  who,  according  to 
Andocides,  is  instigating  the  prosecution  in  pursuance  of  a  personal 
grudge,  and  we  hear  endless  scandal  about  his  domestic  affairs. 
From  Lysias  xix.  (delivered  between  390  and  387)  we  learn  that  the 
family  capital,  which  had  once  been  believed  to  amount  to  two 
hundred  talents,  had  now  shrunk  to  two.  (We  must  take  into  account 
the  economic  revolution  which  followed  on  the  collapse  of  Athens 
in  404.)  We  hear  of  Callias  from  time  to  time  in  the  Hellenica  of 
Xenophon.  He  was  commanding  the  Athenian  force  at  Corinth 
on  the  famous  occasion  (390  B.C.)  when  Iphicrates  cut  up  the  Spartan 
mora  with  his  peltasts  (op.  cit.  iv.  5,  13),  and  was  one  of  the  repre- 
sentatives of  Athens  at  the  critical  congress  held  at  Sparta  early 
in  371,  two  or  three  months  before  the  battle  of  Leuctra.  Hence 
the  agreement  then  concluded  between  the  Athenian  and  Pelo- 
ponnesian  confederacies  has  been  generally  known  as  the  "  Peace 
of  Callias."  His  important  social  position  at  Athens  can  be  gauged 
from  the  facts  that  he  held  by  heredity  the  position  of  "  Torch- 
bearer  "  in  the  Eleusinian  mysteries  and  proxenus,  or,  as  we  might 
say,  "  Consul  "  for  Sparta.  For  a  proper  historical  appreciation 
of  Socrates  it  is  important  to  note  that  Plato  represents  him,  at 
this  early  date,  as  associating  with  persons  like  Callias  and  Alci- 
biadqs,  both  connected  with  the  Periclean  circle,  on  equal  terms, 
and  being  in  high  consideration  with  both  them  and  the  most 
eminent  of  the  foreign  "  wits.11  2 

We  cannot  rate  too  high  the  importance  of  the  Protagoras 
as  the  fullest  and  earliest  exposition  of  the  character  and  aims  of  the 
sophistic  "  education  in  goodness."  Nowhere  else  in  Greek  litera- 
ture have  we  an  account  of  the  matter  comparable  for  a  moment 
to  that  which  Plato  has  put  into  the  mouth  of  Protagoras  himself. 
There  is  really  no  reason  why  we  should  feel  any  distrust  of  the 
strict  "  historicity  "  of  the  statements.  Plato  stood  near  enough 
to  the  Periclean  age  to  be  excellently  well  informed  of  the  facts. 
He  could  form  his  conclusions  not  merely  from  what  he  might  be 
told  by  men  of  an  elder  generation  who  had  known  Protagoras,  or 
actually  taken  his  course,  but  from  the  work  or  works  of  the  dis- 
tinguished sophist  himself.  (The  silly  tale  of  their  destruction  is 
refuted  not  only  by  the  way  in  which  it  is  assumed  in  the  Theae- 
tetus  that  all  the  parties  to  that  conversation  are  familiar  with 

1  Frogs,  432 .  For  an  earlier  Aristophanic  allusion  to  Callias  as  a  spendthrift 
and  coureur  de  femmes,  cf.  Birds,  284-6.  He  had  already  been  attacked  as  a 
"  waster  "  and  patron  of  sophists  by  Eupolis  in  his  K<5Xa/fes  (421  B.C.). 

*  See  the  compliment  paid  him  by  Protagoras  at  3615,  and  observe  that 
It  is  assumed  to  be  based  on  an  acquaintance  begun  still  earlier  on  a  former 
visit  of  Protagoras  to  Athens. 


288          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

them,  but  by  the  express  statement  of  Isocrates.1)  He  stood  far 
enough  away  from  it  to  have  no  personal  motive  for  misrepresenta- 
tion of  any  kind,  and,  in  point  of  fact,  the  personality  and  the  ideas 
of  Protagoras  are  treated  all  through  the  dialogue  with  respect  and 
understanding,  though  we  are  made  to  see  what  his  limitations 
are.  His  exposition  of  his  programme  is  done  with  as  much 
"  gusto  "  as  anything  in  the  whole  of  Plato's  works  ;  so  much  so 
that  some  worthy  modern  critics  have  even  discovered  that  Prota- 
goras is  the  real  hero  of  the  dialogue  who  is  meant  to  be  commended 
at  the  expense  of  the  doctrinaire  Socrates.  Preposterous  as  this 
exegesis  is,  the  fact  that  it  has  been  given  in  good  faith  is  the  best 
proof  that  the  dialogue  is  no  satirical  caricature,  so  far  as  Prota- 
goras is  concerned.  He  is  depicted  as  a  man  of  high  aims  and 
sincere  belief  in  the  value  of  the  education  he  gives  ;  his  one  mani- 
fest foible  is  that  he  is  not  conscious  of  his  own  limitations,  and  in 
that  respect,  according  to  the  Apology,  he  is  only  on  a  level  with 
all  the  other  "  celebrities  "  of  the  Periclean  age. 

If  we  discount  the  little  exchange  of  pleasantries  between 
Socrates  and  his  unnamed  acquaintance  (309^-3100),  which  merely 
serves  the  purpose  of  dating  the  interview  of  Socrates  and  Prota- 
goras by  reference  to  the  age  of  Alcibiades  at  the  time,  the  dialogue 
falls  into  the  following  main  sections  :  (i)  an  introductory  narrative, 
preparatory  to  the  appearance  of  Protagoras  on  the  scene  (3100- 
3160)  ;  (2)  a  statement  by  Protagoras  of  the  nature  of  the  "  good- 
ness "  he  professes  to  be  able  to  teach,  followed  by  a  series  of 
"  sceptical  doubts  "  urged  by  Socrates  against  the  possibility  of 
such  an  education,  which  are,  in  their  turn,  replied  to  by  Protagoras 
at  great  length  (3166-328^)  ;  (3)  an  argument  between  Socrates 
and  Protagoras  leading  up  to  the  Socratic  "  paradox  "  of  the  unity 
of  the  virtues,  which  threatens  to  end  in  an  irreconcilable  dis- 
agreement (328^-3340)  ;  (4)  a  long  interlude  in  which  the  con- 
versation resolves  itself  for  a  time  into  the  discussion  of  a  moralizing 
poem  of  Simonides  (334^-3480)  ;  (5)  resumption  of  the  argument 
begun  in  (3),  with  the  further  developments  that  the  one  thing 
to  which  all  forms  of  "  goodness  "  reduce  is  seen  to  be  "  knowledge/' 
and  the  consequence  is  drawn  that  "  all  wrong-doing  is  error  " 
(3480-3600)  ;  (6)  a  brief  page  of  conclusion  in  which  both  parties 
to  the  discussion  admit  the  need  of  further  inquiry  and  take  leave 
of  one  another  with  many  courtesies  (3600-3620).  This  general 
analysis  of  itself  shows  that  the  central  purpose  of  the  dialogue  is 
to  exhibit  clearly  the  ultimate  ethical  presuppositions  of  the  Socratic 
morality  and  the  "  sophistic  "  morality  at  its  best,  and  to  show 
exactly  where  they  are  in  irreconcilable  opposition.  The  one 
serious  exegetical  problem  we  shall  have  to  face  is  that  of  discovering 
the  connexion  of  the  discussion  of  the  poem  of  Simonides  with  what 
precedes  and  follows. 


1  Isoc.  x.  2,  vvv  d£  r/s  forty  otfrws  dif/tjJuiOfy,  tforts  OVK  olde  Hlpwraydpav  ical  robt 
icar*    tKflvov    rbv    xp6vov  yevofilvovs    <ro<picmist   6n    *ai    roiaDra    Kal   iro\« 
T/xty/xarwSlarepa  (fvyypdnfJLara  jrar&troi'  imtv  J 


THE  PROTAGORAS  289 

I.  INTRODUCTORY  NARRATIVE  (3100-3160).— The  narrative  is 
giyen  in  a  tone  of  humour  marked  by  touches  of  satire,  which  is 
directed  not  against  Protagoras  but  against  the  excessive  adulation 
bestowed  on  him  by  his  younger  admirers,  and  to  a  less  degree 
against  the  self-importance  of  second-rate  "  professors  "  of  the 
type  of  Prodicus.  Its  main  object,  however,  is  to  insist  on  the 
great  importance  of  education  in  "  goodness,"  if  such  an  education 
is  to  be  had,  and  thus  to  raise  our  interest  to  the  appropriate  pitch, 
before  Protagoras  and  his  programme  are  actually  put  before  us. 
Socrates  has  been  roused  from  sleep  in  the  "  small  hours  "  by  his 
young  friend  Hippocrates,  who  has  just  heard  of  the  arrival  of 
Protagoras,  and  is  anxious  not  to  lose  a  moment  in  getting  an  intro- 
duction to  him  and  putting  himself  under  his  tuition.  As  it  is 
still  too  early  to  think  of  disturbing  the  great  man,  Socrates  and 
the  lad  walk  about  for  a  time  in  the  av\r)  of  Socrates1  house,  con- 
versing to  pass  the  time.  The  drift  of  the  conversation  is  that  by 
profession  Protagoras  is  a  "  sophist,"  but  Hippocrates  is  not  pro- 
posing to  study  under  him  in  order  to  enter  the  "  profession  " 
itself ;  he  would  be  degrading  himself  by  such  a  course.  His 
object  is,  like  that  of  the  pupil  of  an  ordinary  schoolmaster  or 
trainer,  to  get  "  culture  "  (TraiScta)  as  a  free  gentleman  should. 
That  is  to  say,  he  is  about  to  put  his  "  soul  "  into  the  hands  of  a 
professional  "  sophist  "  to  be  "  tended."  (The  point  intended  is 
that  "  culture  "  is  a  much  more  serious  thing  than  is  commonly 
supposed.  It  really  means  the  moulding  of  the  "  soul  "  for  good  or 
ill.)  Hence,  before  we  take  such  a  risk,  we  ought  to  be  quite  clear 
on  the  point  "  what  a  sophist  is,"  i.e.  to  what  ends  it  is  his  profession 
to  shape  us.  He  is  a  cro<£os  or  "  wit,"  as  his  name  shows,1  but  we 
might  say  as  much  of  a  painter.  We  want  to  know  further  on  what 
his  "  wit  "  is  exercised,  of  what  accomplishment  he  is  master. 
Hippocrates  makes  the  obvious  suggestion  that  the  particular 
accomplishment  of  the  sophist  is  the  skilful  use  of  speech — the 
"  art  "  which,  in  fact,  the  pupils  of  Protagoras  were  specially 
anxious  to  learn  from  him.  But  any  skilled  professional  can  speak 
well  and  to  the  point  about  his  own  technicality,  and  in  teaching  us 
that  technicality,  he  will  make  us  also  able  to  speak  properly  about 
it.  Thus  the  all-important  question  is,  What  is  it  of  which  a 
"  sophist  "  as  such  is  by  profession  a  teacher? — and  Hippocrates 
cannot  answer  this  question  (3i2tf).2 

Clearly  then,  Hippocrates  is  taking  a  great  risk  and  taking  it 

1  312^.  It  is  assumed  that  the  popular  etymology  of  cro^tcmjy  made  it  a 
derivative  from  <ro06s  and  clStvat,  <ro0icrTiJs  =  6  T&V  <ro<t>uv  torij  j. 

8  Hippocrates  makes  the  suggestion  that  the  "  sophist's  "  speciality  is 
to  be  Scivfa  X^yeip,  of  course,  because  the  special  skill  of  which  Protagoras 
notoriously  boasted  was  the  power  to  "  make  the  weaker  argument  the 
stronger,"  by  stating  the  case  forcibly  and  plausibly.  "  Advocacy  "  is  what 
the  young  men  of  Athens  pay  Protagoras  to  teach  them.  Socrates'  point  is 
that  the  worth  of  his  teaching  as  a  "  culture  for  the  soul  "  depends  on  what 
he  "  advocates  "  and  teaches  others  to  advocate.  Even  from  the  most  utili- 
tarian point  of  view,  to  be  a  clever  advocate  is  not  the  one  and  only  requisite 
for  a  statesman. 


240          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

in  the  dark.  He  would  be  slow  to  trust  the  care  of  his  body  to  a 
particular  adviser,  and  would  do  all  he  could  to  be  sure  of  sucl)  a 
man's  competence  before  he  became  his  patient.  How  much  more 
foolish  to  put  that  much  more  precious  thing,  his  soul,  into  the  hands 
of  a  recently  arrived  foreigner,  without  any  consultation  with  older 
and  more  responsible  friends  and  relatives,  and  actually  without 
knowing  the  real  character  of  the  stranger's  profession  !  We  might 
suggest  that  the  sophist  is  by  profession  a  sort  of  importer  and 
retailer  (Ip.irop6<>  ns  YJ  Kamj\o?)  of  foreign  articles  of  spiritual  diet 
(a  suggestion  taken  up  again  with  a  good  deal  of  humour  in  a  much 
later  dialogue,  the  Sophistes).  The  "  food  of  the  spirit  "  is,  of 
course,  "  studies  "or  "  sciences  "  (yu-a^/xara) ,  and  we  need  to 
guard  against  the  risk  that  the  purveyor  of  this  sustenance  may 
deceive  us,  as  other  vendors  often  do,  about  the  quality  of  his 
merchandise.  The  ordinary  vendor  praises  the  wholesomeness  of 
his  wares,  but  without  really  knowing  anything  about  the  matter. 
You  would  do  well  to  take  the  advice  of  a  medical  man  before  you 
patronize  him.  So  if  one  could  find  a  "  physician  of  souls,"  it 
would  be  desirable  to  take  his  advice  before  patronizing  the  spiritual 
wares  vended  by  Protagoras.  This  is  all  the  more  important  that 
you  cannot  carry  away  samples  of  his  wares,  as  you  might  of  a 
food  for  the  body,  and  examine  them  at  your  leisure  before  con- 
suming them.  "  Sciences "  have  to  be  taken  direct  from  the 
vendor  into  the  soul  itself,  and  if  they  are  unsound  articles  the 
mischief  is  thus  done  at  the  very  time  of  purchase.  You  and  I, 
says  Socrates,  are  still  too  young 1  to  judge  for  ourselves  what  is 
wholesome  diet  for  the  mind.  But  we  can,  at  any  rate,  go  and 
hear  what  Protagoras  has  to  say  about  his  merchandise,  and  take 
the  advice  of  others  accordingly,  before  we  commit  ourselves 

(314*)- 

We  need  not  delay  over  the  lively  description  of  the  scene  in 

the  house  of  Callias,  the  crowd  of  visitors,  and  the  figures  of  those 
lesser  lights  Prodi cus  and  Hippias.  Some  of  the  party  must 
have  been  mere  boys  ;  Socrates  says  this,  in  so  many  words,  of 
Agathon,  and  it  must  be  as  true  of  Charmides,  who  was  still  a  mere 
lad  in  the  year  of  Potidaea.  Plato  has  been  reprimanded  for 
making  fun  of  the  invalidism  of  Prodicus,  but  for  all  we  know, 
Prodicus  may  really  have  been  a  malade  imaginaire  at  whom  it  is 
quite  fair  to  laugh.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  all  the  speakers 
of  the  Symposium  are  present  except  Aristophanes,  who  would 
be  little  more  than  a  child  at  the  supposed  date  of  our  dialogue. 

1  ^uets  ybp  trt.  vtot.  Note  the  repeated  insistence  on  the  comparative 
youth  of  Socrates.  Plato  is  determined  that  we  shall  not  forget  the  date  to 
which  he  has  assigned  the  conversation.  I  should  suppose  that  his  reason  is 
that  he  knew  or  believed  that  Socrates,  as  a  fact,  did  meet  Protagoras  at  this 
date,  and  that  this  was  the  most  important  occasion  on  which  the  two  met, 
just  as  he  mentions  in  the  Phaedo  that  Socrates  first  learned  Anaxagoras' 
doctrine  about  vovs  from  hearing  some  one  "read  aloud,"  as  he  said,  "from 
a  book  of  Anaxagoras,"  simply  in  order  to  make  the  historical  point  that  the 
two  meu  had  not  actually  met. 


THE  PROTAGORAS  241 

(I  should  have  mentioned  in  speaking  of  the  Symposium  that  Aris- 
tophanes must  be  the  youngest  of  the  speakers  in  that  dialogue,  a 
man  of  about  twenty-eight.) 

II.  THE  PROGRAMME  OF  PROTAGORAS  (3i6&-328rf). — As  soon 
as  Protagoras  makes  his  appearance,  Socrates,  who  already  knows 
him  personally,  opens  the  business  on  which  he  has  come.  His 
young,  well-born,  and  wealthy  friend  Hippocrates  has  political 
aspirations  which  he  thinks  might  be  furthered  by  studying  under 
Protagoras.  But  a  preliminary  interview  is  desirable.  Protag- 
oras is  of  the  same  opinion,  and  is  glad  of  the  chance  of  explaining 
his  aims  as  a  teacher,  since  the  profession  is  one  in  which  a  man 
cannot  be  too  careful  of  his  own  reputation.  Men  feel  a  natural 
ill-will  towards  a  brilliant  stranger  when  they  see  the  young  men 
of  promise  preferring  his  company  and  instructions  to  those  of 
their  own  most  eminent  countrymen.  This  is  why  all  the  most 
influential  "  educators "  have  preferred  to  disguise  their  real 
practice,  from  Homer's  time  on,  and  have  professed  to  be  poets, 
physicians,  musicians,  anything  but  what  they  really  are.  Protag- 
oras plumes  himself  on  his  own  courage  in  taking  the  opposite 
course  and  frankly  avowing  that  his  calling  is  to  "  educate  men." 
His  boldness  has  proved  the  wiser  course,  for  in  a  long  professional 
career  he  has  escaped  all  serious  consequences  of  the  popular 
prejudice.1  So  he  has  nothing  to  conceal  and  is  ready  to  expound 
his  aims  with  complete  frankness.  The  whole  company  thereupon 
forms  itself  into  an  audience  for  the  promised  exposition. 

Socrates  now  repeats  the  question  he  had  already  put  to  Hippo- 
crates ;  what  precise  benefit  may  be  expected  from  study  under 
Protagoras  ?  The  answer  Protagoras  gives  is  that  a  pupil  who 
comes  to  him  will  go  away  daily  "  better  than  he  came,"  (3180. 
This  establishes  the  formal  equivalence  of  the  notions  of  "  educat- 
ing men  "  and  "  teaching  goodness.")  But  this  statement  needs 
to  be  made  more  precise.  Any  master  of  a  speciality  might  say 
as  much.  If  you  studied  under  Zeuxippus,  you  would  improve — 
in  drawing,  if  under  Orthagoras — in  flute-playing.  But  in  what 
will  you  improve  daily  if  you  study  under  Protagoras  ?  The 
question,  says  Protagoras,  is  rightly  and  fairly  put,  and  the  answer 
is  that  his  pupil  will  daily  improve,  not  in  knowledge  of  astronomy 
or  geometry  (like  the  pupils  of  the  polymath  Hippias),  but  in  what 
is  the  great  concern  of  life,  "  prudence  in  the  management  of  one's 
private  affairs  and  capacity  to  speak  and  act  in  the  affairs  of  the 
city."  That  is,  Protagoras  undertakes  to  teach  us  not  how  to  be 

1  3166-31  yc.  Protagoras  is,  of  course,  speaking  playfully  when  he  suggests 
that  Homer,  Simonides,  and  others  were  really  "  sophists  "  who  tried  to 
escape  unpopularity  by  passing  themselves  off  for  something  different. 
But  we  may  infer  from  his  remarks  (i)  that  the  popular,  and  very  natural, 
feeling  against  the  professional  sophist  really  existed  in  Athens  in  the  Periclean 
age,  and  is  not,  as  Grote  supposed,  an  invention  of  Plato  and  the  Socratic 
men ;  (2)  that  Protagoras  was  actually  the  first  man  avowedly  to  practise 
the  "  educating  of  men  "  or  "  teaching  of  goodness  "  as  a  paid  profession. 
Unless  these  are  facts,  there  is  no  point  in  what  Plato  makes  him  say. 


242          PLATO :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

good  specialists,  but  how  to  be  good  men,  and  what,  to  a  Periclean 
Athenian,  is  the  same  thing,  good  active  citizens.  He  is  really 
claiming  to  be  able  to  teach  "  statesmanship "  (3190).  (This, 
of  course,  was  precisely  what  aspiring  young  Athenians  paid  him 
to  teach  them.) 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  the  most  important  thing  a 
man  could  teach,  if  it  is  really  true  that  statesmanship  can  be 
taught.  But  Socrates  feels  a  perplexity  on  the  question  whether 
statesmanship  is  teachable.  It  is  hard  to  disbelieve  in  the  claims 
of  a  famous  man  like  Protagoras  who  has  been  pursuing  his  pro- 
fession for  so  many  years  ;  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  considera- 
tions which  make  the  other  way,  and  Socrates  now  proposes  to 
state  them.  We  must  observe  that  he  does  not  undertake  to  prove 
that  statesmanship  cannot  be  taught,  nor  does  he  commit  himself 
to  any  of  the  views  he  goes  on  to  present.  He  merely  urges  that, 
seeing  the  quarter  from  which  they  come,  they  cannot  be  simply 
dismissed,  but  have  to  be  met.  The  argument  is  one  from  what 
Aristotle  calls  etVdra,  the  probabilities  of  the  case. 

The  Athenians  have  a  great  name  for  being  a  "  clever  "  people, 
and  it  is  not  likely  that  an  opinion  held  very  strongly  by  such  a 
people  should  be  a  mere  delusion.  Now  the  Athenian  public  would 
appear  to  hold  that  "  goodness  "  cannot  be  taught.  For  it  is  singular 
that  though  they  will  only  accept  public  advice  on  what  are 
admittedly  matters  for  expert  knowledge  from  properly  qualified 
advisers,  they  listen  to  an  opinion  on  the  statesmanship  of  a  pro- 
posed course  of  action  without  any  such  regard  for  qualifications. 
They  will  listen,  on  a  point  of  naval  construction,  to  no  one 
who  is  not  known  either  to  be  an  expert  himself  or  to  have 
studied  under  experts.  But  when  the  issue  is  one  of  statesman- 
ship— that  is,  one  of  the  goodness  or  badness,  the  rightfulness  or 
wrongfulness,  of  a  proposed  public  act — they  treat  any  one  man's 
opinion  as  equally  deserving  of  a  hearing  with  another's  ;  they 
make  no  demand  here  that  a  man  shall  be  an  approved  "  expert " 
or  have  learned  from  one. 

And  this  is  not  merely  the  attitude  of  the  "  general "  ;  the 
individuals  who  are  regarded  as  our  wisest  and  best  statesmen  show 
by  their  conduct  that  they  hold  the  same  view.  They  neither 
teach  their  own  "  goodness  "  to  their  sons  nor  procure  masters  of 
it  for  them,  but  leave  it  to  chance  whether  the  young  men  will  pick 
up  this  goodness  for  themselves.  The  example  selected,  in  this 
instance,  is  that  of  Pericles.  Thus  Socrates  argues  the  case  by 
appealing,  in  Aristotelian  fashion,  first  to  the  opinion  of  the  "  many  " 
and  then  to  that  of  the  "  wise/'  the  acknowledged  experts.  It  is 
not  likely  that  a  very  widespread  conviction  should  be  merely 
baseless  ;  it  is  not  likely  that  the  convictions  of  "  experts  "  should 
be  merely  baseless ;  it  is  still  less  likely  that  both  parties  should 
be  victims  of  the  same  delusion.  The  point  is  raised  simply  as  a 
difficulty ;  Socrates  is  quite  ready  to  listen  to  a  proof  from  Protag- 
oras that,  after  all,  both  parties  are  wrong.  The  question  is  thus 


THE  PROTAGORAS  248 

not  whether  goodness  can  be  taught  or  not,  but  whether  Protagoras 
can  satisfy  Socrates  that  it  is  teachable,  in  other  words,  whether 
goodness  can  be  taught  on  the  principles  and  by  the  methods  of 
Protagoras. 

In  dealing  with  the  reply  of  Protagoras,  we  must  be  careful 
to  remember  that  his  case  is  not  established  by  the  mere  fact  that 
there  is  a  great  deal  of  truth  in  what  he  says,  so  far  as  it  goes. 
What  is  required  is  that  he  should  make  out  sufficient  justification 
for  his  claim  to  be  able  to  teach  statesmanship  as  a  speciality, 
exactly  as  another  man  might  teach  geometry  or  medicine.  If 
we  keep  this  point  carefully  in  view,  it  will  be  found  that,  though 
what  Protagoras  says  is  true  enough,  as  a  vindication  of  his  own 
claim  it  is  a  complete  ignoratio  elenchi. 

He  begins  by  indicating  his  position  by  means  of  a  fable  about 
the  culture-hero  Prometheus.  At  the  making  of  living  creatures, 
Epimetheus  was  charged  with  the  work  of  distributing  the  various 
means  of  success  in  the  "  struggle  for  existence  "  among  them  ; 
Prometheus  was  to  act  as  supervisor  and  critic.  Epimetheus 
managed  the  distribution  so  badly  that  when  he  came  to  deal  with 
mankind,  the  various  serviceable  qualities  had  already  been  used 
up  on  the  lower  animals  ;  none  were  left  for  man,  who  would  thus 
have  been  helpless  and  defenceless  if  Prometheus  had  not  stolen 
from  heaven  fire  and  the  knowledge  of  industrial  arts.  (In  plainer 
words,  man  is  not  equipped  for  self-preservation  by  a  system  of 
elaborate  congenital  instincts,  and  he  is  handicapped  also  by  physical 
inferiority  :  he  has  to  depend  for  survival  on  intelligence.)  In  the 
"  state  of  nature,"  however,  intelligence  and  the  possession  of  fire 
were  not  enough  to  secure  men  against  their  animal  competitors  ; 
they  had  further  to  associate  themselves  in  "  cities,"  and  this  gave 
occasion  for  all  kinds  of  aggression  on  one  another.  (One  may 
compare  Rousseau's  speculations  about  the  opportunity  given  by 
the  social  impulses  of  mankind  to  the  exploitation  of  the  many  by 
the  able  and  unscrupulous  few.)  Hence  Zeus  intervened  to  preserve 
the  human  race  by  sending  Hermes  to  bestow  on  them  81*17  and 
cuSws,  the  sense  of  right  and  conscience.  But  Zeus  expressly 
commanded  that  these  gifts  were  not  to  be  confined,  like  e.g.  skill 
in  medicine,  to  a  few  specialists ;  they  were  to  be  distributed  to 
every  one,  since  "  political  association  "  is  impossible  on  any  other 
terms  (322^)*  Hence  the  behaviour  of  the  Athenian  ecclesia,  which 
has  surprised  Socrates,  is  reasonable  and  right.  "  Political  good- 
ness "  is  wholly  a  matter  of  justice  and  "  temperance/'  and  no 
member  of  the  community  is  a  layman  or  outsider  where  justice 
and  temperance  are  concerned  ;  every  "  citizen,"  in  fact,  is  an 
expert  in  the  virtues.  This  is  also  why  we  expect  a  man  who  is  a 
layman  in  other  accomplishments  to  confess  the  fact,  and  ridicule 
him  if  he  pretends  to  an  accomplishment  which  he  does  not  possess. 
But  when  it  comes  to  "  justice,"  or  "  temperance,"  or  any  other 
"  goodness  of  a  citizen,"  we  expect  a  man  to  pretend  to  it,  even  if 
he  does  not  possess  it ;  hypocrisy  is  a  tribute  we  expect  vice  to 


244          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

pay  to  virtue  (3230).  Similarly  we  may  easily  satisfy  ourselves 
that  the  Athenian  people  really  believe  that  "  goodness  "  can  and 
must  be  taught,  by  reflecting  that  they  never  "  admonish  "  or 
"  correct  "  those  who  suffer  from  defects  which  they  cannot  help. 
A  man  is  not  reprimanded  or  corrected  for  being  ugly  or  undersized 
or  sickly ;  he  is  pitied.  But  men  are  properly  reprimanded  and 
punished  for  moral  delinquencies,  and  the  whole  object  is  that  the 
reprimand  or  punishment  may  be  a  "  lesson  "  to  the  offender  or  to 
others  not  to  offend  in  the  future.  The  very  existence  of  criminal 
justice  is  thus  proof  that  "  goodness  "  is  held  to  be  something 
which  can  be  taught  (3230-324^).  (This  does  not  mean  that  either 
Protagoras  or  Plato  rejects  the  "  retributive  "  theory  of  punish- 
ment. The  "  retributive  "  theory  means  simply  that  before  a 
man  can  be  held  liable  to  punishment,  he  must  by  his  acts  have 
given  you  the  right  to  punish  him.  You  are  not  entitled  to  inflict 
a  penalty  simply  because  you  think  the  suffering  of  it  would 
"  do  the  man  good  "  ;  the  penalty  must  be  preceded  by  the 
commission  of  an  offence.  No  sane  theory  of  the  right  to  punish 
can  ignore  this.) 

The  little  fable  about  Prometheus  has  already  revealed  Protag- 
oras to  us  as  a  strong  believer  in  the  view  that  morality  is 
dependent  on  vofto?,  the  system  of  conventions  and  traditions 
embodied  in  the  "  usages  "  of  a  civilized  community.  As  we  follow 
his  explanation  we  shall  find  him  laying  still  more  stress  on  this 
point.  Like  Hobbes,  he  holds  that  in  a  "  state  of  nature/1  there 
would  be  no  morality  to  speak  of,  and  the  lack  of  it  would  make 
human  life  "  poor,  nasty,  brutish,  and  short/'  He  declares  himself 
strongly  opposed  to  the  view  of  some  of  his  rivals,  that  "  citizen 
goodness  "  is  a  thing  that  comes  by  "  nature/'  in  other  words, 
that  men  are  born  good  or  bad.  He  is  wholly  without  any  belief 
in  the  moral  goodness  of  the  unspoiled  "  savage  "  and,  in  fact, 
looks  on  morality  as  a  product  of  civilization,  a  matter  of  imbibing 
a  sound  social  tradition.  Such  a  view  would  seem  to  suggest  that, 
since,  as  we  have  just  been  told,  every  civilized  man  has  to  be  a 
"  specialist  "  in  justice  and  temperance,  there  is  no  room  and  no 
need  for  the  expert  teacher  of  goodness,  a  conclusion  which  would 
make  Protagoras'  own  professional  activities  superfluous.  Hence 
he  goes  on,  at  once,  to  explain  that  he  does  not  mean  to  deny  that 
goodness  can  be  taught  or  that  there  are  expert  teachers  of  it. 
You  do  not  imbibe  it  unconsciously  ;  it  is  a  thing  which  comes  by 
teaching  and  training  (323^).  His  position  is  that,  in  a  civilized 
society,  life  is  one  long  process  of  being  taught  goodness,  and  every 
citizen  is,  in  his  degree,  an  expert  teacher.  But  there  are  a  few 
exceptionally  able  teachers  with  a  special  vocation  for  their  function, 
who  do  what  every  good  citizen  is  doing,  but  do  it  better,  and  Protag- 
oras himself  is  simply  one  of  these. 

In  support  of  this  view  he  makes  an  eloquent  and  telling  speech 
on  the  educational  process  to  which  the  civilized  man  is  all  through 
life  subjected,  as  a  consequence  of  the  very  fact  that  he  is  a  member 


THE  PROTAGORAS  245 

of  a  society  with  social  traditions.  Even  in  infancy  parents,  nurses, 
servants,  are  all  busy  teaching  a  child  by  precept  and  example  that 
"  this  is  right  "  and  "  that  is  wrong."  The  elementary  school- 
master next  takes  up  the  same  task.  The  boy's  reading  lessons  are 
passages  from  the  poets,  full  of  sound  moral  instruction,  and  the 
preceptors  from  whom  he  learns  to  read  and  write  and  tune  his 
lyre  pay  more  attention  to  his  conduct  than  to  anything  else.  So 
the  trainer  in  bodily  exercises  makes  it  his  prime  business  to  teach 
hardihood  and  manliness  of  temper,  the  first  requisites  of  a  future 
soldier.  When  "  school  days  "  are  over,  and  the  boy  enters  on 
manhood,  the  city  by  its  laws  sets  before  him  a  rule  for  the  whole 
conduct  of  his  life,  and  penalizes  him  if  he  does  not  learn  from  this 
rule  how  "  to  govern  and  be  governed."  Thus  the  citizen's  life 
is  one  unbroken  progressive  process  of  learning  goodness  (325^3260). 
It  is  this  very  universality  of  the  teaching  which  explains  the  puzzle 
about  the  sons  of  statesmen.  If  any  of  the  "  accomplishments  " 
of  which  Socrates  had  spoken,  for  example  flute-playing,  were  held 
by  some  community  to  be  so  important  that  every  citizen  must 
acquire  it,  and  every  one  was  anxious  to  communicate  his  own 
knowledge  of  it  to  others,  what  would  happen  ?  The  citizens  of 
such  a  community  would  not  all  be  first-rate  performers.  Any  one 
of  them  would  be  a  much  better  performer  than  an  average  member 
of  a  community  which  did  not  insist  on  the  accomplishment ;  but 
the  very  universality  of  the  instruction  would  lead  to  differences 
between  the  individual  citizens,  based  on  their  more  or  less  marked 
natural  aptitude.  Where  the  means  of  instruction  were  open  to  all, 
and  their  use  compulsory  for  all,  proficiency  would  be  most  mani- 
festly in  proportion  to  aptitude.  If  no  one  but  the  son  of  a  musician 
learned  music,  or  no  one  but  the  son  of  an  expert  in  "  goodness  " 
learned  goodness,  we  might  reasonably  expect  that  the  sons  of 
musicians  would  always  be  our  most  successful  musicians  and  the 
sons  of  "  good  men  "  our  best  men.  Just  because  every  one 
"  learns,"  this  does  not  occur  in  an  actual  society,  and  Socrates' 
paradox  is  thus  seen  to  be  no  paradox  at  all.  If  he  would  compare 
the  worst  men  in  a  civilized  society,  like  that  of  Athens,  not  with 
imaginary  "  noble  savages,"  but  with  real  savages,  he  would  soon 
discover  on  which  side  the  superiority  lies  (326^-3275).  And  as  for 
his  argument  that  there  is  no  provision  of  a  special  class  of  expert 
teachers  of  goodness,  we  may  reply  that  neither  are  there  special 
experts  to  whom  a  child  has  to  be  sent  to  learn  to  speak  its  mother- 
tongue,  or  to  whom  the  son  of  an  artisan  must  be  apprenticed  to 
learn  his  father's  business.  In  both  cases,  the  child  picks  up  the 
knowledge  from  its  "  social  environment."  Besides,  there  are 
some  men,  like  Protagoras  himself,  who  have  a  special  and  superior 
gift  for  teaching  goodness,  and  their  pupils  do  make  exceptional 
progress  (3270-328^). 

The  reply  to  Socrates'  doubts  looks  plausible,  and  has  apparently 
traversed  all  the  points  of  his  case.  But  the  plausibility  is,  after  all, 
only  apparent.  If  we  look  more  closely,  we  shall  see  that  the 


246          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

whole  argument  depends  on  simply  identifying  "  goodness  "  with 
the  actual  traditions  of  an  existing  civilized  state.  What  you  do 
imbibe,  as  Protagoras  has  said,  from  parents,  servants,  school- 
masters, daily  intercourse  with  your  fellow-Athenians,  is  nothing 
but  the  vo/ios,  the  social  tradition,  of  the  group  in  which  you  live. 
In  a  different  social  group,  at  Megara  for  example,  the  same  in- 
fluences of  the  social  environment  would  be  equally  powerful,  but 
the  type  of  character  they  would  tend  to  produce  would  be  in 
many  ways  different.  Thus  the  theory  expounded  by  Protagoras 
can  only  be  accepted  as  satisfactory  if  one  assumes,  as  he  has  tacitly 
done,  that  morality  is  entirely  "  relative/'  that  is,  that  there  is  no 
moral  standard  more  ultimate  than  the  standard  of  respectability 
current  in  a  given  society.  If  this  is  conceded,  Protagoras  has 
made  out  his  main  contention  that  "  goodness  "  can  be,  and  actually 
is,  learned  as  a  consequence  of  birth  into  a  society  with  a  definite 
tradition.  But  the  whole  point  of  the  Socratic  identification  of 
morality  with  "  knowledge  "  is  that  morality  is  not  any  more 
"  relative  "  than  geometry.  The  traditions  of  Athens  are  no  more 
an  ultimate  standard  in  matters  of  right  and  wrong  than  they  are 
in  questions  of  mathematics.  In  other  words,  what  Protagoras 
really  means  by  "  goodness/'  if  his  argument  is  to  be  conclusive, 
is  just  the  medley  of  uncriticized  traditions  which  Socrates  calls  in 
the  Phaedo  "  popular  goodness "  and  opposes  to  "  philosophic 
goodness/'  as  the  imitation  to  the  reality.  Goodness,  as  Socrates 
understands  it,  is  a  matter  not  of  traditions  but  of  insight  into 
principles.  Now  this,  to  be  sure,  is  "  knowledge/'  and  must  there- 
fore be  capable  of  being  taught.  But  the  kind  of  goodness  Protag- 
oras must  have  in  mind  when  he  says  that  any  Athenian  citizen, 
as  such,  is  a  teacher  of  it,  is  something  which,  as  his  own  illustration 
about  the  boy  who  picks  up  his  father's  trade  rather  naively  in- 
dicates, is  not  got  by  teaching  of  principles  at  all,  but  merely  picked 
up,  in  the  main,  automatically.  Without  knowing  it,  Protagoras 
has  really  admitted  that  such  goodness  is  what  the  Gorgias  had 
called  a  mere  "  knack." 

Hence  it  follows  that  there  is  a  certain  inconsistency  between 
Protagoras'  main  position  and  the  vindication  of  his  profession  with 
which  he  concludes  his  speech.  To  make  the  whole  speech  con- 
sistent, we  should  have  to  understand  him  to  be  claiming  for  him- 
self a  certain  exceptional  ability  in  catching  the  tone  of  the  "  social 
tradition  "  of  Athens,  or  any  other  community  he  visits,  and 
communicating  that  tone  to  his  pupils.  Now  it  would,  in  the 
first  place,  be  something  of  a  paradox  to  maintain  that  a  brilliant 
foreigner  from  Abdera  can  so  successfully  take  the  print  of  the 
social  traditions  of  every  community  where  he  spends  a  few  weeks, 
that  a  lecture  from  him  will  impress  that  tone  on  a  young  man  more 
effectively  than  lifelong  intercourse  with  a  society  in  which  it  is 
dominant.  It  would  be  bad  manners,  at  least,  for  a  brilliant 
Frenchman  or  American  to  profess  that  a  few  weeks  spent  in  this 
country  had  enabled  him  to  understand  the  "  tone  and  temper  of 


THE  PROTAGORAS  247 

the  British  people  "  better  than  any  of  us  understand  it  for  our- 
selves." l  If  "  goodness "  is  knowledge,  we  can  understand 
that  a  Chinaman,  knowing  nothing  of  "  British  traditions/'  may 
have  lessons  of  first-rate  importance  to  impart  to  us  in  it ;  the 
claim  becomes  absurd  if  goodness  means,  in  us,  simply  thorough 
conformity  to  the  traditions  of  British  respectability.  The  claim 
to  be  an  expert  teacher  of  goodness  is  only  justifiable  on  the  Socratic 
view  that  goodness  is  something  eternal  and  immutable.  It  is  in 
flat  contradiction  with  the  relativism  professed  by  Protagoras. 
The  further  development  of  the  discussion  will  make  it  still  clearer 
that  it  is  bound  to  end  in  an  irreconcilable  divergence  because, 
from  the  first,  the  parties  to  the  conversation  have  meant  different 
things  by  "  goodness/1 

III.  THE  UNITY  OF  THE  "VIRTUES"  (328^-3340).— There  is 
just  one  "  little  "  point  Socrates  would  like  to  have  cleared  up, 
before  he  can  profess  himself  completely  satisfied.  Protagoras 
had  specified  two  qualities  as  bestowed  on  mankind  by  Zeus — the 
sense  of  right  (8007),  and  conscience  (ai8u>?) ;  he  had  gone  on  to 
mention  piety  and  sophrosyne  also  as  constituents  of  "  goodness." 
Does  he  mean  that  "  goodness  "  is  an  aggregate  of  which  these 
characters  are  distinct  constituents  (/xdpia),  or  are  we  to  understand 
that  "  conscience,"  "  sense  of  right,"  "  sophrosyne/9  "  piety,"  are 
synonymous  ?  He  meant  to  be  understood  in  the  former  sense. 
But  did  he  mean  that  the  constituents  are  constituents  in  the  way 
in  which  eyes,  nose,  and  ears  are  constituents  of  a  face,  or  in  the 
sense  in  which  the  smaller  volumes  contained  in  a  homogeneous 
mass  (like  a  lump  of  gold)  are  constituents  ?  i.e.  have  the  different 
"  virtues  "  each  its  own  constitutive  formula,  or  is  there  only  one 
such  formula  ?  The  question  is  one  on  which  a  practical  teacher 
of  goodness  is  bound  to  have  a  definite  opinion,  because  it  has  a 
very  direct  bearing  on  his  educational  methods.  On  the  first 
view,  a  man  might  "  specialize  "  in  one  virtue  (for  example,  courage), 
while  his  neighbour  might  prefer  to  specialize  in  some  other,  just 
as  one  man  may  specialize  in  diseases  of  the  respiratory  organs  and 
another  in  disorders  of  the  digestive  system,  or  as  one  man  may 
become  a  crack  oarsman,  another  a  fast  bowler.  (Or  again,  a  man 
might  set  himself  to  acquire  "  goodness  "  by  specializing  first  in  one 
of  its  "  parts  "  or  "  branches  "  and  then  in  another,  like  Benjamin 
Franklin.)  But  on  the  second  view,  the  principle  of  goodness  will 
be  exactly  the  same  in  whatever  relation  of  life  it  is  displayed.  A 

1  That  Protagoras  actually  took  the  line  here  suggested  seems  to  follow 
from  the  well-known  passage  of  the  Theaetetus  where  the  question  is  raised 
how  Protagoras  could  reconcile  his  doctrine  of  "  Man  the  measure  "  with  his 
own  claim  to  be  able  to  teach  "  goodness."  Socrates  suggests  that  Protagoras 
might  have  pleaded  that  what  he  does  for  his  pupils  is  not  to  give  them 
"  truer  "  views — a  thing  impossible  on  the  Homo  men^ura  theory — but  to  give 
them  "more  useful"  views  (Theaetetus,  i66a~i6Sc).  This  amounts  to  the 
suggestion  of  the  text,  that  Protagoras  believes  himself  to  have  a  special 
aptitude  for  appreciating  the  tone  of  the  current  tradition  of  a  community 
and  impressing  it  on  his  hearers. 


248          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

man  who  really  acquires  one  "  virtue  "  will  have  to  acquire  all 
simultaneously  (3290). 

Protagoras  at  once  adopts  the  first  alternative,  that  which 
recommends  itself  to  average  common  sense.  For  he  thinks  it 
obvious  that  there  are  many  brave  but  licentious  men,  and  many 
"  fair-dealing  "  men  (SiWot),  who  are  far  from  "wise."  (Note  the 
way  in  which  the  "  quadrilateral  "  of  the  four  great  virtues  is 
thus  taken  for  granted  by  Protagoras,  as  by  other  speakers  in 
Plato,  as  something  already  traditional.)  l 

A  view  of  this  kind  implies  that  each  form  of  "  goodness  "  has 
a  function  (SiW/xts)  of  its  own,  distinctive  of  it,  and  radically 
different  from  the  function  of  any  other  form.  (We  have  already 
seen  that  this  view,  widely  current  in  ordinary  society,  is  in  sharp 
opposition  to  the  Socratic  theory,  in  which  the  great  difficulty  of 
defining  a  given  "  virtue  "  is  that  we  regularly  find  ourselves  driven 
to  adopt  a  definition  which  is  equally  applicable  to  every  other 
virtue.)  We  proceed  to  treat  this  position  in  the  recognized  Socratic 
fashion  by  examining  its  consequences.  It  will  follow  that 
"  justice,"  to  take  an  example,  has  a  definite  function,  "  piety  " 
or  "  religion  "  another  and  a  different  function.  Justice  is  not 
piety,  and  religion  is  not  justice.  But  we  cannot  adopt  the 
monstrous  moral  paradox  that  justice  is  impious,  or  that  religion 
is  "  unjust,"  or  wrong,  though  this  would  seem  to  follow  from  the 
complete  disparity  between  the  "  functions "  of  the  different 
virtues  just  asserted  by  Protagoras.2  Hence  Protagoras  himself 
is  driven  to  take  back  what  he  had  just  said  about  the  radical 
disparity  of  the  different  forms  of  goodness.  The  matter  is,  after 
all,  not  so  simple  as  all  that  ;  there  is  some  vague  and  unspecified 
resemblance  between  such  different  "  parts  "  of  goodness  as  piety 
and  justice,  though  we  cannot  say  exactly  what  or  how  close  the 
resemblance  is  (3310).  The  reference  to  the  scale  of  colours  or 
hardnesses  as  illustrating  the  point  (331^)  shows  that  the  meaning 
is  that  one  virtue  somehow  "  shades  off  "  into  a  different  one,  though 
you  cannot  say  exactly  where  the  boundary-line  should  be  drawn, 
as  white  shades  off  into  black  through  a  series  of  intermediate 
grays. 

To  expose  the  looseness  of  this  way  of  thinking  and  speaking. 
Socrates  resorts  to  another  simple  argument.  Wisdom  has  been 
included  by  Protagoras  in  his  list  of  forms  of  goodness,  and  the 
contrary  opposite  of  wisdom  is  a<t>po<rvvrj  ("  folly  ").  But  sophrosyne 

1  It  seems  to  me  that  the  same  allusion  must  underlie  the  curious  phrase 
of  the  poem  of  Simonides  for  the  Scopadae  shortly  to  be  discussed,  where  the 
"  complete  "  good  man  is  called  "  four-cornered  "  (rerpd^wj/os  &i>€v  \f/6yov  rervy- 
M^os).  Presumably  we  are  dealing  with  a  Pythagorean  rer/oaKrtfy.  It 
should  be  clear,  at  any  rate,  that  the  "  quadrilateral  "  is  no  invention  of  Plato, 
since  he  represents  it  as  familiar  to  so  many  of  his  fifth-century  characters. 

1  The  reasoning  (33 la  ff.)  does  not  really  commit  the  error  of  confounding 
otherness  with  contrary  opposition.  The  point  of  the  passage  is  actually  to 
make  the  distinction,  though  in  simple  and  non-technical  language  ;  the  sug- 
gestion that  not- just  (/Jj  dlicaiov)  =  unjust  (&dtKov)  is  made  only  that  it  may 
be  at  once  rejected. 


THE  PROTAGORAS  249 

is  also*  a  virtue  which  we  ascribe  to  men  who  act  "  rightly 
and  beneficially."  Now  sophrosyne  means  by  derivation  moral 
"  sanity/1  and  its  contrary  opposite,  the  conduct  of  those  who  act 
"wrongly  and  harmfully/'  is  consequently  aphrosyne  ("  folly"). 
For  it  is  a  principle  of  logic,  which  we  can  illustrate  by  an  abundance 
of  obvious  examples,  that  cV  cvl  Ivavriov  (every  term  has  one  and 
only  one  definite  contrary).  Further,  what  is  done  "  in  contrary 
senses"  (evai/raos)  must  be  done  "by  contraries,"  i.e.  in  virtue 
of  contrary  characters  in  the  agents.  Thus  if  we  can  oppose  what  is 
"foolishly"  done  to  what  is  "sanely"  or  "temperately"  done, 
we  may  also  oppose  "  folly  "  to  sophrosyne,  temperance,  moral 
sanity.  But  we  have  already  opposed  wisdom  and  folly  as  con- 
traries. On  the  principle  then  that  one  term  (here  "folly")  has 
one  and  only  one  contrary  opposite,  wisdom  and  sophrosyne  must 
be  identified.  Thus  either  we  must  abandon  a  fundamental  logical 
principle,  or  we  must  give  up  the  distinction  between  wisdom 
and  sophrosyne,  as  our  former  argument  was  meant  to  show 
that  we  must  give  up  the  distinction  between  justice  and  piety 
(or  religion). 

(The  reasoning  here  appears  at  first  sight  to  turn  on  a  mere 
"  accident  "  of  language,  the  fact  that  profligacy  happens  to  be 
spoken  of  in  Greek  as  "  folly."  When  we  reflect  on  the  familiarity 
of  the  corresponding  expressions  in  all  languages  which  have  an 
ethical  literature,  we  should  rather  infer  that  the  fact  is  no  accident, 
but  valuable  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  main  tenet  of  Socratic 
morality.  The  thought  underlying  the  linguistic  usage  is  clearly 
that  all  morally  wrong  action  is  the  pursuit  of  something  which  is 
not  what  rightly  informed  intelligence  would  pronounce  good,  and 
it  is  always  wise  to  pursue  what  is  truly  good  and  foolish  to  prefer 
anything  else.) 

The  next  step  in  the  argument  is  this.  We  have  seen  ground 
for  identifying  justice  with  piety  and  wisdom  with  temperance 
or  moral  sanity.  This  leaves  us,  so  far,  with  two  great  types  of 
"  goodness,"  justice,  regard  for  right,  and  moral  sanity.  But  may 
we  not  further  identify  these  two  ?  Can  we  really  say  of  any  act 
that  it  is  "  unjust,"  a  violation  of  some  one's  rights,  and  yet  that  it  is 
"  morally  sane  "  (<rw<j>pov)  or  "  temperate  "  ?  As  a  man  of  high 
character,  Protagoras  says  that  he  personally  would  be  ashamed  to 
make  such  an  assertion,  but  he  knows  that  the  "  many  "  would 
make  it.  We  may  therefore  examine  the  assertion  simply  as  a 
piece  of  the  current  ethics  of  respectability,  to  see  what  it  is  worth 
(3336-0) -1  We  must  be  careful,  then,  to  bear  in  mind  that,  from 

1  Observe  that  the  highly  prized  virtue,  courage  (avdpela),  seems  to  have 
fallen  into  the  background.  This  is  a  piece  of  Plato's  dramatic  art.  The 
identification  of  the  other  commonly  recognized  virtues  with  one  another  is 
comparatively  easy.  But  to  the  popular  mind  there  is  something  "  irra- 
tional "  in  high  courage  ;  it  "  ignores  "  the  risks  which  "  rational  calculation  " 
would  take  into  account.  The  identification  of  courage  with  knowledge  will 
therefore  be  the  great  crux  for  a  rationalist  moralist.  Hence  the  discussion 
is  deliberately  reserved  for  the  second  half  of  Socrates'  argument, 


250          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

the  present  onwards,  Protagoras  is  avowedly  acting  as  the  dia- 
lectical advocate  of  a  current  morality  which  he  personally  regards 
as  defective.  It  is  not  Protagoras  of  Abdera  but  the  current  ethics 
of  respectability,  for  which  he  consents  to  appear  as  spokesman,  that 
is  on  its  trial.  The  question  is  whether  a  man  who  is  acting  "  un- 
justly "  can  be  acting  with  sophrosyne.  In  our  time,  as  in  that  of 
Pericles,  the  average  man  would  say  that  this  is  quite  possible. 
A  man  may  be  "  temperate  "  enough,  he  may  be  clear  of  all 
"  licentiousness,"  but  he  may  be  greedy  or  ambitious  and  quite 
unscrupulous  about  infringing  the  "  rights  "  of  other  men  in  pur- 
suing his  greed  or  ambition.  (Macaulay's  character  of  Sunderland 
would  be  in  point  here  as  an  illustration l)  In  fact,  it  is  proverbial 
that  profligacy  is  a  vice  of  youth  and  hot  blood,  avarice  and  am- 
bition vices  of  "  cold  "  later  age,  and  the  "  old  young  man  "  (like 
Joseph  Surface)  has  always  been  specially  unpopular  with  the 
ordinary  satirist,  who  is  commonly  indulgent  to  the  "  rake,"  unless 
he  happens  to  be  an  elderly  rake.  Socrates'  conviction,  like  that  of 
Dante,  who  punishes  the  prodigal  and  the  miser  in  the  same  circle, 
is  that  Charles  Surface  and  Joseph  are  brothers  in  the  spirit,  no 
less  than  in  the  flesh  ;  the  antithesis  of  the  Sheridans  and  Macaulays 
between  the  "  generous"  and  the  "  mean  "  vices,  is  a  false  one  ; 
there  are  no  "  generous  vices,"  and  no  "  milksop  "  virtues. 

Formally,  the  argument  is  not  allowed  to  reach  a  conclusion  ; 
Protagoras,  finding  his  case  hard  to  defend,  tries  to  take  refuge  in 
irrelevancy  by  diverting  attention  to  the  theory  of  the  "  relativity  " 
of  good.  Socrates  has  started  with  the  linguistic  identification  of 
"  temperance  "  with  moral  sanity.  The  man  who  behaves  with 
moral  sanity  is  the  tv  /SoiAcvo/Aci/os,  the  man  who  acts  "  with  good 
counsel."  Hence  if  a  man  can  in  the  same  act  be  both  temperate 
and  unjust,  it  must  be  possible  to  act  with  good  counsel  in  violating 
a  "  right."  But  a  man  only  shows  himself  to  be  acting  with  good 
counsel  when  he  "  succeeds  "  or  "  does  well  "  by  disregarding  that 
right.  Socrates  is  thus  taking  advantage  of  the  ambiguity  of  the 
expression  cu  7r/>aTTen>,  which  may  either  mean  "  to  act  well,"  or 
simply  to  "  succeed  in  doing  what  you  are  proposing  to  do."  How 
he  would  have  continued  the  argument  is  indicated  by  his  next 
question,  "  Do  you  recognize  the  existence  of  goods  ?  "  He  means, 
having  got  the  admission  that  injustice  is  only  "well-advised" 
when  it  is  successful  injustice,  to  argue  that  no  injustice  really  does 
"  succeed  "  in  procuring  the  aggressor  on  another  man's  rights 
what  he  is  really  aiming  at  getting,  real  good  or  well-being ;  it  is 
always  unsuccessful  because  it  always  involves  sacrificing  the  good 
of  the  soul  to  something  inferior  (the  thesis  of  the  Gorgias  and  of  the 
closing  pages  of  Rep.  i.).  But  the  moment  he  shows  his  hand  by 
and  we  are  prepared  for  it  by  the  long  half-comic  interlude  in  which  the  poem 
of  Simonides  is  canvassed  ;  this  is  Plato's  way  of  indicating  that  it  is  the 
hardest  and  most  important  section  of  the  dialogue. 

*  "  He  had  no  jovial  generous  vices.  He  cared  little  for  wine  or  beauty  ; 
but  he  desired  riches  with  an  ungovernable  and  insatiable  desire,"  etc.  etc. 
(History,  c.  6). 


THE  PROTAGORAS  251 

asking  whether  "good  things"  do  not  mean  "what  is  beneficial 
to  man/'  Protagoras  tries  to  escape  the  development  he  foresees 
by  delivering  a  wholly  irrelevant  homily  on  the  thesis  that  what  is 
good  for  one  animal  may  be  bad  for  another,  and  what  is  good  for 
man  taken  externally  as  a  lotion,  may  be  very  bad  if  taken  internally, 
in  short  that  nothing  can  be  pronounced  good  absolutely  and  uncon- 
ditionally. This  is,  of  course,  a  direct  and  simple  application  of 
Protagoras1  own  principle  of  "  man  the  measure  "  to  ethics,  and 
the  facts  to  which  Protagoras  appeals  are  all  real  facts ;  only  they 
have  no  bearing  on  the  issue  at  stake.  It  is  true  that  I  may  be 
poisoned  by  drinking  something  which  would  have  done  me  good 
if  I  had  used  it  as  an  embrocation,  that  I  should  damage  my  health 
if  I  tried  to  live  on  the  diet  on  which  a  horse  thrives,  and  so  forth. 
It  does  not  in  the  least  follow  that  there  are  not  "good  activities 
of  the  soul/'  which  are  absolutely  good  in  the  sense  that  it  is  good 
that  any  man  should  exhibit  them  at  any  and  every  time,  and  that 
scrupulous  respect  for  "  rights  "  is  not  one  of  these  goods,  and 
possibly  the  best  of  them.  In  common  fairness,  we  may  suppose 
that  Protagoras  is  alive  to  this,  and  that  he  is  simply  doing  his  best 
for  his  client,  the  ethics  of  the  average  man,  by  diverting  the  atten- 
tion of  the  audience  from  the  weak  point  of  his  case.1 

IV.  INTERLUDE. — The  Poem  of  Simonides  (3340-3480). — At 
this  point  the  conversation  threatens  to  end  in  a  general  confusion, 
and  the  interrupted  argument  is  only  resumed  after  a  long  and 
apparently  irrelevant  episode.  The  main  reason  for  the  intro- 
duction of  the  episode  has  already  been  explained.  The  argument 
for  the  Socratic  "  paradoxes  "  makes  a  severe  demand  on  the 
reader's  power  of  hard  thinking,  and  the  most  difficult  part  of  it 
is  yet  to  come.  The  strain  of  attention  therefore  requires  to  be 
relaxed,  if  we  are  to  follow  Socrates  to  his  conclusion  with  full 
understanding.  Plato  also  wants  an  opportunity  to  produce  two 
striking  dramatic  effects.  He  wishes  to  contrast  the  manner  of 
the  "  sophist,"  who  is  highly  plausible  so  long  as  he  has  the  argu- 
ment to  himself,  but  gets  into  difficulty  the  moment  he  is  confronted 
by  close  criticism  with  the  manner  of  Socrates,  who  cares  nothing 
for  eloquent  plausibility  and  everything  for  careful  and  exact 
thinking.  And  he  wants  to  provide  a  part  in  the  drama  for  the 
secondary  characters,  Prodicus  and  Hippias ;  they  will  get  no 
chance  of  a  "  speaking  part "  while  Protagoras  and  Socrates  occupy 
the  centre  of  the  stage.  Hence  I  think  we  should  take  the  whole 
of  this  long  interlude  as  intended  mainly  to  be  humorous  "relief," 
a  gay  picture  of  the  manners  of  cultivated  Athenian  society  in  the 
later  years  of  the  Periclean  age,  and  not  much  more. 

The  fun  opens  with  the  humorous  pretence  of  Socrates  that,  in 
*  To  judge  from  the  Theaetetus,  Protagoras  had  actually  made  the  obvious 
application  of  the  Homo  mensura  doctrine  to  ethics  for  himself  (Burner., 
Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I.,  116—7).  It  leads  directly  to  that  identification 
of  "  virtue  "  with  what  a  respectable  society  actually  approves  which  is  the 
foundation  of  his  explanation  of  his  own  educational  theory  and  practice, 
and  is  common  ground  to  "  subjectivists  "  in  ethics. 


252          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

kindness  to  his  "  shortness  of  memory,"  Protagoras  should  curb 
his  eloquence  and  make  his  answers  to  questions  as  brief  as  he  can. 
(The  self-depreciation  is,  of  course,  fun.     Socrates  means  that  he 
would  like  fewer  words  and  more  thought ;  but  the  implied  criticism 
has  to  be  made  with  due  regard  for  "  manners.")     Protagoras  is  a 
little  huffed  by  the  suggestion  that  the  other  party  to  the  discussion 
should  prescribe  the  character  of  his  responses  ;   Socrates  politely 
expresses  his  regret  for  the  weakness  to  which  he  has  referred,  and 
discovers  that  he  has  an  engagement  elsewhere,  and  the  party 
thus  seems  to  be  on  the  point  of  dissolution,  when  the  auditors 
intervene  to  prevent  such  a  misfortune.    The  point  of  chief  interest 
in  the  general  conversation  thus  caused  is  provided  by  the  enter- 
taining burlesque  of  Prodicus,  the  great  authority  on  the  right 
use  of  words.    All  he  really  has  to  say  is  that  the  audience  who 
listen  to  a  discussion  should  give  a  fair  hearing,  without  fear  or 
favour,  to  both  parties,  and  assign  the  victory  to  the  party  who 
makes  out  the  better  case.     But  his  remarks  are  so  disfigured  by 
the  mannerism  of  stopping  to  discriminate  each  of  the  terms  he 
uses  from  some  other  with  which  it  might  conceivably  be  confused, 
that  it  takes  him  half  one  of  Stephanus's  pages  to  make  his  remark. 
It  is  clear  that  the  real  Prodicus  (who,  as  we  must  remember, 
actually  survived  the  execution  of  Socrates,  and  so  must  have 
been  a  well-remembered  figure  to  many  of  the  first  readers  of  our 
dialogue)  must  have  been  very  much  of  a  formal  pedant  in  manner, 
or  the  stress  laid  on  the  point  by  Plato  would  be  unintelligible. 
No  doubt  we  are  also  to  understand  that  the  defect  is  being  ex- 
aggerated for  legitimate  comic  effect.     But  it  is  not  likely  that  the 
exaggeration  is  very  gross.     Prodicus  was  trying  to  make  a  be- 
ginning with  the  foundations  of  an  exact  prose  style,  and  it  would 
be  quite  natural  that,  once  impressed  with  the  importance  of  dis- 
tinguishing between   "  synonyms,"  he  should  ride  his  hobby  to 
death.     We  know  from  the  remains  of  Varro's  de  lingua  Latina,  from 
Quintilian,  Aulus  Gellius,  and  others,  to  what  lengths  the  men  who 
attempted  to  perform  the  same  services  for  Latin  were  prepared  to 
go,  and  it  is  likely  that  if  the  writings  of  the  "  sophists  "  had  been 
preserved,  we  should  have  found  that  Prodicus  was  not  outstripped 
by  his  Roman  imitators.    There  is  no  trace  of  any  personal  malice 
or  dislike  in  the  entertaining  sketch  Plato  has  given  us.    Hippias 
is  allowed  to  make  a  speech  of  about  the  same  length,  his  main 
point  being  to  mark  his  disagreement  with  the  partisans  of  "  con- 
vention," and  his  conviction  that  the  whole  company,  in  spite  of 
the   differences   of   "  conventional "   political   allegiance,    are   all 
"  naturally  "  fellow-citizens.     His  tone  is  exactly  that  of  a  cosmo- 
politan eighteenth-century  philosophe.      Since   Xenophon   (Mem. 
iv.  4)  pits  Hippias  and  Socrates  against  one  another  as  champions 
of  <£uVis  and  i/o/xo?  respectively,  this  cosmopolitanism  is  presumably 
a  real  trait  of  Hippias,  though  we  cannot  be  sure  that  Xenophon 
is  not  simply  developing  a  hint  taken  from  the  Protagoras  itself. 
But  even  so,  his  representation  shows  that  he  thought  Plato's 


THE  PROTAGORAS  258 

little  picture  true  to  life  in  its  main  point.  None  of  the  interveners 
in  the  general  conversation  shows  any  sense  of  the  real  bearing 
of  the  argument  which  has  just  broken  down.  All  treat  it  as  a 
mere  contest  of  verbal  skill  between  two  parties,  each  of  whom  is 
"  talking  for  victory/'  In  the  end,  a  heated  disagreement  is  only 
avoided  by  the  consent  of  Protagoras  to  submit  to  further  cross- 
questioning,  if  he  may  first  be  allowed  to  deliver  another  speech. 
He  absolutely  declines  Socrates'  proposal  to  submit  himself  to 
be  questioned  and  to  give  an  example  of  what  he  thinks  the  right 
way  to  meet  criticism  (338^-0).  The  scene  which  ensues  can 
hardly  be  understood  as  anything  but  broad  comedy.  Protagoras, 
having  carried  his  point  about  the  delivery  of  a  set  speech  on  a 
theme  of  his  own  choosing,  remarks  that  it  is  an  important  part 
of  "  culture  "  to  understand  the  poets  and  criticize  their  perform- 
ances, and  that  he  will  accordingly  now  expound  and  criticize 
a  poem  composed  by  Simonides  for  the  Scopadae.  This  is  a  task 
suggested  naturally  by  the  previous  course  of  the  conversation, 
as  the  contents  of  the  poem  have  to  do  with  "  goodness/' 

Unfortunately  the  poem  (Fr.  3  in  the  Anthology  of  Hiller- 
Crusius,  12  of  Schneidewin)  has  to  be  reconstructed  from  the 
Protagoras  itself,  and  the  reconstruction  can  be  neither  complete 
nor  certain,  so  that  we  are  not  entitled  to  speak  with  too  much 
confidence  about  the  precise  drift  of  the  poet.  The  general  sense, 
appropriate  enough  in  an  encomium  of  a  half-barbaric  Thessalian 
chief,  seems  to  be  that  it  is  idle  to  expect  complete  and  all-round 
"  goodness  "  in  any  man  ;  there  are  difficult  situations  out  of  which 
no  human  goodness  comes  with  credit.  We  must  be  content  to  call 
a  man  "  good,"  if  his  general  conduct  shows  regard  for  right  (&'*ca), 
if  he  never  misbehaves  without  highly  extenuating  circumstances ; 
absolute  superiority  to  circumstance  can  only  be  expected  in  a  god. 
The  impression  one  gets  is  that  one  is  reading  a  paid  panegyric 
on  a  magnate  against  whom  there  is  the  memory  of  some  shocking 
deed  or  deeds  which  the  eulogist  wishes  to  excuse  or  palliate  by  the 
"  tyrant's  plea,  necessity."  l 

The  point  on  which  Protagoras  fastens  is  this.  Simonides  takes 
occasion  to  comment  unfavourably  on  the  saying  commonly 
ascribed  to  Pittacus  that  "it  is  hard  to  be  good  "  (xaXcTrov  foOXbv 
C/A/ACVCU).  But  he  has  just  said  the  very  same  thing  himself  in 

almost  the  Same   words  (avSp*  ayaObv  p.€V  aA.a0co)S  yevccr&u  ^a\€ir6v). 

He  has  thus  committed  the  absurdity  of  censuring  Pittacus  for 
the  very  sentiment  he  has  just  uttered  as  his  own  (339^). 

Socrates  now  seizes  the  opportunity  to  defend  the  poet  by  the 
aid  of  Prodicus  and  his  famous  art  of  discriminating  between  words. 
The  point,  he  says,  is  that  whereas  Pittacus  had  said  that  it  is  hard 

1  Simonides  writes  much  as  a  poet  would  have  to  do  if  he  were  composing 
an  ode  in  praise  of  William  III  and  felt  that  he  could  not  be  silent  about  the 
murder  of  the  De  Witts  and  the  Glencoe  massacre.  The  apologetic  tone 
shows  that  his  hero  had  done  something  which  was  regarded  by  most  persons 
as  highly  criminal. 


254          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

to  be  (<f/x/A€vcu)  good,  Simonides  says  that  it  is  hard  to  become, 
(yeve'cr&u)  good  ;  "  to  be  "  is  one  thing,  "  to  become  "  another, 
and  thus  there  is  no  formal  contradiction  between  denying  that  it 
is  hard  to  be  good  and  asserting  that  it  is  hard  to  become  good. 
But,  objects  Protagoras,  this  distinction  only  makes  matters  worse 
for  Simonides  ;  if  he  denies  that  it  is  hard  to  be  good,  he  must  mean 
that  it  is  easy  to  possess  goodness,  and  the  common  sense  of  all 
mankind  is  against  him.  Socrates  is  ready  with  a  rejoinder. 
Possibly  Simonides,  like  his  fellow-Cean  Prodicus,  was  a  votary  of 
precision  of  speech,  and  regarded  the  employment  of  xa^€ir°v  m 
the  sense  of  "  difficult  "  as  a  misuse  of  words,  just  as  Prodicus 
objects  to  the  common  colloquial  use  of  the  word  "  awful  "  (Sctvos) 
in  such  phrases  as  "  awful  wealth  "  (detvo?  Tdonto;),  on  the  ground 
that  only  bad  things  can  properly  be  called  "  awful."  Let  Prodicus, 
as  a  fellow-countryman,  tell  us  what  Simonides  really  meant  by 
XaAcTroi/.  Prodicus  at  once  says  he  meant  KO.KOV  ("bad").1  If 
that  is  so,  Pittacus  was,  from  his  Lesbian  ignorance  of  the  exact 
meaning  of  a  Greek  word,  unconsciously  uttering  the  senseless 
statement  that  "  it  is  bad  to  be  good/'  and  Simonides  was  right  in 
objecting  this  to  him.  Prodicus  at  once  accepts  this  explanation, 
but  Protagoras  naturally  rejects  it  as  ridiculous.  "  So  it  is,"  says 
Socrates,  "  and  you  may  be  sure  Prodicus  is  only  making  fun  of 

us"  (341*).  . 

(So  far,  it  is  clear  that  the  whole  tone  of  the  passage  about 
Simonides  is  playful.  Plato  is  laughing,  as  he  often  does,  at  the 
fifth-century  fashion  of  trying  to  extract  moral  principles  from  the 
remarks  of  poets,  especially  of  poets  with  a  reputation,  like 
Simonides,  for  worldly  wisdom  and  a  shrewd  regard  for  the  interests 
of  "  number  one."  The  mock-  respectful  discussion  of  another 
dictum  of  the  same  poet  in  Republic  i.  is  couched  in  exactly  the 
same  tone.  The  solemn  pedantry  of  Prodicus  is  a  second  subject 
of  mockery.  But  the  main  stroke  is  aimed  at  the  superficiality 
of  Protagoras.  With  all  his  eloquence  about  the  value  of  a  critical 
study  of  "  literature,"  his  ideal  of  criticism  is  to  fasten  on  the  first 
and  most  obvious  weak  point,  and  make  an  end  of  the  matter.  He 
has  shown  his  cleverness  by  catching  Simonides  in  a  verbal  contra- 
diction ;  he  does  not  see  the  need  of  an  attempt  to  understand  the 
drift  of  his  poem  as  a  whole,  or  to  consider  whether  the  apparent 
contradiction  will  vanish  when  taken  in  the  light  of  the  general 
context.  We  are  all  only  too  familiar  with  this  sort  of  "  criticism," 
which  aims  at  nothing  more  than  the  commendation  or  censure  of 
individual  phrases,  while  it  lets  "  the  whole  "  go  unregarded.) 

Socrates  now  undertakes  to  propound  an  interpretation  which 
will  pay  due  regard  to  the  meaning  of  the  whole  poem  (3420).  He 
introduces  it  by  some  general  observations,  the  tone  of  which  ought 


1  The  suggestion  is  not  quite  so  absurd  as  it  looks,  absurd  as  it  is. 
in  the  sense  "  a  hard  thing  to  bear,"  may  often  be  paraphrased  by 
without  injury  to  sense.    Cf.  Pindar's  repirvQw  xaXeirdr  re  Kpliris  ("  issues  of  weal 
and  woe  "  ),  or  Homer's  xaXcirAv  yijpa.s  (//.  6  103)  (  "  grim  old  age  '  '  ),  and  the  like. 


THE  PROTAGORAS  255 

to  settle  the  question  whether  we  a^e  to  take  his  exegesis  in  earnest 
or  not.  Crete  and  Sparta  are  really  the  most  philosophical  com- 
munities in  the  Greek  world,  and  "  sophists  "  abound  there  more 
than  anywhere  else ;  but  they  conceal  the  fact  from  mankind  at 
large  by  passing  themselves  off  as  rough  fighting-men,  and  by 
vigilantly  discouraging  intercourse  with  other  cities,  so  that  they 
may  keep  their  wisdom  for  their  own  exclusive  benefit.  This  is 
why  the  ordinary  Spartan  startles  you  from  time  to  time  by  the 
pungency  and  pertinence  of  his  "  dry  "  and  brief  apophthegms. 
They  are  all  the  product  of  this  unique  "  Spartan  culture."  The 
famous  "  seven  sages  " — the  list  of  them  given  in  this  passage  is  the 
earliest  extant — were  all  trained  in  this  school,  and  Pittacus  was 
one  of  them.  Hence  his  saying  "  it  is  hard  to  be  good  "  was  much 
admired  as  a  piece  of  this  sententious  "  philosophy/'  and  Simonides, 
being  an  ambitious  man,  wished  to  win  a  great  reputation  by  refuting 
it.  This  is  the  object  of  his  whole  poem  (342^-3430) . 

(It  ought  not  to  have  to  be  said  that  this  whole  representation 
of  Sparta  and  Crete,  the  least  "  intellectual "  communities  of 
Hellas,  and  the  two  which  Socrates  himself  takes  as  his  models  in 
Republic  viii.  in  describing  the  State  which  has  made  the  mistake 
of  "  neglecting  education,"  is  furious  fun.  Socrates  is  diverting 
himself  by  his  whimsical  suggestions  that  the  "  laconizing  "  fashion- 
ables of  other  cities,  who  affect  the  dress  and  appearance  of  prize- 
fighters, are  all  the  while  imitating  the  wrong  thing,  the  pretence 
under  which  the  Spartans  disguise  their  real  interests,  and  that  the 
"  superiority  of  Sparta  "  is  really  based  not  on  military  prowess 
and  success  but  on  intellectual  eminence.  And  if  the  explanation 
which  introduces  the  exposition  of  the  poem  of  Simonides  is  thus 
sheer  fun,  we  are  bound  in  common  sense  to  expect  that  the  exposi- 
tion will  turn  out  to  be  mainly  fun  too.) 

We  are  now  given  the  professed  exegesis  of  the  poem,  which 
is  only  arrived  at  by  a  series  of  violences  done  to  its  language. 
Simonides  must  be  understood  as  correcting  the  saying  "it  is 
hard  to  be  good  "  by  saying  "  no,  the  truly  hard  thing  is  not  to  be, 
but  to  become  a  thoroughly  good  man,  though  this  is  possible. 
To  be  permanently  good  is  not  hard,  but  absolutely  impossible 
for  a  man  ;  it  is  only  possible  to  a  god."  A  man,  as  Simonides 
goes  on  to  say,  cannot  help  proving  "  bad  "  when  he  is  "  struck 
down  "  by  irretrievable  misfortunes.  Now  no  one  who  is  already 
down  can  be  struck  down.  Hence  Simonides  must  mean  by  a 
"  man,"  an  "  expert,"  a  wise  and  good  man,  and  his  meaning  is 
shown  by  the  fact  that  he  goes  on  to  say  that  a  man  is  "  good  " 

as  long  as  he  "  does  Well  "  (7rpa£as  p\v  yap  ev  ?ras  avr/p  dya0os).       For 

the  man  who  "  does  well,"  or  "  succeeds  "  in  anything  is  the  man 
who  knows  how  the  thing  ought  to  be  done,  the  man  who  "  does 
ill  "  is  always  the  man  whose  knowledge  fails  him.  Simonides  is 
thus  made,  by  an  arbitrary  exegesis,  to  bear  witness  to  the  Socratic 
doctrine  that  "  goodness  "  and  knowledge  are  the  same  (3456). 
His  meaning  is  that  it  is  hard  to  become  good  but  impossible  for 


256          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

man  to  be  permanently  good,  because  of  the  limitations  and  imper- 
fections of  all  human  knowledge. 

The  rest  of  the  poem  develops  the  same  thought.  In  par- 
ticular, when  the  poet  says  that  he  will  "  praise  and  love  the  man 
who  does  no  deed  of  shame  willingly/'  (CKWV  oo-rts  epfy  /x-^v  alvxpov,) 
we  are  not  to  take  his  words  in  what  seems  their  natural  grammatical 
sense.  The  "  cultured  "  Simonides  must  be  supposed  to  know 
that  it  is  a  vulgar  error  to  suppose  that  anyone  would  do  evil 
voluntarily.  Hence  the  CKWV  must  be  taken  by  an  extravagant 
hyperbaton  with  the  words  which  precede  it,  so  that  the  sense  is, 
11 1  readily  praise  and  love  the  man  who  does  no  deeds  of  shame  " 
(though  my  profession  sometimes  unfortunately  requires  me  to  pay 
constrained  compliments  to  "  tyrants "  who  have  committed 
crimes). 

Though  there  have  been  commentators  who  have  taken 
Socrates'  exposition  of  the  poem  as  perfectly  serious,  the  blunder 
ought  to  be  impossible  to  any  man  with  a  sense  of  humour  or  of  the 
necessity  of  maintaining  a  dramatic  unity  of  spirit  throughout  a 
scene.  We  have  been  prepared  for  the  discussion  of  the  verses  by 
an  introductory  homily  on  the  devotion  of  Sparta  to  "  culture/' 
which  is  manifestly  the  merest  playful  humour  ;  we  are  fairly 
entitled  to  suspect  Socrates  whenever  we  find  him  pretending  to 
discover  deep  philosophic  truth  in  the  compositions  of  any  "  poet," 
and  particularly  in  those  of  the  poet  who  had  become  a  byword  for 
his  adroit  and  profitable  flatteries  of  "  the  great  "  ;  his  purpose 
should  be  made  unmistakable  by  the  forced  character  of  the  verbal 
constructions  he  is  driven  to  advocate.  Clearly  we  are  dealing 
with  an  amusing  "  skit  "  on  the  current  methods  of  extracting 
any  doctrine  one  pleases  from  a  poet  by  devices  which  can  make 
anything  mean  anything.  Socrates  is  amusing  himself  by  showing 
that,  if  he  chooses  to  play  at  the  game,  he  can  beat  the  recognized 
champions,  just  as  in  the  Parmenides  Plato  amuses  himself  by 
showing  that  he  can,  if  he  likes,  outdo  the  constructors  of  "  antin- 
omies "  in  the  use  of  their  own  weapons.  The  one  thing  in  the 
whole  of  the  "  lecture  "  on  the  verses  of  Simonides  which  is  not 
playful  is  Socrates'  insistence  on  the  doctrine  that  wrongdoing  is 
error,  and  is  therefore  not  "  voluntary.''  Here  he  is  in  intense 
earnest,  but  the  device  by  which  he  extracts  the  doctrine  from  the 
text  of  Simonides  by  an  impossible  "  punctuation  "  is  itself  merely 
playful,  just  as  his  suggestion  that  what  he  well  knew  to  be  the 
"  paradox  "  of  his  own  theory  is  so  universally  admitted  by  all 
thinking  men  that  it  is  incredible  Simonides  should  not  accept  it, 
is  equally  playful.  He  knows  that  the  very  proposition  he  repre- 
sents as  too  well  known  to  be  ignored  by  Simonides  will  be  rejected 
as  an  extravagance  by  his  audience  when  he  conies  shortly  to 
defend  it.  His  object  in  getting  it  into  the  otherwise  whimsical 
exposition  of  Simonides  is  simply  to  bring  back  the  discussion  to 
the  original  issues  from  which  it  has  been  allowed  to  diverge,  and 
he  has  the  natural  delight  of  a  humorist  in  clothing  his  thesis  in 


THE  PROTAGORAS  257 

the  most  provocative  and  arresting  words  he  can  find.  How  far 
he  is  from  expecting  his  excursus  into  literature  to  be  taken  seriously 
is  shown  by  his  remark  that  he  has  now  discharged  his  part  of  a 
bargain  by  allowing  Protagoras  to  deliver  a  second  speech,  and 
would  be  glad  if  Protagoras  would  honour  the  agreement  by  return- 
ing to  the  interrupted  discussion.  For  his  own  part,  he  thinks  it 
unprofitable  to  spend  our  time  debating  the  meaning  of  the  poets, 
whom  we  cannot  call  directly  into  court  ;  it  is  much  better  to  let 
them  alone  and  try  to  get  at  truth  by  the  direct  interplay  of  our 
own  thoughts  (3470-3480) . 

V.  THE  MAIN  ARGUMENT  RESUMED. — The  Identity  of  Goodness 
with  Knowledge,  and  its  Consequences  (3480-360^).- — Now  that 
Socrates  has  succeeded  in  bringing  back  the  conversation  to  the 
point  where  it  had  been  broken  off,  he  carefully  restates  the  question, 
with  a  polite  assurance  that  he  is  not  talking  for  victory  but  honestly 
asking  the  help  of  Protagoras  towards  the  clarification  of  his  own 
thought.  The  question  is  whether  the  names  of  the  great  virtues 
are  different  names  for  one  and  the  same  thing  (349^),  or  whether 
to  each  of  these  names  there  answers  "  a  peculiar  reality  or  object 

with  its  own  Special  function  "    (tStos   ova'ia  KOL  Trpay/xa    t\ov   cavroi) 

SvVa/uv,  where  note  that  the  word  ova-la,  exactly  as  in  the  Euthyphro, 
implies  the  whole  of  the  "  doctrine  of  forms/'  expounded  in  the 
Phaedo).  Protagoras  has  been  so  far  impressed  by  the  former 
arguments  of  Socrates  that  he  now  restates  his  original  opinion 
with  a  large  modification.  He  admits  that  most  of  the  "  parts  of 
goodness  "  are  "  fairly  like  one  another,"  but  holds  that  di/fym'a, 
valour,  courage,  has  a  distinct  character  of  its  own.  This  is  a 
matter  of  everyday  observation,  for  it  is  a  manifest  fact  that  many 
men  are  singularly  brave,  but  have  no  other  virtuous  quality  ;  they 
have  no  regard  for  rights,  no  religion,  no  command  over  their 
passions,  no  prudence.  (The  view  is  a  familiar  one  ;  it  is  habitually 
adopted,  for  example,  in  the  character-sketches  of  a  work  like 
Macaulay's  History.  It  implies,  of  course,  that  its  supporters 
identify  dvSpct'a  with  the  "  popular  "  courage  which  the  Phaedo 
pronounces  to  be  a  counterfeit  of  true  valiancy,  mere  hardihood 
in  the  face  of  perils.)  The  first  point  which  has  to  be  made  against 
this  position  is  that  it  rests  on  the  false  conversion  of  a  true  pro- 
position. It  amounts  to  identifying  "  the  valiant "  with  the 
"  confident "  or  "  fearless "  (flappaXcot).  Now  it  is  true  that 
all  brave  men  are  fearless,  but  it  is  not  true  that  all  the  "  confident  " 
or  "  fearless  "  are  truly  brave,  and  the  two  classes,  therefore, 
cannot  be  identified.  In  the  absence  of  a  logical  terminology,  this 
point  has  to  be  made  by  examples.  Men  who  have  learned  a 
"  d'angerous "  accomplishment,  such  as  diving,  fighting  in  the 
cavalry,  or  the  like,  will  be  "  fearless  "  in  facing  the  risks  they  have 
learned  to  deal  with,  as  we  also  call  them  "  brave  "  divers  or 
fighters  But  persons  who  have  never  learned  to  dive  or  to  manage 
a  horse  will  also  sometimes  be  reckless  in  throwing  themselves 
into  the  water  or  plunging  into  a  charge.  But  this,  Protagoras 


258          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

says,  is  not  valour ;  it  is  simply  madness.  (He  means,  of  course, 
that  there  is  no  valour  in  taking  a  risk  simply  because  you  are  not 
alive  to  its  magnitude.  True  valour  involves  consciousness  of 
the  risk  you  are  facing.)  Protagoras  accordingly  points  out  that 
though  he  had  admitted  that  the  valiant  are  fearless,  he  had  not 
admitted  the  converse,  and  complains  that  Socrates  is  treating 
him  unfairly  (of  course,  Socrates'  real  object  was  simply  to  lead  up 
to  the  making  of  the  distinction).  It  is  true  that  fearlessness  may 
be  the  effect  of  knowledge,  but  it  may  also  be  the  effect  of  high 
temper  (0v/xos)  or  mere  frenzy  (/uum'a)  ;  hence  the  superior  fear- 
lessness of  the  man  who  has  learned  to  swim  or  to  use  his  weapons 
is  no  proof  that  courage  (as  distinct  from  mere  fearlessness)  is  the 
same  thing  as  "'wisdom  "  or  knowledge  (<ro<£ia).  In  fact,  Protag- 
oras holds  that  the  fearlessness  which  deserves  to  be  called  valour 
is  due  not  to  knowledge  but  to  something  else,  "  nature  "  (<f>vo-L<s) 
and  a  "  thriving  "  or  "  well-fed  "  state  of  soul  (curpo^ta  TW  \j/vxw, 
3516),  just  as  physical  strength  is  not  due  to  knowledge  but  to 
bodily  constitution  and  sound  nourishment.1 

Thus  the  question  whether  valour  can  be  shown,  as  Protagoras 
now  admits  that  the  other  leading  forms  of  "  goodness  "  can  be,  to 
be  knowledge,  requires  us  to  raise  still  more  fundamental  questions. 
We  admit  that  one  may  live  well  or  live  ill,  and  that  the  man  who 
lives  a  life  of  pain  and  misery  is  not  living  well,  but  the  man  who 
lives  a  pleasant  life  is.  May  we  say  then  that  the  pleasant  life  is 
the  good  life,  the  unpleasant  life  the  bad  ?  Protagoras  wishes  to 
stipulate  that  the  pleasure  must  be  "  pleasure  in  fine,  or  noble, 
things"  (TOIS  KaAots,  35 ic),  thus  anticipating  Mill's  "distinction  of 
qualities  "  of  pleasure.  But  might  we  not  say  that  things  are 
good  just  in  so  far  as  they  are  pleasant,  and  bad  in  so  far  as  they  are 
unpleasant,  so  that  good  and  pleasant  are  synonyms  ?  Protagoras 
thinks  it  due  to  his  character  to  maintain  that  this  is  not  true ; 
there  are  bad  pleasures  and  good  pains,  and  there  are  both  pleasures 
and  pains  which  are  neither  good  nor  bad.  But  he  is  willing  to 
treat  the  suggestion,  in  the  Socratic  manner,2  as  one  for  further 
investigation.  (It  is  very  important,  then,  to  remark  that  the 
Hedonist  identification  of  good  with  pleasant  comes  into  the  con- 
versation, in  the  first  instance,  aj  problematic  ;  it  is  to  be  adopted 
or  rejected  according  as  its  implications  approve  themselves  or 
do  not.)  And  the  question  about  the  relation  between  pleasure 

1  The  precise  position  is,  and  is  meant  to  be,  vague.  The  champion  of 
?6/iOf  is  clearly  conceding  more  importance  to  ^ifou  ("  original  temperament  ") 
than  we  might  have  expected  of  him  from  his  earlier  utterances.  This  part 
of  the  Protagoras  has  directly  suggested  Aristotle's  observations  about  the 
"  fearlessness  "  produced  by  ^uret/>(a  or  by  native  Bvpfa  (E.N.  nibb  3  ff.). 

a  35i£»  &<rirfp  <fb  X^7«s,  £$ty,  £/cd0rore,  u>  Su>v/>ar«,  <rKOirujj,€0a  aM,  KT\.  Thus 
Protagoras  knows  all  about  the  Socratic  method  of  "  hypothesis  "  expounded 
in  the  Phaedo.  We  must  suppose  that  he  had  learned  of  it  on  the  earlier 
occasion  when  he  had  met  Socrates  and  formed  a  high  opinion  of  his  abilities. 
Rightly  read,  the  Protagoras  confirms  the  Phaedo  in  a  way  which  can  hardly 
be  accounted  for  except  by  supposing  that  both  are  portraits  of  the  same 
original 


THE  PROTAGORAS  259 

and  good  directly  raises  another  fundamental  issue.  The  popular 
opinion  is  that  "  knowledge  "  has  not  much  influence  on  conduct. 
It  is  held  that  a  man  often  knows  quite  well  that  something  is  good 
or  evil,  but  acts  "  against  his  better  knowledge,"  which  is  mastered 
by  "  temper/'  or  "  pleasure,"  or  "  pain,"  or  "  lust,"  as  the  case 
may  be.  But  may  it  not  be  that  the  popular  opinion  is  wrong, 
and  that  if  a  man  knows  good  and  evil,  nothing  will  ever  prevail 
on  him  to  act  contrary  to  his  knowledge  ?  Protagoras  thinks  that 
it  would  only  be  proper  in  a  professional  teacher  of  goodness,  like 
himself,  to  take  this  view,  and  Socrates  expresses  his  firm  con- 
viction of  its  truth.1  But,  since  most  men  think  otherwise,  we, 
who  dissent  from  them,  must  give  a  correct  analysis  of  the  facts 
they  have  in  mind  when  they  talk  of  a  man's  judgment  as  "  over- 
come "  by  pleasure  or  pain,  and  satisfy  them  that  the  popular 
analysis  of  these  facts  is  inaccurate  (3530).  We  might,  in  fact, 
ask  the  mass  of  men,  who  profess  to  believe  that  a  man  can  be 
seduced  by  the  prospect  of  pleasure  or  frightened  by  that  of  pain 
into  doing,  against  his  better  knowledge,  what  he  recognizes  to 
be  evil,  the  following  questions  :  (a)  When  you  talk  of  something 
as  pleasant  but  evil,  do  you  not  mean  simply  that  the  pleasant 
thing  in  question  leads  to  painful  consequences,  and  when  you  call 
some  things  good  but  unpleasant,  do  you  not  mean  that,  though 
unpleasant  for  the  time  being,  they  lead  to  pleasurable  conse- 
quences ?  "  The  many "  would  readily  admit  this,  and  thus 
would  (b)  commit  themselves  to  the  view  that  good  and  evil  are 
identical  with  pleasant  and  painful.  In  fact  (c)  they  would  admit 
that  the  end  they  always  pursue  is  getting  the  "  greatest  possible 
balance  of  pleasure  over  pain  "  (354c-e).  It  follows  at  once  that, 
on  the  showing  of  the  "  many  "  themselves,  the  experience  which 
they  call  "  being  overcome  by  pleasure  or  by  pain  "  is  really  making 
a  false  estimate  of  pleasures  and  pains.  To  be  "  overcome  "  means 
"  to  take  a  greater  amount  of  evil  in  exchange  for  a  smaller  amount 
of  good  "  (3560),  and  on  the  hypothesis  we  are  examining,  "  good  " 
means  "  pleasure  "  and  "  evil  "  means  "  pain."  Errors  of  conduct 
are  thus  on  the  same  level  as  false  estimates  of  number,  size,  and 
weight.  Now  we  are  preserved  from  mistakes  about  number,  size, 
weight,  by  the  arts  or  sciences  (TC'XVCU)  of  counting,  measuring,  and 
weighing.  In  the  same  way  we  need  to  be  preserved  from  false 
estimates  in  moral  choice  by  a  similar  art  of  estimating  the  relative 
magnitudes  of  "  lots  "  of  prospective  goods  and  evils,  that  is  to 
say,  prospective  pleasures  and  pains,  in  fact  by  an  "  hedonic 
calculus,"  which  will  terminate  disputes.  And  a  "  calculus,"  of 
course,  is  "  knowledge,"  or  "  science."  An  argument  of  this 
kind  ought  to  reconcile  the  "  many  "  themselves  to  the  view  that 

1  352*2  2-4.  Note  that  Socrates  definitely  commits  himself  to  one  oi  th« 
two  premisses  of  the  argument  which  is  to  follow,  the  proposition  that  no 
one  really  acts  against  his  own  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  He  never 
commits  himself  to  the  other  premiss,  the  Hedonistic  doctrine  that  good  is 
pleasure.  This  remains  a  suggestion  for  examination. 


260          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

wrong  choice,  the  victory  of  passion  over  knowledge  as  they  call 
it,  is  really  nothing  but  miscalculation,  and  therefore  that  wrong 
action  is  due  to  error  and  is  always  involuntary  (357-358). 

It  is  on  this  section  of  the  dialogue  that  the  notion  of  a  Platonic 
"  Hedonism  "  has  been  erected,  with  the  consequence  that  one  of 
two  equally  impossible  inferences  has  to  be  made,  either  that  there 
is  no  consistent  ethical  doctrine  to  be  found  in  the  dialogues — 
Plato  allows  himself  at  pleasure  to  argue  for  or  against  any  view 
which  interests  him  for  the  moment  (the  theory  of  Grote) — or  that 
the  Protagoras  expresses  an  "early  theory"  which  is  afterwards 
abandoned  when  we  come  to  the  Gorgias  and  Phaedo.  Careful 
reading  will  show  that  neither  of  these  conceptions  is  justified. 
Neither  Protagoras  nor  Socrates  is  represented  as  adopting  the 
Hedonist  equation  of  good  with  pleasure.  The  thesis  which  Socrates 
is  committed  to  is  simply  that  of  the  identity  of  goodness  and  know- 
ledge. The  further  identification  of  good  with  pleasure  is  carefully 
treated,  as  we  have  seen,  as  one  neither  to  be  affirmed  nor  denied. 
We  are  concerned  solely  with  investigating  its  consequences.  One 
of  these  consequences  would  be  that  what  is  commonly  called 
"  yielding  to  passion  against  our  better  knowledge  "  is  a  form  of 
intellectual  error  and  is  involuntary,  since  it  means  choosing  a 
smaller  "  lot  of  pleasure  "  when  you  might  choose  a  greater.  (These 
consequences  are,  in  fact,  habitually  drawn  by  Hedonists.)  Hedon- 
ism thus  is  in  accord  with  the  doctrines  of  Socrates  on  one  point, 
its  reduction  of  wrong  choice  to  involuntary  error,  and  for  that 
reason  Socrates  says  that  you  can  make  the  apparent  paradoxes  of 
his  ethics  acceptable  to  mankind  at  large,  if  you  also  adopt  the 
Hedonist  equation,  good= pleasure.  (The  "  many,"  in  fact,  do 
in  practice  accept  this  equation,  because  they  are  votaries  of  some 
form  of  the  /Jt'os  <£iXoxp^aros.)  It  does  not  follow  that  because 
Socrates  agrees  with  vulgar  Hedonism  on  the  point  that  wrong 
choice  is  involuntary  error  and  arises  from  lack  of  knowledge  of 
good,  that  he  identifies  knowledge  of  good,  as  the  Hedonist  does, 
with  calculation  of  the  sizes  of  "  lots  "  of  pleasure  and  pain. 
All  he  wants  to  show  is  that  even  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
persons  who  mistake  "popular  goodness"  for  genuine  goodness, 
it  is  no  paradox  to  say  that  goodness  is  knowledge  of  some  sort ; 
the  Hedonist  is  a  "rationalist  "  in  his  ethics,  though  his  "  rational- 
ism "  may  not  be  of  the  right  kind.  That  this  is  all  that  is  meant  is 
clear  from  the  way  in  which  Socrates  is  careful  to  insist  over  and 
over  again  that  the  appeal  is  being  made  to  the  standards  of  "  the 
mass  of  mankind."  We  must  also  not  forget  that  the  appeal  to  the 
unconscious  Hedonism  of  the  average  man  is  being  made  for  a 
further  special  purpose.  The  object  of  convincing  the  average  man 
that,  on  his  own  assumptions,  goodness  is  a  matter  of  right  calcula- 
tion, is  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  further  proof  that,  even  on  these 
assumptions,  courage  can  be  brought  under  the  same  principle  as 
all  the  rest  of  "  goodness."  When  we  thus  take  the  argument  in 
its  proper  context,  we  see  that  the  Protagoras  no  more  teaches 


THE  PROTAGORAS  261 

Hedonism  than  the  Phaedo,  which  also  represents  the  morality  of 
average  men  as  a  business  of  estimating  pleasures  and  pains  against 
one  another.  Rightly  interpreted,  Gorgias,  Phaedo,  Protagoras, 
are  all  in  accord  on  the  one  doctrine  to  which  Socrates  commits 
himself  in  the  present  section  of  our  dialogue,  the  doctrine  that 
"  goodness  "  is  knowledge.  The  confusion  between  "  knowledge 
of  the  good  "  and  computation  of  pleasures  and  pains  is  given,  in  the 
Protagoras  as  in  the  other  dialogues,  for  what  it  is,  a  confusion  of 
the  "  average  man/1  and  for  nothing  more. 

To  come  to  the  application  to  the  problem  about  dvSpcfa.  What 
is  it  that  the  courageous  face,  but  the  cowardly  refuse  to  face  ? 
The  current  answer  is  that  it  is  "  dangers "  (ra  8«va).  But 
"  danger  "  means  an  anticipated  evil,  and  we  have  just  seen  that  even 
the  average  man,  when  he  comes  to  theorize  about  his  own  practice, 
holds  that  no  one  "  goes  to  face  "  what  he  believes  to  be  evil  for 
him.  The  very  fact  that  he  chooses  to  face  the  situation  shows  that 
he  regards  it  as  the  "lesser  evil  "  to  do  so.  The  real  reason,  then, 
why  some  men  face  the  risks  of  war  but  others  run  away,  must  be 
that  the  former  judge  that  more  good,  which  to  them  means  more 
pleasure,  is  to  be  got  by  standing  your  ground  than  by  running 
away ;  the  latter  think  that  they  will  get  more  good,  and  again  they 
mean  more  pleasure,  by  running.  If  we  praise  the  one  and 
condemn  the  others,  we  are  praising  a  true  (and  also  condemning 
a  false)  calculation  about  the  "  balance  of  pleasure  over  pain/' 
The  brave  man  of  everyday  life  faces  the  present  pain  and  peril 
because  he  has  correctly  calculated  that  endurance  of  it  will  lead 
to  a  greater  balance  of  pleasure  than  flinching.  Thus  even  the 
unconscious  theory  of  the  average  man  at  bottom  implies  the  view 
that  courage  is  ^  matter  of  knowing  what  is  and  what  is  not  for- 
midable (<ro<£ia  TCOV  Seivaiv  KCU  JJLIJ  Seii/ah/,  36oc).  This  is,  in  fact, 

exactly  what  Socrates  says  about  "  popular  "  courage  in  the  Phaedo. 
(That  what  the  "  many  "  suppose  to  be  knowledge  of  the  good — 
namely,  knowledge  of  the  hedonic  consequences  of  your  act — is 
something  very  different  from  what  Socrates  means  by  knowledge 
of  the  good  is  true,  but  irrelevant  to  the  present  argument,  which 
only  aims  at  showing  that,  even  if  you  adopt  the  working  morality 
of  the  average  man,  courage  stands  on  the  same  footing  as  the 
other  "  virtues."  From  his  standpoint,  it  resolves  itself,  like  the 
rest,  into  calculation  of  hedonic  consequences ;  from  Socrates'  stand- 
point, it  and  all  the  rest  issue  from  knowledge  of  the  true  and 
eternal  good.) 

VI.  EPILOGUE. — Our  discourse  has,  after  all,  only  ended  by 
bringing  us  in  face  of  the  really  fundamental  problem,  what  true 
"  goodness  "  is  (3600).  (This  remark,  again,  shows  that  Socrates 
is  not  represented  as  accepting  the  Hedonism  which  he  finds  to  be 
the  unconscious  assumption  of  the  average  man.  We  have  seen 
clearly  enough  what  "  goodness  "  is,  on  that  theory.)  In  fact,  we 
have  ended  by  exchanging  positions  in  a  very  entertaining  fashion. 
Protagoras,  who  began  by  being  sure  that  goodness  can  be  taught 


262          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

and  that  he  can  teach  it,  seems  now  to  be  equally  sure  that,  what- 
ever goodness  is,  it  is  not  the  one  thing  which  can  be  taught,  know- 
ledge ;  Socrates,  who  began  by  raising  the  doubt  whether  it  can  be 
taught,  is  now  doing  his  best  to  prove  that  it  must  be  knowledge 
and  nothing  else.  And  here  the  party  breaks  up,  with  a  last  word 
of  graceful  compliment  on  the  part  of  Protagoras.  He  has  often 
testified  to  his  admiration  of  Socrates'  parts  and  rates  him  far  above 
all  other  persons  of  his  years  ;  he  would  not  be  surprised  if  he 
should  yet  become  famous  for  his  "  wisdom." 

Of  course,  the  apparent  paradox  of  which  Socrates  speaks  can 
be  very  simply  explained.  What  he  doubted  was  whether  the 
sort  of  "  goodness  "  of  which  the  public  men  of  Athens  are  examples 
can  be  taught.  Since  this  "  goodness  "  is  just  another  name  for 
"  tactful  management  "  of  affairs,  it  obviously  cannot  be  "  taught." 
A  man  has  to  acquire  tact  by  the  handling  of  affairs  and  men  for 
himself  ;  you  cannot  teach  the  theory  of  it.  But  political  tact  is 
something  very  different  from  anything  Socrates  understood  by 
goodness.  There  is  thus  no  real  confusion  or  shifting  of  ground, 
so  far  as  he  is  concerned.  Protagoras  is  in  a  different  position. 
By  his  own  showing,  the  "  goodness  "  he  aims  at  teaching  is  just 
the  secret  of  political  success,  and  political  success  really  does 
depend  on  a  "  tact "  which  cannot  be  taught.  Hence  Protagoras 
really  does  combine  incompatible  positions  when  he  asserts  both 
that  "  goodness  "  is  not  knowledge,  and  also  that  it  can  be  taught. 
If  by  "  goodness  "  we  mean  what  Protagoras  defined  as  "  success 
in  managing  the  affairs  of  your  household  and  city,"  he  is  right  in 
maintaining  that  goodness  is  not  knowledge,  but  clearly  wrong  in 
holding  that  it  is  an  "  art  "  which  he  can  teach.1 


See  further : 

RITTER,  C. — Platon,  i.  308-342. 

RAEDER,  H. — Platans  philosophische  Entwickelung,  106-111. 

NATORP,  P. — Platons  Ideenlehre,  10-18. 

GOMPERZ,  TH. — Griechische  Denker,  i.  250-264. 

STEWART,  J.  A.— The  Myths  of  Plato,  212-258  (The  Protagoras 
Myth) . 

DITTMAR,  H. — Aeschines  von  Sphettus,  186-212  (on  Aeschines' 
dialogue  Callias,  where,  however,  the  author's  chronology 
of  the  life  of  Callias  is  wrong.  Callias  had  two  sons,  both  in 
at  least  their  later  'teens  in  399.  ApoL  2oa-c.) 

1  Cf.  Burnet,  Early  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  170-179. 


CHAPTER    XI 
THE  REPUBLIC 

THE  Republic  is  at  once  too  long  a  work,  and  too  well  known 
by  numerous  excellent  summaries  and  commentaries,   to 
require  or  permit  analysis  on   the  scale  we   have  found 
necessary  in  dealing  with  the  Phaedo  or  Protagoras.    We  must  be 
content  to  presume  the  student's  acquaintance  with  its  contents, 
and  to  offer  some  general  considerations  of  the  relation  of  its  main 
theses  to  one  another  and  to  those  of  dialogues  already  examined. 

To  begin  with,  it  is  desirable  to  have  a  definite  conception  of 
the  assumed  date  of  the  conversation  and  the  character  of  the 
historical  background  presupposed.  It  should  be  clear  that  Athens 
is  supposed  to  be  still,  to  all  appearance  at  any  rate,  at  the  height 
of  her  imperial  splendour  and  strength.1  Also,  the  time  is  appar- 
ently one  of  profound  peace.  No  reference  is  made  to  military 
operations  ;  though  the  company  consists  mainly  of  young  men  of 
military  age,  no  explanation  of  their  presence  at  home  is  offered. 
Yet  Plato's  two  elder  brothers,  Adimantus  and  Glaucon,  who  are 
both  young  men,  have  already  distinguished  themselves  in  a  battle 
near  Megara  (3680),  which  can  hardly  be  any  other  than  that  of  the 
year  424  (Thuc.  iv.  72).  We  have  to  add  that  the  sophist  Thrasy- 
machus  is  assumed  to  be  at  the  height  of  his  fame,  and  we  know 
that  he  was  already  prominent  enough  to  be  made  the  butt  of  a 
jest  in  the  first  play  of  Aristophanes,  produced  in  the  year  427.2 
Similarly,  the  tone  of  Socrates'  initial  remarks  about  old  age  as  an 
unknown  road  on  which  he  will  yet  have  to  travel  shows  that  we 
are  to  think  of  him  as  still  very  far  from  the  age  (sixty)  at  which  a 
man  officially  became  a  ytpw  at  Athens.  Damonides  of  Oea  is 
referred  to  at  400^  as  still  alive,  and  since  we  have  the  evidence  of 
Isocrates  for  the  statement  that  he  "  educated  "  Pericles,  we  cannot 
suppose  him  to  have  been  born  much,  if  at  all,  later  than  the  year 
500.  All  these  considerations,  taken  together,  suggest  that  the 
supposed  date  of  the  conversation  must  be  about  the  time  of  the 

1  This  is  made  especially  clear  by  the  tone  of  the  satire  on  democracy  viii. 
557  fif.,  where  it  is  unmistakably  the  powerful,  opulent,  and  formidable  democ- 
racy of  the  Archidamian  war  that  Socrates  is  depicting.  The  year  411,  assumed 
as  the  dramatic  date  by  some  commentators,  is  about  the  worst  of  all  possible 
choices.  It  is  rendered  impossible  by  the  fact  that  in  the  Republic,  Cephalus, 
the  father  of  Polemarchus  and  Lysias,  is  still  alive,  though  an  old  man.  The 
date  is  thus  before  his  death  and  the  removal  of  his  sons  to  Thurii,  whence  they 
returned,  after  a  good  number  of  years,  to  Athens  in  411  (Vit.  Lysiae,  c.  i). 

1  Aristoph.,  Fr.  198. 

a63 


264         PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

peace  of  Nicias  (421  B.C.)  or  the  preceding  truce  of  422.  It  is  im- 
portant to  remember  that  Athens  came  out  of  the  Archidamian 
war,  though  not  quite  on  the  terms  she  might  have  got,  but  for  the 
folly  of  the  democratic  leaders  after  Sphacteria  (425),  far  and  away 
the  richest  and  most  powerful  of  the  combatant  states,  with  the 
main  of  her  empire  intact.  For  purposes  of  illustration  the  student 
should  read  by  the  side  of  the  Republic,  the  Wasps  and  Peace  of 
Aristophanes,  as  illustrative  of  the  conditions  of  the  time.  Socrates 
must  be  thought  of  as  being  no  more  than  middle-aged,  somewhere 
about  fifty  years  old,  and  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  it  was  at 
most  a  couple  of  years  before  that  Aristophanes  had  brought  him 
on  the  stage  in  the  Clouds.  Plato  himself  would  be  a  mere  child 
of  some  five  to  seven  years. 

There  is  nothing  in  the  dialogue  to  support  any  of  the  fanciful 
modern  speculations  about  a  possible  "  earlier  edition  "  without 
the  central  books  which  discuss  the  character  and  education  of  the 
"  philosopher-kings/'  or  the  possible  existence  of  the  first  book  by 
itself  as  a"  dialogue  of  search."  On  the  contrary,  the  appearances 
are  all  in  favour  of  regarding  the  whole  as  having  been  planned  as 
a  whole.  It  is  not  until  we  come  to  the  sixth  book  that  we  are 
in  sight  of  the  "  goodness  "  which  is  one  and  the  same  thing  with 
knowledge  ;  the  goodness  of  the  "  guardians  "  of  Republic  ii.-iv. 
has  been  carefully  marked  as  remaining  all  along  at  the  level  of 
"  opinion.1'  It  rises  no  higher  than  loyalty  to  a  sound  national 
tradition  taken  on  trust,  and  is  thus  so  far  on  a  level  with  the 
"  popular  "  goodness  of  the  Phaedo,  though  the  tradition  in  this 
case  is  that  of  a  morally  sounder  society  than  that  of  Athens,  or 
of  any  existing  Greek  TroXi?.1  Hence  it  is  inconceivable  that  Plato 
should  ever  have  composed  a  Republic  which  ignored  the  central 
points  of  Socratic  ethics.  The  first  book,  again,  serves  its  present 
purpose  as  an  introduction  to  the  whole  work  perfectly.  In  outline, 
all  the  main  ideas  which  underlie  the  description  of  the  ideal  man 
and  the  ideal  society  are  there,  the  conception  of  the  life  of  measure 
(in  the  argument  about  TrAcovcfta),  the  thought  of  happiness  as 
dependent  on  "  function  "  or  vocation,  and  the  rest ;  but  all  are 
stated,  as  they  should  be  in  an  Introduction,  in  their  abstract  form  ; 
their  real  significance  only  becomes  apparent  as  they  are  clothed 
with  concrete  detail  in  the  full-length  picture  of  the  good  man  and 
the  good  community.  To  me  it  is  inconceivable  that  Republic  i. 
should  ever  have  been  planned  except  as  the  introduction  to  a  work 
covering  the  ground  of  the  Republic  as  we  have  it.2 

1  This  is  why  in  Book  IV.  the  virtues,  as  practised  in  the  "  reformed  "  city, 
are  still  distinguishable,  so  that  different  virtues  are  most  specially  prominent 
in  different  sections  of  society,  and,  again,  why  we  are  told  at  iv.  430^  3  that 
the  account  just  given  of  courage  is  adequate  only  as  a  description  of  "  citizen  " 
courage,  and  may  have  to  be  revised  later  on.  The  "  unity  of  the  virtues  " 
only  emerges  in  Republic  vi.  when  we  come  to  discuss  the  character  of  the 
"  philosopher- king." 

•The  only  specious  argument  for  an  earlier  Urstaat  is  that,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Timaeus,  where  Socrates  is  made  to  recapitulate  the  contents 


THE  REPUBLIC  265 

it  has  sometimes  been  asked  whether  the  Republic  is  to  be 
regarded  as  a  contribution  to  ethics  or  to  politics.     Is  its  subject 
"  righteousness/'  or  is  it  the  "ideal*  state  >Nj&  The  answer  is  that 
from  the  point  of  view  of  Socrates  and  Plato  there  is  no  distinction,, 
except  one  of  convenience,  between  morals  and  politics.    The  laws 
of  right  are  the  same  for  classes  and  cities  as  for  individual  men. 
But  one  must  add  that  these  laws  are  primarily  laws  of  personal  ' 
morality  ;  politics  is  founded  on  ethics,  not  ethics  on  politics.]^  The 
primary  question  raised  in  the  Republic  and  finally  answered  at  its 
closers  a  strictly  ethical  one,  What  is  the  rule  of  right  by  which  a 
maiTbught  to  regulate  his  life  ?    And  it  should  be  noted  that  the 
first  simple  answer  offered  to  the  question,  that  of  Cephalus  and 
Polemarchus,  makes  no  reference  at  all  to  the  TroXts  and  its  vo/xoi, 
and  this,  no  doubt,  is  why  it  is  put  into  the  mouths  of  speakers 
who  were  not  Athenian  TroXirat  but  protected  aliens.    The  political 
reference  is  brought  into  the  dialogue  in  the  first  instance  by  Thrasy- 
machus,  who  insists  on  treating  morality  as  a  mere  product  and 
reflex  of  the  habit  of  obedience  to  a  political  XQWCOV  or  "  sovereign." 
Socrates  finds  it  necessary  to  keep  this  political  reference  in  view 
throughout  his  own  argument,  but  he  is  careful  to  explain  that  the 
reason  for  studying  the  public  life  of  classes  and  communities  is 
simply  that  we  see  the  principles  of  right  and  wrong  "  writ  large  " 
in  them  ;  we  study  the  "  larger  letters  "  in  order  to  make  out  the 
smaller  by  their  aid.    All  through,  the  ultimate  question  is  that 
raised  by  Glaucon  and  Adimantus,  what  right  and  wrong  are  "  in 
the  soul  of  the  possessor/'    This  comes  out  most  clearly  of  all  in 
the  part  of  the  work  which  is  written  with  most  palpable  passion, 
the  accounts  of  the  degenerate  types  of  city  and  men.     Each  de- 
fective constitution  is  studied  and  the  tone  of  public  life  fostered  by 
it  noted,  in  order  that  we  may  learn  by  this  light  to  read  the  heart 
of  the  individual  man.     We  see  the  real  moral  flaw  in  the  outwardly 
decent  man  who  regards  becoming  and  remaining  "  well-off  "  as 
the  finest  thing  in  life,  by  considering  the  quality  of  national  life 
in  a  merchant-city,  like  Carthage,  where  the  "  merchant-prince  " 
is  dominant  and  gives  the  tone  to  the  whole  community,  and 
so  on.    The  Republic,  which  opens  with  an  old  man's  remarks  about 
approaching  death  and  apprehension  of  what  may  come  after  death, 
and  ends  with  a  myth  of  judgment,  has  all  through  for  its  central 
theme  a  question  more  intimate  than  that  of  the  best  form  of 
government  or  tJMijapst  eugenic  system  of  propagation  ;  its  question 
is,  How  does  a  flBlttam  or  forfeit  eternal  salvation  ?     For  good  or 

of  the  Republic  (Twfjja-iga),  nothing  is  said  about  the  philosopher-kings 
and  their  education^^H>thing,  however,  is  said  about  the  account  of  the 
"  imperfect  "  types  ^^Kien  and  societies  in  Republic  viii.— ix.  either.  The 
silence  of  the  Tiwa^^Bbout  everything  which  follows  Republic  v.  can  be 
explained  conjectun^^fc  more  ways  than  one.  The  simplest  explanation  is 
that  the  real  purpos^^Khe  recapitulation  is  to  serve  as  an  introduction  to 
the  projected  but  un^^Bd  Critias.  Any  explanation  of  the  facts  must  remain 
conjectural,  since  Pl^^Brrote  only  the  opening  pages  of  the  projected  Critias, 
and  we  do  not  know|^J  he  meant  to  develop  the  story. 


266          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

bad,  it  is  intensely  "  other-worldly/'  Man  has  a  soul  which  can 
attain  everlasting  beatitude,  and  this  beatitude  it  is  the  great 
business  of  life  to  attain.  The  social  institutions  or  the  education 
which  fit  him  to  attain  it  are  the  right  institutions  or  education  ; 
ail  others  are  wrong.  The  "  philosopher  "  is  the  man  who  has 
found  the  way  which  leads  to  this  beatitude.  At  the  same  time, 
no  man  lives  to  himself,  and  the  man  who  is  advancing  to  beatitude 
himself  is  inevitably  animated  by  the  spirit  of  a  missionary  to  the 
community  at  large.  Hence  the  philosopher  cannot  be  true  to 
himself  without  being  a  philosopher-king ;  he  cannot  win  salvation 
without  bringing  it  down  to  his  society.  That  is  how  the  Republic 
views  the  relation  between  ethics  and  statesmanship. 

The  fundamental  issue  is  raised  in  the  introductory  book  with 
great  artistic  skill.  From  the  simple  observations  of  old  Cephalus 
about  the  tranquillity  with  which  a  man  conscious  of  no  undis- 
charged obligations  can  look  forward  to  whatever  the  unseen 
world  may  have  to  bring,  Socrates  takes  the  opportunity  to 
raise  the  question  what  SIKOLIOO-VVVJ,  taken  in  the  sense  of  the 
supreme  rule  of  right — "  morality  "  as  we  might  say — is.  What  is 
the  rule  by  which  a  man  should  order  the  whole  of  his  life  ?  Before 
we  can  embark  on  the  question  seriously,  we  need  to  be  satisfied 
that  it  is  not  already  answered  for  us  by  the  ordinary  current  moral 
maxims  of  the  decent  man ;  that  there  really  is  a  problem  to  be 
solved.  Next  we  have  to  see  that  the  theories  in  vogue  among 
the  superficially  "  enlightened,"  which  pretend  to  answer  the 
question  in  a  revolutionary  way,  are  hopelessly  incoherent.  Only 
when  we  have  seen  that  neither  current  convention  nor  current  anti- 
conventionalism  has  any  solution  of  the  problem  are  we  in  a 
position  to  raise  it  and  answer  it  by  the  true  method.  Thus  there 
are  three  points  of  view  to  be  considered:  that  of  the  unphilo- 
sophical  decent  representative  of  current  convention,  sustained 
by  Cephalus  and  his  son  Polemarchus ;  that  of  the  "  new  morality," 
represented  by  Thrasymachus ;  and  that  of  sober  philosophical 
thinking,  represented  by  Socrates. 

As  to  the  first  point  of  view,  that  of  decent  acquiescence  in  a 
respectable  convention  which  has  never  been  criticized,  we  note, 
and  this  may  serve  as  a  corrective  to  exaggerations  about  the 
extent  to  which  "  the  Greeks  "  identified  morality  with  the  VO/KOS 
of  a  "  city,"  that  Plato  has  deliberately  chosen  as  the  exponent 
of  moral  convention  a  representative  who,  as  a  ^CTOIKOS,  naturally 
makes  no  appeal  to  the  "  city  "  and  its  usages  ;  the  rule  of  Cephalus 
is  specially  characteristic  not  of  a  wdAig  but  of  a  profession,  and 
a  profession  which  in  all  ages  has  enjoyed  the  reputation  of  sound 
and  homely  rectitude.  The  old  man's  morality  is  just  that  which 
is  characteristic  of  the  honourable  merchant  of  all  places.  "  Right/] 
according  to  him,  means  "  giving  to  every  man  his  own,  and  speaking 
the  truth,"  i.e.  a  man  is  to  honour  his  business  obligations  and  hii 
word  is  to  "  be  as  good  as  his  bond  "  ;  the  man  who  acts  thus  has 
discharged  the  whole  duty  of  man.  The  point  of  the  conversation 


THE  REPUBLIC  267 

begun  between  Socrates  and  Cephalus,  and  continued  with  Pole- 
marchus  as  respondent,  is  merely  that  this  simple  rule  for  business 
transactions  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  supreme  principle  of  morality 
for  two  reasons,  (i)  There  are  cases  where  to  adhere  to  the  letter 
of  it  would  be  felt  at  once  to  be  a  violation  of  the  spirit  of  right  ; 
(2)  if  you  do  try  to  put  it  into  the  form  of  a  universal  principle  by 
explaining  that  "  giving  a  man  his  own  "  means  "  treating  him  as 
he  deserves/1  "  giving  him  his  due/1  however  you  understand  the 
words  "  a  man's  due,"  you  get  again  a  morally  bad  principle.1 
Against  Polemarchus,  who  thinks  that  morality  can  be  reduced  to 
"  giving  every  one  his  due  "  in  the  sense  of  being  a  thoroughly 
valuable  friend  to  your  friends  and  a  dangerous  enemy  to  your  foes 
(a  working  morality  expressed  in  the  "  gnomic  "  verses  of  Solon 
and  Theognis),  it  has  to  be  shown  that  to  make  such  a  principle 
of  conduct  acceptable  to  a  decent  man's  conscience,  we  must  at 
least  take  our  "  friends  "  and  "  foes  "  to  mean  "  the  good  "  and 
"  the  bad  "  respectively,  and  that,  even  then,  the  principle  is 
condemned  by  the  fact  that  it  makes  it  one  half  of  morality  to 
"  do  evil  "  to  some  one.  The  argument  equally  disposes  incidentally 
of  the  "  sophistic  "  conception  of  "  goodness  "  as  a  kind  of  special 
accomplishment  by  showing  :  (i)  that  in  any  definite  situation 
in  life,  the  "  accomplishment  "  needed  to  confer  the  benefit  de- 
manded by  that  situation  is  some  kind  of  skill  other  than  "  good- 
ness "  ;  and  (2)  that  all  these  accomplishments  can  be  put  to  a 
morally  bad,  as  well  as  to  a  morally  good,  use.  Virtue,  for  example, 
will  not  make  a  man  the  best  of  all  advisers  about  an  investment, 
and  the  knowledge  which  does  make  a  man  a  good  counsellor  on 
such  a  matter  also  makes  him  a  very  dangerous  adviser,  if  he 
chooses  to  use  it  for  a  fraudulent  end.  This  prepares  us  to  discover 
later  on  that  though  "  goodness  "  in  the  end  is  knowledge  and 
nothing  but  knowledge,  it  is  something  quite  different  from  the 
"  arts "  or  "  accomplishments "  with  which  the  professional 
"  teachers  of  goodness  "  confound  it. 

When  we  come  to  the  anti-conventional  "  immoralism  "  of  the 
"  enlightenment/'  it  is  important  to  remark  that  Thrasymachus 
is  made  to  overstate  the  position  ;  as  Glaucon  says,  at  the  opening 
of  the  second  book,  he  has  bungled  the  case.  (As  we  know  of  no 
reason  why  Plato  should  misrepresent  a  prominent  man  of  the 
preceding  generation,  the  violence  and  exaggeration  is  presumably 
a  genuine  characteristic  of  the  actual  Thrasymachus,  and  it  is  used 

1  The  apparent  triviality  of  the  examples  chosen  by  Socrates  to  illustrate 
his  point  is  only  apparent.  He  takes  simple  illustrations,  as  Professor  Burnet 
has  said,  because  the  issue  at  stake  is  most  readily  seen  in  such  cases.  Thus, 
e.g.,  the  question  whether  one  should  return  a  weapon  to  a  lunatic  because  it  is 
his  raises  the  problem  whether  it  is  the  duty  of  a  banker  to  honour  all  the 
cheques  of  a  wealthy  senile  client,  or  of  a  solicitor  to  take  his  instructions  for 
a  manifestly  insane  will  without  any  warning  to  his  family;  and  these  are 
questions  of  moment,  not  only  for  the  casuist  but  for  the  legislator.  Grotius 
has  to  begin  with  precisely  the  same  kind  of  elementary  example  when  he 
wants  to  discuss  the  problems  connected  with  international  good  faith  in  the 
De  iure  belli  et  pads. 


268          PLATO :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

mainly  for  humorous  effect.    Thrasymachus,  like  modern  authors 
whom  one  could  name,  must  not  be  taken  to  mean  all  he  says  too 
seriously.     Bluster  is  a  mannerism  with  him,  as  it  is  in  fact  with 
some   successful   advocates.     The   serious   statement   of   the   im- 
moralist  case  is  reserved  for  Glaucon.)     As  Thrasymachus  states  the 
case,  there  is  really  no  such  thing  as  moral  obligation.     What  men 
call  "  right  "  is  "  the  interest  of  the  superior/'     (In  this  phrase,  TO 
KpeiTTov  is  to  be  taken  as  neuter,  and  what  is  meant   is   "  the 
sovereign  "  in  a  community.)     The  theory  is  that  right  or  morality 
is  a  synonym  for  conformity  to  vo/xos  (the  institutions  and  traditions 
of  the  community).     But  these  institutions  have  been  originally 
imposed  on  the  community  by  the  "  sovereign  "  purely  with  a  view 
to  his  own  benefit,  and  the  only  reason  why  they  should  be  respected 
is  that  the  "  sovereign  "  has  the  power  to  make  you  suffer  if  you 
do  not  respect  them.    Hence,  unlike  Hobbes,  Thrasymachus  feels 
no  need  to  justify  the  absolutism  of  the  "  sovereign  "  by  appeal  to 
the  "  social  contract  "  by  which  he  has  been  invested  with  his 
sovereign  powers  ;  since  he  does  not  regard  "  right  "  as  having  any 
meaning,  he  has  not  to  show  that  the  sovereign  has  any  right  to 
obedience  ;    it  is  sufficient  to  observe  that  his  power  to  enforce 
obedience  is  guaranteed  by  the  simple  fact  that  he  is  the  sovereign. 
Like  the  imaginary  prehistoric  kings  and  priests  of  Rousseau  or 
Shelley,  he  has  succeeded  in  imposing  his  will  on  the  community 
and  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  said.     In  practice  this  theory 
would  work  out  exactly  like  that  of  Callicles  in  the  Gorgias,  but 
there  is  the  important  difference  that,  in  theory,  the  two  immor- 
alists  start  from  opposite  assumptions.    Callicles  is  a  partisan  of 
<£u'cns  who  honestly  believes  that  in  the  "  order  of  things  "  the 
strong  man  has  a  genuine  right  to  take  full  advantage  of  his  strength  ; 
Thrasymachus  is  pushing  the  opposite  view  of  all  morality  as  mere 
"convention"  to  an  extreme.    The  evidence  for  his  theory  is, 
in  the  first  instance,  simply  the  fact  that  all  governments  make 
"high  treason,"  the  subversion  of  the  sovereign,  the  gravest  crime. 
The  first  care  of  every  government  is  to  ensure  the  constitution, 
whatever  it  is,  against  revolution.     By  pure  confusion  of  thought 
the  safeguarding  of  the  constitution  is  then  identified  with   the 
safeguarding  of  the  private  interests  of  the  particular  persons  who 
happen  at  any  moment  to  be  exercising  the  function  of  sovereignty. 
Subsequently  an  appeal  is  made  to  the  familiar  facts  about  the 
"  seamy  side  "  of  political  and  private  life,  the  unscrupulosity  and 
self-seeking  of  politicians,  and  the  readiness  of  private  men  to  cheat 
one  another  and  the  community,  to  job  for  their  families  and  the 
like,  when  the  chance  offers.     It  would  be  easy  to  show  that  the 
indictment  is  drawn  up  with  careful  reference  to  features  of  con- 
temporary Athenian  life,  but  the  reasoning  of  Thrasymachus  rests 
on  the  further  assumption  that  the  seamy  side  of  life  is  its  only 
side  ;  life  is  robbing  and  being  robbed,  cheating  and  being  cheated, 
and  nothing  else.    This  is,  after  all,  not  an  impartial  picture  even  of 
a  society  groaning  under  the  rule  of  a  tyrant  or  a  demagogue,  and 


THE  REPUBLIC  269 

when  Socrates  comes  to  reply,  he  also  finds  no  difficulty  in  appealing 
to  equally  "  real  "  facts  of  a  very  different  kind,  e.g.  the  fact  that 
a  politician  expects  to  get  some  sort  of  remuneration  for  his  work, 
which  shows  that  the  work  itself  is  not  necessarily  a  "  paying  " 
thing.  Even  in  the  world  as  it  is,  the  "strong  man's  "  life  is  not 
all  getting  and  no  giving. 

The  fact  is  that  Thrasymachus,  like  Mr.  Shaw  or  Mr.  Chesterton, 
has  the  journalist's  trick  of  facile  exaggeration.  He  is  too  good  a 
journalist  to  be  an  esprit  juste,  and  the  consequence  is  that  he  lands 
himself  in  a  dilemma.  If  his  "  sovereign  "  who  has  a  view  only 
to  the  interests  of  "  number  one  "  is  meant  to  be  an  actual  person 
or  body  of  persons,  it  is  obvious,  as  Socrates  says,  that  he  is  not 
infallible.  It  is  not  true  that  the  moral  code  and  the  institutions 
of  any  society  are  simply  adapted  to  gratify  the  personal  desires  of 
the  sovereign  who,  according  to  Thrasymachus,  devises  them,  or 
to  further  his  interests  ;  judged  by  that  standard,  every  existing 
set  of  vofjioi  is  full  of  blunders.1  But  if  you  assume  that  the 
sovereign  is  always  alive  to  his  own  interests  and  always  embodies 
them  in  his  regulations,  your  sovereign  is  a  creature  of  theory,  an 
"  ideal/1  and  you  lay  yourself  open  at  once  to  the  line  of  argument 
adopted  by  Socrates  to  show  that  his  worth  depends  on  fulfilling 
a  social  function,  independently  of  the  question  whether  he  gets 
any  private  advantage  from  his  position  or  not.  The  "  new 
morality  "  of  Thrasymachus  must  therefore  stand  or  fall  on  its 
own  merits  as  an  ethical  theory  ;  it  derives  no  real  support  from 
his  speculations  about  the  origin  of  government  in  the  strong  man's 
"  will  to  power." 

On  the  argument  by  which  Socrates  meets  the  strictly  ethical 
assertion  that  "  conventional  "  morality  is  a  mere  expression  of 
the  low  intelligence  and  weakness  of  the  "  herd,"  all  I  wish  to 
remark  here  is  that  he  is  guided  throughout  by  the  Pythagorean 
analogy  between  tuned  string,  healthy  body  and  healthy  mind, 
which  is  the  key  to  half  the  best  thought  of  the  Greek  moralists. 
The  immoralist's  case  is  really  disposed  of  in  principle  by  the  often 
misunderstood  argument  about  7rA.€ove£ia  (Rep.  i.  349&~35oc).  The 
reasoning  already  contains  in  germ  the  whole  doctrine  of  the 
"  right  mean  "  afterwards  developed  in  the  Philebus  and  the  Ethics 
of  Aristotle.  The  point  is  that  in  all  applications  of  intelligence 
to  the  conduct  of  activity  of  any  kind,  the  supreme  wisdom  is  to 
know  just  where  to  stop,  and  to  stop  just  there  and  nowhere  else. 

1  For  example,  on  Thrasymachus'  theory,  the  Sfjfiot,  which  is  the  Kpeirrov 
at  Athens,  must  be  supposed  to  have  adopted  the  institution  of  ostracism  in 
the  interests  of  the  dij^os,  as  a  safeguard  against  would-be  "  dictators."  But 
in  actual  working  the  institution  favours  the  aspirant  to  a  dictatorship  by- 
giving  him  a  chance  to  remove  the  natural  leaders  of  a  "  constitutional  opposi- 
tion." The  selection  of  magistrates  by  lot,  again,  must  be  supposed  to  have 
been  adopted  to  equalize  the  chances  of  the  citizens  ;  but,  as  its  ancient  critics 
said,  it  may  work  the  wrong  way,  since  it  gives  the  fuffddvjpos  as  good  a  chance 
of  office  as  anyone  else,  whereas  he  would  be  handicapped  under  an  elective 
system  by  his  known  or  suspected  hostility  to  the  constitution. 


270          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

The  "  wise  man,"  like  the  musician  or  the  physician,  knows  what 
the  fool  or  the  quack  never  knows,  "  how  much  is  enough."  The 
mistake  common  to  the  fool  in  the  management  of  life  and  the 
bungler  tuning  a  musical  instrument  or  treating  a  sick  man,  is 
that  they  believe  in  the  adage  that  you  "  can't  have  too  much  of  a 
good  thing."  On  the  strength  of  this  misleading  faith,  one  ruins 
his  instrument,  another  kills  his  patient,  and  the  third  spoils  his 
own  life.  There  is  a  "  just  right  "  in  all  the  affairs  of  life,  and  to 
go  beyond  it  is  to  spoil  your  performance,  and  consequently  to 
miss  "  happiness."  Once  grasped,  this  point  leads  on  to  the  other 
that  the  "just  right  "  in  any  performance  means  the  adequate 
discharge  of  function,  and  that  happiness,  in  turn,  depends  on 
discharge  of  function.  The  introduction  to  the  Republic  thus  leads 
us  up  to  precisely  the  telcological  conception  of  the  rule  of  conduct 
from  which  Butler  starts  in  the  Preface  to  his  Sermons.  "  Happi- 
ness "  depends  on  "  conformity  to  our  nature  as  active  beings." 
What  "  active  principles  "  that  nature  comprises  and  how  they 
are  organized  into  a  "  system  "  we  learn  in  the  immediately  follow- 
ing books. 

With  the  opening  of  the  second  book,  we  are  introduced  to  the 
genuine  version  of  the  immoralist  doctrine  of  which  Thrasymachus 
had  given  a  mere  exaggeration,  the  theory  that  regard  for  moral 
rules  is  a  pis  alter,  though  one  which  is  unfortunately  unavoidable 
by  ordinary  humanity.  The  theory  is  often  referred  to  as  that 
of  Glaucon  and  Adimantus,  but  it  should  be  noted  that  Adimantus 
takes  no  part  in  the  statement  of  the  theory  and  that  Glaucon, 
who  does  explain  it  fully,  is  careful  to  dissociate  himself  from  it ; 
it  is  given  as  a  speculation  widely  current  in  educated  circles  of  the 
time  of  the  Archidamian  war  and  supported  by  specious  though,  as 
Glaucon  holds,  unsound  arguments.  His  own  position  is  simply 
that  of  an  advocate  speaking  from  his  brief.  He  undertakes  to 
make  an  effective  defence  of  the  case  which  Thrasymachus  had 
mismanaged,  in  order  that  it  may  really  be  disproved,  not  merely 
dismissed  without  thorough  examination  of  its  real  merits.  The 
important  feature  of  his  argument  is  not  so  much  the  well-known 
statement  of  the  "  social  contract  "  theory  of  the  origin  of  moral 
codes  as  the  analysis  of  existing  morality  to  which  the  historical 
speculation  is  meant  to  lead  up.  The  point  is  that  "  men  practise 
the  rules  of  right  not  because  they  choose,  but  because  they  cannot 
help  themselves."  At  heart  every  one  is  set  simply  on  gratifying 
his  own  passions,  but  you  will  best  succeed  in  doing  this  by  having 
the  fear  of  your  fellow-men  before  your  eyes  and  abstaining  from 
aggression  on  them.  If  you  get  the  chance  to  gratify  your  passions 
without  moral  scruples,  and  can  be  sure  not  to  be  found  out  and 
made  to  suffer,  you  would  be  a  fool  not  to  benefit  by  your  oppor- 
tunity. This  is  the  point  of  the  imaginative  fiction  about  the 
"  ring  of  Gyges."  The  real  fact  which  gives  the  sting  to  the 
fiction  is  simply  that  we  all  know  that  there  is  no  human  virtue 
which  would  not  be  deteriorated  by  confidence  of  immunity  from 


THE  REPUBLIC  271 

detection.  None  of  us  could  safely  be  trusted  to  come  through  the 
ordeal  with  our  characters  undepraved.  We  are  all  prone  to  lower 
our  standard  whenjwe  believe  that  there  is  no  eye,  human  or  divine, 
upon  us.  There  <fc.n  be  little  doubt  that  a  theory  of  this  kind, 
which  amounts  to  the  view  suggested  as  possible  by  Kant  that 
no  single  human  act  has  ever  been  done  simply  "  from  duty/'  was 
a  current  one  in  the  age  of  Socrates,  and  we  can  even  name  one  of 
the  sources  upon  which  Plato  is  presumably  drawing.  The  theory 
attempts  to  combine  in  one  formula  the  two  rival  conceptions  of 
"  nature  "  and  "  convention  "  as  regulative  of  action.  It  amounts 
to  saying  that  there  is  a  morality  of  unscrupulous  egoism  which  is 
that  of  "  nature  "  and  is  practised  by  us  all  when  we  are  safe  from 
detection,  and  another  and  very  different  "  morality  of  convention," 
a  morality  of  mutual  respect  for  "  claims  and  counter-claims  " 
which  we  are  obliged  to  conform  to,  so  far  as  our  behaviour  is 
exposed  to  the  inspection  of  our  fellows.  This  doctrine  is  taught 
in  so  many  words  in  a  long  fragment,  discovered  at  Oxyrhynchus, 
of  Socrates'  contemporary  and  rival,  Antiphon  the  "  sophist."  * 
According  to  Antiphon,  the  "  wise  man/'  who  means  to  make  a 
success  of  life,  will  practise  "  conventional  justice  "  when  he  believes 
that  his  conduct  will  be  observed  by  others,  but  will  fall  back  on 
"  natural  justice  "  whenever  he  can  be  sure  of  not  being  found  out. 
This  is  exactly  the  position  Glaucon  means  to  urge  in  his  apologue. 
What  he  wants  Socrates  to  prove  is  that  the  conception  of  the  two 
rival  moralities  is  a  false  one  ;  that  mutual  respect  of  rights  is  the 
true  morality  of  "  nature/'  as  much  as  of  "  convention,"  the  course 
of  conduct  suitable  to ' '  our  nature  as  agents."  The  proof  is  supplied 
in  the  end  by  the  doctrine  of  the  "  parts  of  the  soul  "  in  Republic  iv., 
exactly  as  Butler  attempts  to  supply  a  similar  proof  of  the  same 
thesis  by  his  account  of  the  hierarchy  of  the  "  active  principles  "  in 
his  three  Sermons  on  Human  Nature. 

The  contribution  of  Adimantus  to  the  discussion  is  that  he 
places  the  argument  for  regarding  respect  for  the  rights  of  one's 
neighbour  as  a  mere  cover  for  self-seeking  on  a  basis  independent  of 
all  speculations  about  moral  origins.  The  tone  of  his  speech  is 
carefully  differentiated  from  that  of  Glaucon.  Glaucon,  as  he 
himself  admits,  is  simply  making  the  ablest  forensic  defence  he 
can  of  his  case,  and  can  jest  about  the  gusto  with  which  he  has 
thrown  himself  into  the  cause  of  a  dubious  client ;  Adimantus 
speaks  from  the  heart  in  a  vein  of  unmistakable  moral  indignation. 
He  complains  not  of  the  speculations  of  dashing  advanced  thinkers, 
but  of  the  low  grounds  on  which  the  defence  of  morality  is  based  by 
the  very  parties  who  might  be  presumed  to  have  it  most  at  heart. 
Parents  who  are  sincerely  anxious  that  their  sons  should  grow  up 
to  be  honest  and  honourable  men  regularly  recommend  virtue 
simply  on  the  ground  of  its  value  as  a  means  to  worldly  success 
and  enjoyment ;  they  never  dwell  on  the  intrinsic  worth  of  virtue 

1  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri,  XI,  no.  1364. 


*72          PLATO :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

itself.  On  the  contrary,  their  habitual  insistence  on  the  hardness 
of  the  path  of  virtue  and  the  pleasantness  of  vicious  courses  suggests 
that  they  think  virtue  in  itself  no  true  good.  And  the  poets  all 
speak  the  same  language.  When  you  come  to  the  representatives 
of  religion,  who  might  be  expected  to  take  the  highest  line,  you 
find  that  they  are  worst  of  all.  They  terrify  the  sinner  by  their 
stories  of  judgment  to  come,  but  only  as  a  preliminary  step  to 
assuring  him  that  they  will,  for  a  small  consideration,  make  his 
peace  with  Heaven  by  easy  ritual  performances  and  sacraments 
which  involve  no  change  of  heart.  The  whole  influence  of  religion 
and  education  seems  to  be  thrown  into  the  scale  against  a  genuine 
inward  morality,  and  this  is  a  much  more  serious  matter  than  the 
speculations  of  a  few  clever  men  about  the  "  original  contract  " 
and  the  motives  which  prompted  it.  We  need  a  new  religion  and  a 
new  educational  system.  (We  must,  of  course,  note  that  the 
indictment  of  religion  is  throughout  aimed  not  at  the  official  cult  us 
of  the  city,  but  at  the  Orphic  and  similar  sects  ;  the  vehemence 
with  which  Adimantus  speaks  seems  to  indicate  an  intense  personal 
hostility  to  these  debased  "  Salvationists  "  which  is  presumably  a 
real  trait  of  the  man's  character.) 

The  effect  of  the  two  speeches,  taken  in  conjunction,  is  to  im- 
pose on  Socrates  the  task  of  indicating,  by  a  sound  analysis  of 
human  nature,  the  real  foundations  of  morality  in  the  very  constitu- 
tion of  man,  and  of  showing  how  education  and  religion  can  be, 
and  ought  to  be,  made  allies,  not  enemies,  of  a  sound  morality. 
This,  we  may  say,  is  the  simple  theme  of  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the 
dialogue.  Some  comments  may  be  offered  on  the  various  stages 
of  the  demonstration.  The  theme  has  already  been  propounded 
in  the  demand  of  Glaucon  that  it  shall  be  made  clear  how  "  justice  " 
and  "  injustice  "  respectively  affect  the  inner  life  of  their  possessor, 
independently  of  any  sanctions,  human  or  divine.  It  is  to  the 
answer  to  this  question  that  Socrates  is  really  addressing  himself 
in  the  picture  of  an  ideally  good  man  living  in  an  ideal  relation  to 
society,  which  culminates  in  the  description,  given  in  Books  VI .-VII., 
of  the  philosopher-king,  his  functions  in  society,  and  the  discipline 
by  which  he  is  fitted  for  their  discharge,  as  well  as  by  the  briefer 
studies,  in  Books  VIII.  and  IX.,  of  increasing  degeneration  from 
the  true  type  of  manhood.  The  answer  to  Adimantus,  so  far  as  his 
indictment  of  education  is  concerned,  has  to  be  found  in  the  account 
of  the  training  of  the  young  into  worthy  moral  character  by  a  right 
appeal, through  literature  and  art,  to  the  imagination  (BooksIII.-IV .)  ; 
his  attack  on  immoral  religion  may  be  said  to  be  the  direct  occasioin 
both  of  the  regulation  of  early  "  nursery  tales  "  with  which  Socrates 
opens  his  scheme  of  reform  in  Book  II.,  and  of  the  magnificent 
myth  of  judgment  with  which  the  dialogue  closes,  itself  a  specimen 
of  the  way  in  which  the  religious  imagination  may  be  made  the  most 
potent  reinforcement  of  a  noble  rule  of  life.  In  dealing  with  the 
details  of  the  positive  contributions  of  the  dialogue  to  both  politics 
and  religion,  it  is  necessary  to  observe  some  caution,  if  we  are  to 


THE  REPUBLIC  278 

avoid  specious  misunderstandings.  We  must  remember  all  through 
that  the  political  problem  of  the  right  organization  of  a  state  is 
avowedly  introduced  not  on  its  own  account,  but  because  we  see 
human  virtue  and  vice  "  writ  large  "  in  the  conduct  of  a  state  or  a 
political  party,  and  may  thus  detect  in  the  community  the  real 
moral  significance  of  much  that  would  escape  our  notice  if  we  only 
studied  humanity  in  the  individual.1  Hence  we  shall  probably  be 
misunderstanding  if  we  imagine,  as  has  sometimes  been  imagined, 
that  either  Socrates  or  Plato  is  seriously  proposing  a  detailed  new 
constitution  for  Athens,  and  still  more  if  we  imagine  that  either 
would  have  approved  of  the  introduction  of  the  new  constitution 
by  revolution  into  a  society  wholly  unprepared  to  receive  it.  The 
most  we  are  entitled  to  say  about  any  of  the  detailed  proposals 
of  the  Republic  is  that  Plato  presents  them  as  what,  according  to 
Socrates,  is  most  in  accord  with  the  moral  nature  of  man,  and  may 
therefore  be  expected  to  be  approximately  realized  in  a  thoroughly 
sound  condition  of  society. 

(i)  In  the  impressive  picture  given  in  Books  II.-IV.  of  the 
working  of  the  principle  of  specialization  of  function  according 
to  vocation,  which  will  ultimately  turn  out  to  be  the  foundation 
of  all  "  justice/'  there  are  one  or  two  points  which  have  perhaps 
not  received  sufficient  attention,  and  may  therefore  be  briefly  noted. 

I  think  it  is  clear  that  we  must  not  take  the  description  of 
the  three  successive  stages  through  which  Socrates'  community 
passes  as  meant  to  convey  any  speculation  about  the  beginnings 
of  civilization.  The  "  first  city  "  is  already  on  the  right  side  of 
the  line  which  separates  civilization  from  barbarism.  Its  inhab- 
itants are  already  agriculturists,  permanently  cultivating  a  fixed 
territory  ;  they  are  at  home  in  the  working  of  metals,  and  in  some 
respects  they  exhibit  an  advance  in  economic  organization  on 
the  Athens  of  the  Periclean  age.  (Thus  they  have  their  clothes 
made  by  a  distinct  class  of  artisans,  not  woven  in  the  house  by  the 
women  of  the  family,  as  was  still  largely  the  custom  at  Athens.) 
The  notion  that  we  are  reading  a  satire  on  Antisthenes  and  the 
"  return  to  nature  "  is  merely  ludicrous.  What  is  really  described 
is,  in  the  main,  the  condition  of  a  normal  71-0X19  where  the  citizens 
are  farming-folk.  To  me  it  seems  clear  that,  so  far  as  Plato  has 
any  particular  historical  development  before  his  mind,  he  is  think- 
ing of  what  Athens  itself  had  been  before  the  period  of  victory  and 
expansion  which  made  her  an  imperial  city  and  the  centre  of  a 
world-wide  sea-borne  commerce.  (This  is  suggested  almost  irre- 
sistibly by  the  assumption  that  even  the  "  first  city/1  like  Athens, 
requires  to  import  a  good  many  of  its  necessaries  from  elsewhere, 

1  For  example,  punctuality  is  what  is  commonly  considered  a  "  minor 
social  virtue."  A  man  is  not  thought  much  the  worse  of,  if  he  is  always  late 
at  an  appointment.  But  when  we  see  how  the  issue  of  a  campaign  or  even 
of  a  war  may  be  affected,  if  expected  reinforcements  arrive  just  a  little  too 
late,  we  are  reminded  that  it  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  call  any  virtue  a  "  minor  " 
one.  The  contemplation  of  the  "  large  letters  "  teaches  us  not  to  despise 
"  minute  particulars." 


274          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

and  consequently  contains  merchants  and  sailors,  and  is  already 
producing  for  the  foreign  market.)  In  the  description  of  the 
steps  by  which  this  little  society  expands  and  becomes  a  city  with 
a  multitude  of  artificial  wants,  and  trades  which  minister  to  them, 
thus  acquiring  a  "  superfluous  population  "  which  must  somehow 
be  provided  for,  we  can  hardly  see  anything  but  a  conscious  re- 
flection of  the  actual  expansion  of  Attica  under  Cimon  and  Pericles. 

(2)  We  must,  of  course,  note  that  not  all  the  artificial  wants 
which  arise  in  the  city  as  it  becomes  "  luxurious  "  are  meant  to  be 
condemned.     Even  the  demand  for  delicacies  for  the  table  is  an 
indication  that  the  standard  of  living  is  rising,  and  all  social  students 
know  that  a  rise  in  this  standard  is  by  no  means  an  entirely  unwhole- 
some thing.     It  is  more  significant  that  one  of  the  chief  features 
of  the  development  is  the  growth  of  professions  like  those  of  the 
actor  and  the  impresario.     People  are  beginning  to  feel  the  need  of 
amusement,  and  this  means,  of  course,  that  they  are  becoming 
conscious  that  they  have  minds,  which  need  to  be  fed  no  less  than 
their  bodies.     Presumably  the  reason  why  Socrates  could  not  look 
for  "  justice  "  in  the  community  of  farmers,  but  has  to  wait  for 
the  "  luxurious  city  "  to  come  into  existence  and  be  reformed, 
is  precisely  that  the  members  of  the  first  society  would  hardly 
be  alive  to  the  fact  that  they  have  souls  at  all ;  they  could  not  feel 
the  need  for  a  daily  supply  of  any  bread  but  that  which  perishes  ; 
they  have  no  "  social  problem." 

(3)  It  has  been  asked  why,  when  over-population  leads  to  an 
acute  social  problem,  aggressive  warfare  rather  than  colonization 
should  be  assumed  as  the  only  way  out  of  the  difficulty.    The 
answer,  of  course,  is  simple.     In  the  first  place,  peaceful  coloniza- 
tion of  derelict  territories  had  never  been  a  feasible  procedure 
for  a  Greek  city.    The  founders  of  the  ancient  and  famous  cities 
we  call  the  "  Greek  colonies  "  had  regularly  had  to  wrest  their  sites 
from  previous  occupants  not  much  inferior  to  themselves  in  "  cul- 
ture/1   There  was  no  America  or  Australia  in  the  Mediterranean 
basin.    And  in  the  second,  Socrates  knows  his  countrymen  and 
is  well  aware  that  a  Greek  "  surplus  population  "  would  not  be 
likely  to  transport  itself  across  the  seas  in  quest  of  a  new  home  so 
long  as  there  was  a  fair  chance  of  a  successful  inroad  on  its  neigh- 
bours.    He  is,  as  he  says,  not  discussing  the  morality  of  the  pro- 
ceeding ;    he  is  merely  noting  that  it  is  what  the  city  would,  in 
fact,  do.     (In  theory,  to  be  sure,  it  was  a  commonplace  that  an 
aggressive  war  of  expansion  is  not  a  iustum  bellum.)    And  the  point 
he  wishes  to  insist  on  is  the  perfectly  sound  one,  that  the  experience 
of  having  to  make  common  sacrifices  and  face  common  dangers  in 
war,  just  or  unjust  (but  when  did  any  nation  throw  its  soul  into 
the  prosecution  of  a  war  which  it  seriously  believed  to  be  unjust  ?), 
does  more  to  generate  self-devotion  in  citizens  than  any  other.     War 
gives  the  social  reformer  his  chance,  for  the  double  reason  that 
it  produces  the  temper  which  is  willing  to  live  hard,  make  sacri- 
fices, and  submit  to  discipline,  and,  when  it  is  hard  contested  and 


THE  REPUBLIC  275 

the  issue  doubtful,  it  makes  the  necessity  for  sacrifice  and  submission 
pressing  and  patent.     We  who  have  lived  through  the  events  of 
1914-1918  should  be  able  to  understand  this  from  our  own  experience. 
(4)  It  is  unhappily  customary  to  make  two  bad  mistakes  about 
the  nature  of  the  reconstituted  social  structure  which,  in  Socrates' 
narrative,  emerges  from  the  experience  provided  by  a  great  war. 
It  is  called  a  "  system  of  caste,"  and  the  matter  is  then  made  worse 
by  calling  the  %Aiovpyot'  who  form  the  third  of  Socrates'  social 
classes,    "  the    working   class,"    or    "  the    industrial    class."    The 
immediate  consequence  is  that  the  social  and  political  theory  of  the 
Republic  suffers  a  complete  travesty,  due  to  the  unconscious  in- 
fluence of  ideas  derived  from  our  experience  of  modern  "  industrial- 
ism."   To  guard  against  misconceptions  of  this  kind,  we  must,  in 
the  first  place,  be  clear  on  the  point  that  there  is  no  system  of 
"  caste  "  in  the  Republic.    The  characteristic  of  "  caste  "  is  that 
one  is  born  into  it,  and  that  once  born  into  a  caste  it  is  impossible 
to  rise  above  it.     You  may  forfeit  your  caste  in  various  ways,  as  a 
Brahmin  does  by  crossing  the  seas,  but  no  one  can  become  a 
Brahmin  if  he  is  not  born  one.     Now  Socrates  believes,  rightly  or 
wrongly,  that  heredity  is  a  powerful  force  in  the  intellectual  and 
moral  sphere  ;  as  a  general  rule,  a  man  will  find  his  natural  place 
in  the  "  class  "  to  which  his  parents  belong  (all  the  more,  no  doubt, 
as  procreation  is  to  be  placed  under  careful  "  eugenic  "  regulations). 
But  the  rule  has  its  notable  exceptions  :  there  are  those  who  prove 
quite  unfitted  for  the  work  of  the  class  into  which  they  are  born, 
and  those  who  show  themselves  qualified  to  take  their  place  in  a 
higher  class.     Hence  it  is  part  of  Socrates'  idea  that  the  early  life 
of  the  individual  shall  be  under  close  and  constant  surveillance, 
and   subjected   to   repeated  tests   of   character  and  intelligence. 
There  is  to  be  every  opportunity  for  the  discovery  and  degradation 
of  the  unworthy  and  the  promotion  of  the  worthy;   no  one  is  to 
be  ensured  by  the  accident  of  birth  in  a  particular  social  status, 
and  no  one  is  to  be  excluded  by  it  from  rising  to  the  highest 
eminence.     This  qualification  of  the  principle  of  heredity  by  the 
antithetic  principle  of  the  "  open  career  "  for  ability  and  character 
is  absolutely  destructive  of  "caste."    The  philosopher-kings  or  the 
soldiers  of  the  Socratic  state  are  no  more  a  "  caste  "  than  Napoleon's 
marshals.     And,  in  the  second  place,  the  3i?/uovpyot  do  not  corre- 
spond to  what  we  call  the  "  artisan  "  or  "  working  "  class,  i.e. 
to  wage-earners  or  persons  who  maintain  themselves  by  selling  their 
labour.    They  include  our  wage-earners,  but  they  also  include  the 
great  bulk  of  what  we  should  call  the  civilian  population,  inde- 
pendently of  economic  status.    The  thought  underlying  the  dis- 
tinction of  the  three  classes  has  primarily  nothing  to  do  with 
economic  status.     It  is  simply  that  in  any  full-grown  society,  you 
may  distinguish  three  types  of  social  service.    There  is  a  small 
section  which  serves  the  community  directly  by  directing  its  public 
life,  making  rules  and  regulations  and  controlling  policy.    These 
are  the  "  complete  "  or  "  full-grown  "  guardians.   There  is  necessarily 


276          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

an  executive  arm,  whose  business  it  is  to  support  the  directive 
action  of  the  first  class  by  the  necessary  physical  force  against 
enemies  from  without  and  malcontents  and  offenders  from  within, 
the  army  and  police.  It  is  this  body  which  Socrates  calls  by  the 
name  cwiKovpoi,  and  it  should  be  noted  that  he  selects  the  word 
not  merely  for  the  appropriateness  of  its  literal  sense  ("helpers," 
"  auxiliaries  "),  but  because  it  was,  as  we  can  see  e.g.  from  Herodotus, 
the  technical  name  for  the  trained  professional  body-guard  of 
monarchs,  and  therefore  indicates  the  important  point  that  the 
"  executive  "  of  the  Socratic  State  is  a  carefully  trained  professional 
fighting  force,  not  an  amateur  constabulary  or  militia.  The 
associations  of  the  word  are  the  same  as  those  of  such  an  English 
expression  as  "  the  Guards/'  and  Socrates  does  not  scruple  to  apply 
to  his  €7riKov/3oi  the  opprobrious  name  by  which  such  permanent 
professional  soldiers  were  called  in  Greek  democracies,  which 
objected  on  principle  to  their  existence.  They  are,  like  the  Ionian 
and  Carian  soldiers  of  an  Amasis,  /xto-floW  ("  mercenaries  ")/ 
except  for  two  considerations —that  they  are  citizens,  not  aliens, 
and  that  the  only  /xto-flos  they  get  is  their  "  keep."  These  two 
classes  are  distinguished  by  the  fact  that  they  are  the  only  direct 
"  servants  of  the  public."  What  remains  is  the  whole  bulk  of  the 
"civilian  population/'  with  the  exception  of  the  "guardians" — 
every  one  who  does  not  directly  serve  the  public  either  as  a  states- 
man or  as  a  soldier  or  policeman.  Thus  the  8^/xtovpyoi  include 
not  only  all  the  so-called  "working  class,"  but  the  whole  body  of 
professional  men,  and  the  whole  class  of  employers  of  laboto-.  Since 
the  two  superior  classes  are  expressly  forbidden  to  have  a/y  kind  of 
property,  personally  or  as  classes,  it  follows  that  the  whole  "  capital  " 
of  ^  the  State  is  in  the  hands  of  the  S^/uov/iyoi.  A  "merchant 
prince,"  under  such  a  classification,  is  just  as  much  one  of  the 
"  industrials  "  as  his  clerks  and  office-boys.  Much  purely  perverse 
criticism  of  the  scheme  would  have  been  obviated  if  this  simple 
consideration  had  been  duly  kept  in  mind. 

(5)  An  immediate  consequence  is  that,  in  spite  of  all  that  has 
been  said  about  the  "  socialism  "  or  "  communism  "  of  the  Republic, 
there  is  really  neither  socialism  nor  communism  to  be  found  in 
the  work.  The  current  confusions  on  the  point  are  probably 
due  mainly  to  the  mistaken  notion  that  the  emphatic  demand  of 
Book  IV.2  for  the  banishment  of  "  wealth  "  and  "  penury  "  from 
society  must  be  the  proposal  of  a  communist,  or  at  least  of  a 
socialist.  This  assumption  is,  on  the  face  of  it,  absurd.  The  point 
made  in  Book  IV.  is  simply  that  a  man's  character  and  work  in  life 
will  be  spoiled  equally  by  the  possession  of  irresponsible  wealth, 
with  no  adequate  social  duties  attached  to  it,  and  by  a  penury  which 
breaks  his  spirit  and  forces  him  to  do  bad  and  scamped  work  in 
order  to  keep  himself  alive.  A  man  may  be  aware  of  these  dangers 
without  adopting  either  the  socialist  or  the  communist  theory  of 
the  right  economic  organization  of  society.  In  point  of  fact, 
1  Rep.  iv.  4iga-42oa.  •  Rep.  iv.  421^  ff. 


THE  REPUBLIC  277 

nothing  much  is  said  in  the  book  about  the  economic  organization  of 
the  only  class  who  have  any  economic  function  at  all,  the  Sypiovpyot, 
but  the  implication  of  what  is  said  is  that  there  are  differences  of 
wealth  among  them,  and  that  the  "  means  of  production  and  dis- 
tribution "  are  individually  owned  and  operated.     In  Book  VIII. 
it  is  carefully  indicated  that  one  of  the  first  signs  of  the  degeneration 
of  the  ideal  State  into  a  "  timocracy  "  is  the  acquisition  of  real  and 
personal  property  by  the  two  superior  classes  (they  "  appropriate 
lands  and  houses/'  (viii.  5476) ),  but  nothing  is  said  of  the  first 
introduction  of  private  property  among  the  8iy/*iovpyoi,  who  thus 
must  be  presumed  to  have  enjoyed  it  all  along.    There  are  other 
more  general  considerations  which  point  to  the  same  conclusion. 
For  one  thing,  both  pure  communism  and  "  State  monopoly  "  of  the 
means  of  production  are  so  alien  to  the  system  of  a  Greek  Ti-oXts — 
the  "  State  ownership "  of  the  silver  mines  at  Laurium  was  an 
exception  at  Athens — that  Socrates  could  not  be  presumed  to  be 
contemplating  either,  unless  he  expressly  explained  himself.    For 
another,  it  is  clear  that  agriculture  is  the  assumed  economic  founda- 
tion of  the  life  of  his  city,  and  agriculture  is  just  the  pursuit  to 
which  a  "  socialistic  "  economic  system  is  least  easy  of  application. 
Collectivism  is  historically  an  ideal  of  the  "  proletariat "  of  great 
towns  ;  the  farmer  has  always  been  tenacious  of  the  very  different 
ideal  of  peasant  ownership.     And  it  is  noticeable  that  in  the  Laws 
Plato  declares  himself  for  peasant  ownership  in  its  extreme  form. 
The  citizens  there  not  merely  own  their  "  holdings  "  but  own  them 
as  their  inalienable  patrimonies,  and  "  common  cultivation  "  is 
expressly  forbidden  (v.  7400-6).    We  may  fairly  take  it  that  if  he 
had  intended  to  represent  his  master  as  advocating  views  of  a 
radically  different  type,  he  would  have  made  the  point  unmistakable. 
Hence,  it  seems  to  me  that  we  must  recognize  that  the  economic 
organization  of  the  ideal  city  of  the  Republic  is  definitely  "  indi- 
vidualistic."    Yet  we  must  not  suppose  that  Plato  is  in  any  sense 
putting   Socrates  forward  as  a  conscious   "  anti-socialist."    The 
real  object  of  the  one  restriction  of  ownership  on  which  the  dialogue 
insists  as  fundamental,  the  prohibition  of  all  property  to  the  direct 
servants  of  the  State,  is  not  economic.    The  purpose  is  the  same  as 
that  of  the  still  more  emphatic  prohibition  of  family  life,  the  elimina- 
tion of  the  conflict  between  public  duty  and  personal  interest. 
What  Socrates  wants,  as  Bosanquet  has  said,  is  simply  to  divorce 
political  power  from  financial  influence.     Wealth  is  to  have  no 
political  influence  in  his  society  ;  it  is  "  plutocracy,"  not  individual 
ownership,  which  he  is  determined  to  suppress.     His  rulers  are  much 
more  in  the  position  of  a  mediaeval  military  monastic  order  than  in 
that  of  a  collectivist  bureaucracy. 

(6)  It  may  not  be  unnecessary  to  remark  that,  as  there  is  no 
socialism,  there  is  also  no  "  community  of  women  "  in  the  Republic. 
If  the  reader  will  take  the  trouble  to  work  out  the  consequences  of 
the  regulations  prescribed  for  the  mating  of  the  guardians,  he  will 
find  that  the  impulses  of  sex  and  the  family  affections  connected  with 


278         PLATO:  THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

them  are  subjected  to  much  severer  restraint  than  any  which  has 
ever  been  adopted  by  a  Christian  society.  It  is  plain  that  the 
governing  classes,  to  whom  the  regulations  are  meant  to  apply, 
are  expected  to  find  no  gratification  for  the  sexual  impulses  except 
on  the  solemn  occasions  when  they  are  called  on  to  beget  offspring 
for  the  State.  The  extension  of  the  duties  of  the  "  guardian  " 
to  both  sexes  of  itself  carries  the  consequence  that  these  occasions 
arise  only  at  long  intervals  ;  and  the  self-denial  implied  in  the 
acceptance  of  such  a  rule  of  life  might  prove  to  be  even  severer 
than  that  imposed  on  the  monk  by  his  vow  of  chastity,  for  the  very 
reason  that  the  inhibition  has  to  be  broken  through  at  the  time 
when  the  State  so  commands.  Indeed,  the  overwhelming  probability 
is  that  if  any  society  should  attempt  to  enforce  on  any  part  of  itself 
regulations  of  the  kind  proposed  in  the  Republic,  the  attempt  would 
faU  just  because  of  their  intolerable  severity.  No  actual  ruling 
class  would  be  likely  to  consent  to  the  absolute  elimination  of  the 
affections  of  the  family  circle  from  its  own  life,  even  if  it  were 
prepared  to  reduce  the  gratification  of  the  physical  impulses  of 
sex  to  the  contemplated  minimum.  The  true  criticism  on  the 
whole  treatment  of  sex  in  the  Republic  is  that,  like  all  non-Christian 
moralists,  rigourist  or  relaxed,  Socrates  very  much  wn^estimates 
the  significance  of  sex  for  the  whole  of  the  spiritual  life.  Whatever 
we  may  think  on  this  point,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  at 
any  rate  the  general  principles  which  underlie  the  treatment  of 
the  position  of  women  in  Republic  v.  are  no  personal  "  development " 
of  Plato's ;  they  belong  to  the  actual  Socrates.  Aeschines,  in  the 
remains  of  his  Aspasia,  agrees  with  Plato  in  representing  the  philo- 
sopher as  insisting  that  "  the  goodness  of  a  woman  is  the  same  as  that 
of  a  man,"  and  illustrating  the  thesis  by  the  political  abilities  of 
Aspasia  and  the  military  achievements  of  the  Persian  "  Amazon  " 
Rhodogyne.1  Hence  the  thought  that  the  duties  of  statesmanship 
and  warfare  should  be  extended  to  women  must  be  regarded  as 
strictly  Socratic,  and  the  rest  of  the  proposals  of  Republic  v.  are  no 
more  than  necessary  consequences  of  this  position.  If  they  are  to  be 
rejected,  we  must  refute  the  assumption  on  which  they  are  based, 
that  the  distinction  of  sex  is  one  which  only  affects  the  individual  in 
respect  to  the  part  to  be  played  in  contributing  to  procreation  and 
the  rearing  of  a  new  generation ;  we  must  be  prepared  to  hold  that  the 
difference  goes  deeper  and  modifies  the  whole  spiritual  life  profoundly. 
(7)  There  arc  one  or  two  remarks  which  may  be  made  about 
the  plan  of  moral  and  religious  training  laid  down  in  Books  II.  and 
III.,  as  supplementary  to  the  many  excellent  studies  of  this  part 
of  the  dialogue  already  in  existence.  We  note  that  in  the  proposed 
purification  of  the  stories  by  which  religious  impressions  are  to  be 
communicated  to  the  very  young,  it  is  not  merely,  nor  even  mainly, 
the  Homeric  mythology  to  which  exception  is  taken, '  The  crowning 
offenders  are  Hesiod  and  the  other  theogonists  who  have  related 

1  See  the  fragments  of  the  Aspasia  collated  in  H.  Dittmar's  Aeschinct 
von  Sphettos.  275-283. 


THE  REPUBLIC  279 

stories  of  the  violent  subversion  of  older  dynasties  of  gods  by 
younger.  This  would,  of  course,  include  the  Orphicists  ;  Socrates 
has  not  forgotten  that  it  was  they  against  whom  the  denunciation 
of  Adimantus  had  been  more  specially  directed.  It  is  even  more 
instructive  to  observe  that  the  attack  on  tragedy  as  propagating 
false  religious  conceptions  is  directly  aimed  at  Aeschylus,  who  has 
often  been  mistaken  in  modern  times  for  an  exponent  of  the  religion 
of  simple-minded  Athenians.  This  means  two  things.  It  means 
that  to  the  Periclean  age,  even  as  late  as  the  time  of  the  peace  of 
Nicias,  Aeschylus  was  still  the  great  representative  of  tragedy,  in 
spite  of  the  popularity  and  renown  of  Sophocles,  who  was  clearly 
thought  of,  as  he  is  thought  of  in  Aristophanes'  Frogs,  as  a  follower, 
though  a  worthy  follower,  of  the  great  originator  of  tragedy.  If 
Sophocles  had  in  his  own  day  already  been  recognized  as  "  the 
mellow  glory  of  the  Attic  stage,"  it  would  be  a  mystery  why  nothing 
is  said  of  the  very  unsatisfactory  part  played  by  the  gods  in  such  a 
work  as  the  King  Oedipus.  It  also  means  that  Socrates  is  alive 
to  the  fact  that  Aeschylus  is  no  old-fashioned,  simple-minded 
worshipper  of  Apollo  of  Delphi,  or  the  Olympians  generally.  In 
fact,  a  "  blasphemy  "  against  Apollo  is  precisely  one  of  the  counts 
brought  against  him.  If  it  is  "  atheism  "  to  represent  the  Olympians 
as  practising  a  questionable  morality,  Aeschylus,  in  spite  of  Dr. 
Verrall,  is  just  as  much  an  "  atheist  "  as  Euripides,  and  Socrates 
rightly  makes  the  point.1 

(8)  Most  of  the  specific  criticisms  contained  in  the  discussion 
of  the  educational  employment  of  poetry  and  music  are,  naturally 
enough,  negative.  Socrates  clearly  holds  quite  strongly  that  the 
tendency  of  the  art  61  his  own  time  is  to  a  love  of  a  relaxed  and 
formless  complexity  and  variety  for  its  own  sake,  and  he  thinks 
it  necessary,  in  the  interests  of  character,  as  well  as  of  taste,  to 
revert  to~austerer  and  more  cr  classical  "  standards.  It  is  important 
to  remember  that  these  strictures  are  put  into  tHe  mouth  of  Socrates, 
speaking  not  later  than  the  peace  of  Nicias. 

We  must  not,  then,  suppose  that  they  are  aimed  at  epigoni 
of  a  later  generation.  It  is  not  the  floridity  of  Timotheus  or 
Agathon  which  is  the  object  of  attack,  but  the  art  of  the  Periclean 
age.  We  are  only  throwing  dust  in  our  own  eyes  if  we  suppose 
that  Socrates  wants  merely  to  repress  the  cheap  music-hall  and  the 
garish  melodrama,  or  the  equivalents  of  freak  movements  like 
Dada.  He  is  seriously  proposing  to  censure  just  what  we  consider 
the  imperishable  contributions  of  Athens  to  the  art  and  literature 
of  the  world,  because  he  holds  that  they  have  tendencies  which  are 

1  It  would  be  singularly  unlikely  that  Aeschylus,  who  had  fought  at 
Marathon,  should  feel  any  particular  devotion  to  a  god  who  had  "  medized  " 
all  through  the  Persian  wars.  That  he  felt  none  is  surely  proved  by  the  part 
Apollo  is  made  to  play  all  through  the  Orestean  trilogy.  The  so-called  naivete 
of  Aeschylus,  like  that  of  Herodotus,  is  a  product  of  consummate  art.  In 
one  important  passage  where  the  poet  really  is  expressing  personal  religious 
conviction  he  is  at  pains  to  tell  us  that  "  popular  orthodoxy  "  is  against  him 
(A gam.  757, 


280          PLATO:   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

unfavourable  to  the  highest  development  of  moral  personality. 
The  magnitude  of  the  sacrifice  is  the  true  measure  of  the  value 
he  ascribes  to  the  end  for  which  he  purposes  to  make  it.  We  shall 
not  appreciate  his  position^ unless  we  understand  quite  clearly 
_that^  he  is  in  downright  earnest  with. .the  consideration  that_the 
connexion  between  aesthetic  _  taste  and  morality  is  so  close  .th^t 
whatever  tends  to >  ennoble  .our  aesthetic  taste  directly  tends  .to 
elevate  our  character^  and  whatever  tends  to  foster  a  "  taste L "  for 
tKeHebasedln Tart  fends  equally  to  deprave  a  man's  whole  moral 
DeifigT"  Whether  we  share  this  conviction  or  not,  the  recognition 
tharSocrates  holds  it  with  as  little  qualification  as  Ruskin  is  the 
key  to  the  understanding  of  the  whole  discussion  of  early  education. 
We  are  allowed  also  to  see  incidentally  that  the  suggested  reforms 
in  "  musical  "  education  are  not  meant  to  be  limited  to  the  censure 
of  what  is  debased.  It  is  meant  that  the  young  "  guardian  "  is  to 
be  subjected  from  the  first  to  the  positive  influences  of  lofty  art  of 
every  description.  (Painting,  embroidery,  architecture,  and  certain 
"  minor  arts  " — one  naturally  thinks  of  the  characteristic  Athenian 
art  of  pottery  as  an  example — are  expressly  specified,  Republic  iii. 
40  la  ff.)  The  growing  boy  or  girl  is  to  live  in  an  environment  of 
beauty,  and  the  appreciation  of  the  beauty  of  the  environment 
is  expected  to  lead  insensibly  to  appreciation  of  whatever  is  morally 
lovely  and  of  good  report  in  conduct  and  character.  To  Socrates1 
mind  the  moral  employment  of  such  epithets  as  "  fair/'  "  foul/' 
"  graceful,"  "  graceless,"  is  no  mere  metaphor,  but  a  genuine 
analogy  based  on  the  fact  that  all  sensible  beauty  is  itself  the  ex- 
pression and  shadow  of  an  inward  beauty  of  character.1 

(9)  Since  the  whole  of  the  early  education  contemplated  in  the 
Republic  is  based  on  an  appeal  to  taste  and  imagination,  it  follows 
that,  as  Socrates  is  careful  to  insist,  the  "  goodness  "  it  produces, 
though  it  will  be  quite  sufficient  for  every  class  except  the  statesmen, 
is  not  the  true  and  philosophic  goodness  of  which  the  Phaedo  speaks. 
As  we  are  carefully  reminded,  the  self-devotion  of  even  the  fighting 
force  of  the  reformed  city  is  founded  on  "  opinion,"  not  on  know- 
ledge ;  their  virtue  is  absolute  loyalty  to  a  sound  tradition  which 
they  have  imbibed  from  their  "  social  environment,"  not  loyalty  to 
the  claims  of  a  summum  bonum  grasped  by  personal  insight.  Thus 
the  virtue  described  and  analysed  in  Book  IV.  is  still  "  popular 
virtue  " ;  its  superiority  over  the  goodness  of  the  average  Athenian, 
the  respectability  we  have  heard  Protagoras  preaching,  is  due  simply 
to  the  superiority  of  the  "  social  tradition  "  of  the  Socratic  city 
over  that  of  Periclean  democracy.  There  is  thus  a  double  reason 

1  Besides  painting,  embroidery,  and  architecture,  the  Republic  (I.e.)  men- 
tions weaving,  the  manufacture  of  all  "  vessels  "  or  "  furniture  "  ((r/cevwp),  and 
appears  to  allude  to  gardening.  There  would  be  plenty  of  room  in  Socrates' 
city  for  the  arts  of  design,  if  there  is  not  much  left  for  the  poet  and  dramatist. 
It  is  an  interesting  question  whether  Socrates  may  not  be  right  in  what  is  his 
evident  conviction  that  the  greatest  art  does  require  a  certain  austerity  and 
severe  restriction  in  the  matter  of  its  vehicles  of  expression.  I  suggest  the 
question  without  wishing  to  answer  it. 


THE  REPUBLIC  281 

why  we  are  bound  to  regard  the  picture  of  philosophers  and  their 
philosophic  virtue  drawn  in  the  central  books  as  an  essential  part  of 
the  argument,  and  to  reject  any  speculations  which  treat  this  part 
of  the  Republic  as  an  afterthought.  The  account  of  that  supreme 
goodness  which  is  indistinguishable  from  knowledge  is  absolutely 
necessary  in  any  presentation  of  Socratic  ethics.  And  again,  since 
the  statesmen  of  the  Republic  have  to  control  and  conserve  the 
national  traditions,  they  must  have  a  goodness  which  is  not  simply 
the  product  of  those  conditions  themselves.  There  would  be  no 
point  in  subjecting  the  good  soldier  to  the  control  of  a  higher 
authority  if  the  loyalty  to  established  tradition  which  is  the 
soldier's  point  of  honour  were  the  highest  moral  principle  attainable. 
In  a  Republic  without  the  central  books,  Sparta  would  have  to 
figure  not  as  an  example  of  the  second-best,  but  as  the  ideal  com- 
munity itself,  whereas  the  whole  point  of  the  description  of  the 
"  timocracy  "  in  Book  VIII.  is  that  a  State  like  Sparta,  where  the 
qualities  of  the  mere  soldier  and  sportsman  are  regarded  as  a  moral 
ideal,  has  taken  the  first  fatal  step  towards  complete  moral  anarchy 
and,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  must  be  expected  to  take  those 
which  follow  in  due  succession. 

Recognition  that  the  whole  account  of  the  virtues  given  in  Re- 
public iv.  is  thus  provisional  should  save  us  from  attaching  too  much 
importance  to  the  famous  doctrine  of  the  "  three  parts  "  of  the  soul. 
We  must  be  careful  to  understand  that  this  doctrine  does  not  profess 
to  be  original  nor  to  be  a  piece  of  scientific  psychology.  We  have 
already  found  it  presupposed  as  something  known  in  educated 
circles  in  the  Gorgias  and  Phaedo,  and  have  seen  reason  to  think 
that  it  is  Pythagorean  in  origin,  as  Posidonius  is  known  to  have 
maintained,1  and  directly  connected  with  the  theory  of  the  "  three 
lives."  This  means  that  we  are  to  take  it  primarily  as  a  working 
account  of  "active  principles/'  or  "  springs  of  action,"  which  suffi- 
ciently describes  the  leading  types  of  "  goodness/'  as  goodness  can 
be  exhibited  in  any  form  short  of  the  highest.  The  scheme  will 
thus  be  excellently  applicable  to  the  goodness  of  the  eirucovpot, 
for  ^their  life  is  still  a  form,  though  the  worthiest  form,  of  the 
<£iAoT(/zos  /?t'os.  Loyalty  to  "  honour/'  "  chivalry,"  "  ambition  " 
(though  a  wholly  unselfish  ambition),  is  the  utmost  we  demand  of 
them ;  the  life  of  duty  remains  for  the  best  of  them  a  struggle 
between  a  "  higher  "  and  a  "  lower,"  though  a  struggle  in  which 
the  "  higher  "  regularly  wins,  and  this  justifies  our  recognition  of  a 
plurality  of  "  parts  of  the  soul  "  in  them.  It  will  be  characteristic 
of  their  experience  that  there  should  be  conflicts  of  "  desire  "  with 
the  tradition  of  loyalty,  and  that  chivalrous  sentiment  should  be 
required  to  act  as  the  reinforcement  of  loyalty  to  tradition  in  the 
conflict.  But  the  familiar  Socratic  doctrine  is  that  the  "  philo- 
sopher "  who  has  directly  gazed  for  himself  on  that  supreme  good 
of  which  the  Symposium  has  told  us,  necessarily  desires  the  good 
he  has  beheld ;  to  him  "  disobedience  to  the  heavenly  vision  " 
1  Buruet,  Early  Greek  Philosophy*,  296  n.  2, 


282          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

would  be  impossible,  exactly  as  in  Christian  theology  sinful  volition 
is  held  to  be  impossible  to  the  saints  who  actually  enjoy  the  beatific 
vision  of  God.  Hence  it  must  follow  that,  as  a  description  of  the 
moral  life  of  the  philosopher,  the  doctrine  of  the  distinct  "  parts  " 
of  the  soul  becomes  increasingly  impossible  as  he  makes  progress 
towards  the  goal  at  which  his  activity  is  consciously  directed.  This 
is  why  the  last  word  of  Socrates  on  the  doctrine  is  to  remind  us 
that  it  may  be  necessary  to  revise  it  when  we  have  grasped  the 
truth  of  the  "  divinity  "  of  the  soul  (Rep.  x.  6nb  ff.),  and  why  we 
are  told,  when  it  is  first  introduced,  that  we  must  not  expect  to 
arrive  at  exact  and  certain  truth  by  the  line  of  inquiry  we  are  now 
pursuing  (iv.  435^).1  I  do  not  think  it  needful  to  say  more  about 
the  doctrine  here,  than  to  utter  a  word  of  warning  against  two 
possible  misunderstandings.  We  must  avoid  every  temptation  to 
find  a  parallel  between  the  "  parts  "  or  "  figures  "  in  the  soul  and 
the  modern  doctrine  of  the  "  three  aspects  "  of  a  complete  "  mental 
process"  (cognition,  conation,  feeling).  Plato  is  not  talking  about 
"  aspects  "  of  this  kind,  but  about  rival  springs  of  action,  and  the 
doctrine,  as  presented  in  the  Republic,  has  no  reference  to  anything 
but  action  and  "  active  principles/'  or  "  determining  motives." 
Also  we  must  not  make  the  blunder  of  trying  to  identify  the 
0vju,oei8€s  with  "  will."  From  the  Socratic  point  of  view,  will 
cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  judgment  "  this  is  good,"  and  this 
judgment  is  always,  of  course,  a  deliverance  of  the  Xoyio-TLKov.  But 
the  XayurriKov  may  pronounce  a  true  judgment,  or  it  may  be  led 
into  a  false  one  under  the  influence  of  present  appetite  or  of  anger 
or  ambition,  or  again,  it  may  only  be  saved  from  false  judgment 
because  the  "  sense  of  honour "  comes  into  collision  with  the 
promptings  of  appetite.  To  look  in  the  scheme  of  the  Republic 
for  some  facultas  electiva,  intervening  between  the  formation  of  a 
judgment  of  "  practical  thinking  "  and  the  ensuing  action,  would 
be  to  misunderstand  its  whole  character. 

(10)  We  see  then  why  there  can  never  have  been  a  "  first 
Republic/'  including  the  "  guardians  "  and  the  scheme  for  their 
early  education,  but  without  the  philosopher-king  and  his  training 
in  hard  scientific  thinking.  The  philosopher-king  is  doubly  de- 
manded as  the  only  adequate  embodiment  of  the  Socratic  con- 
ception of  goodness,  and  also  as  the  authority  whose  personal 
insight  into  good  creates  the  public  tradition  by  which  the  rest  of 
society  is  to  live.  To  do  full  justice  to  the  conception  we  must 
not  forget  that  Socrates'  statesmen  are  expected  to  combine  two 

1  The  suggestion  is  that  in  the  man  who  achieves  his  eternal  salvation,  the 
elements  of  "  mettle  "  and  "  concupiscence  "  are,  BO  to  say,  transubstan- 
tiated, swallowed  up  in  intellect.  (Of  course  this  "  intellect  "  would  not  be 
a  "  cold,  neutral  "  apprehension  of  truth,  but  an  intellect  on  fire  with  intel- 
lectual "  passion,"  a  white-hot  intelligence.)  The  same  suggestion  is  made 
more  openly  in  the  Timaeus  (6gc  ff.).  Since  we  cannot  suppose  the  Pythag- 
orean Timaeus  to  have  learned  about  the  "tripartite  soul  "  for  the  first  time 
from  the  conversation  of  Socrates  two  days  before,  the  fact  that  he  makes  a 
point  of  the  doctrine  indicates  that  Plato  regards  it  as  Pythagorean. 


THE  REPUBLIC  288 

characters  which  are  not  often  united.  They  are  to  be  original 
scientific  thinkers  of  the  first  order,  but  equally,  they  are  to  be 
"  saints."  In  the  account  of  the  character  which  will  be  demanded 
of  them  and  the  natural  endowments  it  presupposes,  we  hear, 
indeed,  of  the  qualifications  we  also  should  demand  of  a  scientific 
genius — intellectual  quickness,  retentive  memory  and  the  like — but 
we  hear  as  much,  if  not  more,  of  what  we  should  regard  as  moral 
qualifications  for  sainthood,  which  may  be  wanting  to  a  man  without 
impairing  his  eminence  in  science.  How  serious  Socrates  is  with 
this  side  of  the  matter  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  his  philosophers 
are  to  be  selected  exclusively  from  the  best  specimens  of  young 
people  who  have  come  out  pre-eminently  successful  from  the  hard 
discipline  by  which  the  fighting-force  is  made.  The  "  auxiliary  " 
himself,  as  described  in  the  earlier  books,  is  expected  to  have  all  the 
moral  elevation  of  Wordsworth's  "  Happy  Warrior/'  and  the 
"  Happy  Warrior  "  is,  in  turn,  only  the  raw  material  out  of  which 
years  of  hard  intellectual  labour  will  make  the  philosophic  states- 
man. If  we  lose  sight  of  either  half  of  this  ideal  we  shall  form  a 
sadly  defective  notion  of  what  the  Republic  means  by  a  "  philo- 
sopher." By  thinking  only  of  the  sainthood,  we  might  come  to 
imagine  that  the  philosopher  is  a  kind  of  Yogi,  bent  on  a  selfish 
absorption  into  the  divine  calm  of  the  Absolute  ;  it  would  then  be  a 
mystery  why  he  is  to  be  trained  for  his  vocation  by  years  of  severe 
mathematical  study,  and  again  why,  when  he  has  at  last  descried 
the  vision  of  the  good,  he  should  at  once  be  made  to  devote  all  his 
powers,  throughout  the  prime  of  his  life,  to  the  work  of  government. 
If  we  think  only  of  the  science,  and  say  merely  that  what  is  aimed 
at  is  that  the  highest  intellectual  attainments  shall  be  employed 
in  the  business  of  governing  the  world,  we  shall  be  forgetting  that 
many  of  the  most  eminent  men  of  science  would  have  been  dis- 
qualified for  the  supreme  position  in  Socrates'  city  by  defects  of 
character.  From  the  point  of  view  of  intellectual  eminence  we 
could  think,  perhaps,  of  no  names  so  illustrious  as  those  of  Galileo 
and  Newton.  But  it  may  be  taken  as  certain  that  both  would, 
by  the  Socratic  standard,  be  relegated  to  the  class  of  Si?/uovpy<u. 
The  moral  cheapne^  of  the  one  man's  character,  the  vein  of  small 
egotism  in  the  other's,  would  debar  them  from  being  so  much  as 
ImKovpoi.  What  we  need  to  understand  clearly  is  that  Socrates 
holds  firmly  to  two  positions  at  once — the  position  that  only  a  moral 
hero  or  saint  is  fit  to  be  a  supreme  ruler  of  men,  and  the  further 
position  that  discipline  in  sheer  hard  thinking,  which  can  only  be 
won  by  personal  service  of  science,  is  the  immediate  and  indis- 
pensable path  to  the  direct  vision  of  good  which  makes  the  saint 
or  hero.  We  are  clearly  here  on  Pythagorean  ground.  The  under- 
lying thought  is  just  that  which  seems  to  have  been  distinctive 
of  Pythagoras,  the  thought  that  "  salvation  "  or  "  purification  " 
of  the  soul  is  to  be  achieved  by  science  (paO-jnaTa),  not  by  a 
ritual  of  ceremonial  holiness ;  the  philosopher-kings  embody  the 
same  ideal  which  had  inspired  the  Pythagorean  communities  when 


284          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

they  set  to  work  to  capture  the  government  of  the  cities  of  Magna 
Graecia.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  actual  Socrates, 
whose  standing  complaint  against  Athenian  democracy  in  the 
dialogues  is  that  it  has  no  respect,  in  matters  of  right  and  wrong, 
for  the  authority  of  the  "  man  who  knows,1'  shared  these  ideas. 
They  are  avowed  by  Plato  himself  in  his  correspondence,  where 
they  figure  as  the  true  explanation  of  his  apparently  Quixotic 
attempt  to  make  Dionysius  II  into  a  possible  constitutional 
monarch  by  an  education  in  mathematics.  No  doubt  Plato  and 
his  friends  were  expecting  from  science  something  more  than  it  has 
to  give,  but,  as  Professor  Burnet  has  said,  their  proceedings  are 
unintelligible  unless  we  understand  that  the  expectation  was 
passionately  sincere. 

How  preoccupation  with  science  was  expected  to  ennoble 
character  (provided  that  only  the  right  type  of  person  is  allowed 
to  meddle  with  it),  we  see  most  readily  by  comparing  the  courage 
pronounced  in  Book  IV.  to  be  all  that  is  wanted  of  the  IviKovpot 
with  the  still  higher  type  of  courage  declared  in  Book  VI.  to  be 
part  of  the  character  of  the  philosopher.  The  "  courage  "  de- 
manded of  the  good  soldier,  in  whose  make-up  Ov^s  plays  the 
leading  part,  was  defined  as  steadfast  loyalty  in  the  face  of  perils 
and  seductions  to  the  right  opinions  inculcated  in  him  by  education. 
Its  foundation  is  thus  allegiance  to  a  code  of  honour  held  with  such 
passion  that  no  fear  of  pain  or  death  and  no  bait  that  can  be  offered 
to  cupidity  is  able  to  overcome  it.  Clearly  a  courage  like  this 
will  carry  a  man  "  over  the  top/1  make  him  volunteer  for  a  desperate 
enterprise,  or  win  him  a  V.C.  But  there  are  situations  in  life  which 
make  a  demand  for  a  still  higher  degree  of  fortitude.  It  is  matter 
of  experience  that  a  V.C.  may  not  be  equal  to  the  task  of  duty 
imposed,  for  example,  on  a  priest  whose  business  it  is  to  tend  daily 
the  last  hours  of  the  victims  of  some  foul  pestilence  in  a  plague- 
smitten  city.  Or  again  a  brave  soldier,  who  will  face  deadly  peril 
when  his  "  blood  is  up  "  and  the  eyes  of  his  comrades  and  his 
commander  are  on  him,  may  not  have  the  nerve  of  the  scientific 
man  who  will  quietly  inoculate  himself  with  some  loathsome  dis- 
order to  study  its  symptoms,  or  try  the  effects  of  some  new  and 
powerful  anaesthetic  upon  himself,  in  order  to  decide  on  its  possible 
utility  in  medicine.  This  is  the  sort  of  courage  of  which  Socrates 
speaks  as  only  possible  to  a  man  who  "  knows  "  the  relative  in- 
significance of  the  duration  of  any  individual  personal  life  from  his 
habitual  "  contemplation  of  all  time  and  all  existence."  We  should, 
probably,  prefer,  both  in  the  case  of  the  priest  and  in  the  case  of 
the  man  of  science,  to  speak  of  "  faith,"  but  the  point  is  that,  in 
both  cases,  the  agent  is  inspired  by  an  absolutely  assured  personal 
conviction  about  the  universal  order  and  his  own  place  in  it.  With- 
out this  absolute  assurance  of  conviction,  one  is  never  wholly  free 
from  liability  to  illusion  about  one's  own  personal  importance, 
and  so  never  quite  a  free  man.  Because  Socrates  holds  that  the 
sciences  form  a  ladder  which  leads  up  in  the  end  to  the  vision  of  the 


THE  REPUBLIC  285 

"  Good  "  as  the  clue  to  the  whole  scheme  of  existence,  he  looks  to 
science,  as  its  supreme  service,  to  make  us  thus  at  last  completely 
free  men.  From  this  point  of  view,  clearly  in  the  soul  of  the  man 


who  "  knows/'  the  "  parts  "  (fwpia)  or  "  figures  "  (ci&y)  which 
have  been  distinguishable  at  a  lower  level  of  moral  development 
will  be  finally  fused.  His  life  will  have  only  one  spring  of  action 
or  active  principle,  his  vision  of  the  supreme  good  itself.  The  forms 
of  virtue,  at  its  highest  level,  will  therefore  lose  their  distinction. 
It  might  be  possible  for  the  average  good  civilian,  or  even  for  the 
good  soldier  of  the  State,  to  be  characterized  by  one  form  of  good- 
ness more  than  by  another.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  the  assign- 
ment of  different  virtues  as  characteristic  to  different  sections  of  the 
community.  It  is  not  meant  that  so  long  as  the  shop-keeper  or 
the  fanner  is  "  temperate/'  it  does  not  matter  whether  he  is  a 
coward.  He  could  not  be  a  good  man  at  all,  if  he  were  that,  and 
a  society  in  which  no  one  had  any  courage  except  the  members  of 
the  army  and  police  would  be  morally  in  a  bad  way.  But  fighting 
is  not  the  civilian's  trade.  He  will  be  none  the  less  a  valuable 
member  of  society  as  a  shop-keeper  or  a  farmer  because  he  has  not 
been  trained  to  show  all  the  pluck  and  presence  of  mind  which 
would  win  a  D.S.O.  or  a  V.C.,  though  the  State  would  succumb 
in  the  hour  of  peril  if  its  fighting-arm  had  no  more  martial  courage 
than  the  average  civilian.  But  if  a  man  is  inspired  in  all  the  acts 
of  his  life  by  the  vision  of  the  supreme  good,  he  will  be  equal  to  all 
the  emergencies  of  life  alike  ;  in  having  one  virtue,  he  will  neces- 
sarily have  all.  Substitute  for  "  the  good  "  God,  and  the  principle 
of  the  unity  of  the  virtues  takes  on  the  familiar  form  Ama  et  fac 
quod  vis. 

(n)  The  conception  of  science  as  the  road  to  vision  of  the  good 
leads  us  at  once  to  consideration  of  the  central  metaphysical  doctrine 
of  the  Republic,  the  doctrine  of  the  "  Form  of  Good  "  (tSc'a  rayaOov). 
As  is  usual  when  the  forms  are  mentioned  in  a  Platonic  dialogue, 
their  reality  is  neither  explained  nor  proved.  It  is  taken  for  granted 
that  the  company  in  the  house  of  Polemarchus,  or  at  least  Glaucon 
and  Adimantus  who  conduct  the  discussion  with  Socrates,  know 
quite  well  what  the  theory  means  and  will  not  dispute  its  truth. 
It  is  assumed  also  as  known  to  every  one  that  the  mathematical 
sciences  are  concerned  with  forms  ;  forms  are  the  objects  which 
we  get  to  know  from  mathematics,  though  the  mathematician 
leads  us  up  to  acquaintance  with  them  by  starting  from  the  sensible 
"  figures  "  which  he  employs  as  helps  to  our  imagination.  So  far, 
we  are  told  nothing  we  have  not  learned  from  the  Phaedo.  But 
there  are  two  points  of  the  first  importance  on  which  the  Republic 
adds  to  that  dialogue,  (a)  We  now  hear  of  a  certain  supreme 
"  form,"  the  "  Good  "  or  "  Form  of  Good/'  which  is  the  supreme 
object  of  the  philosopher's  study.  We  learn  that,  over  and  beyond 
the  recognized  mathematical  studies,  there  is  a  still  more  ultimate 
discipline,  "dialectic,"  and  that  it  is  the  function  of  "  dialectic  " 
to  lead  directly  to  this  vision  of  the  "  good."  Further,  we  are  told 


288          PLATO :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

that  this  "  good  "  is  something  Socrates  cannot  describe  ;  It  is  not 
"  reality  or  being/'  but  "  on  the  other  side  "  of  both,  though  it  is 
the  source  of  all  the  reality  (aXrjOeia)  and  being  (ouo-i'a)  of  every- 
thing, (b)  The  procedure  of  the  mathematical  sciences  is  criticized 
and  contrasted  with  that  of  "  dialectic/'  with  a  view  to  explaining 
just  why  the  ideal  of  science  is  realized  in  dialectic  and  in  dialectic 
alone.  Both  points  call  for  some  special  consideration. 

(a)  THE  FORMS  (IMai)  IN  THE  REPUBLIC.— From  the  Phaedo, 
among  other  dialogues,  we  gather  that  there  is  a  form  corresponding 
to  each  "  universal  "  predicate  which  can  be  significantly  affirmed 
of  a  variety  of  logical  subjects.  The  same  thing  is  explicitly  said 
in  the  Republic  (vi.  5076,  x.  5960)  ;  in  the  latter  place  the  "  form 
of  bed  (K\ivrj)  or  table  "  (rpaTrcfa)  is  given  as  an  example.  (This 
seems  at  variance  with  the  well-known  statement  of  Aristotle 
that  "  we  "—i.e.  the  Platonists— deny  that  there  are  "  forms  "  of 
artificial  things,1  but  we  must  remember  that  Aristotle  is  speaking 
of  the  doctrine  as  elaborated  in  the  Academy,  not  of  the  position 
ascribed  to  Socrates  in  the  dialogues.)  But  in  the  Republic  we 
learn  that  there  is  a  "  Form  of  Good  "  which  is  to  the  objects  of 
knowledge  and  to  knowing  itself  what  the  sun  is  to  visible  objects 
and  to  sight.  This  is  then  further  explained  by  saying  that  the 
sun  both  makes  the  colours  we  see  and  supplies  the  eye  with  the 
source  of  all  its  seeing.  In  the  same  way,  the  "  good  "  supplies 
the  objects  of  scientific  knowledge  with  their  being  (ouo-t'a)  and 
renders  them  knowable.  And  as  the  sun  is  neither  the  colours 
we  see  nor  the  eye  which  sees  them,  so  the  "  good  "  is  something 
even  more  exalted  than  "  being."  2  Later  on,  we  find  that  the 
sciences  form  a  hierarchy  which  has  its  culmination  in  the  actual 
apprehension  of  this  transcendent  "  good." 3  Now,  since  it  is 
assumed  in  the  Republic  that  scientific  knowledge  is  knowledge  of 
forms,  the  objects  which  are  thus  said  to  derive  their  being  from 
"  the  good  "  must  clearly  mean  the  whole  body  of  the  forms. 
The  "  good  "  thus  holds  a  pre-eminence  among  forms,  and  strictly 
speaking,  it  might  be  doubtful  whether  we  ought  to  call  it  a  "  form  " 
any  more  than  we  can  call  the  sun  a  colour.  At  least,  all  the  other 
forms  must  be  manifestations  or  expressions  of  it.  In  the  Phaedo 
nothing  was  said  which  would  warrant  this  treatment  of  the  forms 
as  a  hierarchy  or  ordered  series  with  a  first  member  of  such  a  unique 

1  Metaphysics,  A.  9916  6,  M.  io8oa  6. 

2  Rep.  vi.  5086-5096.     For  the  full  understanding  of  the  analogy  with  the 
sun  it  is  necessary  to  understand  the  theory  of  colour-vision  implied  which  is 
fully  expounded  in  the  Timaeus.     A  colour  is  itself  a  kind  of  "  flame  " 
(Timaeus,  670  ff.),  and  the  immediate  organ  of  the  sight  by  which  it  is  appre- 
hended is  also  itself  a  fire,  like  that  of  the  sun,  which  is  contained  in  the  eye 
and  issues  forth  from  it  in  the  act  of  vision  (ibid.  456  ft.).     Thus  the  sun,  as  the 
source  of  light,  actually  is  also  the  source  both  of  colour  and  of  colour- vision. 
The  well-known  Neoplatonist  formula  that  vovs  and  rA  vorjrd  taken  together 
as  inseparable  proceed  immediately  from  the  supreme  reality  "  the  One  "  is 
a  perfectly  correct  transcript  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Republic  into  the  termin- 
ology of  technical  metaphysics. 

*  Rep.  vii. 


THE  REPUBLIC  287 

character ;  they  appeared  rather  to  be  a  vast  plurality  of  which 
all  the  members  stand  on  the  same  footing.  Hence  it  is  intelligible 
that  the  view  should  have  been  taken  that  the  "  good  "  of  the  Re~ 
public  represents  a  Platonic  development  going  far  beyond  anything 
we  can  attribute  to  Socrates  himself.  I  think,  however,  that  we 
must  be  careful  not  to  exaggerate  on  this  point.  There  can,  at 
least,  be  no  doubt  that  the  "  form  of  good  "  is  identical  with  the 
supreme  Beauty,  the  vision  of  which  is  represented  in  the  Symposium 
as  the  goal  of  the  pilgrimage  of  the  philosophic  lover.  Hence, 
though  it  is  true  that  the  name  "  form  of  good  "  occurs  nowhere 
but  in  the  central  section  of  the  Republic,  it  would  not  be  true  to 
say  that  the  object  named  does  not  appear  in  the  Symposium  with 
much  the  same  character.  Again,  though  the  Phaedo  does  not 
name  the  "  form  of  good,"  the  phrase  ctfios  rayaOov  is  verbally  no 
more  than  a  periphrase  for  TO  ayaOov  ("  the  good"),  just  as  similar 
periphrases  occur  constantly  with  the  words  <£vVi9,  Suva/us,  in  Plato.1 
And  it  is  in  the  Phaedo  itself  that  we  are  told  of  Socrates1  conviction 
that  the  ayaQov  KCU  Se'ov  (the  "  good  and  the  ought  ")  is  the  principle 
which  "  holds  everything  together,"  and  thus  the  cause  of  all  order 
in  the  universe.2  The  statements  of  the  Republic  merely  make  the 
implications  of  this  passage  of  the  Phaedo  a  little  more  explicit. 
If  the  good  is  the  universal  cause,  it  obviously  must  have  just  the 
character  the  Republic  ascribes  to  it.  Hence  Professor  Burnet 
seems  to  be  right  in  holding  that  what  is  said  of  the  "  form  of 
good  "  is  strictly  within  the  limits  of  Socratism,  and  that  this 
explains  the  point  of  contact  between  Socrates  and  an  Eleatic 
like  Euclides  of  Megara.3  That  Socrates  finds  himself  unable  to 
speak  of  this  form  of  good  except  negatively,  and  that  he  can  only 
characterize  it  positively  by  an  imperfect  analogy,  is  inevitable  from 
the  nature  of  the  case.  The  same  thing  may  be  seen  in  any  philo- 
sophy which  does  not  simply  deny  or  ignore  the  "  Absolute  "  or 
supreme  source  of  all  reality.  Because  this  source  is  ex  hypothesi 
a  source  of  all  reality,  you  are  bound  to  insist  that  it  transcends, 
and  is  thus  "  wholly  other  "  than,  every  particular  real  thing  ; 
every  predicate  you  affirm  of  it  belongs  properly  to  some  of  its 
effects  in  contradistinction  from  others  and  can  therefore  only  be 
asserted  of  the  supreme  source  "  analogically "  and  with  the 
warning  that  the  analogy  is  imperfect  and  would  mislead  if  pressed 
unduly.  At  the  same  time,  because  it  is  the  source  of  all  reality, 
every  predicate  which  expresses  a  "  positive  perfection  "  must,  in 
its  degree,  characterize  the  source  of  all  "  perfections  "  and  must 
be  ascribed  to  it  "  analogically."  All  we  gain  by  knowledge  of  the 
"  detail "  of  the  universe  must  add  to  and  enrich  our  conception 

1  To  take  the  first  examples  which  come  to  hand  :  Phaedo,  gSa  2,  a/rJas  AXXo 

s  =  another  cause  ;  Phaedrus,  246^  6,  ^  irrepov  5iW/us  =  "  a  wing  "  ;  Timaeus, 

8,  rty  rov  tru^iaros  0i5a(v=sthe  body. 

8  The  physicists  are  accused  (Phaed.  ggc  5)  of  falsely  thinking  that  rb  &ya,0bv 
Koi  Se'ov  auvSei  /cal  otWx«  ouScV.     As  one  might  say,  "  they  forget  that  obliga- 
tion is  the  ligature  "  which  connects  all  things. 

*  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I.,  168-170. 


288          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

of  the  source  of  reality,  and  yet  we  can  never  "  comprehend  "  or 
completely  "  rationalize  "  that  source.  It  remains,  when  all  is 
said,  an  unexhausted  and  surprising  "  mystery."  Hence  the 
necessity  Christian  theology  has  always  felt  itself  under  of  incor- 
porating the  profound  agnosticism  of  the  "negative  way/'  or 
"  way  of  remotion,"  in  itself  and  the  grotesque  aberrations  into 
which  it  has  always  fallen  in  the  hands  of  second-rate  theologians 
who  have  attempted  to  know  God  as  one  may  know  the  "  general 
conic."  Hence  also  the  tension  between  the  affirmative  and  the 
negative  moments  in  a  metaphysic  like  that  of  Mr.  Bradley.  Hence 
equally  the  inevitable  failure  of  "  positive  science  "  to  complete 
its  task  of  explaining  everything.  To  explain  everything  would 
mean  to  get  completely  rid  of  all  elements  of  "  bare  fact/'  to  deduce 
the  whole  detail  of  existence  from  a  body  of  "  laws/'  perhaps  from 
a  single  "  law,"  in  themselves  (or  itself)  "  evident  to  the  intellect," 
as  Descartes  tried  to  deduce  physics  from  geometry,  because 
geometry  appeared  to  him  to  involve  no  postulates  which  are  not 
immediately  "  evident  "  as  true.  In  fact,  we  only  "  rationalize  " 
nature,  in  the  sense  of  eliminating  "  bare  fact  "  for  which  no  ex- 
planation is  forthcoming,  at  one  point  by  reintroducing  it  somewhere 
else,  as  M.  Meyerson  has  insisted  in  his  series  of  illuminating  works 
on  the  philosophy  of  the  sciences.  And  it  is  just  because  science 
is  under  this  restriction  that  its  interest  is  perennial ;  if  we  could 
ever  expect  to  "  complete  "  it,  we  should  have  to  anticipate  a 
time  when  it  would  no  longer  interest  us.  Science  is  eternally 
progressive  just  because  it  is  always  tentative.1 

The  language  used  in  the  Republic  of  the  "  Form  of  Good,"  as 
the  last  paragraph  has  suggested,  at  once  raises  the  question  whether 
or  not  this  form  can  be  identified  with  God,  of  whom  language  of 
the  same  kind  is  used  by  Christian  theologians  and  philosophers. 
We  cannot  answer  this  important  question  correctly  except  by 
making  a  distinctio  sometimes  forgotten.  If  the  question  means 
"  is  the  Form  of  Good  another  name  for  the  God  recognized  in  the 
Platonic  philosophy  ?  "  the  answer  must  be  definitely  No,  for  the 
reason  given  by  Burnet,  that  the  good  is  a  form,  whereas  God  is 
not  a  form  but  a  "  soul,"  the  supremely  good  soul.  When  we 
come  to  deal  with  the  Laws,  we  shall  see  the  importance  for  Plato's 
own  thought  of  this  distinction.  It  is  just  because  his  God  is  not 
a  form  that  God  can  play  the  part  the  Platonic  philosophy  assigns 
to  Him.  But  if  we  mean  "  is  the  Good  spoken  of  in  the  Republic 
identical  with  what  Christian  divines  and  philosophers  have  meant 

1  The  last  word  on  the  question  whether  the  philosophy  of  the  Republic 
and  the  dialogues  generally  is  "  rationalism  "  or  not  is  briefly  this.  If  we 
could  fully  comprehend  "  the  good  "  we  should  see  directly  that  it  is  through 
and  through  intelligible,  and  the  only  object  which  is  wholly  and  perfectly 
intelligible ;  as  we  never  can  comprehend  it  completely,  there  is,  in  fact, 
always  something  mysterious,  not  yet  understood,  about  it.  It  is  free  from 
all  self-contradiction,  but  it  always  contains  "  surprises  "  for  us.  We  can 
"  see  into  it  "  to  some  extent,  and  it  is  the  philosopher's  duty  to  see  further 
and  further  into  it ;  but  you  will  never  "  see  through  it." 


THE  REPUBLIC  289 

by  God  ?  "  the  answer  must  be  modified.  In  one  most  important 
respect  it  is.  The  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  "  Form  of 
Good  "  is  that  it  is  the  transcendent  source  of  all  the  reality  and 
intelligibility  of  everything  other  than  itself.  Thus  it  is  exactly 
what  is  meant  in  Christian  philosophy  by  the  ens  realissimum,  and 
is  rightly  regarded  as  distinct  from  and  transcendent  of  the  whole 
system  of  its  effects  or  manifestations.  And,  as  in  the  ens 
realissimum  of  Christian  philosophers,  so  in  the  "  Form  of  Good  " 
the  distinction,  valid  everywhere  else,  between  essentia  and  esse, 
So-Sein  and  Sein,  falls  away.  In  other  language,  it  transcends 
the  distinction,  too  often  treated  as  absolute,  between  value  and 
existence.  It  is  the  supreme  value  and  the  source  of  all  other 
value,  and  at  the  same  time  it  is,  though  "  beyond  being,"  the 
source  of  all  existence.  This  explains  why,  when  a  man  at  last 
comes  in  sight  of  it  at  the  culmination  of  his  studies  in  "  dialectic," 
it  is  supposed  to  be  grasped  by  direct  vision,  and  for  that  reason  is 
strictly  "  ineffable."  Neither  Plato  nor  anyone  else  could  tell 
another  man  what  the  good  is,  because  it  can  only  be  apprehended 
by  the  most  incommunicable  and  intimate  personal  insight.  Thus, 
as  it  seems  to  me,  metaphysically  the  Form  of  Good  is  what  Christian 
philosophy  has  meant  by  God,  and  nothing  else.  From  the  Christian 
standpoint,  the  one  comment  which  would  suggest  itself  is  that 
since,  on  Socrates1  own  showing,  the  distinction  between  essence 
and  existence  falls  away  in  the  good,  it  should  not  properly  be 
called  one  of  the  forms  at  all,  and  hence  Socrates  and  Plato  are  not 
fully  alive  to  the  significance  of  their  own  thought  when  they  speak 
of  a  "  God  "  who  is  a  \l/vxy  and  thus  on  a  lower  level  of  "  reality  " 
than  the  good.  Their  form  of  theism  is  only  necessitated  because, 
in  fact  though  not  in  words,  they  are  still  haunted  by  a  feeling 
that  the  good  is,  after  all,  a  "  value  "  or  an  essentia,  and  needs 
some  intermediate  link  to  connect  it  up  with  the  hierarchy  of 
"  realities  "  or  "  existents."  On  this  point  the  last  word  of  Greek 
constructive  thought  was  said  not  by  Plato  but  by  Plotinus  and 
Proclus.  (Of  course,  also,  we  must  remember  that  a  specifically 
Christian  philosophy  is  determined  in  its  attitude  towards  the 
theistic  problem  by  the  fact  that  Christianity  is  an  historical  re- 
ligion. It  starts  with  the  fact  of  the  "  Word  made  flesh/1  itself  a 
coalescence  of  existence  and  value,  and  to  preserve  its  Christian 
character,  it  is  bound  to  be  true  to  that  starting-point  in  its  whole 
metaphysical  construction.) 

(6)  THE  CRITICISM  OF  THE  SCIENCES. — In  studying  the  criticism 
Socrates  passes  upon  the  sciences  and  his  theory  about  their  limi- 
tations, we  must  not  be  misled  by  t'he  fact  that  he  deals  throughout 
only  with  the  various  branches  of  mathematics  as  recognized  in 
the  fifth  century.  This  was  inevitable  because  he  had  before  him 
no  other  examples  of  systematic  and  organized  knowledge.  In 
principle  what  he  has  to  say  is  readily  applicable  to  the  whole 
great  body  of  more  "  concrete  "  sciences  which  has  grown  up  since 
his  own  day.  If  we  speak  of  his  comments  as  a  criticism  on  the 


290          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

mathematical  method,  we  must  understand  the  phrase  "mathematical 
method  "  in  the  same  wide  sense  in  which  it  is  to  be  understood 
in  reading  Descartes,  as  meaning  simply  the  method  which  aims 
at  knowing  exactly  what  its  initial  assumptions  mean,  and  at 
deducing  their  implications  exactly  and  in  the  right  order.  This 
is  the  method  of  all  genuine  science  whatsoever ;  there  is  nothing 
in  it,  as  Descartes  rightly  insisted,  which  involves  any  restriction 
to  the  special  subject-matter,  "  number  aitd  quantity  "  (and,  in 
fact,  pure  mathematics  themselves  have  long  ago  outgrown  the 
restriction).  The  point  of  the  criticisms  is  that  the  p.aOr)p.ara 
themselves  do  not  and  cannot  succeed  in  being  absolutely  true  to 
the  ideal  of  method  they  set  before  themselves.  This  is  why  we 
find  that  if  we  are  to  pursue  the  path  of  science  to  the  end,  we  are 
driven  to  recognize  the  reality  of  "  dialectic  "  as  the  crowning 
science  of  all  sciences,  and  to  demand  that  the  existing  fj.aOrjp.ara 
shall  themselves  be  reconstituted  on  a  more  certain  basis  by  the 
light  of  the  dialectician's  results.  The  recognition  of  this  necessity 
may  well  belong  to  the  actual  Socrates,  since  the  most  sensational 
thing  in  the  whole  history  of  fifth-century  science  had  been  the 
demonstration  by  the  dialectician  Zeno  that  the  postulates  of 
mathematics,  as  hitherto  prosecuted  by  the  Pythagoreans,  contra- 
dict one  another.1  To  save  mathematical  science  in  the  face  of 
Zeno's  arguments  it  became  necessary  in  the  fourth  century  to 
reconstruct  the  whole  system,  and  the  reconstruction  is  preserved 
for  us  in  the  Elements  of  Euclid.  The  men  by  whom  the  actual  re- 
construction was  done,  Eudoxus,  Theaetetus,  and  their  companions, 
so  far  as  they  are  known  to  us,  were  all  associates  of  Plato  himself 
in  the  Academy,  and  it  is  quite  certain  that  this  revision  of  the 
accepted  first  principles  of  mathematics  was  one  of  the  chief 
problems  to  which  the  school  devoted  itself.  In  the  Republic, 
which  is  concerned  with  the  fifth  century,  we  naturally  hear  nothing 
about  the  way  in  which  the  difficulty  was  subsequently  met,  but 
we  are  allowed  to  hear  of  the  imminent  need  that  the  work  should 
be  done. 

The  main  thought  is  quite  simple.  In  all  the  sciences  the  objects 
we  are  really  studying  are  objects  which  we  have  to  think  but 
cannot  see  or  perceive  by  any  of  our  senses.  Yet  the  sciences 
throughout  direct  attention  to  these  objects,  which  are,  in  fact, 
forms,  by  appealing  in  the  first  instance  to  sense.  The  geometer 
draws  a  figure  which  he  calls  a  "  square  "  and  a  line  which  he  calls 

v 

1  To  take  one  of  the  simplest  examples  :  you  cannot  advance  a  step  in 
elementary  geometry  without  recognizing  that  any  terminated  straight  line 
can  be  bisected,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  Pythagorean  geometers 
made  the  assumption.  But  it  is  also  one  of  their  assumptions  that  points  are 
"  units  having  position."  If  this  is  so,  since  a  "  unit  "  cannot  be  split,  when  I 
"  bisect  AB  at  C  "  ;  C  cannot  be  a  "  point  of  AB,"  and,  in  fact,  cannot  be  a 
"  point  "  at  all.  Thus  one  at  least  of  the  assumptions,  "  a  straight  line  can 
be  bisected  at  "  a  point,"  "  a  point  is  a  unit  having  position,"  must  be  false. 
But  the  Pythagorean  geometer  cannot  see  his  way  to  do  without  either.  A1J 
Zeno's  "  antinomies  "  are  of  this  type. 


THE  REPUBLIC  291 

its  "  diagonal."  But  when  he  demonstrates  a  proposition  about 
the  square  and  its  diagonal,  the  objects  of  which  he  is  speaking 
are  not  this  visible  figure  and  this  visible  line  but  the  square  and  the 
diagonal,  and  these,  of  course,  we  do  not  see  except  "with  the 
mind's  eye  "  (vi.  510^-0).  (It  would  not  even  be  true  to  say,  like 
Berkeley,  that  what  he  is  talking  about  is  this  visible  figure  and 
an  indefinite  plurality  of  others  which  are  "  like  "  it,  for  the  simple 
reason  that  we  can  construct  no  visible  figure  at  all  which  exactly 
answers  to  his  definition  of  a  "square.")  Further,  all  through 
his  reasoning  the  geometer  or  arithmetician  depends  on  certain 
"  postulates  "  (vwofoWs)  of  which  he  "  gives  no  account  " 
(Ao'yoq),  such  as  the  "  postulate  "  that  every  number  is  either  odd 
or  even,  or  that  there  are  just  three  kinds  of  angle.  It  is  meant 
that  these  postulates  are  neither  immediately  self-evident,  nor  is 
any  proof  given  of  them.  They  are  "  synthetic  "  in  Kant's  sense 
of  the  word,  and  they  are  assumed  without  proof  (vi.  $ioc-d). 
Thus  there  are  two  initial  restrictions  on  the  thinking  of  the  mathe- 
maticians, as  represented  by  the  existing  state  of  their  science. 
They  depend  upon  sensible  things  like  diagrams  as  sources  of 
suggestion,  though  not  as  the  objects  of  their  demonstrations. 
What  cannot  be  "  illustrated  "  or  "  represented  "  to  the  eye  falls 
outside  the  scope  of  their  science.  And  they  make  no  attempt  to 
reach  real  self-evidence  in  their  initial  postulates.  They  show 
that  their  theorems  follow  by  logical  necessity  from  a  group  of 
unproved  premisses,  but  they  do  not  undertake  to  show  that  there 
is  any  necessity  to  admit  these  premisses  themselves.  Thus  the 
whole  body  of  conclusions  is  left,  so  to  say,  hanging  in  the  air. 
The  geometer's  "  results  "  in  the  end  rest  on  a  tacit  agreement 
(6/AoAoyta)  between  himself  and  his  pupil  or  reader  that  the  question 
whether  his  assumptions  are  justifiable  shall  not  be  asked.  In 
strictness  we  cannot  call  the  results  "  knowledge  "  so  long  as  the 
assumptions  from  which  they  have  been  deduced  are  thus  left 
unexamined  (vii.  533s).1 

This  suggests  to  us  at  once  the  possibility  and  necessity  of  a 
higher  and  more  rigorous  science,  "  dialectic."  Such  a  science 
would  differ  from  the  sciences  in  vogue  in  two  ways  :  (i)  it  would 
treat  the  initial  postulates  of  the  sciences  as  mere  starting-points 
to  be  used  for  the  discovery  of  some  more  ultimate  premisses  which 
are  not  "  postulated,"  but  strictly  self-luminous  and  evident 
a  real  "  principle  of  everything,"  and  when  it  had 


1  We  may  readily  supply  further  examples  in  illustration  of  the  two  points 
on  which  Socrates  dwells.  Thus  the  notion  that  the  visible  diagram  is  either 
the  object  about  which  the  geometer  reasons,  or  at  any  rate,  a  necessary 
source  of  suggestion,  is  dispelled  by  the  elementary  consideration  that  e.g.  a 
work  on  Conies  commonly  begins  with  propositions  about  the  properties  of  the 
"  general  conic."  But  you  cannot  draw  even  a  rough  diagram  of  a  "  general 
conic."  So  the  other  point  is  well  illustrated  by  the  labour  spent  for  cen- 
turies on  trying  to  show  that  what  we  now  know  to  be  the  arbitrary  Euclidean 
postulate  of  parallels  (that  non-intersecting  straight  lines  in  the  same  piano 
are  equidistant)  is  a  necessity  of  thought. 


292          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

discovered  such  a  principle  (or  principles),  it  would  then  deduce 
the  consequences  which  follow ;  (2)  and  in  this  movement  no 
appeal  would  be  made  to  sensible  aids  to  the  imagination,  the  double 
process  of  ascent  to  the  "  starting-point  of  everything  "  and  descent 
again  from  it  would  advance  from  "  forms  by  means  of  forms  to 
forms  and  terminate  upon  them  "  (vi.  5ii6-c).  In  fact,  we  may 
even  say  that  "  dialectic  "  would  "  destroy  "  (dvatpetv)  the  postu- 
lates of  the  existing  sciences  (ras  viroOta-us  avaipovo-a,  vii.  533c), 
that  is,  it  would  deprive  them  of  the  character  of  ultimate  postu- 
lates by  showing  that — so  far  as  they  are  not  actually  false,  as 
they  may  turn  out  to  be — they  are  consequences  of  still  more 
ultimate  truths. 

In  this  account  of  the  aims  of  dialectic  we  recognize  at  once  the 
method  described  in  the  Phaedo  as  that  of  tricei/us  cv  Xdyot?  on 
which  Socrates  had  fallen  back  after  his  disillusionment  about 
Anaxagoras.  Only  here  the  special  emphasis  is  thrown  on  just 
that  side  of  the  dialectic  method  which  the  immediate  purposes  of 
the  Phaedo  permitted  us  to  dismiss  in  a  single  sentence.  We  are 
contemplating  the  procedure  there  said  to  be  necessary  if  anyone 
disputes  an  initial  "  postulate."  In  that  case,  the  Phaedo  told  us, 
our  "  postulate  "  will  require  to  be  itself  deduced  as  a  consequence 
from  one  more  ultimate,  and  the  process  will  have  to  be  repeated 
until  we  come  to  a  postulate  which  all  parties  are  content  to  accept. 
In  the  last  resort  this  would,  of  course,  involve  deduction  from  some 
principle  which  can  be  seen  to  possess  unquestionable  internal 
necessity.  Thus,  so  far,  the  Republic  agrees  exactly  with  the 
Phaedo  about  the  task  of  "  dialectic,"  except  that  it  lays  special 
stress  on  just  that  part  of  it  which  had  not  to  be  taken  into  account 
in  the  Phaedo  because  the  company  there  were  all  willing  to  admit 
the  doctrine  of  forms  as  a  "  postulate  "  without  demanding  any 
justification  of  it.  It  is  clear  from  the  Republic  that  if  a  disputant 
should  refuse  to  make  this  admission,  the  theory  of  forms  itself 
would  require  to  be  examined  in  the  same  way  in  which  the  postu- 
lates of  the  mathematician  von  Fach  are  to  be  investigated.  In 
the  one  passage  of  the  dialogues  where  any  such  examination  is 
made,  it  is  not  put  into  the  mouth  of  Socrates  but  into  that  of  the 
Pythagorean  Timaeus  (Tim.  516  7  ff.). 

Though  Socrates  naturally  confines  himself  to  criticisms  of  the 
sciences  which  had  attained  some  degree  of  organization  in  his 
own  day,  it  is  obvious  that  they  would  apply  with  equal  force  to 
any  others.  Physics,  chemistry,  biology,  economics  are  all  full  of 
undefined  "  primitive  notions  "  and  undemonstrated  assumptions, 
and  it  is  part  of  the  work  of  the  students  of  these  sciences  themselves 
to  make  a  steady  effort  to  ascertain  just  what  their  untested  pre- 
suppositions are,  and  to  consider  how  far  they  are  really  required, 
and  how  far  they  form  a  consistent  system.  The  progress  made 
by  pure  mathematics  in  the  last  half -century  has  largely  consisted 
in  a  more  accurate  and  complete  statement  of  the  "  primitive 
notions  "  and  **  indemonstrable  postulates  "  of  the  science  and  the 


THE  REPUBLIC  298 

elimination  of  numerous  conscious  or  tacit  "  postulates  "  as  actually 
false.  Thus,  for  example,  the  process  by  which  the  Infinitesimal 
Calculus  has  been  purged  of  bad  logic  and  false  assumptions,  or 
the  development  of  "  non-Euclidean  geometry,'1  is  an  excellent 
illustration  of  the  self-criticism  and  self-correction  of  thought  which 
Socrates  and  Plato  call  "  dialectic. "  Socrates1  complaint  (vii. 
5330)  about  the  mathematician  who  gives  the  name  of  science  to  a 
procedure  in  which  the  starting-point  is  something  one  does  not 
know,  and  the  conclusion  and  the  intermediate  steps  "combina- 
tions of  things  one  does  not  know,"  would  be  a  perfectly  correct 
description  of  the  contents  of  any  average  text-book  of  the  Calculus 
in  vogue  seventy  years  ago.  And  it  is  manifest  that  the  same  sort 
of  scrutiny  is  required  by  such  notions  as  "  force/1  "  accelera- 
tion/' "atomicity,"  "evolution,"  "price."  They  are  all  inevit- 
ably in  practical  use  long  before  the  sciences  which  employ  them 
have  formulated  any  very  precise  account  of  their  meaning,  ^nd 
the  progress  of  science  as  science  (as  distinct  from  its  application 
to  "  commerce  ")  consists  very  largely  in  the  steady  correction  of 
our  first  crude  attempts  to  explain  what  we  mean  by  them.  The 
physicist  of  to-day  may,  like  Democritus,  make  the  "  atomic 
structure  of  matter  "  a  foundation-stone  of  his  science,  but  he 
means  by  his  "  atom  "  something  Democritus  would  not  have 
recogriized  as  "  atomic  "  at  all.  Similarly  we  all  talk  of  the  "  evolu- 
tion "  of  species,  but  the  view  that  new  species  originate  by  sudden 
and  considerable  "  mutations,"  if  established,  would  change  the 
whole  character  of  the  special  "  Darwinian  "  postulate  about  the 
character  of  the  process ;  it  would  involve  exactly  what  Socrates 
means  by  a  "  destruction  "  of  the  postulate.  Thus,  so  far,  we  may 
say  that  what  the  Republic  calls  "  dialectic  "  is,  in  principle,  simply 
the  rigorous  and  unremitting  task  of  steady  scrutiny  of  the  in- 
definables  and  indemonstrables  of  the  sciences,  and  that,  in  par- 
ticular, his  ideal,  so  far  as  the  sciences  with  which  he  is  directly 
concerned  goes,  is  just  that  reduction  of  mathematics  to  rigorous 
deduction  from  expressly  formulated  logical  premisses  by  exactly 
specified  logical  methods  of  which  the  work  of  Peano,  Frege,  White- 
head,  and  Russell  has  given  us  a  magnificent  example. 

But  the  "  reduction  of  all  pure  mathematics  to  logic  "  is  only 
a  part,  and  not  the  most  important  part,  of  what  the  Republic 
understands  by  "  dialectic."  Such  a  unification  of  the  sciences 
as  the  Republic  contemplates  would  require  a  combination  of  the 
reduction  of  mathematics  to  logic  with  the  Cartesian  reduction  of 
the  natural  sciences  to  geometry.  When  the  task  was  finished,  no 
proposition  asserting  "matter  of  fact,"  devoid  of  internal  necessity, 
should  appear  anywhere  among  the  premisses  from  which  our  con- 
clusions are  ultimately  drawn.  The  first  principles  to  which  the 
dialectician  traces  back  all  our  knowledge  ought  to  exhibit  a  self- 
evident  necessity,  so  that  science  would  end  by  transforming  all 
"  truths  of  fact  "  into  what  Leibniz  called  "  truths  of  reason." 
This  involves  a  still  more  significant  extension  of  the  range  of 


294          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

"science."  It  implies  that  in  a  completed  philosophy  the  dis- 
tinctions between  value  and  fact,  essentia  and  esse,  So-sein  and  Sein 
are  transcended.  The  man  who  has  attained  "  wisdom  "  would  see 
that  the  reason  why  anything  is,  and  the  reason  why  it  is  what  it  is, 
are  both  to  be  found  in  the  character  of  an  ens  realissimum  of  which 
it  is  self-evident  that  it  is  and  that  it  is  what  it  is,  a  self-explanatory 
"  supreme  being/1  This  is  why  dialectic  is  said  to  culminate  in 
direct  apprehension  of  "  the  good  "  as  the  source  of  both  existence 
and  character.  The  thought  is  that  all  science  in  the  end  can  be 
transformed  into  a  sort  of  "  algebra,"  but  an  algebra  which  is, 
as  Burnet  says,  teleological.  The  demand  for  such  a  science  is,  in 
fact,  already  contained  by  implication  in  the  remark  of  Socrates  in 
the  Phaedo  that  he  hoped  to  find  in  Anaxagoras  a  solution  of  the 
problem  of  the  shape  and  position  of  the  earth  based  on  proof  that 
"  it  is  best  "  that  it  should  have  just  that  shape  and  position  and 
no^  other  (Phaedo  qjd-e).  When  a  modern  biologist  explains  the 
structure  of  an  organism  by  the  notion  of  "  adaptation  "  to  its 
environment  he  is  thus  using  on  a  small  scale  the  principle  which  the 
Republic  would  make  the  supreme  universal  principle  of  all  scientific 
explanation  whatsoever.  Only,  of  course,  the  biological  concep- 
tion of  "  adaptation  "  stops  short  with  a  relative  best ;  the  par- 
ticular environment  of  a  particular  species  is  taken  as  (relatively) 
constant  and  independent ;  the  "  best  "  realized  in  the  develop- 
ment of  the  species  is  adequate  adaptation  to  that  given  environ- 
ment. When  the  principle  is  made  universal,  the  "  best  "  becomes 
an  ethical  and  absolute  best,  since  no  place  is  left  for  an  "  environ- 
ment "  of  everything.  The  "  goodness  of  God,"  or  its  equivalent, 
takes  the  place  of  the  fixed  "  environment  "  as  that  to  which  the 
structure  of  things  is  conceived  as  "  adapted." 

We  need  not  suppose  that  Plato  imagined  this  programme 
for  the  completion  of  science  as  capable  of  actual  execution  by 
human  beings.  We  have  learned  from  the  Symposium  that  "  philo- 
sophy "  itself  is  a  life  of  progress,  it  is  not  those  who  are  already 
in  possession  of  "wisdom,"  but  those  who  are  endeavouring  after 
it,  who  philosophize.  The  Timaeus  reminds  us  with  almost  weari- 
some repetition  that,  in  physical  science  in  particular,  all  our 
results  are  inevitably  provisional,  the  best  we  can  reach  with  our 
present  lights,  and  that  we  must  be  prepared  to  see  them  all  super- 
seded or  modified.  One  of  the  standing  contrasts  between  Plato 
and  his  great  disciple  Aristotle  is  just  that  this  sense  of  the  pro- 
visionality  and  progressiveness  of  science  is  so  prominent  in  the 
one  and  so  absent  from  the  other.  Plato  never  assumes,  as  Aristotle 
was  so  apt  to  assume,  that  he  can  do  the  world's  scientific  thinking 
for  it  once  for  all.  This  apparent  finality,  which  made  Aristotle 
so  attractive  to  the  thinkers  of  the  thirteenth  century,  who  were 
just  recovering  the  thought  of  "  Nature  "  as  a  field  for  study  on  her 
own  account,  makes  the  real  value  of  Aristotle's  science  rather 
difficult  for  us  to  appreciate  to-day.  Plato  was  far  too  true  to  the 
Socratic  conception  of  the  insignificance  of  human  knowledge  by 


THE  REPUBLIC  295 

comparison  with  the  vastness  of  the  scientific  problem  to  fall  into 
the  vein  of  cheap  and  easy  dogmatism.  But  though  the  final 
"  rationalization  "  of  things  may  be  an  unattainable  goal,  there  is 
no  reason  why  we  should  not  try  to  get  as  near  to  the  goal  as  we 
can.  If  we  cannot  expel  the  element  of  "  brute  fact  "  for  which  we 
can  see  no  reason  from  science,  we  may  try,  and  we  ought  to  try, 
to  reduce  it  to  a  minimum.  We  cannot  completely  "  mathematize  " 
human  knowledge,  but  the  more  we  can  mathematize  it,  the  better. 
We  shall  see,  when  we  come  to  speak  of  Plato's  oral  teaching  in  the 
Academy,  how  earnestly  he  set  himself  to  carry  out  the  programme 
by  getting  behind  the  mere  assumption  of  the  forms  as  the  last 
word  in  philosophy,  and  deducing  the  forms  themselves  from  the 
"  good/1 

(c)  It  should  be  unnecessary  to  dwell  on  the  point  that,  with  all 
his  devotion  to  this  demand  for  a  critical  metaphysic  of  the  sciences, 
Plato  is  no  champion  of  a  mere  vita  contemplativa  divorced  from 
practical  social  activity.  One  could  not  even  say  that  he,  like 
Kant,  conceives  of  "  speculative "  and  "  practical "  reason  as 
active  in  two  distinct  spheres  of  which  one  is  subordinated  to  the 
other.  To  his  mind,  the  two  spheres  are  inseparable.  The  uni- 
fication of  science  is  only  possible  to  one  who  is  illuminated  by  the 
vision  of  the  Good  which  is  the  principle  of  the  unification,  and  the 
Good  is  only  seen  by  the  man  who  lives  it.  Hence  the  demand  that 
the  "  philosopher  "  shall  devote  the  best  years  of  his  working  life 
to  the  arduous  practice  of  governing,  in  all  its  details  great  or  small, 
is  only  the  other  side  of  the  conviction  that  without  the  "  heroic  " 
character  no  one  will  ever  rise  to  the  supreme  rank  in  science  itself. 
The  "  philosopher  "  is  necessarily  a  missionary  and  a  sort  of  lesser 
Providence  to  mankind  because,  on  Socratic  principles,  the  "  Good  " 
cannot  be  seen  without  drawing  all  who  see  it  into  its  service.  The 
"  philosophers'  "  social  activity  is  all  the  more  effective  that  it  is 
not  pursued  directly  for  its  own  sake,  in  the  spirit  of  the  well- 
meaning  but  tiresome  persons  of  our  own  day  who  take  up  "  social 
work  "  as  they  might  take  up  typewriting  or  civil  engineering,  but 
issues  naturally  and  inevitably,  as  a  sort  of  "  by-product,'1  from 
their  aspiration  after  something  else,  just  as  the  "  great  inventions  " 
of  modern  times  regularly  issue  from  the  discoveries  of  men  who 
were  not  thinking  at  all  of  the  applications  of  science  to  convenience 
and  commerce,  or  as  art,  literature,  social  life  have  all  owed  an 
incalculable  debt  to  St.  Francis  and  his  "  little  brethren,"  who  never 
gave  a  thought  to  any  of  them. 

(12)  This  desultory  chapter  may  be  brought  to  an  end  by  a  few 
remarks  on  the  impressive  picture  of  Republic  viii.-ix.  about  the 
stages  of  progressive  degeneration  through  which  personal  and 
national  character  pass  as  the  true  ideal  of  life  falls  more  completely 
out  of  view.  It  should  be  obvious  that  the  primary  interest  of  these 
sketches  is  throughout  ethical,  not  political.  The  "  imperfect  " 
constitutions  are  examined  in  order  to  throw  light  on  the  different 
phases  of  personal  human  sinfulness,  not  in  the  interests  of  a  theory 


296          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

of  political  institutions.  We  see  the  sinfulness  of  even  "  honour- 
able "  ambition  or  "  business  principles,"  when  they  are  made  the 
mainspring  of  a  man's  life,  more  clearly  by  considering  the  type 
of  national  character  exhibited  by  a  community  in  which  these 
motives  determine  the  character  of  national  life.  Socrates  is  still 
adhering  to  his  declared  purpose  of  using  the  "  larger  letters  " 
to  decipher  the  smaller.  In  the  sketches  themselves,  Socrates  is 
all  through  "  drawing  with  his  eye  on  the  object."  We  are  told 
in  so  many  words  that  Sparta  has  furnished  the  model  for  the 
picture  of  the  second-best  society,  where  education  is  neglected  and 
the  highest  moral  ideal  is  to  display  the  character  of  a  good  fighting- 
man  and  sportsman,  i.e.  the  society  in  which  "  honourable  ambition/' 
the  pursuit  of  the  cursus  honor  urn,  is  thought  the  supreme  virtue. 
As  mankind  go,  a  community  of  this  kind  is  not  a  bad  one ;  it  is 
morally  in  a  much  healthier  state  than  a  society  where  every  one 
regards  "  getting  rich  "  as  the  great  aim  in  life,  and  the  "  merchant 
prince  "  is  the  national  hero.  Rome,  in  its  better  days,  would  be 
an  example  of  the  kind  of  society  intended,  no  less  than  Sparta. 
The  point  of  Socrates'  criticism  is  that  when  "  ambition  "  becomes 
master  instead  of  servant,  it  is  not  likely  to  remain  "  honourable  " 
ambition,  ambition  to  "  serve."  From  the  first,  the  ambition  of 
the  "  timocratic  "  State  has  not  been  aspiration  to  be  pre-eminent 
in  the  best  things ;  at  their  best,  the  Spartans  made  a  very  poor 
contribution  to  the  positive  pursuit  of  the  highest  life.  When 
they  were  not  at  their  best,  their  "  ambition  "  took  the  form  of 
mere  devotion  to  military  success ;  and  at  their  worst,  ihey  were 
mere  aspirants  to  the  exercise  of  power  and  the  accumulation  of 
the  wealth  to  be  got  by  "  empire,"  as  the  "  timocratic  man,"  in 
his  old  age,  degenerates  into  the  kind  of  character  who  is  greedy 
of  the  power  money  will  give  him.  It  ought  to  have  been  im- 
possible to  find  any  idealization  of  Sparta  in  the  picture.  As  I  have 
written  elsewhere,  it  would  be  truer  to  say  that  in  the  Republic 
we  discern  the  shadows  of  the  third-century  ephors  and  of  Nabis 
behind  the  "  respectable  "  figure  of  Agesilaus. 

It  is  generally  admitted  that  the  picture  of  the  "  democratic  " 
city  where  every  one  does  as  he  pleases,  and  the  most  typical  of 
citizens  is  the  gifted  amateur  who  plays,  as  the  mood  takes  him, 
at  every  kind  of  life  from  that  of  the  voluptuary  to  that  of  the 
ascetic — a  sort  of  Goethe,  in  fact — is  a  humorous  satire  on  Athenian 
life  and  manners.  Of  course  we  should  be  alive  to  the  further  point 
that  the  satire  would  be  wholly  beside  the  mark  if  directed  against 
the  drab  and  decent  bourgeois  Athens  of  Plato's  manhood.  The 
burlesque  is  aimed  directly  against  the  Imperial  democracy  of  the 
spacious  days  of  Pericles  when  Athens  was  a  busy  home  of  world- 
commerce  and  the  "  new  learning."  If  we  read  the  description 
side  by  side  with  the  famous  Funeral  Oration  in  Thucydides,  we 
shall  see  at  once  that  the  very  notes  of  Athenian  life  which  Pericles 
there  selects  as  evidence  of  its  superiority  are  carefully  dwelt  upon 
by  Socrates  for  the  opposite  purpose  of  proving  that,  for  all  its 


THE  REPUBLIC  297 

surface  brilliancy,  such  a  life  is  at  bottom  so  diseased  that  society 
is  on  the  verge  of  complete  collapse.  I,  at  least,  cannot  avoid  the 
conviction  that  Socrates  sees  in  just  what  must  have  been  the  great 
charm  of  Athens  for  men  like  Sophocles,  Protagoras,  Herodotus — its 
apparently  inexhaustible  variety  and  freshness — the  unmistakable 
"  symptoms  of  the  end/1 1  (Perhaps  he  was  not  very  far  wrong. 
What  would  probably  have  been  the  issue  of  the  Penclean  age  if 
Alcibiades,  the  incarnation  of  its  energy  and  versatility,  had  returned 
triumphant  from  the  subjugation  of  Sicily  ?  One  may  "  hazard  a 
wide  solution/') 

We  are  given  no  hint  of  the  source  from  which  the  picture  of 
the  intermediate  society,  where  wealth  is  the  great  title  to  admira- 
tion and  "  merchant  princes "  control  the  national  destiny,  is 
taken.  But  I  do  not  doubt  that  we  can  name  the  State  which 
Plato  has  in  mind.  When  we  remember  that,  as  we  see  from 
allusions  in  the  Laws  and  in  Aristotle's  Politics,2  there  were  just 
three  cities  whose  constitutions  impressed  Greek  thinkers  by  their 
appearance  of  being  framed  on  definite  principles — Sparta,  Crete, 
and  Carthage.  I  think  it  may  safely  be  assumed  that  Carthage 
has  supplied  the  hints  for  the  Venice  or  Amsterdam  of  the  Re- 
public, just  as  we  may  presume  that  Socrates  has  the  Carthaginians 
more  than  anyone  else  in  fnind  in  the  earlier  passage  where  he 
remarks  on  the  exceptional  aptitude  of  "  Phoenicians  "  for  com- 
merce. The  subsequent  history  of  Carthage  during  the  first  two 
Punic  wars  affords  an  interesting  commentary  on  what  is  said 
about  the  internal  dissensions  which  paralyse  the  "  oligarchical 
city/'  On  the  concluding  argument,  by  which  the  life  of  respect 
for  right  is  pronounced  far  superior  in  happiness  to  the  life  of  sating 
one's  cupidities  and  ambitions,3  there  is  no  need  to  say  much.  The 
reasoning  is  that  we  have  already  met  in  the  Gorgias,  and  turns  on 
the  application  of  the  medical  formula  of  "  depletion  and  recovery 
from  depletion  "  to  the  moral  life.  The  "  passions,"  like  the 
physical  appetites  of  hunger  and  thirst,  are  capable  of  no  permanent 
and  progressive  satisfaction.  You  feed  full  to-day,  but  to-morrow 
finds  you  as  hungry  again  as  though  to-day  had  never  been.  What 
you  mistake  for  happiness  has  been  only  the  temporary  arrest  of 
a  "  depletion/'  On  the  other  hand,  what  you  gain  in  knowledge 

1  Cf.  V.  Soloviev's  saying  that  "  visible  and  accelerated  progress  is  a  symp- 
tom of  the  end/' 

aArist.  Politics,  B  n  (12726  24  ff.  ;  note  that  Aristotle  too  comments 
on  the  "plutocracy  "  of  the  Carthaginian  scheme,  and  plutocracy  is  what  is 
meant  by  "  oligarchy  "  in  the  Republic).  For  a  reference  to  Carthage  in  the 
Laws,  see  Laws,  674*1,  written,  no  doubt,  after  Plato's  association  with  affairs 
in  Sicily  had  made  Carthage  very  much  of  an  actuality  to  him.  Commerce 
made  Carthage  an  object  of  interest  to  Athens  in  the  Periclean  age  (Aristoph. 
Knights,  174),  and  it  has  been  plausibly  suggested  that  the  great  plague  of 
the  third  year  of  the  Archidamian  war  was  brought  to  Athens  from  Carthage 
by  infected  merchandise. 

8  Republic,  ix.  5836  ff .     Cf . 

"  '  Mete  unto  wombe  and  worn  be  eek  unto  mete, 
Shall  God  destroyen  bothe/  as  Paulus  seith." 


298          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

and  goodness  is  not  won  to-day  to  be  "  excreted  "  by  the  time  to- 
morrow is  upon  you.  It  is  permanently  acquired.  It  is  not 
with  character  and  intellect  as  it  is  with  bodily  health,  which  is 
a  mere  balance  between  antithetic  processes  of  waste  and  repair  ; 
character  and  intellect  are  KT^ara  cs  aUi.  This  is  the  reason 
for  the  distinction  between  the  "  false  "  pleasures  of  sensuality  and 
ambition  and  the  "true"  pleasures  of  the  philosophic  life. 
The  former  are  "false,"  not  in  the  sense  that  they  are  not 
really  felt,  but  in  the  sense  that  they  are  not  what  they 
promise  to  be.  "  Alle  Lust  will  Ewigkeit,"  but  no  Ewigkeit  is  to  be 
got  out  of  the  jSibs  <£iA.ocra)ju,aTos  or  the  /fc'os  <£iA(m/x.o9,  a  truth 
which  no  special  pleading  for  Hedonism  can  explain  away.  I  wil] 
add  one  final  caution  against  possible  misinterpretation.  Plato 
credits  the  "  three  lives  "  with  distinctive  pleasures,  much  as  Mill 
talks  of  a  distinction  of  "  higher  "  and  "  lower  "  in  pleasure.1 
But  he  gives  a  rational  reason  for  his  preference  of  the  "  philo- 
sopher's "  pleasure  where  Mill  gives  an  absurd  one.  Mill  tries  to 
persuade  his  readers  that  a  jury  of  pleasure-tasters  devoid  of  all 
moral  principle  would  be  unanimous  in  preferring  the  philosopher's 
pleasures,  or,  alternatively,  that  the  dissentients  may  be  disabled 
as  no  genuine  connoisseurs.2  Plato  gives  the  right  reason  for  the 
preference,  that  the  issue  is  one  which  must  be  decided  by  "  in- 
telligence," and  it  is  just  intelligence  which  the  philosopher  has  and 
his  rivals  have  not.  This  is  what  John  Grote  also  meant  when  he 
said  that  Mill's  argument  is  based  on  a  misconception  of  our  reason 
for  attaching  weight  to  the  philosopher's  verdict.  We  go  to  him 
not  as  Mill  assumes,  for  evidence,  but  for  authority? 
See  further : 

NETTLESHIP,    R.    L. — "  Lectures   on   the   Republic   of   Plato " 
(vol.  ii.  of  Philosophical  Remains)  ;    Plato's  Conception  oj 
Goodness  and  the  Good  ;    The  Theory  of  Education  in  Plato's 
Republic  in  Hellenica  *,  61-165. 
NATORP,  P. — Platons  Ideenlehre,  175-215. 
RITTER,  C. — Platon,  ii.  3-39,  554-641  al. ;  Platons  Staat,  Darstel- 

lung  des  Inhalts.     (Stuttgart,  1909.) 

RAEDER,  H. — Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung,   181-245. 
BARKER,  E. — Greek  Political  Theory  :  Plato  and  his  Predecessors, 

145-268. 

STEWART,  J.  A. — Myths  of  Plato,  133-172  (Myth  of  Er),  471-474 

(Myth  of  the  Earth-born]  ;    Plato's  Doctrine  of  Ideas,  47-62. 

SHORE Y,  P. — Plato's  Republic.     (London  and  New  York,  Vol.  I. 

1930,  Vol.  II.  I935-) 

DIES,  A. — Introduction  to  the  edition  of  the  dialogue  in  the 
Collection  des  Universite's  de  France.     (Paris,  1932.) 

1  Republic,  5820-0. 

1  Mill's  plea  is  a  perfect  example  of  the  kind  of  argument  the  Greeks  called 
a  Aoyos  dvTiarp€<f>a)v,  i.e.  one  which  makes  for  neither  party,  because  it  can 
be  equally  well  applied  by  the  other.  If  the  sage  disables  the  judgment  of 
the  profligate  on  the  plea  that  he  must  have  lost  the  taste  for  the  "  higher 
pleasures  "  before  he  can  prefer  the  lower,  the  profligate  can  equally  retort  on 
the  sage  with  the  adage  about  sour  grapes.  "  You  have  taken  to  philosophy," 
he  may  say,  "  because  you  are  physically  too  old  to  enjoy  debauchery." 

*  Examination  of  the  Utilitarian  Philosophy,  p.  47. 


CHAPTER    XII 
THE  PHAEDRUS1 

THE  Phaedrus  presents  a  double  difficulty  to  the  student  of 
Plato's  work  as  a  whole.     What  is  its  proper  place  in  the 
series  of  the  dialogues  ?     And  what  is  its  purpose  ?     Is  it, 
as  it  professes  to  be,  a  discussion  of  the  principles  upon  which 
"  rhetoric"  (prose  style)  may  be  made  into  a  "  science,"  or  is  its 
real  subject  Eros  ?     Is  Plato  primarily  concerned  with  the  question 
of  the  use  and  abuse  of  sexual  passion,  or  are  the  speeches  Socrates 
delivers  on  this  topic  merely  examples  of  the  right  and  the  wrong 
use  of  persuasive  eloquence  ? 

The  first  question,  on  examination,  proves  capable  of  being 
narrowed  down  to  one  which  we  may  regard  as  of  minor  importance. 
No  serious  student  of  Platonic  style  now  defends  the  singular  theory 
of  some  critics  in  classical  antiquity  that  the  prominence  of  Eros 
in  the  dialogue  and  the  loaded  rhetoric  of  Socrates'  encomium 
on  him  prove  the  work  to  be  a  youthful  writing,  perhaps  the  earliest 
of  all  the  dialogues.2  It  is  matter  of  common  agreement  that,  on 
stylistic  grounds,  the  dialogue  cannot  be  placed  earlier  than  those 
works  of  Plato's  maturity  as  a  writer  with  which  we  have  been 
dealing  in  the  last  four  chapters ;  it  cannot  be  far  removed  from 
the  great  quadrilateral  in  point  of  date.  But  there  still  remains 
the  question  whether  it  may  be  earlier  than  some  of  these  four,  or 
whether  it  is  later  than  all  of  them.  In  particular,  we  have  to  ask 
whether  the  Phaedrus  is  earlier  or  later  than  the  Republic.  Argu- 
ments from  stylometry  cannot  be  wholly  trusted  in  this  case,  since 
it  is  manifest  that  many  of  the  peculiarities  of  language  are  due  to 
deliberate  imitation.  On  the  whole,  the  stylometrists  appear  to  be 
satisfied  that  the  Phaedrus  is  the  later  of  the  two  works,  and  this 
view  is  plausibly  supported  by  the  contention  urged  by  H.  Raeder, 
that  some  of  the  details  of  the  mythical  part  of  the  dialogue  are 
hardly  intelligible  except  on  the  assumption  that  its  readers  would 
be  familiar  with  Republic  v.  and  the  concluding  myth  of  Republic  x. 
I  do  not  myself  find  the  argument  conclusive.3  On  the  other  hand, 

1  On  the  problems  connected  with  the  dialogue,  see  inter  cetera  Thompson, 
Phaedrus,  Introduction;  C.  Ritter,  Platon,  i.  256;  H.  Raeder,  Platons  philoso- 
phische  Entwickelung,  245  ff. 

1  Diogenes  Laertius  (iii,  25)  mentions  the  theory ;  Olympiodorus  repeats 
the  story  as  a  fact. 

8  Raeder  sees  in  the  mention  of  the  "  journey  of  a  thousand  years  "  on 
which  the  soul  enters  after  each  incarnation  (Phaedrus,  2490)  a  reference  to 
the  fuller  explanation  in  the  Republic  (6i5a).  This  is  inconclusive,  since  the 

299 


800          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

as  we  shall  see  in  the  next  chapter,  there  is  convincing  reason  for 
thinking  that  the  Theaetetus,  which  pretty  certainly  opens  the  group 
of  dialogues  of  Plato's  later  life,  was  not  written  until  about  twenty 
years  after  the  Republic  and  its  immediate  fellows,  and  it  is  perhaps 
hard  to  believe  that  so  great  a  writer  as  Plato  was  absolutely  silent 
through  so  long  a  period.  Hence  I  have  nothing  to  set  against  the 
conclusions  of  recent  eminent  scholars  on  the  point,  and  would 
merely  remark  that  the  priority  of  the  Republic  is  not  absolutely 
demonstrable,  and  also  that,  in  view  of  the  difference  in  spirit 
between  Republic  and  Theaetetus,  we  must  fairly  suppose  the 
Phaedrus,  if  the  composition  falls  in  the  interval  between  those  two 
dialogues,  to  have  been  written  early  rather  than  late  in  the  interval. 

The  other  problem  is  more  difficult,  and  I  would  recommend 
the  reader  to  suspend  his  judgment  on  it  until  he  has  followed  our 
analysis  of  the  dialogue.  My  own  opinion  is  on  the  side  of  those 
who  regard  the  right  use  of  "rhetoric  "  as  the  main  topic,  for  the 
following  simple  reason.  In  Socrates,  with  whom  the  "  tendance 
of  the  soul "  was  the  great  business  of  life,  it  is  quite  intelligible 
that  a  discussion  of  the  use  of  rhetoric  or  anything  else  should  be 
found  to  lead  up  to  the  great  issues  of  conduct.  If  the  real  subject 
of  the  Phaedrus  were  sexual  love,  it  is  hard  to  see  how  its  elaborate 
discussion  of  the  possibility  of  applying  a  scientific  psychology 
of  the  emotions  to  the  creation  of  a  genuine  art  of  persuasion,  or 
its  examination  of  the  defects  of  Lysias  as  a  writer,  can  be  anything 
but  the  purest  irrelevance. 

In  structure  the  dialogue  is  of  the  simplest  type.  Socrates  falls 
in  with  Phaedrus  who  is,  under  medical  advice,  taking  a  consti- 
tutional in  the  country  outside  the  city  walls,  and,  for  the  sake  of 
his  company,  joins  him,  departing  for  once  from  his  preference  for 
the  streets  of  the  town.  He  soon  persuades  Phaedrus  to  sit  down 
by  the  bank  of  the  Ilissus  under  the  shade  of  a  plane  tree ;  the 
conversation  which  ensues  takes  place  here  and  is  strictly  tete-a-tete. 
As  for  the  supposed  date  of  the  conversation,  it  can  be  approximately 
fixed  by  the  opening  sentences.  Lysias,  who  figures  as  a  mere  lad 
in  the  Republic,  is  now  at  the  height  of  his  fame  as  a  writer  of  Aoyot 
(228a),  and  is  living  at  Athens  (2276).  We  may  add  the  further 
detail  that  Polemarchus  is  also  alive  and,  according  to  Socrates, 
"  has  betaken  himself  to  philosophy  "  (2576),  also  that  Isocrates, 
though  still  young,  is  already  rivalling  Lysias  in  his  profession  ; 
Socrates  anticipates  that  he  may  either  throw  Lysias  and  all  former 
professors  of  it  into  the  shade,  or  even  aspire  to  a  still  higher  calling, 

period  seems  in  both  cases  to  be  taken  over  from  current  Orphic  mythology. 
So  the  reference  to  the  "  lots  "  which  play  a  part  in  assigning  a  new  body  to 
the  soul  (Phaedrus ,2 496)  need  not  be  to  Republic  6ijd,  since  the  K\ijpoi  appear  to 
be  Orphic  (Burnet,  Early  Greek  Philosophy3,  190  n.  3).  Still  less  convincing  is 
the  argument  that  the  Phaedrus  tacitly  presupposes  the  doctrine  of  the  "  parts 
of  the  soul "  expounded  in  Republic  iv.,  since  this  is  equally  true  of  the  Goreias, 
as  we  have  seen,  and  the  doctrine  appears  to  be  a  piece  of  fifth-century  Pytnag- 
oreanism.  Raeder's  other  arguments  are  complicated  by  the  assumption 
that  the  dialogue  contains  a  polemic  against  Isocrates.  On  this  vide  infra. 


THE  PHAEDRUS  801 

for  "  there  really  is  philosophy  in  him  "  (2790).  The  conversation 
thus  falls  at  some  date  between  411,  when  Polemarchus  and  Lysias 
returned  to  Athens  from  Thurii,  and  the  year  of  anarchy,  404-3, 
when  Polemarchus  fell  a  victim  to  the  "  Thirty."  The  tradition 
was  that  Isocrates  was  some  seven  years  older  than  Plato,  so  that 
his  birth  would  fall  about  435  B.C.  ;  as  he  survived  the  battle  of 
Chaeronea  (338  B.C.),  he  cannot  well  have  been  born  much  if  any 
earlier;  hence  he  would  be  about  twenty-four  in  411  and  thirty-one 
in  the  "  year  of  anarchy/1  A  date  intermediate  between  411  and 
404  is  thus  required  by  the  supposed  facts.  We  note  then  that 
Phaedrus  must  now  be  between  five  and  twelve  years  older  than 
when  we  met  him  in  the  Symposium  ;  no  lad  (for  he  figured  in  the 
Protagoras),  but  a  man  at  least  approaching  forty1 ;  Socrates  is  a 
•ytpwv,  a  man  of  at  least  sixty^  and  perhaps  more. 

When  Socrates  falls  in  with  Phaedrus,  the  time  of  day  is  already 
close  on  noon  (this  explains  why  the  pair  so  soon  take  rest  under  the 
plane-tree).  Phaedrus  has  spent  the  early  morning  listening  to  a 
brilliant  and  paradoxical  Aoyos — we  should  call  it  an  essay — by 
Lysias  in  defence  of  the  thesis  that  a  lad  should  be  kinder  to  a 
wooer  who  is  not  "  in  love  "  than  to  one  who  is.  He  has  the  written 
text  with  him,  and  Socrates  professes  to  believe  that  he  is  taking 
his  solitary  stroll  for  the  express  purpose  of  getting  it  by  heart. 
The  main  point  of  the  short  and  playful  conversation  between 
Socrates  and  Phaedrus  as  they  make  their  way  to  the  place  they 
have  chosen  for  their  siesta  (227-230)  is  to  pitch  the  ethical  key 
for  what  is  to  follow.  Socrates  is  not  interested  in  the  "  rationaliza- 
tion of  myths/'  like  that  of  Boreas  and  Orithyia,  because  he  is  pre- 
occupied with  a  graver  problem,  that  of  learning  to  "  know  him- 
self "  ;  he  is  indifferent  to  the  charms  of  the  country,  because  the 
trees,  unlike  the  men  he  meets  in  the  streets,  can  "  teach  him 
nothing  "  that  bears  on  this  supreme  topic,  the  moral  being  of  man. 
These  remarks  prepare  us  for  the  moral  earnestness  with  which  the 
merits  of  Lysias's  essay  and  the  possibilities  of  rhetoric  are  to  be 
treated  in  the  body  of  the  dialogue. 

THE  ESSAY  OF  LYSIAS  (2300-2340). — It  has  been  disputed 
whether  the  discourse  Phaedrus  proceeds  to  read  is  an  authentic 
composition  of  Lysias  or  a  brilliant  imitation  of  his  style  by  Plato 
himself.  There  is  no  evidence  either  way,  but  for  my  own  part,  I 
feel  that  we  must  agree  with  those  scholars,  including  Lysias' 
latest  editor,  Hude,  who  regard  the  essay  as  genuine.  No  one 
doubts  Plato's  ability  to  compose  a  Xoyos  for  Lysias  with  perfect 
fidelity  to  the  style  of  the  supposed  author.  But,  since  the  dialogue 
ends  with  severe  and  formal  censure  of  Lysias,  founded  on  a  search- 
ing criticism  of  the  Arfyog,  I  find  it  difficult  to  believe  that  the 
document  is  an  invention.  It  would  be  self-stultifying  to  publish 
a  severe  criticism  of  a  well-known  author  based  on  an  imitation  of 
him  which  the  critic  had  composed  for  his  own  purposes  and  could 

1  The  same  point  is  taken  by  Parmentier,  Bulletin  de  I' association  Guillaunw 
No.  10,  p.  4. 


302          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

not  expect  readers  to  take  as  authentic.  One  might  as  well  suppose 
that  Berkeley  could  have  made  the  point  he  wants  to  make  in 
Alciphron  about  the  false  glitter  and  shallowness  of  Shaftesbury 
by  composing  an  imitation  of  the  Characteristics.  Plato's  purpose, 
like  Berkeley's,  demands  that  the  attack  should  be  made  on  work 
which  is  both  genuine  and  admired  by  the  circles  whose  literary 
and  moral  false  taste  is  to  be  exposed.  Hude  seems  to  me  fully 
justified  in  printing  the  discourse  as  part  of  his  text  of  Lysias. 

The  thesis  of  Lysias,  we  must  remember,  would  be  an  offensive 
paradox  even  to  the  section  of  Athenian  society  which  practised 
"  unnatural  "  aberrations.  The  fashionable  theory  was  that  the 
relations  in  question  are  ennobled  when  they  are  inspired  by  genuine 
"  romantic  "  attachment,  but  not  otherwise,  as  is  taken  for  granted 
by  the  encomiasts  of  them  in  the  Symposium.  To  suffer  the 
advances  of  an  cpacrn??  from  calculations  of  advantage  was  regarded 
as  the  basest  thing  a  Greek  lad  could  do.  For  a  modern  parallel 
to  the  paradox  we  might  imagine  a  clever  essay  written  to  show  that 
Tom  Jones's  conduct  towards  Lady  Bellaston  is  morally  more 
innocent  than  his  affair  with  Molly  Seagrim.  We  must  not  suppose 
that  Lysias  intends  his  argument  to  be  taken  seriously.  He  simply 
means  to  exhibit  his  cleverness  by  showing  how  good  a  case  he  can 
make  out  for  the  worst  conduct,  much  as  a  clever  writer  to-day 
might  amuse  himself  and  his  readers  by  an  essay  on  the  moral 
elevation  of  a  bomb-throwing  "  Communist/'  But  there  are  theses 
which  cannot  be  defended  and  arguments  which  cannot  be  employed, 
even  in  jest,  without  revealing  deep-seated  moral  depravity  or 
insensibility ;  the  kind  of  cleverness  which  sustains  such  theses 
by  the  use  of  such  arguments  is  a  real  moral  danger  to  the  com- 
munity and  requires  to  be  countered,  as  it  is  by  Socrates,  with  better 
morality  and  superior  wit. 

The  discourse  may  be  summarized  very  briefly  ;  it  is  throughout 
an  appeal  to  considerations  of  "  utility  "  in  the  most  sordid  sense 
of  the  word.  One  is  likely  to  make  one's  price  much  more  effectively 
out  of  a  suitor  who  is  a  cold  sensualist.  Romantic  love  has  its 
fits  of  repentance  and  its  lovers'  quarrels  ;  it  changes  its  object, 
and  when  it  does  so,  it  passes  into  hate  and  scorn.  It  imperils 
reputation,  since  the  romantic  suitor  "  blabs  "  of  his  success,  while 
the  business-like  sensualist  knows  how  to  hold  his  tongue.  The 
"  lover  "  is  notoriously  jealous  and  tries  to  monopolize  his  beloved  ; 
the  cool  sensualist  does  not  object  to  going  shares  with  rivals  recom- 
mended by  their  wealth  or  other  qualities.1  The  "  lover "  is 
attracted  by  physical  charm  before  he  has  considered  the  suita- 
bility of  the  connexion  in  other  respects  ;  the  man  who  is  not  "  in 
love  "  chooses  carefully.  The  lover's  judgment  is  blinded  by  his 
passion,  and  this  makes  him  the  worst  of  confidants  and  advisers. 
He  flatters  one's  weaknesses  and  quarrels  with  one's  better  qualities. 
On  all  these  grounds  it  is  absurd  to  expect  solid  and  lasting  advan- 
tage irom  one's  complaisances  towards  him.  (Manifestly  such  a 
1  Like  our  own  Charles  II,  to  take  an  actual  example. 


THE  PHAEDRUS  808 

discourse,  apart  from  the  moral  turpitude  which  pervades  it,  is 
really  a  failure,  considered  merely  as  a  defence  of  its  thesis.  Lysias 
gives  a  number  of  excellent  reasons  for  thinking  that  it  is  bad  to 
"  grant  favours  to  a  lover  "  ;  he  has  given  no  reason  for  thinking 
that  it  may  not  be  as  bad,  or  worse,  to  grant  them  to  a  sensual 
"  man  of  the  world."  The  speech  is  thus,  judged  by  any  reasonable 
standard,  bad  rhetoric,  as  well  as  bad  ethics,  a  point  which  Socrates 
will  not  be  slow  to  make.) 

Socrates  professes  at  first  to  have  paid  no  attention  to  the 
matter  of  the  discourse.  He  was  attending  wholly  to  its  stylistic 
qualities,  and  these  even  Lysias  himself  could  hardly  approve, 
since  it  was  full  of  empty  repetition  and  tautology.  The  mere 
recollection  of  what  poets  like  Sappho  and  Anacreon  have  said  about 
love  would  enable  a  man  to  make  a  much  better  speech  on  the  same 
theme.  Lysias  has  in  fact  shown  no  "  invention  "  in  his  essay  ;  he 
has  merely  dwelt  on  one  obvious  point,  the  "  blindness  "  and 
irrationality  of  the  lover's  passion/'  a  point  no  one  could  miss.  The 
whole  merit  of  his  performance,  if  it  has  any,  must  be  looked 
for  in  the  arrangement  (8ia0e<ris)  of  this  commonplace  material. 
Phaedrus  himself  admits  this  (236^-6),  but  challenges  Socrates,  if 
he  can,  to  treat  the  same  theme  (u7ro'0e<rts),  the  admitted  "  madness  " 
of  the  lover's  passion,  better  than  Lysias  has  done.  Socrates 
accepts  the  challenge,  with  a  prayer  to  the  Muses  to  make  up  for 
his  well-known  ignorance  by  the  aid  of  their  "  inspiration."  With 
this  preface  he  makes  a  rival  speech  on  the  theme,  only  carefully 
introducing  one  slight  but  significant  modification.  The  supposed 
speaker,  in  his  discourse,  is  to  be  not  a  cold-blooded  sensualist 
making  a  disgraceful  "  business  proposition,"  but  a  "  lover  "  astute 
enough  to  cloak  his  passion  under  an  appearance  of  indifference. 
(This  gives  Socrates  a  double  advantage  over  Lysias.  He  safe- 
guards his  own  character  by  abstaining  from  even  a  playful  defence 
of  a  morally  disgraceful  thesis,  and  he  leaves  himself  free,  if  he 
pleases,  to  urge  subsequently  that  the  apparent  reasonability 
of  the  speech  is  only  the  simulated  rationality  of  a  madman,  since 
the  client  into  whose  mouth  it  is  put  is  really  inspired  all  the  time 
by  "  romantic  "  unreason.) 

FIRST  SPEECH  OF  SOCRATES.— Thesis :  It  is  Bad  to  Listen  to 
the  Blandishments  of  a  "Lover"  (2376-241^). — The  first  requisite 
for  all  sound  deliberation  is  to  know  the  real  character  of  the  object 
about  which  we  are  deliberating.  Since  the  question  is  whether 
one  should  yield  to  a  lover,  we  must  start  by  understanding  what 
"  love  "  is,  and  what  it  aims  at,  and  whether  it  is  for  our  good  or 
for  our  harm.  "  Love  "  is,  of  course,  a  desire  or  craving  for  some- 
thing. Now  there  are  two  principal  types  of  desire — the  "  inborn  " 
craving  for  the  pleasant,  and  the  desire  for  the  "  best,"  which  is  not 
inborn,  but  has  to  be  acquired,  and  is  based  on  judgment  (So'£a) — 
and  there  is  often  a  clash  between  the  two.  The  victory  of  judg- 
ment (8o'£a)  in  this  conflict  over  appetitive  craving  is  what  we 
call  sophro$yne ;  the  victory  of  appetite  over  our  judgment  of  good 


804          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 


we  call  "lust11  or  "passion"  (vppis).  "Love"  (ipw,  sexual 
passion)  is  one  special  variety  of  vftpi*  or  "  lust."  It  is  the  prev- 
alence of  violent  desire  for  the  pleasant  uninformed  by  rational 
judgment  of  good,  when  aroused  by  physical  beauty  (2380).  The 
question  before  us,  then,  is  whether  it  is  for  the  benefit  or  for  the 
hurt  of  the  party  who  has  aroused  such  a  passion  to  gratify  it. 
And  here,  Socrates  says,  he  will  give  the  rein  to  an  almost  "  poetical  " 
eloquence  with  which  he  feels  himself  inspired  beyond  his  ordinary, 
perhaps  by  the  surroundings  in  which  he  is  speaking.  (The  arti- 
ficial graces  of  Lysias  are  to  be  met  by  the  "  unstudied  eloquence  " 
of  the  "  heart.1') 

The  "  lover,"  being  a  slave  to  his  pleasures,  will,  of  course, 
desire  his  beloved  to  be  the  pliant  minister  to  them,  and  will  hate 
everything  which  makes  him  less  subservient,  and  gives  him  any 
kind  of  personal  independence.  Now  wisdom,  valour,  even  ready 
wit  and  eloquence  themselves,  tend  to  give  one  an  independent 
personality,  and  for  that  reason  a  "  lover  "  will  object  to  them  in 
the  object  of  his  passion.  His  jealousy  will  prompt  him  to  exclude 
the  beloved  from  all  intercourse  which  would  "  make  a  man  "  of 
him,  and  above  all  from  "  divine  philosophy."  The  last  thing 
he  will  desire  is  that  his  "  minion's  "  charm  for  himself  should  be 
endangered  by  the  acquisition  of  intelligent  and  manly  qualities  of 
soul.  In  the  next  place,  he  will  resent  the  acquisition  of  hardy  and 
manly  physical  qualities  such  as  make  one  of  worth  in  "  war  and 
other  necessities  "  ;  he  will  deliberately,  for  his  own  pleasure,  try 
to  keep  the  cpo^eyos  to  a  soft  and  effeminate  course  of  life.  Finally, 
he  will  be  anxious  to  isolate  his  victim  from  all  the  influences  of 
family  affections  ;  he  will  object  to  his  having  any  financial  in- 
dependence, or  to  his  marrying  and  forming  a  family  of  his  own, 
since  he  resents  whatever  tends  to  emancipate  the  victim  from  the 
position  of  mere  minister  to  his  own  selfish  pleasure.  Thus  the 
"  lover  "  is  an  enemy  to  the  good  alike  of  the  victim's  soul,  of  his 
body,  and  of  his  estate.  (We  see  that  Socrates'  pretence  of  being 
carried  out  of  himself  on  a  flood  of  "  inspired  "  eloquence  must  not 
be  taken  too  seriously.  He  is  deliberately  observing  the  rules  of 
arrangement  which  Lysias  had  neglected.  His  theme  is  nominally 
that  of  Lysias,  the  jealous  and  petulant  selfishness  of  the  "  lover." 
But  he  has  carefully  articulated  his  argument  and  avoided  vain 
repetition  by  grouping  the  effects  of  the  lover's  jealousy  on  his 
victim  under  the  heads  of  mind,  body,  estate.  This  has  given  him 
further  the  opening  for  lifting  the  whole  argument  to  a  worthier 
moral  level  by  insisting  on  the  supreme  importance  of  the  moral 
goods  which  are  jeopardized  by  complaisance.  Considered  simply 
as  an  example  of  effective  pleading,  Socrates'  speech  has  thus 
stylistic  advantages  over  that  of  Lysias  which  far  outweigh  his 
neglect  of  the  verbal  graces  and  prettinesses  of  the  other.) 

The  speech  ends  with  a  further  consideration.  Connexion 
with  an  tycumfc  has  been  shown  to  be  productive  of  evil  to  mind, 
body,  and  fortune.  We  may  add,  as  a  minor  point,  that  besides 


THE  PHAEDRUS  805 

being  "  harmful,"  it  is  also  not  even  pleasant.  Association  with  a 
flatterer  or  a  kept  mistress  is  also  hurtful,  but  the  palliative  can 
be  urged  that,  at  any  rate,  these  are  "pleasant  vices."  But  in 
the  connexion  of  the  ipa<mfc  with  his  victim,  the  victim  does  not 
even  get  the  pleasure  ;  such  as  it  is,  it  is  all  on  the  side  of  the  other 
party ;  the  victim's  position  is  intolerable,  and  he  only  sustains 
it  on  the  strength  of  promises  of  solid  advantages,  which  the  "  lover" 
will  not  implement,  when  once  he  has  had  his  wicked  will  and  sated 
himself.  The  "  love  "  of  the  c/wwmys  is  thus  the  proverbial  love  of 
the  wolf  for  the  lamb. 

Even  Phaedrus  can  see  that  this  discourse,  though  it  gives  good 
reasons  against  bestowing  favours  on  a  "  lover/'  does  nothing  to 
advance  the  plea  of  the  suitor  who  is  not  "  in  love."  Socrates,  who, 
of  course,  did  not  mean  to  act  as  advocate  for  such  a  client,  suggests 
that  it  would  be  enough  to  add  that  such  a  person  is  in  all  respects 
the  very  opposite  of  the  lover  whose  faults  we  have  exposed.  He 
is  about  to  take  his  leave  of  Phaedrus  with  this  remark,  when  "  the 
divine  sign  "  checks  him.  He  professes  to  understand  this  as  a 
warning  that,  since  Eros  is  a  god,  he  has  committed  an  impiety 
by  denouncing  him  and  must  purge  himself  of  his  contempt  by  a 
palinode,  as  Stesichorus  did  when  he  had  blasphemed  Helen.  If 
a  real  gentleman  had  overheard  either  the  speech  of  Lysias  or  that 
which  Socrates  has  just  delivered,  he  would  have  imagined  that  he 
was  listening  to  persons  brought  up  among  "  common  sailors,"  in- 
capable of  understanding  what  a  free  man  means  by  "  love." 
Thus  the  point  of  the  "  palinode  "  is  to  be  that  it  is  a  recanta- 
tion of  the  identification  of  c/>o>s  with  a  brutal  physical  appetite 
(241^-2430)  ,l 

SECOND  SPEECH  OF  SOCRATES  (2440-2560). — The  True  Psychology 
of  Love. — The  ground  on  which  we  have  so  far  maintained  that 
it  is  better  to  associate  with  one  who  is  not  in  love  than  with  a 
"  lover  "  is  that  the  lover  is  "  beside  himself  "  (/xaiWcu),  but  the 
man  who  is  not  in  love  retains  his  sanity,  and  sanity  is  better  than 
"  madness."  This  is  the  proposition  we  are  now  to  recant.  It 
would  be  true  if  there  were  only  one  kind  of  frenzy,  common  mad- 
ness. But  there  is  an  inspired  "  frenzy  "  which  is  productive  of 
good  we  could  not  equally  obtain  in  a  state  of  sanity  and  control 
of  ourselves.  One  of  its  forms  is  prophecy ;  the  priestess  of  Delphi, 
who  predicts  in  a  state  of  "  exaltation,"  is  far  superior  as  a  prophet 
to  diviners  who  predict  the  future  by  calculations  based  on  the 
flight  of  birds  and  similar  omens  ;  a  second  form  is  the  "  exaltation  " 
of  the  authors  of  "  purifications  "  and  "  initiations,"  "  founders  of 

1  The  definition  of  (pus  from  which  the  speech  of  Socrates  started  was 
correct  in  the  sense  that  it  is  a  true  definition  of  what  Lysias  had  called  fy<os 
in  formulating  his  thesis.  Hence  it  was  rightly  adopted  also  by  Socrates  for 
the  immediate  purpose  of  showing  how  the  same  thesis  might  have  been 
treated  with  less  superficiality  and  without  idle  repetition.  But,  as  we  shall 
see,  it  is  not  in  fact  an  adequate  account  of  even  guilty  and  degraded  human 
"  love,"  to  call  it  a  craving  for  a  certain  physical  "  exoneration."  (Even  an 
unholy  love — if  it  is  "  love  "  at  all — is  the  pollution  of  a  high  sacrament.) 


806         PLATO :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

religions  "  as  we  should  say  ;  a  third  is  the  inspiration  of  the  poet. 
No  one  who  attempts  to  compose  poetry  in  a  state  of  "  sanity  " 
by  rules  of  art  ever  achieves  anything  great  (2440-2452).  The 
madness  of  the  lover,  as  we  shall  find,  is  a  fourth  form  of  this  divine 
"  frenzy  "  which  is  so  much  wiser  than  the  wisdom  of  the  world.1 
We  intend  to  show,  that,  if  the  lover  is  mad,  his  madness  is  an 
inspiration  from  heaven  and  may  be  a  great  blessing.  To  prove 
this  we  must  lay  down  the  principles  of  a  sound  psychology  ;  we 
must  see  what  is  the  nature,  and  what  the  actions  and  passions 
of  the  soul. 

In  the  first  place,  the  soul  is  immortal  (2450),  a  statement  which 
means  to  a  Greek  that  it  is  divine.  The  proof  of  this  is  that  what- 
ever is  always  in  motion  is  immortal,  and  the  soul  is  always  in 
motion.  The  minor  premiss  of  this  syllogism  is  again  proved  thus. 
The  soul  is  the  source  and  initiator  of  its  own  motions  ;  its  motions 
are  not  communicated  from  without,  but  spontaneously  originated 
from  within.  Thus  they  were  never  started  by  anything  else,  and, 
as  the  soul  itself  is  the  first  fountain  of  them,  they  can  never  come 
to  an  end.  If  the  soul  could  come  to  an  end,  there  would  be  an 
end  of  nature  and  becoming  universally  (2450) — a  statement  which 
implies  that  souls  are  the  only  things  which  can  move  from  within, 
and  so  the  only  possible  sources  of  movement.  The  soul  may  thus 
be  rigorously  defined  as  "  that  which  moves  itself  "  (2460). 2  But 

1  To  ^appreciate  this  doctrine  aright,  we  must  neither  forget  the  habitual 
"  irony  "  of  Socrates  nor  exaggerate  it.     The  key  to  his  meaning  is  given  by 
his  well-known  theory  about  the  poets.     He  found  the  poets  unable  to  explain 
in  bald  prose  what  they  meant  by  their  finest  passages,  or  how  they  came  by 
them.     Hence  he  classes  them  among  the  persons  who  think  they  have  a 
knowledge  which  they  really  have  not.     They  are  not  alive,  whatever  they 
may  suppose,  to  the  full  significance  of  their  best  work.     He  does  not,  of 
course,  mean  to  suggest  either  that  the  great  things  in  Sophocles  or  Euripides 
are  not  really  great,  or  that  great  poetry  may  be  nonsense.     It  means  more 
than  the  poet  himself  in  his  "  uninspired  "  hours  could  tell  you,  and  this  shows 
that  some  influence  which  the  poet  cannot  wholly  control  has  been  speaking 
through  him.     In  the  same  way,  though  it  is  part  of  his  irony  to  dwell  on  the 
alleged  benefits  conferred  on  men  by  the  trance-utterances  of  the  Pythia  or 
the  "  purifications  "  devised  by  abnormal  and  eccentric  "  religious  geniuses/' 
it  is  quite  consistent  with  his  habitual  attitude  to  "  things  divine  "  that  he 
should  suppose  a  higher  power  to  use  such  vehicles  for  revealing  the  future, 
and  admit  the  real  healing  effects  of  some  "  initiations  "  and  "  purifications  " 
on  the  body  and  mind.     The  great  defect  he  finds  in  poetry  as  in  /iam/oj  is 
just  that  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  are  not  subject  to  the  prophets.     Hence 
you  cannot  depend  on  the  Pythia's  predictions,  and  hence  also  the  great  poet 
is  apt  to  decline  into  bathos  or  nonsense  as  much  as  the  Shadwell  to  deviate 
(occasionally)  into  sense. 

2  This  argument,  in  an  expanded  form,  is  reproduced  in  the  Laws,  as  we 
shall  see,  and  treated  there  as  the  sufficient  proof  both  of  the  existence  of 
God  and  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.     Unlike  the  arguments  of  the  Phaedo 
it  has  no  special  connexion  with  the  theory  of  the  forms.     But  it  would  be 
rash  to  say  that  its  introduction  shows  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  post-Socratic 
development  of  Plato's  own  thought,  since  in  principle  the  argument  is  that  of 
Alcmaeon  of  Crotona  that  the  soul  is  immortal  because  it  "  is  like  immortal 
things,  and  is  like  them  in  the  point  that  it  is  always  in  motion  "  (Aristot. 
de  Anima,  40 $a  30).     Hence  the  argument  must  have  been  well  known  to 


THE  PHAEDRUS  807 

what  is  the  character  of  this  "  self -moving  "  source  of  all  move- 
ment ?  For  our  purposes,  we  may  content  ourselves  with  an 
analogy.  It  is  like  a  charioteer  with  a  pair  of  winged  steeds, 
forming  a  single  living  whole.1  In  the  case  of  the  gods,  driver  and 
horses  are  all  as  good  as  they  can  possibly  be  ;  in  the  human  soul, 
the  driver  has  to  manage  two  horses  of  different  strain,  and  this  is 
what  makes  his  task  so  difficult.  While  the  horses  keep  their  wings, 
they  travel  round  the  circuit  of  heaven  and  the  soul  "  administers  " 
the  Cosmos.  But  they  may  lose  their  wings  and  fall  to  earth  ;  the 
soul  then  acquires  an  earthly  body  which  seems  to  be  able  to  move 
itself  (though  it  is  really  moved  by  the  soul  within  it),  and  it  is  this 
complex  of  body  and  soul  which  we  call  the  mortal  "  animal." 
By  analogy  we  come  commonly  to  think  of  God  (falsely)  as  a  being 
with  a  soul  and  body  which  are  never  separated  by  death  (246^). 

(We  see  at  once  that  we  are  dealing  in  a  parable  with  the  "  three 
parts  "  of  the  soul ;  the  driver  is  judgment,  the  two  horses  are 
"  honour  "  or  "  mettle  "  and  "  appetite."  If  we  press  the  details, 
they  imply  that  all  three  "  parts  "  are  present  not  only  in  the  soul 
which  has  not  yet  put  on  the  garment  of  the  flesh,  but  in  the  gods, 
who  are  never  embodied  at  all.  This  would  be  quite  at  variance 
with  the  hints  of  the  Republic  and  the  express  teaching  of  the 
Timaeus.  But  it  is  not  really  permissible  to  extract  metaphysics 
from  mythical  details  which  are  necessitated  by  simple  regard 
for  the  coherency  of  the  pictorial  representation.) 

The  myth  proceeds  to  describe  the  life  of  all  souls  under  the 
image  of  a  great  festal  procession.  The  souls  progress,  under  the 
leadership  of  the  gods,  round  the  whole  compass  of  the  heavens, 
maintaining  the  universal  order  of  things.  The  goal  of  the  whole 
pilgrimage  is  reached  by  an  ascent  to  a  region  outside  the  whole 
heaven,  "  the  plain  of  reality,"  where  the  procession  pauses  and 
enjoys  a  Sabbath  rest  in  the  contemplation  of  "  bodiless  reality, 
without  figure,  colour,  or  tangible  quality  "  (in  other  words  the 
forms)  ;  this  is  the  true  home  of  souls,  and  the  source  of  their 
spiritual  food.  Thus  the  thought  is  that  it  is  in  the  strength  of  this 
pure  contemplation  that  gods  and  men  alike  execute  the  practical 
task  of  establishing  and  maintaining  natural  and  moral  order  in  the 
realm  of  mutability  and  becoming.  Like  Moses  they  make  every- 
thing after  the  pattern  they  have  seen  "  in  the  mount."  The  gods, 
of  course,  achieve  this  "  steep  ascent  of  heaven  "  with  complete 
success ;  they  actually  conduct  their  living  chariots  out  of  the 
whole  region  of  "  nature  "  to  the  goal  outside  it.  With  men  it  is 
otherwise.  The  best  of  them  only  succeed  for  a  time  in  getting 
their  heads  above  the  visible  region,  and  attaining  a  glimpse  of 

Socrates,  who  alludes  to  the  views  of  Alcmaeon  about  the  brain  as  familiar  to 
himself  in  the  autobiographical  narrative  of  the  Phaedo. 

~  l  Phaedrus  2460,  ^OIK^TW  Si)  ffvpffrrtp  dvvdjuL€i  viroirrtpov  fcuyovs  re  KCLL  ty^xov. 
(rvjjLffxjTy  here  should  mean,  as  the  word  regularly  does  in  Plato,  literally  con- 
cretae,  "  grown  together  into  one."  It  is  inserted  in  order  to  insist  on  the 
unity  of  the  individual  mind.  We  are  to  think  of  the  driver  and  his  horses  as 
a  single  organism. 


808          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

what  lies  wholly  beyond  it,  and  then  redescend.  The  worse  are 
thrown  into  complete  confusion  by  the  restiveness  of  the  horse  of 
inferior  strain  and  the  unskilfulness  of  the  horseman.  Their  horses 
lose  their  wings,  and  horses  and  horseman  sink  to  earth,  not  to 
regain  their  old  place  until  the  wings  of  the  soul  have  grown  afresh. 
The  magnitude  of  the  fall  is  shown  by  the  kind  of  life  which  the 
now  incarnate  soul  leads  in  the  body.  Those  who  have  "  seen 
most  "  become  philosophers,  lovers  of  beauty,  musical  men  or 
lovers ;  then  follow  in  descending  order,  law-abiding  kings  and 
soldiers,  men  of  affairs  and  business,  athletes  and  physicians, 
prophets  and  "  initiators,"  poets  and  artists,  mechanics  and 
farmers,  professional  sophists  and  demagogues,  tyrants.  The  rule 
which  applies  to  all  is  that  after  each  life  a  man  receives  the  rewards 
of  the  deeds  done  in  the  body.  None  may  recover  his  wings  and 
return  to  the  place  from  which  he  fell  until  ten  thousand  years  are 
over,  except  one  who  chooses  to  live  the  life  of  the  "  philosopher  or 
philosophic  lover  "  three  times  in  succession.  For  such  a  man  the 
ten  thousand  years  are  reduced  to  three  thousand.1  For  others 
the  scheme  includes,  like  that  of  the  Republic,  reincarnations  in 
animal  as  well  as  in  human  bodies,  but  no  soul  can  finally  recover 
its  wings  after  such  a  degradation  until  it  has  once  more  been 
reincarnated  in  human  form,  for  the  recovery  of  the  soul's  wings 
is  only  effected  by  recollection  of  the  things  of  which  the  soul 
caught  a  glimpse  when  it  was  following  the  great  procession  of  the 
gods,  and  it  is  only  man  to  whom  the  experiences  of  sense  suggest 
these  recollections.  A  man  in  whom  these  recollections  are  Toeing 
awakened  is  popularly  thought  "  distracted/1  from  his  loss  of 
interest  in  the  things  other  men  take  seriously,  but  he  is  really 
"  inspired  "  (frflovomfwv).2 

Now  our  sensible  experiences  only  suggest  few  and  faint  images 
of  righteousness  and  temperance  and  the  other  forms,  but  beauty 
is  much  more  impressively  adumbrated  in  sense-experience,  and 
the  effect  of  the  experience  in  awakening  "  recollection  "  is  therefore 
exceptionally  startling.  In  the  soul  which  has  all  but  lost  the 
impression  of  heavenly  beauty,  the  effect  of  its  earthly  adumbra- 
tion is  to  provoke  "  brutal "  appetite  (rcTpaTroSos  vo/xov,  2500)  for 
intercourse  with  the  beautiful  body.  But  in  a  soul  fresh  from  deep 
contemplation  of  spiritual  beauty,  the  sight  of  earthly  beauty 

1  Thus  the  scheme  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  myth  of  Er  in  the  Republic. 
The  assumption  is  that  the  normal  extreme  limit  of  human  life  is  a  hundred 
years.  Reincarnations  take  place  once  in  a  thousand  years  in  order  that  the 
rewards  and  punishments  at  the  end  of  each  incarnation  may  be  on  a  tenfold 
scale.  The  privilege  of  escape  from  the  wheel  after  three  incarnations  and 
the  hope  that  in  general  it  will  be  achieved  after  ten,  are  not  mentioned  in  the 
Republic,  but  I  suspect  Orphic  origin  for  part  at  any  rate  of  this.  Empedocles 
fixes  the  soul's  period  of  exile  from  heaven  at  30,000  "seasons  "  (Fr.  115, 
R.P.,  181),  and  we  may  suspect  that  he  is  reckoning  three  &pai  to  the  year, 
lap,  0fyo»,  xetiufr.  On  the  details  of  the  Phaedrus  myth  the  student  should 
consult  the  full  commentary  in  Stewart's  Myths  of  Plato. 

1  Cf.  Browning's  Epistle  of  Karshish  with  its  treatment  of  Lazarus  as  "  the 
madman/'  or  St.  Paul  s  language  about  the  "  foolishness  "  of  the  Cross. 


THE  PHAEDRUS  809 

arouses  religious  awe  and  worship  ;  the  soul's  wings  begin  to  sprout, 
and  this  process,  like  the  getting  of  teeth,  is  a  mingled  one  of  un- 
easiness with  intervals  of  relief,  pain  in  the  absence  of  the  beloved, 
rest  and  pleasure  in  his  company.  Hence  the  lover  gladly  forsakes 
all  other  society,  neglects  his  property,  and  throws  convention  to 
the  wind,  so  long  as  he  can  win  the  society  in  which  he  is  getting  his 
heart's  desire.  Men  call  this  "  being  in  love  "  ;  it  is  really  growing 
one's  spiritual  wings  again  (250^-252^).  What  sort  of  person  will 
provoke  this  passion  is  a  matter  of  the  lover's  peculiar  temperament. 
In  the  best  type  of  man  the  qualities  which  awaken  it  are  "  love  of 
wisdom  "  and  a  "  commanding  personality  "  (2520)  ;  others  are 
attracted  by  different  gifts.  In  every  case  the  "  lover  "  aims  at 
moulding  the  being  he  "  idolizes  "  into  the  more  and  more  perfect 
image  of  the  "  god  "  whom  both  serve,  and  the  affection  between 
them  grows  with  every  fresh  step  of  the  process  (2520-2530). 

But  we  must  remember  what  we  said  about  the  difference  in 
strain  between  the  horses  of  the  human  soul.  The  better  horse  is 
modest  and  chivalrous,  a  "  thorough-bred  "  ;  the  worse  horse  is  a 
"  bolter."  So  when  the  charioteer  is  wrapt  in  the  contemplation 
of  the  beloved,  the  better  horse  modestly  holds  himself  in,  but  the 
worse  "  bolts,"  in  spite  of  rein  and  whip,  from  lust  after  carnal 
delight.  The  worse  horse  may  be  often  "  pulled  to  his  haunches," 
but  he  persists  in  his  struggles,  and  the  time  of  really  fierce  tempta- 
tion comes  when  the  passion  which  began  on  one  side  is  reciprocated 
on  the  other.  If  the  temptation  is  successfully  resisted,  the  pair 
have  won  one  out  of  the  three  "  Olympic  victories  "  necessary  to 
release  them  from  incarnation  in  the  flesh.  Henceforward  they  have 
mastered  the  evil  in  themselves  and  won  their  freedom.  But  if 
their  lives  are  directed  only  to  the  second-best,  "  honour,"  in  the 
place  of  the  first-best,  "  wisdom,"  the  evil  horse  may  get  his  way  in 
an  unguarded  moment,  and  then  there  will  be  other  such  moments 
in  their  lives,  though  not  many,  as  their  conduct  has  not  commended 
itself  to  their  "  whole  souls."  Their  attachment  will  be  real,  but 
not  so  real  as  that  of  the  pair  who  have  won  the  mastery  over  them- 
selves. At  death,  they  are  still  "  wingless  "  though  "  desirous  to 
be  winged,"  and  even  this  is  a  gain.  It  is  at  least  a  beginning  of 
the  journey  heavenwords,  and  the  rest  will  come  (253^-256^) -1 

This,  then,  is  what  association  with  a  true  lover  may  bestow  ; 
intimate  relations  with  the  man  who  is  "  not  in  love  "  lead  to  a 
meanness  of  soul,  falsely  taken  for  a  virtue,  and  a  nine-thousand- 
years'  period  of  "  folly,"  spent  on  and  under  the  earth.  May 
Eros  accept  this  recantation,  grant  Socrates  not  to  lose  his  "  skill 
in  matters  of  love,"  and  punish  Lysias  by  converting  him,  as  his 

1  The  power  and  insight  with  which  this  account  of  the  conflict  between 
the  spirit  and  the  flesh  is  written  should  not  mislead  us  into  supposing  that  it 
must  be  concealed  autobiography.  Comparison  with  what  Alcibiades  says 
in  the  Symposium  about  the  relations  between  himself  as  a  boy  and  Socrates 
suggests  that  the  model  for  Plato's  picture  of  the  lover  who  has  come  through 
the  severest  temptation  unsmirched  is  to  be  found  in  Socrates  and  his  behaviour 
to  ihe  beautiful  and  petulant  boy. 

II 


810          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

brother  Polemarchus  has  already  been  converted,  to  philosophy l 
(256^-2576). 

Phaedrus  is  delighted  with  the  fine  speech  to  which  he  has  just 
listened.  Lysias  himself  could  hardly  match  it.  Perhaps  he  would 
not  try  ;  he  is  a  touchy  man  and  was  recently  gravely  offended  by  a 
politician  who  had  called  him  a  mere  "  writer  of  speeches  "  in  de- 
preciation. But,  says  Socrates,  politicians  who  affect  to  despise 
"  discourse- writing  "  are  only  disguising  envy  under  the  mask  of 
contempt.  They  are  vain  enough  of  the  decrees  they  propose 
and  carry,  and  what  is  a  decree  but  the  record  of  a  "  discourse  " 
to  which  the  author  has  prefixed  the  names  of  its  admirers,  "  the 
council  "  or  "  the  people  "  ?  And  how  much  vainer  a  man  is  when 
his  "  discourses  "  are  preserved  in  perpetuity  as  the  "  laws  "  of 
a  State.  Clearly,  if  there  is  any  discredit  it  is  not  in  composing 
discourses,  but  in  composing  them  ill.  And  this  raises  the  whole 
question,  what  is  good  writing  ?  (258^).  This  is  the  sort  of  problem 
which  it  gives  an  educated  man  real  pleasure  to  discuss.  If  we 
neglect  it  and  prefer  to  sleep  out  the  warm  noon-tide,  the  cicadae 
over  our  heads  may  carry  our  bad  report  to  their  patrons  the 
Muses.2  Accordingly,  we  now  find  ourselves  launched  on  a  serious 
inquiry  into  the  problem  of  style.  What  is  a  good  style  ? 

THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  STYLE  (259^-278^). — (Nominally  the  ques- 
tion under  discussion  is  that  of  the  canons  of  a  sound  rhetoric, 
but  we  shall  see  that  it  rapidly  expands  into  a  consideration  of  the 
character  of  "  style  "  in  literature  in  general.  A  speaker  or  writer 
has  a  case  of  which  he  wishes  to  convince  his  hearer  or  reader. 
The  question  is  what  principles  may  be  laid  down  for  the  presenta- 
tion of  this  case  in  the  way  which  will  be  most  effective.  Thus  the 
considerations  urged  by  Socrates  bear  as  much  on  the  written  ex- 
position of  a  subject  in  an  essay  or  a  treatise  as  upon  the  spoken 
presentation  of  it  to  an  audience.  The  reason  for  approaching  the 
topic  primarily  from  the  side  of  spoken  discourse  is  simply  that, 
in  the  age  of  Socrates,  there  was  no  serious  prose  literature  in 
existence.  The  one  still  extant  prose  work  of  importance  of  an 
earlier  date  than  the  supposed  conversation  between  Socrates  and 
Phaedrus  was  the  book  of  Herodotus.  The  "  pre-Socratic  philo- 
sophers "  had,  indeed,  attempted  to  state  their  views  about  Averts  in 
a  sort  of  prose  ;  the  Periclean  age  saw  the  first  written  manuals 
of  "  rhetoric  "  and  medicine,  and  the  first  written  discussions  of 
ethical  and  political  problems.  But  the  writers  of  rixyai  made 
no  pretensions  to  style,  and  their  compositions  were  not  regarded 
as  "  literature."  Literary  prose,  as  a  vehicle  for  the  artistic 
expression  of  reflection  upon  life,  was  the  creation  of  Isocrates, 

1  The  point  of  the  remark  about  Polemarchus  is  unknown.  Had  he,  as 
would  be  quite  possible,  fallen  in  with  some  belated  survivor  of  the  downfall 
of  the  Pythagoreans  during  his  years  in  Italy  ?  E.g.  with  Philolaus  ? 

1  Note  the  allusion  in  259^  to  the  saying  familiar  from  the  Phaedo  that 
philosophy  is  the  pcytoni  /Aowri/tiJ.  It  is  assumed  that  the  saying  is  ajready 
current ;  hence  we  cannot  be  far  wrong  in  supposing  that  its  origin  was 
Pythagorean 


THE  PHAEDRUS  811 

and  at  the  assumed  date  of  the  conversation,  Isocrates  is  still 
simply  a  composer  of  speeches  to  be  delivered  in  the  law-courts.) 

It  would  seem  obvious  that  the  first  prerequisite  of  a  really 
good  "  discourse  "  is  that  the  deliverer  of  it  should  know  the  truth 
about  his  subject.  Yet  the  accepted  view  is  that  this  is  unnecessary. 
To  compose  a  telling  speech  you  need  not  know  what  are  the  Strata, 
the  "  rights  and  wrongs  of  the  case  "  ;  you  need  only  know  what 
the  audience  who  are  to  decide  the  issue  think  right  and  wrong. 
You  win  your  case  by  appeal  to  the  "  prejudices  of  your  hearers." 
But  this  view  will  not  bear  examination.  It  would  be  a  comic 
situation  if  Phaedrus,  being  under  the  impression  that  the  word 
"  horse  "  means  a  donkey,  should  be  persuaded  by  a  discourse  on 
the  usefulness  of  the  horse  in  war  to  provide  himself  with  a  donkey l 
against  his  next  campaign.  It  would  be  worse  than  comical  if 
a  public  man  with  a  persuasive  tongue  confused  evil  with  good  and 
led  the  community  to  embark  on  a  policy  based  on  the  confusion. 
This  would  not  be  statesmanship,  but  the  reverse  of  it.  Possibly, 
however,  the  professors  of  rhetoric  might  reply  that  they  do  not 
claim  for  their  art  that  it  can  teach  us  the  principles  of  good  and 
evil,  but  simply  that  even  if  you  know  these  principles,  you  will  not 
be  able  to  turn  your  knowledge  to  account  in  practice  unless  you 
also  follow  their  precepts.2  Thus  sound  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil  would  be  an  indispensable  prerequisite  for  statesmanship,  but 
mastery  of  the  technical  rules  of  rhetoric  would  be  necessary  for 
the  statesman  who  needs  to  convince  the  public.  So  far  as  it 
goes  this  is  a  fair  defence  of  rhetoric, — on  one  condition.  •  The 
condition  is  that  the  rules  in  question  form  a  real  TC^VT;  or  "  art/' 
the  application  of  real  scientific  knowledge  to  practice.  But  there 
is  a  view  that  they  are  nothing  of  the  kind ;  "  persuasion  "  is  a 
mere  empirical  "  knack  "  (rpi/Jij)  for  which  no  rules  can  be  laid 
down,  and  there  is  no  "  art  of  speaking  "  distinct  from  the  know- 
ledge of  the  true  facts  about  the  subject-matter  of  the  discourses. 
This  view  demands  consideration  (2590-2610). 

May  we  not  define  rhetoric  as  verbal  "  sorcery  "  (i/^xaywyi'a)  3 
whether  practised  in  the  courts,  in  other  public  gatherings,  or  in 
private  life,  and  whether  the  issues  on  which  it  is  employed  are 
grave  or  trivial  ?  The  writers  on  the  subject,  it  is  true,  generally 
confine  the  sphere  of  the  art  to  public  discourses  before  law-courts 
and  popular  assemblies  ;  but  they  forget  that  such  a  restriction 
would  amount  to  excluding  Zeno  and  his  paradoxes  from  considera- 

1  The  implication  is  that  Phaedrus  is  still  a  rich  man  ;  he  would  have  to 
serve  in  the  cavalry,  if  called  out,  and  thus  belongs  to  the  class  of  irevTaKOffto- 
pidinvoi  or  that  of  ITTTT^S. 

1  This,  we  may  remind  ourselves,  is  actually  the  view  taken  by  Gorgias 
in  the  dialogue  called  after  him.  He  disclaims  any  pretence  to  be  able  to 
"  teach  goodness." 

•  The  word  should  be  understood  in  its  literal  sense  of  "  spirit-raising/' 
The  eloquent  speaker  deals  with  the  \f/vx*l  of  the  audience  as  the  sorcerer 
does  with  the  ghosts  he  raises  and  lays  ;  he  puts  a  "  spell  "  on  you.  So  we 
hear  in  our  modern  slang  of  "  wizards  "  and  spell-binders  "  in  public  life. 


812          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

tion.  This  would  be  a  bad  mistake.  Zeno,  like  the  speakers  in  the 
courts  or  the  ecclesia,  is  a  controversialist.  Just  as  a  skilled 
political  or  forensic  pleader  can  make  us  think  the  same  course  or 
the  same  case  just  or  unjust  at  his  pleasure,  Zeno  makes  us  accept 
or  deny  the  same  proposition  in  the  mathematics  as  he  pleases. 
Rhetoric  is  thus  universally  skill  in  controversy.  Success  in  it 
depends  on  ability  to  establish  resemblances  or  similarities  and  to 
expose  resemblances  which  have  been  tacitly  presupposed  by  the 
antagonist  *  (2610).  Now  we  are  most  readily  led  astray  in  cases 
where  the  dissimilarity  between  two  things  is  apparently  slight, 
and  therefore  a  man  who  wants  to  confuse  others  but  avoid  being 
misled  himself,  as  the  controversialist  does,  needs  to  know  what  are 
the  real  similarities  and  dissimilarities  between  things,  and  this 
makes  it  ridiculous  to  talk  of  an  "  art  of  discourse  "  which  can  be 
divorced  from  "  knowledge  of  the  real  "  (2620).  We  may  illustrate 
the  point  from  the  discourse  of  Lysias  with  which  we  have  been 
concerned.  Lysias  is  discussing  the  question  whether  a  "  lover  " 
is  a  blessing  or  a  curse.  Now  "  love  "  is  not,  like  "  iron  "  or 
"  silver/'  a  word  with  a  definite  and  undisputed  meaning.  Different 
persons  understand  very  different  things  by  the  name.  It  is  idle 
to  ask  whether  a  "  lover  "  is  a  blessing  or  not,  unless  we  begin  by 
defining  "  love."  Lysias  never  explains  what  he  means  ;  in  his 
opening  sentence  he  introduces  the  word  "  lover  "  without  any 
explanation.  The  ambiguity  thus  introduced  into  his  speech  is 
definitely  an  offence  against  art,  a  violation  of  a  law  of  good  style. 
He  begins  where  he  ought  to  have  ended.2  Socrates  was  better 
inspired  by  the  local  deities,  since  he  opened  his  speech  by  the 
required  definition. 

A  second  grave  fault  in  style  is  that  there  is  no  recognizable 
order  in  the  discourse  of  Lysias.  It  is  not  the  consistent  develop- 
ment of  a  theme  and  has  no  organic  structure.  There  is  no  dis- 
coverable reason  why  the  various  points  of  the  speech  might  not 
have  been  made  in  a  wholly  different  order.  But  a  good  discourse 
ought  to  have  a  definite  organic  structure,  just  like  a  living  creature. 
There  should  be  a  definite  plan  underlying  it  which  would  be  ruined 
if  you  inverted  the  order  of  its  paragraphs.3  Here  again  the  dis- 
course with  which  the  Nymphs  inspired  Socrates  presents  an  in- 
structive contrast.  It  began  by  saying  what  "  love  "  is,  a  kind  of 
"  madness  "  or  "  frenzy."  Next  it  distinguished  two  main  types  of 

1  Cf.  the  appeals  to  "  precedents  "  which  are  so  common  a  feature  of  both 
forensic  and  political  oratory.  The  irapd8ei7/ia  which  Aristotle  calls  a  "  rhetori- 
cian's form  of  induction"  (Analyt.  Post.  A,  7ia  9)  is  just  the  "appeal  to 
precedent." 

1  The  right  order  of  thought  would  be  to  say  first  what  the  passion  "  love" 
is,  then  to  consider  how  it  will  affect  the  man  who  is  dominated  by  it,  and 
last  of  all  to  ask  whether  these  effects  will  make  him  a  better  influence  in  a 
lad's  life  than  the  man  who  is  not  "  in  love."  Lysias  begins  with  this  last 
question,  and  never  raises  the  others. 

*  Socrates  puts  his  finger  on  the  defect  which,  above  all  others,  is  the  most 
glaring  fault  of  the  bad  stylist,  neglect  of  the  logical  sequence  of  the  parts  of 
his  essay  or  the  chapters  of  his  book. 


THE  PHAEDRUS  813 

madness,  that  due  to  human  disease  and  that  due  to  divinely 
sent  "  exaltation  "  above  everyday  "  conventionalities."  Then 
it  went  on  to  make  a  further  subdivision  of  divine  "  exaltation  " 
itself,  and  so  to  distinguish  the  "  exaltation  "  of  the  lover  from  that 
of  the  "  seer/'  the  "  poet/'  and  the  founder  of  a  religion,  and  ended 
with  an  imaginative  hymn  in  praise  of  Eros  (2646-2656).  Much  of 
what  we  said  was,  perhaps,  sportive,  but  there  are  two  points  about 
the  method  we  followed  which  are  of  serious  importance.  When 
any  subject  is  to  be  expounded,  it  is  vitally  important  to  define  it, 
and  to  define  it  one  must  be  able  to  "  collect  "  its  disiecta  membra 
into  a  single  "  pattern  "  (iSc'a),  as  we  did  when  we  reduced  all  the 
manifestations  of  "  love  "  under  the  one  head  of  "  distraction  " 
(Trapai/oia).  But  it  is  no  less  important,  when  we  have  got  our 
single  "  pattern/1  to  "  divide  "  it  again  rightly  into  sub-patterns, 
like  a  skilful  carver  who  disjoints  an  animal  at  the  proper  articula- 
tions. This  was  what  we  tried  to  do  when  we  went  on  to  distin- 
guish a  "  sinister/'  or  left-hand  and  a  "  right-hand  "  distraction, 
and  then  carefully  subdivided  both  again  along  the  proper  lines, 
so  that  we  were  left  with  a  "  sinister  "  love  which  we  were  entitled 
to  denounce  and  a  clearly  discriminated  "  right-hand  "  or  "  divine  " 
love  which  was  eulogized  as  the  source  of  the  greatest  blessings. 
(It  was  just  this  process  of  first  "  collecting  "  the  definition  and  then 
making  a  scientific  subdivision  of  .the  definitum  on  a  proper  funda- 
mentum  divisionis  which  enabled  us  to  give  a  rational  justification 
for  our  answer  and  our  approbation.)  Socrates  is  devoted  to  this 
method  of  combined  "  composition  "  and  "  division,"  and  is  ready 
to  follow  the  steps  of  the  "  dialectician  "  who  possesses  it,  as  those  of 
a  god.  Thus  we  are  brought  to  the  conclusion  that  "  dialectic  is 
philosophy  "  in  the  wide  sense  in  which  that  word  means  the 
capacity  for  seeing  the  real  affinities  in  things,  and  so  grouping 
them  in  well-defined  genera ;  and  detecting  the  differences  which 
mark  off  different  species  within  the  genus,  is  the  first  requisite 
of  a  masterly  style.  To  be  a  true  stylist,  you  must  have  a  clear 
view  of  your  subject  as  a  whole,  and  be  able  to  articulate  it  aright 
(2650-266^). 

Phaedrus  agrees  that  this  is  a  good  account  of  "  dialectic," 
and  that  Socrates  has  a  correct  conception  of  a  "  scientific  style." 
But  Thrasymachus  and  the  other  teachers  of  prose  style  have  not 
the  qualities  we  have  described.  What  they  mean  by  "  rhetorical 
style  "  is  something  different.  They  mean,  in  fact,  the  arrangement 
of  the  parts  of  a  "  discourse  "  on  a  certain  model  which  they  pre- 
scribe, but  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  kind  of  logical  structure 
just  described.  To  use  technical  terms,  they  say,  e.g.,  that  a  good 
speech  must  have  its  exordium  (TTPOOI'/AIOV)  ;  then  you  must  go 
on  to  the  narration  (Snjy^o-is),  which  relates  what  you  allege  to 
be  the  facts  of  the  case ;  next  to  the  production  of  the  depositions 
(fjiaprvptai)  of  witnesses ;  then  to  a  consideration  of  the  presumptions 
(rcK/xijpia)  and  plausibilities  (etjco'ra) ;  and  there  are  many  other 
subdivisions.  (The  precise  meaning  of  the  technical  terms  is  in 


814          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

many  cases  uncertain,  since  some  of  them  were  not  preserved  in  the 
later  manuals  of  the  art,  and  even  of  those  which  are  preserved,  we 
cannot  be  certain  that  they  already  had  their  later  meanings  as 
early  as  the  fifth  century.  The  reader  may  consult  the  notes  in 
Thompson's  edition  of  the  dialogue.)  Gorgias  and  his  master 
Tisias  insist  on  the  importance  of  a  dexterous  art  of  exaggeration 
and  extenuation;  Polus  and  Protagoras  before  him  on  grace 
and  appropriateness  of  verbal  phrasing.  We  need  not  follow  them 
into  all  these  details,  but  we  must  test  the  worth  of  their  theory  of 
style  as  a  whole  ;  perhaps  its  texture  will  look  very  loose  if  we  view 
it  in  a  clear  light  (2666-2680). 

Suppose  a  man  claimed  to  be  a  physician  on  the  ground  that  he 
knew  recipes  for  raising  and  lowering  the  body's  temperature, 
producing  a  vomit  and  an  evacuation  and  the  like,  would  specialists 
like  our  friend  Eryximachus  admit  his  claim  ?  If  he  did  not  know 
also  in  what  patients,  when,  and  with  what  violence  to  produce 
these  effects,  they  would  say  at  once  that  he  did  not  know  medicine. 
So  Sophocles  or  Euripides  would  say  to  anyone  who  knew  how  to 
make  single  speeches  effectively  but  not  how  to  construct  an 
artistic  whole  out  of  them,  "  You  may  understand  the  preliminaries 
to  play-making,  but  you  don't  know  how  to  make  a  play."  So 
Pericles,  we  may  be  sure,  would  have  told  us  urbanely  that  a  man  who 
has  learned  the  devices  of  the  textbooks  has  only  learned  the  pre- 
liminaries to  "  rhetoric.11  The  art  consists  in  knowing  how  and 
when  to  use  the  various  devices  to  effect  (mQavfa)  and  to  make 
your  discourse  into  a  real  whole  (2680-2690) -1 

Admittedly  this  cannot  be  learned  from  any  of  the  law-books  : 
how  then  should  a  man  set  himself  to  acquire  a  really  persuasive 
style  ?  To  begin  with,  he  must  have  a  natural  gift  of  expression, 
or  he  will  be  wasting  time  in  trying  to  cultivate  a  barren  soil. 
If  he  has  the  natural  gift,  its  cultivation  demands  both  knowledge 
and  practice  (/*e\en;),  and  is  thus  not  wholly  a  matter  of  "art." 
In  so  far  as  it  does  depend  on  knowledge  and  thus  is  an  "  art/1 
Lysias  and  Thrasymachus  have  misconceived  the  kind  of  knowledge 
required.  What  it  is  may  be  suggested  to  us  by  the  facts  about 
Pericles,  the  most  effective  of  all  our  great  orators.  Over  and 
above  his  natural  gift  of  speech  (irpbs  ru>  €v<f>vrj<s  eti/at,  2700), 
Pericles  had  the  advantage  of  early  association  with  Anaxagoras. 
This  gave  him  a  certain  largeness  of  mental  outlook  which  makes 
itself  felt  in  his  political  oratory.2  The  great  stylist,  in  fact,  needs 

1  Note  that  Euripides  is  definitely  associated  here  with  Sophocles  (268^). 
Both  are  assumed  to  be  living  and  accessible.  Hence  we  should  date  the 
conversation  before  the  final  departure  of  Euripides  from  Athens  (408  or  407). 
The  reference  to  Eryximachus  and  his  father  (2680)  shows  that  if  they  are  the 
persons  of  the  same  names  who  were  implicated  in  the  scandal  of  415,  it  had 
not  such  serious  consequences  for  them  as  it  had  for  some  of  their  circle. 

8  Of  course,  the  allusion  is  half  playful.  The  suggestion  is  that  Pericles 
turned  to  account  in  practical  statesmanship  the  Anaxagorean  physical 
speculations  about  the  sovereignty  of  vovt;  he  made  mens  agitat  molem  into 
a  political  principle  (2700,  5). 


THE  PHAEDRUS  815 

to  build  on  -the  same  foundations  as  the  great  physician.  If  a 
man  is  to  be  more  than  a  mere  empiric  in  medicine,  as  we  may  see 
from  the  teaching  of  Hippocrates,  he  needs  a  scientific  knowledge 
of  the  body,  which  can  hardly  be  acquired  without  a  knowledge  of 
"  nature  "  as  a  whole.  He  must  know  whether  the  human  body 
is  composed  of  one  single  ingredient  or  of  many,  and,  in  either  case, 
he  must  further  know  how  the  substance  or  substances  composing 
the  human  body  are  affected  by  each  and  all  of  the  substances 
which  medicine  employs  in  its  pharmacopoeia.  Without  this 
scientific  basis,  medicine  would  be  a  mere  "  fumbling  in  the  dark." l 
The  same  thing  is  true  of  the  "  orator.'1  He  is  trying  to  produce 
healthy  convictions  in  the  minds  of  his  audience  by  discourses 
exactly  as  the  physician  produces  healthy  conditions  in  their 
bodies  by  his  prescriptions.  Hence  anyone  who  undertakes  to 
teach  the  art  of  persuasion  needs  first  of  all  to  have  a  thoroughly 
scientific  knowledge  of  the  mind.  He  must  know  what  are  its 
components  and  exactly  how  each  type  of  discourse  will  affect 
them.  In  a  word,  he  must  have  a  sound  psychology  of  human 
nature.  Thus  he  must  understand  what  different  temperaments 
there  are  among  his  auditors,  what  different  types  of  "  discourses  " 
there  are,  and  why  such  and  such  a  type  of  "  discourse  "  appeals  to 
such  and  such  a  temperament.  And  this  is  not  all.  The  effective 
speaker,  like  the  successful  physician,  must  have  skill  in  diagnosis. 
He  must  be  able  in  practice  to  judge  rapidly  and  surely  of  the 
temperament  of  an  actual  audience  and  the  type  of  appeal  which 
will  go  home  to  them.  Only  when  he  has  thus  diagnosed  his 
hearers'  temperaments  and  decided  on  the  right  kind  of  appeal 
to  make  will  he  be  in  a  position  to  apply  the  rules  given  in  the 
hand-books  for  producing  the  kind  of  effect  which  will  be  oppor- 
tune (269^-2726). 

The  road  to  oratorical  success  we  have  described  is,  no  doubt, 
a  long  and  difficult  one  ;  but  can  the  writers  of  the  handbooks 
really  show  us  an  easier  short  cut  ?  We  know  that,  as  has  been 
already  mentioned,  they  often  say  the  "  speaker  "  or  "  stylist  " 
need  not  concern  himself  with  realities  or  "  truths  "  ;  he  need  only 
aim  at  being  plausible,  and,  indeed,  should  often  prefer  plausibility 
to  truth.  Thus  if  he  is  employed  in  a  case  where  a  plucky  little 
man  has  beaten  a  stronger  but  cowardly  man,  he  would,  speaking 

1  Plato  is  thinking  mainly  of  the  doctrine  of  the  four  fundamental 
"  humours  "  (blood,  phlegm,  red  bile,  black  bile)  on  which  the  Coan  school  of 
medicine  built  up  its  humoral  pathology,  and  is  arguing  that  the  physician 
must  have  a  scientific  knowledge  of  the  action  of  each  substance  in  the 
pharmacopoeia  on  each  of  these  "  humours."  The  counterpart  would  be  a 
scientific  knowledge  of  the  "  active  principles,"  as  Butler  calls  them,  in  the 
human  mind  and  the  way  in  which  each  may  be  stimulated  or  inhibited  by 
the  appropriate  type  of  verbal  appeal.  The  particular  Hippocratean  work 
alluded  to  is,  perhaps,  the  nepl  </>vato$  avQpamov,  where  the  humoral  pathology 
is  expressly  expounded.  But  see  the  discussion  of  Die's,  Autour  de  Platon,  30  ff. 
The  sure  and  rapid  gauging  of  the  temper  of  the  audience,  on  which  he  rightly 
insists  as  all-important,  is  just  the  sort  of  thing  of  which  there  can  be  no 
No  rules  can  be  given  for  it;  it  is  a  matter  of  aloBrjais  (27 ic). 


816          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

for  the  defence,  dwell  on  the  improbability  that  the  small  man  should 
have  attacked  a  bigger  man,  or,  if  he  spoke  for  the  prosecution, 
he  would  try  to  suggest  that  there  had  been  a  concerted  assault 
by  several  assailants.  In  either  case,  the  real  facts  of  the  situa- 
tion are  just  what  the  clever  advocate  would  take  care  to  keep  dark. 
But  we  must  retort  once  more  that  one  can  only  judge  of  the 
"  plausibilities  "  in  proportion  as  one  knows  the  real  facts.  (The 
advocate  may  rely  on  distortion  of  the  facts,  but  he  must  know 
what  they  are  if  he  is  to  distort  them  in  a  really  plausible  way.) 
So  we  adhere  to  our  view  that  it  is  a  long  and  a  hard  task  to  acquire 
the  art  of  a  persuasive  style.  The  time  and  labour  required  would 
be  disproportionate  if  one's  object  were  merely  to  make  an  im- 
pression on  one's  fellow-mortals,  and  not,  as  it  ought  to  be,  to  make 
our  words,  like  our  deeds,  acceptable  to  God.  (That  would,  of 
course,  be  the  aim  of  a  true  statesman,  who  employs  his  knowledge 
of  human  temperaments  and  the  way  in  which  they  may  be  ap- 
pealed to,  to  enlist  his  fellow-citizens  in  the  prosecution  of  good  and 
the  avoidance  of  evil.)  This  is,  in  substance,  all  we  have  to  say 
about  the  principles  of  an  art  of  style.  It  must  be  based  on  a 
masterly  knowledge  of  the  subject-matter  dealt  with  and  an  equally 
masterly  knowledge  of  the  psychology  of  the  hearers  (or  readers) 
addressed,  combined  wtih  a  natural  gift  of  language  (2720-2746). 

We  may  now  turn  to  the  question,  suggested  by  the  sneer  of 
the  unnamed  politician  about  Lysias  (257^,  whether  it  is  a  proper 
thing  to  perpetuate  one's  discourses  in  writing.  Socrates  professes 
to  have  heard  a  story — Phaedrus  prefers  to  think  that  he  is  inventing 
it — that,  in  the  old  days  when  Egypt  was  governed  by  gods,  the 
god  Thoth  invented  the  art  of  writing  and  recommended  it  to 
Amon,1  who  then  ruled  at  Thebes,  as  a  device  which  would 
make  the  Egyptians  wiser  and  improve  their  memories.  Amon 
reproved  him,  on  the  ground  that  written  records  tend  to  make  us 
neglect  the  cultivation  of  memory  by  making  it  unnecessary,  and 
to  fill  men  with  an  empty  conceit  of  their  own  wisdom.  They  think 
they  know  a  great  deal  which  they  have  merely  read  without 
understanding  and  without  any  abiding  effect  on  their  minds.  The 
art  of  writing  does  not  act  as  a  substitute  for  memory ;  it  merely 
provides  us  with  memoranda — convenient  means  of  refreshing  our 
memory  from  time  to  time.  A  book  is  like  a  picture.  The  figures 
of  the  picture  may  actually  "  look  alive,"  but  they  cannot  speak. 
So  the  words  and  sentences  in  a  written  book  look  full  of  wisdom,  but 
if  you  question  the  book  about  its  meaning,  you  can  get  no  reply. 
A  "  discourse/'  once  written  down,  comes  into  the  hands  of  the 
unintelligent,  as  well  as  of  the  intelligent,  and  is  exposed  to  mis- 
interpretation. If  it  is  to  be  rightly  understood,  it  needs  the  living 
voice  of  the  author  to  explain  and  defend  it.  Thus  the  written 
discourse  is  at  best  a  lifeless  image  of  the  living  thought  which  is 

1  Plato  calls  him  Thamus,  but  the  mention  of  Thebes  shows  what  Egyptian 
god  he  has  in  mind.  Is  the  name  Thamus,  which  has  perplexed  the  com- 
mentators, due  to  a  presumably  wilful  confusion  with  the  Syrian  Thammuz  ? 


THE  PHAEDRUS  817 

written  "  in  the  soul  of  him  who  understands  it."  A  gardener  may, 
for  amusement,  force  flowers  in  a  "  garden  of  Adonis,1'  l  but  he 
takes  care  to  sow  the  seeds  of  crops  about  which  he  is  in  earnest  in 
the  appropriate  soil  and  to  wait  months  for  their  maturing.  So  the 
man  who  is  in  earnest  about  raising  the  fruit  of  righteousness  and 
goodness  will  not  trust  to  forcing  it  by  writing  his  deepest  convic- 
tions in  ink  ;  he  will  trust  to  the  slow  and  steady  cultivation  of 
them  in  his  own  soul,  and  in  those  of  others  with  whom  he  is  in 
constant  personal  contact.  When  he  commits  his  thoughts  to 
writing,  it  will  be  partly  as  a  memorandum  against  the  "  forgetful- 
ness  of  his  old  age,"  partly  because  such  literature  affords  a  worthy 
form  of  entertainment  in  our  hours  of  relaxation.  So  we  may  tell 
Lysias  —  and  we  might  say  the  same  thing  to  Homer  and  the  poets, 
or  to  Solon  and  the  "  composers  "  of  laws  —  that  if  any  of  them  has 
really  understood  what  his  "  works  "  can  effect  and  what  they 
cannot,  and  how  secondary  a  place  they  hold  by  comparison  with 
his  living  thought  —  such  a  man  has  a  claim  to  a  very  different 
name  from  that  of  Aoyoyp<£<£os  ;  he  is  a  true  "  philosopher.  "  But 
if  he  really  has  nothing  better  to  give  mankind  than  the  painfully 
elaborated  phrases  and  clauses  of  his  writings,  he  deserves  to 
be  called  a  mere  poet  or  speech-writer  or  "  law-  writer."  a  The 
man  ought  always  to  be  greater  than  his  book  or  poem  or  code 
(2746-2782). 

This  conviction  that  a  man's  personality  ought  to  be  greater 
than  his  literary  "  work,"  and,  in  particular,  that  the  true  philo- 
sopher is  a  great  personality  whose  very  deepest  thoughts  are  those 
which  he  cannot  set  down  "in  black  and  white,"  was  one  Plato 
held  strongly  and  retained  to  the  end  of  his  life.3  It  explains  why 
he  never  attempted  to  put  in  writing  any  of  his  own  profoundest 
metaphysical  speculations.  They  were  the  fruit  of  a  "  way  of  life," 
and,  to  be  understood,  pre-supposed  the  living  of  the  same  life 
on  the  part  of  the  recipient.  To  record  them  for  the  world  at 
large  would  have  been  merely  to  court  dangerous  misunderstanding. 
Even  so,  Carlyle,  as  the  jest  has  it,  wrote  thirty-seven  volumes  to 
persuade  the  world  that  silence  is  golden.  Naturally  he  could  not 
tell  us  the  secret  of  the  "  golden  silence."  That  could  only  be  told 
to  a  man  with  the  soul  of  a  second  Carlyle,  and  such  a  man  would 
discover  the  secret  without  needing  to  read  the  thirty-seven 
volumes. 

1  As  we  should  say,  "  in  a  hot-house."  The  horti  Adonidis  were  pots  in 
which  flowers  were  rapidly  forced,  to  die  again  equally  rapidly. 

*  vofjLoypdfav  (278^  2)  cannot  mean  "  writer  of  music."  The  word  appears 
to  be  used  nowhere  else  in  literature.  Here  it  obviously  means  a  "  code- 
maker,"  and  the  point  is  that  if  a  man  like  Solon  really  exhausted  all  his 
wisdom  in  the  mere  excogitation  of  the  clauses  of  a  code  of  laws,  so  that  in 
personal  intercourse  he  merely  talked  his  own  code,  as  some  writers  are  said 
to  talk  their  own  books,  he  deserves  to  be  spoken  of  with  disparage- 
ment. The  word  is  invented  to  convey  the  same  sort  of  depreciation  as 


Compare  the  insistence  on  the  point  in  Ep.  vii.  3410-342(1,  3430-344**, 
where  the  imagery  and  language  seem  directly  reminiscent  of  our  dialogue. 


318          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Epilogue  (2780-2790). — Has  Socrates  any  message  for  his  friend 
Isocrates,  the  younger  rival  of  Lysias  ?  He  can  only  conjecture 
what  the  young  man's  development  will  be,  but  he  believes  that 
Isocrates  has  better  natural  endowments  and  a  nobler  temper  of 
soul  than  Lysias.  Probably,  if  he  continues  in  his  present  pro- 
fession, he  will  out-distance  all  rivals  and  competitors,  and  it  may 
be  that  he  will  be  led  "  by  a  diviner  impulse  "  to  still  higher  things, 
for  there  really  is  a  "  strain  of  philosophy  "  in  him. 

Nothing  remains  now  but  that  Socrates  should  take  leave  of 
the  spot  where  he  has  spent  his  hour  of  siesta  with  a  brief  prayer  to 
Pan  and  its  other  tutelary  spirits.  His  prayer  is  that  "  he  may 
become  fair  in  the  inward  man,  and  that  the  outer  man  may  be 
conformable  to  the  inward ;  that  he  may  regard  wisdom  as  the 
true  riches  and  that  his  wealth  may  be  such  as  none  but  the  tem- 
perate can  carry.'1  Thus  the  prayer  is  for  good  of  mind,  body,  and 
fortune,  and  is  worded  in  a  way  to  remind  us  of  the  Socratic  estimate 
of  the  relative  importance  of  the  three. 

There  is  no  real  need  to  enter  into  the  idle  questions  which  have 
been  raised  about  the  significance  of  the  allusions  to  Isocrates. 
What  is  said  is  strictly  true  and  appropriate  to  the  assumed  situa- 
tion. Isocrates  certainly  had  greater  parts  than  Lysias  and  stood 
on  a  higher  intellectual  and  moral  level.  He  showed  his  superiority 
in  parts  by  becoming  the  real  creator  of  literary  prose  style,  and  his 
superiority  in  character  by  deserting  "  speech- writing  "  for  the 
foundation  of  a  school  for  the  training  of  the  young  for  public  life. 
However  defective  Plato  may  have  thought  the  training  he  gave, 
the  simple  fact  that  it  was  based  on  a  generous  Pan-Hellenism,  and 
that  Isocrates  was  the  recognized  mouthpiece  of  this  Pan-Hellenism 
among  the  publicists  of  his  age,  fully  explains  Plato's  ascribing  to 
Socrates  the  remark,  quite  likely  enough  to  have  been  actually 
made,  that  there  was  a  strain  of  philosophy  in  the  man.  There 
can  be  no  doubt  about  the  historical  fact  of  the  influence  of  Socrates 
on  Isocrates.1  As  to  the  alleged  "  feud  "  between  Isocrates  and 
Plato,  of  which  much  has  been  made  by  some  modern  writers,  there 
is  really  no  evidence  for  it.  The  frequent  expressions  in  Isocrates' 
writings  depreciatory  of  "  science  "  and  "  eristic  "  as  a  propaedeutic 
for  the  statesman  are,  indeed,  pretty  clearly  meant  specially  for  the 
Academy,  but  the  attempts  to  find  sarcastic  rejoinders  in  Plato 
to  these  little  acerbities  have  not  really  been  successful,  and  the 
ingenuity  devoted  to  these  attempts  seems  to  me  to  have  been 
simply  wasted.  After  all,  Plato  and  Isocrates  had  a  good  deal  in 
common  in  their  .views  on  practical  politics,  and  they  were  neither 
Alexandrian  literati  nor  German  Professors.  We  in  this  country 
can  quite  understand  how  two  eminent  men  can  differ  in  their 

1  On  this  seeBurnet,  Greek  Philosophy,  Parti.,  215-219 ;  "  Socratic  Doctrine 
of  the  Soul,"  in  Proceedings  of  the  British  Academy,  1915-16,  p.  235  ff.  So  the 
point  of  Isocrates'  comments  on  the  attack  on  Socrates  by  Polycrates  is  that 
Socrates  was  as  absurd  a  theme  for  invective  as  Busiris  for  eulogy.  Polycrates 
showed  his  silliness  by  denouncing  a  man  of  exemplary  virtue  no  less  than  by 
eulogizing  a  monster  (Isocr.  xi.  4). 


THE  PHAEDRUS  319 

philosophical  programmes  without  becoming  personal  enemies, 
or  how  the  bigger  man  of  the  two  can  afford  to  take  an  occasional 
"  rap  over  the  knuckles  "  from  the  lesser  in  good  part.  (No  one 
supposes,  for  example,  that  Shakespeare's  relations  with  Ben 
Jonson  were  disturbed  by  Ben's  occasional  quips.)  Hence  I  cannot 
but  agree  with  Professor  Burnet  in  thinking  that  the  tradition 
followed  by  Cicero,  which  represents  Plato  and  Isocrates  as  being 
on  personally  friendly  terms,  is  likely  to  be  the  true  one.1 

In  taking  leave  of  the  Phaedrus,  we  may  note  that  while  it 
supplements  the  Gorgias  in  its  conclusions  about  the  value  of 
"  style,"  it  modifies  nothing  that  was  said  in  the  earlier  dialogue. 
The  moral  condemnation  pronounced  on  the  use  of  eloquent  speech 
to  pervert  facts  and  produce  false  impressions  remains  the  same. 
So  does  the  verdict  that  the  sort  of  thing  the  professional  teachers 
from  Tisias  to  Thrasymachus  profess  to  expound  is  not  a  science  but 
a  mere  "  trick  "  or  "  knack  "  (and  therefore  cannot  be  conveyed,  as 
they  professed  to  convey  it,  by  "lessons").  In  adding  that  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  a  subject-matter  and  a  sound  knowledge  of 
the  ^  psychology  of  the  public  addressed  furnish  a  really  scientific 
basis  for  a  worthy  and  effective  style,  Plato  is  saying  nothing  incon- 
sistent with  the  results  of  the  Gorgias.  There  is  thus  no  sufficient 
ground  for  thinking  that  the  teaching  of  the  Phaedrus  represents  a 
later  "  development "  from  the  more  "  Socratic  "  position  of  the 
Gorgias.  Socrates  cannot  have  lived  in  the  Athens  of  the  Archi- 
damian  war  and  the  subsequent  twenty  years  without  having  had 
occasion  to  turn  his  thoughts  to  the  problem  of  the  value  of ' '  rhe- 
torical "  style,  and  there  is  no  reason  why  he  should  not  actually 
have  reached  the  conclusions  of  the  Phaedrus,  though  naturally  we 
cannot  prove  that  he  had. 

See  further : 

THOMPSON,  W.  H. — Plato's  Phaedrus. 

ROBIN,  L. — Phedre  (Collection  des  Universitcs  de  France,  Paris. 

1933). 
RITTER,    C. — Platon,    ii.    39-62  ;     Platons    Dialog    Phaidros  *, 

pp.  1-280. 

RAEDER,  H. — Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung,  245-279. 
NATORP. — Platons  Ideenlehre,  52-87. 
STEWART,  J.  A.— Myths  of  Plato,  306-396  (Phaedrus  Myth) ; 

Plato's  Doctrine  of  Ideas,  62-65  and  Part  II. 
DIES,  A. — Autour  de  Platon  II,  400-449. 

1  Cicero,  Orator,  xiii.  42,  "  me  autem  qui  Isocratem  non  diligunt  una  cum 
Socrate  et  Platone  errare  patiantur."  Cf.  Diogenes  Laert.  III.,  8,  where 
we  are  told  that  the  Peripatetic  Praxiphanes  wrote  a  dialogue  in  which 
Isocratea  figured  as  the  guest  of  Plato.  The  theory  of  a  rivalry  has  no  ancient 
tradition  behind  it.  This  is  the  more  significant  that  the  rivalry  between 
Aristotle  and  the  school  of  Isocrates  is  quite  well  attested  (Cicero,  de  Oratore, 
iii.  35,  141,  Orator,  xix.  62).  I  should  suppose  that  Plato's  purpose  in  ending 
the  dialogue  with  a  marked  compliment  to  Isocrates  is  to  show  that  it  ia  not 
as  a  polemic  against  him. 


CHAPTER    XIII 
THE  THEAETETUS 

IT  seems  possible  to  date  the  composition  of  the  Theaetetus 
more  precisely  than  that  of  any  other  Platonic  dialogue. 
For  the  main  discussion  is  introduced  by  a  short  preliminary 
conversation  between  the  Megarians,  Euclides  and  Terpsion,  whom 
we  met  in  the  Phaedo  as  members  of  the  inner  Socratic  circle. 
Terpsion  relates  that  he  has  just  met  Theaetetus  of  Athens,  who 
is  being  conveyed  home  from  the  Athenian  camp  at  Corinth  after  a 
battle,  wounded  and  suffering  severely  from  dysentery.  The 
thought  of  the  loss  such  a  man  will  be  to  the  world  reminds  Euclides 
that  Socrates  had  once  met  Theaetetus,  just  before  his  own  death, 
and  had  prophesied  a  distinguished  future  for  the  lad.  Euclides 
professes  to  have  heard  all  about  this  from  Socrates  himself  ;  he 
was  so  struck  that  he  at  once  wrote  out  memoranda  of  what  Socrates 
had  told  him,  and  afterwards  corrected  and  enlarged  them  with  the 
help  of  Socrates  himself. 

Since  much  stress  is  laid  on  the  point  that  Theaetetus,  who  is 
called  a  distinguished  "  man  "  by  Terpsion  (1426)  was  a  mere 
"  lad  "  in  the  year  399,  it  is  clear  that  the  battle  from  which 
Theaetetus,  as  the  whole  tone  of  the  Prologue  implies,  was  carried 
home  to  die,  must  fall  a  good  while  later.  As  Dr.  Eva  Sachs  has 
shown,1  the  known  engagement  which  best  satisfies  the  implied 
conditions  is  that  of  the  year  369,  in  which  Epaminpndas  broke 
through  the  Athenian  and  Spartan  lines  on  Mt.  Oneion.2  Mani- 
festly the  dialogue  was  written  as  a  tribute  to  the  memory  of 
Theaetetus,  shortly  after  his  death,  which  Euclides  and  Terpsion 
regard  as  certainly  impending.  This  brings  us  to  368  or  the  be- 
ginning of  367  as  the  date  of  its  completion.  Thus,  as  Burnet 
points  out,  it  must  have  been  finished  on  the  very  eve  of  Plato's 
departure  from  Athens  to  throw  himself  into  his  great  political  adven- 
ture at  Syracuse,  and  probably  with  full  consciousness  that  he  was, 
for  the  time,  about  to  abandon  the  studious  life  for  that  of  affairs. 

Several  points  in  the  introduction  call  for  remark,  (i)  When 
Euclides  explains  that,  to  avoid  tediousness,  he  has  adopted  the 

1  In  her  dissertation  de  Theaeteto  Atheniensi  (Berlin,  1914),  which  finally 
disposes  of  Natorp's  singular  theory  that  the  dialogue  is  a  juvenile  work. 

2  Xenophon,  Hellenica,  vii.  i,  41  ;    Bury,  History  of  Greece,  p.  608.     The 
engagement  appears  to  have  been  a  trivial  one,  but  even  trivial  engagements 
involve  casualties.     Theaetetus  apparently  owed  his  death  more  to  dysentery 
than  to  his  wounds  (1426) 

3»o 


THE  THEAETETUS  821 

directly  dramatic  form  of  narration  (1436-0),  we  must,  of  course, 
understand  that  this  is  really  Plato's  explanation  of  his  abandon- 
ment of  the  method  adopted  in  all  the  great  dialogues  of  his  literary 
prime  (except  the  Phaedrus).  Henceforth,  with  a  possible  excep- 
tion for  the  Parmenides,  we  shall  find  him  returning  to  the  simply 
dramatic  method  of  his  earliest  writings.1  This  is,  no  doubt, 
because  in  these  later  works  the  old  interest  in  reproducing  a  living 
picture  of  Socrates  and  his  contemporaries  has  at  last  yielded 
pretty  completely  to  the  more  philosophical  interest  of  developing 
the  subject-matter.  The  Theaetetus  is  the  latest  dialogue  in 
which  the  personality  of  Socrates  is  made  prominent.  (2)  The 
stress  laid  on  the  prophetic  insight  shown  by  Socrates  in  his  estimate 
of  the  lad  Theaetetus  seems  unintelligible,  unless  we  are  to  take 
the  meeting  of  the  lad  and  the  old  philosopher,  and  the  forecast 
made  by  the  latter,  as  genuine  historical  facts.  They  are  just  the 
sort  of  facts  which  might  properly  be  made  the  most  of  in  a  work 
meant  as  a  "  tribute  "  to  the  memory  of  Theaetetus.  (3)  Euclides' 
account  of  the  way  in  which  he  worked  up  his  narrative,  with  the 
help  of  Socrates  himself,  may  be  a  fiction,  but  Plato  evidently 
thought  it  a  natural  fiction.  We  may  fairly  infer  that  admirers  of 
Socrates  actually  took  down  such  notes  of  striking  conversations, 
and  that  Plato  himself  may  have  used  such  records,  made  by  himself 
or  others,  as  material  for  his  Socratic  dialogues.  In  the  present 
case,  by  appealing  to  the  record  of  Euclides  he  contrives  to  let 
us  know  that  he  was  not  himself  actually  present  when  Socrates 
met  Theaetetus,  though  we  might  otherwise  have  expected  him  to 
be  there.  Possibly  this  is  explained  by  the  illness  which  also  kept 
him  away  from  the  death-scene  of  the  Master  a  few  weeks  later. 
(4)  The  introduction  of  Euclides  and  Terpsion  into  the  narrative, 
like  the  preoccupation  with  the  personality  of  Parmenides  and  Zeno 
in  the  Parmenides,  and  the  appearance  of  a  "  visitor  from  Elea  "  as 
chief  speaker  in  the  two  later  dialogues,  which  are  made  to  continue 
the  conversation  of  the  Theaetetus,  shows  that  we  have  reached  a 
period  in  Plato's  life  when  his  special  interest  is  to  define  his  atti- 
tude towards  the  Megarian  developments  of  Eleaticism.  This  is 
a  matter  which  will  call  for  consideration  more  particularly  when 
we  go  on  to  deal  with  the  Parmenides  and  Sophistes.  We  shall 
find  Plato  in  these  dialogues  taking  up  an  attitude  of  decided 
hostility  to  the  one-sided  intellectualism  of  the  school  as  tending  to 
pervert  philosophy  into  a  mere  barren  sporting  with  "  abstractions." 
The  same  attitude  is  shown  in  our  dialogue  by  the  emphatic  recog- 
nition of  the  contribution  of  sensation  to  real  knowledge.  By 
virtually  dedicating  the  dialogue  to  his  old  friend  Euclides, a 

1  On  the  question  whether  the  Parmenides  is  earlier  or  later  than  the 
Theaetetus,  see  the  next  chapter.  In  any  case,  they  must  be  nearly  contem- 
porary. Probably  the  difficulty  of  keeping  up  the  indirect  method  in  the 
Parmenides  was  the  immediate  occasion  for  its  abandonment. 

1  Euclides  can  hardly  be  assumed  to  have  died  in  the  interval  between  369 
an  1  367.  That  would  be  too  much  of  a  coincidence. 


822          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Plato  gives  us  to  understand  that  his  growing  dissatisfaction  with 
the  contemporary  "  Megarians  "  implies  no  change  in  his  sentiments 
towards  the  founder  of  the  school,  an  old  and  faithful  member  of 
the  group  who  had  been  lifelong  admirers  of  Socrates. 

The  main  conversation  is  dated  very  shortly  before  the  famous 
trial  of  399,  as  we  see  from  the  concluding  sentence  (2iod),  where 
Socrates  explains  that  he  has  to  attend  at  the  offce  of  the  "  king/1 
to  put  in  his  answer  to  the  indictment  of  Meletus.  The  parties 
present,  besides  Socrates,  are  the  Pythagorean  geometer  Theodorus, 
the  lad  Theaetetus,  his  companion  the  younger  Socrates  (147^), 
who  is  a  "  mute  personage,"  and  possibly  one  or  two  other  un- 
named lads.  The  scene  is  an  unnamed  palaestra  (1440),  possibly 
that  in  the  Lyceum.  We  learn  in  the  course  of  the  dialogue  that 
Theodorus  comes  from  Cyrene,  and  that  he  is  a  friend  and  admirer 
of  the  now  deceased  Protagoras,  though  he  professes  to  be  strictly 
a  mathematician,  wholly  unversed  in  the  methods  and  terminology 
of  contemporary  Athenian  "  philosophy "  (1466,  1650).  That 
he  belonged  to  the  Pythagorean  order  is  indicated  by  the  appear- 
ance of  his  name  in  the  list  of  Pythagoreans  given  by  lamblichus 
(Vit.  Pythag.  xxxvi.  267).  A  notice  preserved  by  Proclus  in  his 
commentary  on  the  First  Book  of  Euclid's  Elements  (Friedlein,  p.  66) 
shows  that  Eudemus  in  his  History  of  Mathematics  ranked  Theo- 
dorus with  Hippocrates  of  Chios  as  one  of  the  greatest  of  fifth- 
century  geometers.  Xenophon  (Mem.  iv.  2,  10)  mentions  him  in 
a  way  which  implies  that  Socrates  knew  him,  though  this  may  be 
only  Xenophon 's  inference  from  our  dialogue.  Theaetetus,  it  is 
important  to  remember,  was  a  member  of  Plato's  Academy  and  one 
of  the  very  first  mathematicians  of  the  fourth  century.  Eudemus, 
as  we  see  from  Proclus  (loc.  cit.)t  named  him  along  with  Archytas 
and  Leodamas  as  one  of  the  three  prominent  geometers  of  the  fourth 
century.  From  notices  in  the  Scholia  to  Euclid's  Elements  and 
elsewhere,  we  gather  that  he  was  one  of  the  first  mathematicians 
to  begin  the  systematic  study  of  the  types  of  "  quadratic  surd  " 
worked  out  to  its  completion  in  Euclid's  Tenth  Book,  and  he  is  still 
more  often  referred  to  as  the  geometer  who  completed  the  theory  of 
the  "  regular  solids,"  by  adding  to  the  three  known  to  the  Pythag- 
oreans (tetrahedron,  cube,  dodecahedron)  the  remaining  two 
(octahedron,  icosahedron).1 

Though  the  dramatic  power  of  the  Theaetetus  is  still  remarkable, 
it  has  features  which  show  that  we  are  near  the  point  at  which 

1  There  is  a  little  difficulty  here.  The  meaning  of  the  statement  must  be 
that  the  fifth-century  geometers  already  knew  the  constructions  for  the  in- 
scription of  three  of  the  figures  in  the  sphere  :  Theaetetus  added  the  construc- 
tions for  the  remaining  two  and  thus .  completed  the  doctrine  of  Euclid, 
Elements,  xiii.  But  Plato  definitely  attributes  to  the  Pythagorean  Timaeus  a 
knowledge  of  all  five  regular  solids  (and  this  is  why  these  solids  were  known 
in  antiquity  as  the  "  figures  of  Plato  ").  Careful  reading,  however,  will 
show  that  Timaeus  is  never  allowed  to  mention  the  inscribing  of  the  octa- 
hedron and  icosahedron  in  the  sphere,  as  he  does  that  of  the  tetrahedron  and 
dodecahedron.  This  seems  to  me  confirmation  of  the  tradition  that  these 
construction0  were  unknown  in  the  fifth  century. 


THE  THEAETETUS  823 

dialogue  will  become  a  mere  conventional  form  for  what  is  in  reality 
an  essay  on  a  set  theme.  The  theme  is  propounded  at  the  beginning 
of  the  discussion  and  is  then  pursued,  except  for  one  remarkable 
digression,  owned  to  be  such  by  the  author  himself,  with  a  system 
and  strictness  we  have  not  yet  met  in  any  of  the  major  dialogues. 
The  Socratic  cross-questioning  is  becoming  a  conscious  pursuit 
of  the  "  critical  "  method,  brought  to  bear  on  a  single  determinate 
problem.  This  makes  the  analysis  of  the  dialogue  unusually  easy 
to  follow. 

INTRODUCTION  (143^-1510) 

The  problem  to  be  discussed  is  still  made  to  arise,  in  the  fashion 
of  the  Protagoras  or  Republic,  apparently  almost  by  accident.  In 
the  old  way,  Socrates  is  made  to  speak  of  his  interest  in  the  young 
and  to  ask  Theodorus  whether  any  of  the  lads  of  Athens  have 
struck  him  as  showing  remarkable  promise.  Theodorus  says  that 
there  is  one  whose  remarkable  combination  of  quick  intelligence, 
perseverance,  and  modesty  afford  grounds  for  hoping  very  great 
things  of  him,  Theaetetus.  It  is  curious  that  this  remarkable 
boy  has  a  quaint  physical  resemblance  to  Socrates  himself.  This 
gives  Socrates  his  opening.  He  calls  Theaetetus  out  of  the  group 
of  lads  who  are  anointing  themselves  after  their  exercises  and 
begins  a  conversation  with  him.  Theodorus,  he  says,  has  just  made 
a  remark  about  our  facial  resemblance.  As  Theodorus  is  not  a 
portrait-painter,  such  a  remark  from  him  is  not  very  important. 
But  as  he  is  an  eminent  man  of  science,  his  opinion  about  our 
mental  endowments  carries  weight.  Hence  Socrates  would  be 
glad  to  discover  whether  the  lad's  mental  gifts  really  bear  out  the 
very  high  commendation  they  have  just  received.  He  will  put 
this  to  the  test  by  asking  a  question.  Theaetetus  is  learning  geo- 
metry and  other  things  from  Theodorus.  Now  to  learn  means  to 
be  acquiring  knowledge.  But  what  exactly  is  knowledge  ?  Can 
Theaetetus  offer  any  answer  to  this  question,  one  which  has  often 
perplexed  Socrates  himself  ?  The  lad  begins,  as  Plato  so  often 
makes  an  interlocutor  do,  by  an  enumeration.  Geometry  and  the 
other  things  taught  by  Theodorus  are  knowledge  ;  so  is  shoe- 
making  or  carpentry. 

Of  course,  as  Socrates  points  out,  this  is  no  answer  to  the 
question.  To  answer  the  question  what  knowledge  is  by  saying 
that  shoemaking  is  knowledge  only  amounts  to  saying  that  knowing 
how  to  make  shoes  is  knowledge.  Knowing  how  to  make  furniture 
is  also  knowledge.  Our  problem  is  to  say  what  we  mean  by  the 
"  knowing  "  which  appears  as  a  "  determinable  "  in  both  these 
statements.  Theaetetus  seizes  the  point  at  once,  since  it  makes  the 
problem  under  consideration  the  same  in  type  with  a  mathematical 
one  which  he  and  the  younger  Socrates  have  just  solved.  That 
problem  was  to  find  a  common  formula  for  what  we  call,  in  our 
modern  terminology,  "  quadratic  surds/'  or  "  irrational  square 


824         PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

roots."  As  stated  by  Theaetetus,  the  question  is  treated,  exactly 
as  it  is  in  Euclid,  as  one  about  "  lines  "  (yQd^al).  You  cannot 
construct  a  straight  line  commensurable  with  your  unit  of  length, 
such  that  the  square  upon  it  is  3  or  5  or  7  or  n  or  13  or  17  times  the 
area  of  the  square  09  the  unit  line.  But  you  can  devise  a  general 
formula  for  all  these  cases  as  follows.  We  may  divide  the  integers 
into  two  classes :  those  which  are  the  product  of  two  equal  factors 
(4,  9, 16,  etc.),  and  those  which  are  not  (e.g.  6, 8).  We  may  then  call 
the  first  class  "  square  "  and  the  second  "  oblong  "  numbers.  This 
enables  us  to  make  a  correlated  division  of  all  terminated  straight 
lines.  If  the  area  of  the  square  described  on  such  a  straight  line 
can  be  represented,  in  terms  of  the  area  of  the  square  on  a  unit 
line  by  a  number  which  is  the  product  of  two  equal  factors,  we 
call  the  line  in  question  a  "  length  "  (/x^os)  ;  if  this  area  is  repre- 
sented by  a  number  which  is  not  the  product  of  two  equal  factors, 
we  call  the  corresponding  line  a  "  power."  Lines  of  the  first  class 
are  all  commensurable  with  one  another,  since  they  are  all 
"  measured  "  by  our  standard  unit  of  length  ;  lines  of  the  second 
class  have  no  common  measure,  but  the  areas  of  the  squares  on 
them  have  (e.g.  ^3  and  ^5  have  no  common  measure,  but  an  area 
of  3  square  feet  and  one  of  5  square  feet  have  one,  namely,  the 
square  on  a  line  i  foot  long).  This  is  why  the  lines  of  the  second 
class  are  called  "  powers  "  ;  they  are  not  themselves  commensurable 
with  one  another  but  their  "  second  powers  "  are  commensurable.1 
Thus,  since  every  terminated  straight  line  under  consideration 
belongs  to  one  and  only  one  of  these  two  classes,  Theaetetus  has 
succeeded,  by  the  use  of  dichotomy,  in  strictly  defining  the  class 
which  we  should  call  "  quadratic  surds  "  (1486). 

Socrates  is  delighted  with  this  achievement,  and  only  wishes 
Theaetetus  to  apply  the  same  ability  to  determining  the  class  of 
"  sciences  "  or  "  knowledges,"  by  bringing  them  all  under  one  common 
determinable  (148^).  Theaetetus  is  eager  to  solve  the  problem, 
but  does  not  feel  equal  to  the  task,  though  he  cannot  persuade 
himself  to  let  it  drop  from  his  mind.  This  shows  that  Theaetetus 
is  "  pregnant  "  with  a  thought  which  he  cannot  successfully  bring 
to  the  birth.  Now  Socrates,  like  his  mother,  practises  the  obstetric 
art,  not,  like  her,  on  the  bodies  of  women,  but  on  the  souls  of  men. 
He  has  no  spiritual  offspring  of  his  own  to  bear,  as  midwives  are 
no  longer  fruitful  when  they  enter  on  their  profession.2  But  he 
has  great  skill  in  assisting  at  the  birth  of  a  younger  man's  thoughts, 
and  in  discerning  whether  they  are  healthy  and  well  formed  or 

1  The  use  of  the  word  SiW/xts  in  this  sense  of  "  quadratic  surd  "  was 
presumably  an  experiment  in  language  which  did  not  perpetuate  itself.  The 
name  for  the  "  quadratic  surds  "  which  became  technical  in  the  Academy  and 
has  passed  thence  into  Euclid  and  later  mathematics  generally,  is  eu#e?a< 
dvv&fMi  ffiiifjifjicTpoi,  straight  lines  whose  squares  have  a  common  measure  (Eucl. 
Elements,  x.  Def.  3). 

*  Note  that  it  is  implied  in  the  comparison  that  Socrates  had  not  always 
been  spiritually  "  past  procreation,"  any  more  than  his  own  mother  had  always 
been  barren. 


THE  THEAETETUS  825 

sickly  and  misshapen.  This  discernment  is  the  more  necessary 
that  the  offspring  of  the  mind,  unlike  that  of  the  body,  are  some- 
times mere  fantastic  "ghosts"  (ciSwXa)  of  thoughts.1  Socrates 
is  like  his  mother  in  another  respect.  Midwives  are  excellent 
match-makers,  since  their  professional  skill  makes  them  good 
judges  of  the  physical  suitability  of  a  couple  to  one  another.  So 
Socrates  has  often  judged  shrewdly  that  some  of  the  young  men 
who  have  frequented  his  company  are  not  really  "  pregnant  " 
with  thoughts  at  present,  and  in  such  cases  he  has  found  mates  for 
them  in  whose  society  they  have  ceased  to  be  barren,  such  as 
Prodicus.2  He  has  now  an  occasion  for  the  practice  of  his  gift. 
He  will  help  Theaetetus'  spiritual  first-born  into  the  world,  and 
then  we  will  try  it,  to  see  whether  it  is  a  genuine  thought  or  a  mere 
"  changeling  "  (1490-151^). 


FIRST  DEFINITION  OF  KNOWLEDGE  (1510-1860) 

KNOWLEDGE  AND  SENSATION  :  THE  THEORY  STATED  (1510- 
ifod).— With  this  encouragement  Theaetetus  attempts  a  first 
definition.  A  man  who  knows  a  thing  "  perceives  "  the  thing  he 
knows  (as  our  own  proverb  says,  "  seeing  is  believing  ").  So  we 
may  say,  as  a  first  suggestion,  that  "  knowledge  (cVitm^)  is  just 
perception  "  (cuo-flr/o-ts)  .3  This  would  seem  to  be  only  another 
way  of  saying  what  Protagoras  expressed  by  the  formula  that 
"  man  is  the  measure/1  Theaetetus,  who  has  often  read  Protagoras 
(1520),  agrees  with  Socrates  that  Protagoras  meant  by  this  that 
"  what  appears  to  me,  is  to  me  ;  what  appears  to  you,  is  to  you." 
In  fact,  "  I  perceive  this  "  ="  this  appears  to  me  "  ="  this  is  so 
to  me  "  (1526).  "  Sense  "  (aurftpris)  is  thus  always  apprehension 

1  The  suggestion  is  that  if — as  is  not  the  case — a  woman  sometimes  gave 
birth  to  a  real  child  and  sometimes  to  a  "  changeling,"  the  midwife's  task 
would  become  even  more  responsible  than  it  is.  She  would  have  to  decide 
in  a  given  case  whether  the  offspring  should  be  cast  away.  The  passage  lends 
no  support  to  the  erroneous  popular  theory  of  infanticide  as  a  feature  of 
Athenian  life. 

1  The  transparent  irony  of  this  passage  has  actually  been  missed  by  some 
of  the  zealots  for  the  "  sophists."  It  is  the  minds  which  Socrates  judges  to 
be  barren,  the  persons  on  whom  his  own  endeavours  would  be  thrown  away, 
i.e.  the  second-rate,  whom  he  hands  over  to  Prodicus  and  his  likes.  That  the 
conception  of  the  obstetrics  of  the  soul  is  a  genuine  Socratic  fancy  is  shown 
by  the  allusion  in  Aristophanes'  Clouds,  137  ft. 

8  I  render  afoOijffit  in  this  statement  by  "perception,"  rather  than  by 
"  qensation, "  since  it  is  not  clear  to  me  that  Theaetetus  is  at  first  using  the 
word  with  the  specific  meaning  of  discernment  by  sense.  Until  Socrates  leads 
him  to  make  his  statement  more  precise,  he  seems  to  me  to  be  employing 
alffOdveoffai,  in  the  fashion  of  the  pre-Socratics,  for  direct  apprehension  of  any 
kind,  whether  sensuous  or  not.  What  a  man  is  directly  apprehending  he  is 
sure  of  (Mffrarai).  For  this  sense  of  {riffraff Oat  cf.  Heraclit.  Fr.  35  (By- 
water),  TOVTOP  brlffTavrai  irXeicrra  cldtvai,  "  they  feel  sure  he — sc.  Hesiod — 
was  so  wise."  That  afoOijeis  is  meant  at  first  to  include  all  immediate 
conviction  is  shown  by  the  introduction  of  the  argument  about  numerical 
propositions,  1541  ff. 


326          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

of  something  which  is  (TOV  OVTOS),  and  is  infallible,  and  therefore  is 
the  same  thing  as  certain  knowledge  (tirurrrjprj)  (1520). 

We  should  note  very  carefully  exactly  what  is  the  theory  here 
ascribed  to  Protagoras.  (That  the  interpretation  of  his  dictum 
is  the  correct  interpretation,  or  at  least  that  supposed  by  his  readers 
at  large  to  be  correct,  is  clear,  since  it  is  assumed  that  all  the  parties 
to  the  conversation  are  quite  familiar  with  the  context  of  the  saying, 
and  not  one  of  them  suggests  that  there  can  be  any  mistake  about 
its  meaning.)  The  view  Plato  ascribes  to  Protagoras  is  not  "  sub- 
jectivism.'1 It  is  not  suggested  that  "  what  appears  to  me  "  is  a 
"  mental  modification  "  of  myself.  The  theory  is  strictly  realistic  ; 
it  is  assumed  that  "  what  appears  to  me  "  is  never  a  "  mere  appear- 
ance/1 but  always  "  that  which  is,"  "  reality."  But  Protagoras 
denies  that  there  is  a  common  real  world  which  can  be  known  by  two 
percipients.  Reality  itself  is  individual  in  the  sense  that  I  live  in 
a  private  world  known  only  to  me,  you  in  another  private  world 
known  only  to  you.  Thus  if  I  say  the  wind  is  unpleasantly  hot 
and  you  that  it  is  disagreeably  chilly,  we  both  speak  the  truth, 
for  each  of  us  is  speaking  of  a  "  real  "  wind,  but  of  a  "  real  "  wind 
which  belongs  to  that  private  world  to  which  he,  and  only  he, 
has  access.  No  two  of  these  private  worlds  have  a  single  con- 
stituent in  common,  and  that  is  precisely  why  it  can  be  held  that 
each  of  us  is  infallible  about  his  own  private  world.  Protagoras 
is  not  denying  the  genuine  "  objectivity  "  of  each  man's  private 
world  ;  his  equation  of  "  appears  to  me  "  with  "  is,  is  real,  to  me  " 
is  meant  to  insist  on  this  objectivity.  But  he  denies  the  reality 
of  the  "  common  environment  "  presupposed  by  "  intra-subjective 
intercourse."  His  thesis  is  strictly  metaphysical,  not  psychological. 

But  now,  how  if  Protagoras  really  meant  something  more 
elaborate  than  this,  and  explained  his  meaning  more  fully  to  his 
intimates  "  in  secret,"  though  he  gave  the  world  at  large  only 
this  one  hint  of  it  ?  There  is  a  "  far  from  contemptible  "  (ov  <£avAos) 
view  which  we  might  regard  as  implied  by  the  Protagorean  dictum, 
and  it  is  as  follows.1  All  truth  is  strictly  relative.  Nothing,  e.g., 
is  big  or  hot  "  absolutely,"  but  only  "  big  "  or  "  hot  "  relatively 
to  some  standard  of  comparison.  If  you  selected  your  standard 
differently,  the  same  thing  could  truly  be  said  to  be  "  small  "  or 
"cold,"  relatively  to  the  new  standard.  This  applies  even  to 
existential  propositions.  You  cannot  say  absolutely  "  this  is," 
any  more  than  you  can  say  "  this  is  so."  You  can  only  say  "  this 
is,  is  real  "  relatively  to  something  else.  For  the  very  word  "  is  " 
is  a  misnomer.  The  things  we  speak  of  as  "  existing  "  are  really 
events  which  "  happen  "  as  a  consequence  of  movements  ;  move- 
ment is  the  only  thing  which  is  ultimately  real  in  the  universe,  as 

1  Theaet.  i$2c-d.  Since  Socrates  suggests  that  this  doctrine  was  only  told 
by  Protagoras  to  his  followers  "in  a  mystery,"  sub  stgillo  (4v  dirop/rtjrv), 
clearly  nothing  of  the  kind  can  have  been  found  in  his  book.  The  suggestion 
is  that  if  you  think  out  all  that  is  really  implied  in  the  Homo  me*sura  formula, 
you  will  be  led  to  the  metaphysical  theory  now  to  be  expounded. 


THE  THEAETETVS  82* 

all  the  "  wise,"  with  the  solitary  exception  of  Parmenides,  seem  to 
have  held  from  time  immemorial.  All  life,  bodily  or  mental,  is 
movement  and  activity ;  cessation  of  movement  is  lethargy, 
stagnation,  death  (1520-153^).  Now  apply  this  to  the  case  of 
anything  we  perceive  by  sense,  e.g.  a  white  expanse.  We  must  not 
say  that  the  white  we  see  is  "  in  "  a  body  outside  our  own,  nor  yet 
that  it  is  "  in  "  our  own  eye.  It  is  not  anywhere.  The  truth  is 
that  what  we  call  our  "  eye  "  and  what  we  call  the  "  outside  world  " 
are  simply  two  sets  of  motions.  When  they  come  into  contact 
and  interfere  with  one  another,  something  "happens"  (yiyvtrat) 
momentarily  as  a  consequence  of  this  interference,  and  this  some- 
thing is  the  colour,  which  is  thus  neither  "  within  "  us  nor  "  with- 
out "  us,  but  is  just  the  joint  product  of  two  factors,  the  system  of 
motions  which  are  outside  the  organism  and  the  system  of  motions 
which  are  the  eye  l  (1530).  This  explains  at  once  why  each  of  us 
lives  in  a  strictly  private  world.  Any  change  in  either  of  the  causal 
factors,  the  "  motions  "  in  the  larger  world  and  the  "  motions  "  in 
the  organism,  may  affect  their  joint  product,  and  therefore  a  man 
and  a  dog  will  not  see  the  same  colours,  nor  a  man  in  health  the 
same  colours  as  a  man  out  of  health.  If  the  perceived  quality, 
"  hot,"  "white,"  or  what  not,  were  simply  an  affection  of  "  that 
by  which  we  measure  or  apprehend,"  i.e.  of  our  own  organism  or 
"  sensibility,"  it  ought  not  to  be  modified  by  changes  in  anything 
else  (as,  in  fact,  it  is  by,  e.g.,  variations  in  illumination)  ;  2  if  it  were 
simply  a  character  of  "  that  which  is  measured  or  apprehended  " 
(the  external  object),  it  should  similarly  be  unaffected  by  changes 
internal  to  the  organism  (but,  in  fact,  it  is  affected  by  them). 
The  facts  thus  show  that  the  perceived  world  is  a  function  of  two 
variables,  my  special  organism  and  its  environment ;  hence  it  is 
necessarily  a  "  private  "  world  (154^). 

Before  we  can  judge  such  a  theory  on  its  merits  we  need  a  further 
clarification  of  our  thoughts.  On  the  "  private-world  "  theory, 
six  dice  will  not  only  "  appear  "  but  "  be  "  at  once  "  many  "  and 
"  few  "  :  "  many,"  if  a  group  of  four  is  my  standard  of  comparison, 
"  few  "  if  my  standard  is  a  dozen.  Reflection  on  such  cases  leads 
us  irresistibly  to  make  three  affirmations  which  seem  to  be  self- 
evident  and  yet  not  all  mutually  compatible  :  (i)  nothing  can 
become  greater  in  bulk  or  number  except  by  being  augmented 

1  We  shall  see  later  on  that  this  is  not  a  complete  account  of  the  matter. 
The  "  product "  of  the  two  motions  is  itself  a  motion,  and  this  motion  has  two 
aspects.  The  "  seeing  eye  "  is  as  much  a  momentary  event  as  the  seen  colour. 
As  to  the  terminology  of  1530,  the  active  motion  (rb  irpoffpd\\ov)  must  be 
conceived  as  that  of  the  eye's  own  "visual  ray"  issuing  out  of  the  eyeball; 
the  passive  (rb  irpoff^a\\6(ji€vov)  is  what  we  commonly  call  the  "  external "  object 
on  which  this  supposed  visual  ray  impinges.  We  should  think  more  naturally 
of  reflected  light  striking  on  the  retina  as  the  rpo<rpd\\ov,  but  Plato  always 
presupposes  the  Empedoclean  conception  of  seeing  as  effected  by  a  "  search- 
light "  thrown  out  by  the  eye  into  the  world  around  us. 

*  In  1546,  rb  irapafj,cTpotifJL€vov  is  simply  a  paraphrase  for  ofo-^<rts.     Socrates 
inserts  the  TapapeTpotnevov  simply  to  echo  the  curious  use  of  the  word 
in  the  formula  of  Protagoras. 


828          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 


;  (2)  that  to  which  nothing  has  been  added  and  from 
which  nothing  has  been  subtracted  has  been  neither  augmented  nor 
diminished  ;  (3)  what  once  was  not  but  now  is  must  have  "  come  to 
be  "  in  the  interval  (i.e.  there  has  been  a  transitional  process  of 
"  coming  into  being/1  1556)  .* 

Yet  the  case  of  the  dice,  or  the  case  in  which  Socrates  is  one 
year  taller  than  Theaetetus  but  the  next  shorter,  seems  to  create  a 
difficulty.  In  this  last  case,  Theaetetus  has  grown,  but  Socrates 
has  neither  grown  nor  shrunk.  He  is  now,  what  he  was  not  last 
year,  "  shorter,11  and  yet  there  has  been  no  process  of  "  coming 
to  be  shorter."  How  are  we  to  explain  the  paradox  ?  We  cannot 
explain  it  at  all  to  a  corporealist  who  denies  the  reality  of  acts  and 

E  recesses  and  the  invisible  generally.  But  it  might  be  explained 
y  the  theory  of  certain  more  refined  (/co/^orepoi)  persons,  whose 
secret  Socrates  offers  to  disclose  (1560).  Their  theory  is  this. 
As  has  been  already  suggested,  the  only  reality  is  motion.  There 
are  two  types  of  motion,  the  active  and  the  passive.  The  mutual 
friction  or  interference  (rptyi?)  of  an  active  and  a  passive  motion 
regularly  gives  rise  to  a  twin  product,  "  sense  "+"  sensible 
quality/1  and  neither  of  these  is  ever  to  be  found  without  its  "  twin." 
And  this  twin  product  is  itself,  again,  a  pair  of  movements,  though 
of  movements  more  rapid  than  those  which  gave  rise  to  it.  Thus, 
to  apply  the  theory  to  the  case  of  vision,  you  have  first  two  "  slower  " 
causative  "  movements  "  (the  "  active  "  movement  here  is  supposed 
to  be  the  "  event  "  which  is  the  visual  apparatus,  the  "  passive  " 
is  the  event  we  call  the  environment)  ;  when  there  is  an  "  inter- 
ference "  of  these  two  motions,  in  that  very  process  there  emerge 
two  correlated  "  quicker  "  movements,  neither  of  which  ever  exists 
without  the  other,2  "  vision  in  act  "  and  "  seen  colour."  Thus  the 
couple  "  seeing  eye  "  and  "  colour  seen  "  are  themselves  a  dual 
more  "  rapid  "  event  produced  as  an  effect  by  the  mutual  inter- 
ference of  the  two  "  slower  "  causal  movements.  It  follows  that 
all  predication  is  strictly  relative.  The  "  causal  "  motions  them- 
selves are  strictly  relative  to  one  another,  each  is  "  active  "  or 
"  passive  "  only  in  relation  to  its  correlate  ;  and  similarly  in  the 
"  effect/'  the  seen  colour  is  seen  only  by  this  "  seeing  eye,"  and  this 
"  seeing  eye  "  sees  only  this  colour.  "  Being  "  is  thus  a  strictly 
relative  term.  To  speak  accurately,  we  ought  never  to  say  "#  is," 
but  "  %  is,  relatively  to  y  "  ;  if  we  omit  the  qualification,  it  is  only 
because  of  an  inveterate  linguistic  bad  habit.  Socrates  does  not 

1Note  that  we  have  here  in  outline  the  fundamental  thought  of  the 
Aristotelian  doctrine  about  "  generation  "  and  "  corruption."  The  diroplai 
connected  with  the  problem  are  one  of  the  topics  of  the  Parmenides  (1550-1576). 

1  Thus  the  theory  is  closely  analogous  to  Aristotle's  doctrine  that  in  actual 
perception  the  afoOipu  and  the  alcr0rjr6v  are,  while  the  perception  lasts,  one  and 
the  same.  ^  The  important  difference  is  that  in  the  account  given  here,  both 
the  al<r6riT6v  and  the  al<r8w6/Mvot>  only  exist  actually  during  the  process  of  per- 
ception ;  apart  from  the  process,  <reye  "  and  "  colour  "  only  are  "  potenti- 
ally." On  Aristotle's  theory,  this  is  true  of  the  "  seeing  eye,"  but  not  of  the 
seen  colour. 


THE  THEAETETUS  829 

commit  himself  to  this  theory  of  "  absolute  becoming,"  any  more 
than  to  any  other,  but  he  has  stated  it  because  we  cannot  dispose 
of  the  assertion  that  "  is  "  ="  appears  to  me"  without  deciding 
this  still  more  fundamental  question  (i^Sd). 

We  note  that  the  difference  between  the  Protagorean  formula 
and  the  doctrine  now  given  as  that  of  certain  unnamed  "  fine 
wits  "  is  that  the  first  is  a  piece  of  "  epistemology,"  the  second  is 
ontology,  and  professes  to  give  the  grounds  for  the  individualistic 
or  "  solipsist  '  epistemology.  The  proposition  that  my  perceived 
world  only  exists  for  me,  and  that  it  is  meaningless  to  ask  whether 
your  "  world  "  and  "  mine  "  can  contain  one  and  the  same  object, 
is  only  one  special  consequence  of  the  much  more  far-reaching 
doctrine  that  "  is  "  itself  has  no  meaning  unless  one  adds  the  quali- 
fication "  relatively  to."  It  is  now  being  asserted  not  merely  that 
perceived  qualities  only  exist  "  for  "  the  percipient  who  is  aware  of 
them,  and  he  is  only  "  percipient  "  of  just  these  qualities,  but  that 
the  correlated  active  and  passive  "  slower  "  movements,  thing  and 
environment,  only  are  relatively  to  one  another.  (Thus,  e.g., 
the  statement  that  a  particle  A  exists  would  actually  mean  that  A 
interacts  in  a  certain  way  with  B  and  C,  and  so  on  for  B  and  C 
themselves.)  This  is  why  the  doctrine  described  here  cannot  be 
disposed  of  in  the  summary  way  in  which  Mr.  Bradley  has  disposed 
of  the  "  phenomenalism "  of  many  modern  scientific  men  in 
Appearance  and  Reality.  The  persons  of  whom  Mr.  Bradley  is 
thinking  have  really  not  got  behind  the  restricted  doctrine  of  the 
"  relativity  "  of  perceived  quality  to  percipient.  At  the  back  of 
their  minds  there  is  still  the  notion  that  both  percipient  and  per- 
ceived quality  are  effects  of  something  which,  though  not  itself 
perceived,  is,  or  is  real  in  an  absolute  sense,  and  thus  they  are 
easily  convicted  of  inconsistency  with  themselves.  But  the  theory 
we  are  now  dealing  with  asserts  that  the  "  slower  motions,"  assumed 
by  the  victims  of  Mr.  Bradley's  dialectic  to  be  simply  "  real,"  are 
themselves  purely  relative,  each  such  "  active  "  motion  being  relative 
to  a  specific  "  passive  "  motion  and  vice  versa.  It  is  thus  not 
open  to  the  criticism  that  it  regards  anything  whatever,  per- 
ceptible or  imperceptible,  as  simply  real ;  "  this  is  real  "  is,  on  this 
view,  always  an  incomplete  statement  which,  as  it  stands,  is  strictly 
devoid  of  significance. 

It  is  not  clear  from  what  quarter  Socrates  is  supposed  to  have 
learned  the  theory.  He  is  clearly  not  inventing  it,  since  he  repre- 
sents it  as  the  "  secret  "  of  certain  refined  wits.  Nor  do  I  think 
it  likely  that  Plato  has  devised  the  whole  thing  for  himself  simply 
as  a  metaphysic  which  might  be  urged,  and  in  fact  would  have  to 
be  urged,  by  a  far-seeing  defender  of  the  Protagorean  formula. 
The  insistence  on  motion  as  the  only  reality  at  once  suggests  a 
Heraclitean  influence,  and  the  elaborate  kinematic  working  out  of 
the  thought  further  suggests  that  the  KO^OL  of  whom  Socrates  is 
thinking  are  persons  with  a  strong  mathematical  interest.  If  we 
had  more  information  than  we  have  about  the  curious  blend  of 


880          PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Heraditeanism  and  Pythagorean  mathematics  represented  in  our 
tradition  by  the  stories  told  of  the  mysterious  Hippasus,  we  might 
be  able  to  say  something  more  definite.  From  Plato's  own  point 
of  view,  the  theory  would  be  perfectly  acceptable  as  an  account  of 
"  pure  "  sensation ;  but  we  must  remember  that,  as  it  is  part  of  the 
object  of  the  dialogue  to  show,  no  piece  of  knowledge,  not  even  the 
crudest  statement  about  present  fact,  ever  is  a  mere  deliverance  of 
sensation. 

With  this  general  metaphysical  theory  as  a  presupposition,  we 
could  now  dispose  of  the  superficial  objection  to  Protagoras  that 
some  "  appearances  " — those  of  dreams,  delirium,  fever — are 
deceptive.  The  world  of  the  sleeper  or  the  fever-patient  is  as  real 
to  him,  while  his  dream  or  fever  lasts,  as  the  world  of  the  man  awake 
and  in  health  is  to  him.  And  it  is  not  true  to  say  that  there  is  any 
conflict  between  the  way  in  which  the  world  appears  to  one  and  the 
same  percipient,  according  as  he  is  awake  or  asleep,  ill  or  well. 
On  the  theory,  the  "  twin-product,"  sensation  +  sensed  quality 
is  a  function  of  the  complex,  organism  +  environment.  But  it  is 
an  immediate  consequence  that,  since  a  sleeping  or  delirious 
organism  is  different  from  a  waking  or  healthy  organism,  the  result 
of  interaction  with  environment  must  be  different.  Socrates  asleep 
is  different  from  Socrates  awake  in  important  organic  respects,  and, 
on  the  theory  we  are  considering  there  is  no  "  self  "  or  "  percipient  " 
but  the  organism  as  it  is  at  the  moment.  Thus  the  sensa  of  Socrates 
asleep  are  real  relatively  to  Socrates  asleep,  exactly  as  those  of 
Socrates  awake  are  real  relatively  to  Socrates  awake,  and  it  would 
be  abandoning  the  whole  theory  of  the  relativity  of  "  being  "  to 
judge  of  the  reality  of  the  sensa  of  Socrates  asleep  by  reference  to 
those  of  Socrates  awake  (1570-1 6oc).  The  sensa  of  any  percipient 
organism  at  any  moment  are  relative  to  the  state  of  that  organism 
at  that  moment,  and  to  nothing  else,  just  as  that  organism  at  that 
moment  is  relative  to  those  sensa  and  to  nothing  else.  (The  esse 
of  the  organism  at  the  moment  t,  we  may  say,  is  to  perceive  the 
sensa  it  perceives  at  that  moment ;  the  esse  of  those  sensa  is  to  be 
perceived  by  it  at  that  moment ;  neither  organism  nor  sensa  have 
any  further  reality.)  Consequently  the  "  world  "  of  any  percipient 
at  any  moment  is  private  to  that  percipient  and  that  moment. 
"  My  perception  is  inerrant,  for  it  is  relative  to  my  world  (e/^  ouri'a) 
at  that  moment." l  Thus  the  theory  we  have  stated  justifies  the 
Heracliteans  in  saying  that  all  is  motion,  Protagoras  in  saying  that 
"  man  "  is  the  measure,"  and  Theaetetus  in  saying  that  sense  is 
knowledge  (i6od-e). 

1  i6oct  dXijOfy  Apa  faol  i)  ^  af<707j<ns — TT)J  y&p  ipy*  ov<rtas  def  tonv,  where  note 
(a)  that  dei  means  not "  always  "  but  "  at  each  moment,"  "  at  a  given  moment," 
and  (6)  that  ij  ^  ovffta  does  not  mean  "  my  own  being,"  as  though  the  thought 
were  that  what  I  perceive  is  a  "  subjective  "  irdflos  or  state  of  my  own  body 
or  mind,  but  "  the  reality  which  is  mine,"  a  real  world  of  objects  which  is  my 
own  private  world.  The  crux  of  the  whole  theory  is  that  it  is  an  attempt  to 
insist  at  once  on  the  objectivity  of  the  world  I  perceive  and  on  its  purely  private 
character. 


THE  THEAETETUS  831 

THE  THEORY  EXAMINED. — First  Criticism  (1600-1 652). -— The 
thought  of  which  Theaetetus  was  in  labour  has  now  been  fairly 
brought  into  the  world,  Our  next  task  is  to  consider  whether 
it  is  a  genuine  piece  of  thinking  or  only  a  "  changeling/1  To  give 
the  lad  breathing-time  for  recollection,  Theodoras  partially  takes 
his  place  as  respondent  while  Socrates  raises  a  number  of  critical 
doubts,  (a)  How  does  Protagoras  justify  his  selection  of  man  in 
particular  as  the  "  measure  "  ?  The  theory  would  equally  warrant 
the  statement  that  any  creature — a  pig,  a  baboon,  or  a  tadpole — is 
the  "  measure/'  provided  only  that  it  is  sentient,  (b)  If  each  of 
us  is  the  "  measure  "  of  reality  and  unreality  in  his  own  world, 
where  has  Protagoras  any  advantage  over  his  pupils  ?  How  can  he 
claim  to  correct  a  pupil's  views  about  the  reality  of  a  world  which, 
on  the  theory,  is  private  to  the  pupil  and  relative  to  the  pupil  as  its 
"  measure  "  ?  (The  very  attempt  implies,  contrary  to  the  theory, 
that  there  is  a  "  world  "  of  some  kind  common  to  Protagoras  and 
the  pupil,  and  that  Protagoras  is  a  better  "  measure  "  of  it  than  the 
other.)  Was  the  professional  career  of  Protagoras  a  prolonged 
practical  joke  ?  Protagoras  might,  however,  fairly  say  that  this 
sort  of  "  criticism  "  is  mere  caricature.1  We  must  examine  the 
proposed  identification  of  sense-perception  with  knowledge  in  dead 
earnest.  So  we  go  on  to  ask  (c)  whether  when  we  hear  foreigners 
speaking  their  own  language  we  also  know  "  what  they  are  saying," 
or  whether  when  a  person  who  cannot  read  sees  a  written  page  he 
knows  what  is  written  on  it.  The  only  possible  answer  is  that  in 
such  a  case  one  does  know  what  one  actually  hears  or  sees,  the 
pitch  of  the  syllables  or  the  shape  and  colour  of  the  letters,  but  one 
does  not  know  the  meaning  of  the  foreign  vocables  or  the  written 
words.  (Thus  the  formula  knowing  =  perceiving  by  the  senses 
will  not  cover  the  case  of  knowing  the  meaning  of  such  symbols ; 
their  meaning  can  neither  be  heard  nor  seen.)  (d)  Suppose  a 
man  has  seen  something  and  then  shuts  his  eyes,  but  still  remembers 
what  he  saw.  He  no  longer  sees  it,  but  can  we  say  that  he  does  not 
know  what  he  has  seen  and  still  remembers  ?  There  is  real  point 
in  these  questions,  but  we  must  take  care  not  to  "  crow  "  over 
Protagoras  and  his  theory  prematurely.  If  he  were  alive,  he  would 
probably  have  known  how  to  make  a  telling  rejoinder  to  such  cavils. 
As  he  is  dead  and  has  no  one  to  represent  him,  we  must  try  to  act 
as  his  advocates  ourselves,  and  to  plead  the  cause  as  effectively  as 
we  can  (1645-1 650). 2  If  we  are  to  press  mere  verbal  points,  any 

1  Theaet.  i62d-e.  This  might  be,  but  need  not  be,  a  hint  that  there  had  been 
attempts  to  discredit  the  formula  of  Protagoras  by  caricatures  of  this  kind. 
But  I  think  it  very  rash  to  indulge  in  conjectures  about  Antisthenes — to  whom 
I  can  discover  no  certain  allusions  in  Plato — as  the  author  of  the  arguments. 
The  dvri\oyiKol  were  a  fairly  numerous  class,  and  we  may  suppose  that  many  of 
them  exercised  their  wit  on  so  tempting  a  theme.  Protagoras  would  have  an 
easy  retort  to  the  first  of  the  four  objections.  A  tadpole  is  quite  a  good 
"  measure  "  of  the  "  world  "  with  which  the  tadpole  has  to  concern  itself. 

•The  personification  of  the  "  discourse  "  of  Protagoras  as  an  "  orphan  " 
whose  natural  guardians  are  neglecting  their  duties  lends  no  colour  to  the  silly 


882          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 


could  quite  easily  make  many  more  formidable  than 
those  we  have  made  ourselves,  without  ever  coming  to  close  quarters 
with  Protagoras'  real  thought. 

SOCRATES'  PROPOSED  DEFENCE  OF  PROTAGORAS  (i66a-i68c).  — 
Protagoras  might  fairly  say  that  he  would  not  have  been  affected 
by  the  question  about  memory  which  puzzled  a  lad  like  Theaetetus. 
He  would  have  exposed  the  absurdity  of  talking  about  memory  as 
if  it  meant  the  "  persistence  "  of  the  state  of  the  organism  in  which 
it  was  at  the  moment  of  stimulation.  He  would  have  insisted  on 
the  point  that,  according  to  his  theory,  each  of  us  is  not  one  per- 
cipient but  a  different  percipient  with  every  change  in  the  state  of 
his  organism.  And  he  would  have  urged  that  it  is  for  his  opponent  to 
refute  him  directly  by  proving  either  that  a  man's  "  senses  "  (atV^o-ets) 
are  not  private  to  himself,  or,  alternatively,  that,  granting  this  position, 
the  sense-object  which  "  appears  "  or  "  is  "  need  not  be  private.1 

Meanwhile,  the  thesis  of  Protagoras  remains  untouched.  Each 
percipient  has  his  own  strictly  personal  and  private  world  ;  it  is 
not  merely  his  "  apparent  "  world,  but  a  real,  though  private, 
world.  And  yet  there  is  a  difference  between  the  wise  man  and  his 
neighbours,  a  practical  difference.  The  wise  man  is  one  who 
can  influence  another  so  that  the  other  man's  private  world,  which 
appears  and  really  is  bad,  is  made  to  appear  and  be  good  (i66d). 
Thus  the  abnormal  perceptions  of  the  diseased  organism  are  as 
much  a  disclosure  of  reality  as  the  normal  perceptions  of  the  healthy. 
The  physician  does  not  attempt  to  argue  the  patient  into  denying 
their  reality.  He  subjects  the  patient  to  a  regimen  which  brings 
his  perceptions  into  accord  with  those  of  his  fellow-men,  and  thus 
makes  them  "  wholesome  "  or  "  useful,"  whereas  they  were,  before 
treatment,  dangerous  and  unwholesome.  So  the  "  sophist,"  who  is 
the  physician  of  the  soul,  aims  not  at  giving  a  pupil  "  truer  views  " 
—  that  would  be  impossible,  if  the  pupil  is  the  "  measure  "  of  his 
own  real  world  —  but  at  giving  him  "  better  "  and  more  wholesome 
views  of  life  (i66d-i6yc).  The  defence  made  by  Socrates  for  Protag- 
oras thus  amounts  to  crediting  him  with  a  "  pragmatist  "  view. 
Any  one  belief,  actually  held,  is  as  "  true  "  as  any  other,  but  some 
sensations  and  some  ways  of  thinking  are  "  better/1  that  is,  "  more 
useful  hi  practice  "  than  others.  It  is  implied,  though  not  actually 
said,  that  the  "  useful  "  way  of  perceiving  and  thinking  is  that 

legend  about  the  prosecution  of  Protagoras  and  the  destruction  of  his  book. 
Socrates  is  merely  jesting  over  the  reluctance  of  Theodorus  to  commit  him- 
self to  a  "non-professional"  controversy.  Theodorus  is  called  the  natural 
guardian  of  the  orphan  simply  because  he  professes  to  be  an  old  friend  and 
admirer  of  its  author.  The  image,  of  course,  implies  that  the  book  of  Protag- 
oras had  not  been  destroyed,  but  had  survived  its  "  father."  Only,  no  one 
will  venture  on  an  "  official  "  defence  of  it. 

1  Theaet.  i66c.  In  this  alternative,  the  first  position,  that  each  man's 
af<r0ifarets  are  "  private,"  cannot  be  contested.  I  see  with  my  own  eyes,  and  no 
other  man  can  see  with  them,  any  more  than  I  can  see  with  his  eyes.  Thus 
the  issue  between  realism  and  "  absolute  phenomenalism  "  is  rightly  made  to 
be  just  whether  two  men,  each  using  his  own  private  senses,  can  perceive  an 
object  which  is  "  common  "  to  both  of  them. 


THE  THEAETETUS  888 

which  agrees  with  the  perception  and  thought  of  your  "  social  en- 
vironment," since  it  is  only  such  agreement  which  makes  concerted 
action  possible.  To  be  gravely  "  eccentric  "  in  your  perceptions  or 
your  moral  convictions  puts  you  into  the  class  of  the  insane  and 
makes  practical  co-operation  with  your  neighbours  impossible.  The 
root  of  the  matter  is  that,  though  the  notion  of  a  "  common  "  natural 
or  moral  world  is,  strictly  speaking,  a  fiction,  it  is  a  fiction  which  is 
necessary  to  life.  The  practical  urgencies  of  life  require  that  my 
private  world  and  your  private  world  should  not  be  very  dissimilar. 
If  they  are  sufficiently  alike,  by  a  useful  fiction  we  can  act  "  as  if  " 
we  had  a  common  world  ;  where  the  divergence  is  too  great  to 
admit  of  this  fiction,  when  I  call  black  what  you  call  white,  one  of 
us  needs  a  physician  for  the  body  or  the  soul.  By  altering  the 
state  of  the  percipient,  the  physician,  according  to  the  Protagorean 
theory  itself,  necessarily  also  alters  the  character  of  his  "  world/' 

Since  Socrates  offers  this  interpretation  as  a  substitute  for  an 
"  official  "  exegesis,  it  is  clear  that  it  cannot  have  been  given  by 
Protagoras  himself  ;  since  it  is  welcomed  by  Protagoras'  old  ad- 
mirer Theodoras,  we  may  infer  that  it  is  offered  as  a  fair  and  honest 
attempt  to  explain  what  Protagoras  meant,  on  the  assumption  that 
he  was  a  man  of  intelligence  and  that  his  doctrine  was  intended  to 
be  compatible  with  his  claims  for  himself  as  a  practical  teacher. 
So  far  as  I  can  see,  it  is  not  only  offered  in  good  faith,  but  is  about 
the  best  defence  which  can  be  made  for  the  view  that  the  "  common  " 
world  is  strictly  the  creation  of  the  "  intersubjective  intercourse  " 
on  which  all  practical  co-operation  depends.  Against  modern 
statements  of  pragmatism  it  has  the  advantage  that  it  does  not 
attempt  the  task  of  equating  "  true  "  with  "  practically  useful  "  ; 
it  simply  sets  aside  the  distinction  between  "  true  "  and  "  false  " 
as  irrelevant  to  human  life,  and  replaces  it  by  the  obviously  relevant 
distinction  between  "  useful "  and  "  harmful."  Our  attention 
is  thus  concentrated  on  the  fundamental  question  whether  the 
abolition  of  the  distinction  of  true  from  false  really  leaves  this  all- 
important  practical  distinction  between  useful  and  harmful  stand- 
ing or  not.  This  ultimate  issue  is  so  serious  that  we  cannot  allow 
the  case  for  the  pragmatist  to  be  prejudiced  by  being  left  to  the 
championship  of  a  boy,  even  if  he  is,  like  Theaetetus,  a  boy  of 
genius  ;  Theodoras  must  take  the  defence  on  himself  (1680-1690) -1 

1  It  may  be  advisable  to  warn  some  readers  again  against  the  really  wanton 
attempt  to  find  a  hidden  attack  on  Antisthenes  in  the  pleasantries  interchanged 
between  Socrates  and  Theodorus  at  1696.  Theodorus  compares  Socrates  with 
Antaeus,  who  compelled  every  one  to  wrestle  with  him,  merely  because 
Socrates  is  so  insistent  on  dragging  Theodorus  himself  into  a  philosophical 
argument  he  would  rather  decline.  This  leads  naturally  to  the  mention  of 
Heracles  as  the  person  who  finally  vanquished  Antaeus.  It  is  needless  to 
look  for  any  more  recondite  reason  for  the  allusion.  And  it  is  still  more 
needless  to  suppose  that  when  Socrates  speaks  of  the  numerous  Heraclesea 
with  whom  he  has  had  stiff  "  bouts/'  he  is  thinking  of  his  own  friend  and 
companion.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  we  shall  hear  less  in  the  future  of  the  im- 
aginary "  feud  "  of  Plato  with  Antisthenes  since  Wilamowitz  has  uttered  his 
timely  protest  against  this  Antisthenes- Legende. 


884          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

SECOND  EXAMINATION  OF  THE  PROTAGOREAN  THESIS  (169^- 
1720, 1760-1796). — The  task  now  before  us  is  to  examine  the  "  prag- 
matist  "  philosophy  on  its  own  merits.  The  examination  falls 
into  two  sections,  between  which  the  famous  panegyric  on  the  life 
of  devotion  to  "  useless  science  "  is  inserted,  admittedly  as  a 
digression.  It  strikes  us  at  once,  as  a  common  experience,  that 
every  one  knows  there  are  soijie  things  about  which  he  thinks  him- 
self wiser  than  others  and  other  things  about  which  he  thinks 
others  wiser  than  himself  (1700-6).  Every  one  admits  that  there 
are  things  about  which  he  is  ignorant  and  incompetent  and  needs  to 
be  taught  or  directed.  And  by  "  wisdom  "  and  "  ignorance  "  men 
suppose  themselves  to  mean  true  and  false  belief  (Sofa)  respec- 
tively. According  to  the  thesis  of  Protagoras,  this  belief  that  some 
of  my  beliefs  are  true  and  others  false,  being  one  of  my  beliefs, 
must  be  true.  It  must  be  true,  since  it  is  a  belief,  that  there  are 
things  of  which  a  given  man  is  not  the  "  measure."  This  is  a  direct 
consequence  of  Protagoras'  own  principle,  and  yet  it  contradicts 
that  principle.  And  the  worst  of  it  is  that  if  there  is  one  point  on 
which  every  one,  even  those  who  would  most  readily  concede  that 
any  one  man's  sensations  are  just  as  veridical  as  any  other's, 
is  agreed,  it  is  that  when  you  come  to  the  question  what  is  whole- 
some or  hurtful,  each  of  us  is  not  equally  the  "  measure  "  for  him- 
self. That  is  just  why  we  need  the  expert  physician  (1710) .  So 
in  moral  matters,  even  those  who  hold  that  there  is  no  common 
standard  of  right  and  wrong,  but  that  "  right  "  means  simply  for 
any  community  what  that  community  agrees  in  approving,  never 
think  that  "  expediency  "  is  a  purely  relative  matter.  No  one 
holds  that  the  expedient  is  what  a  given  community  thinks  ex- 
pedient, though  many  persons  hold  that  right  is  just  whatever  the 
community  happens  to  think  right.  Every  one  holds  that  there  is 
a  common  standard  of  expediency  (1726).  These  considerations 
are  meant  to  lead  up  to  the  conclusion  that  the  plausible  "  prag- 
matist"  substitution  of  the  "  useful "  for  the  "true"  as  the 
criterion  of  value  in  beliefs  fails  at  its  central  point.  It  refutes 
itself  by  presupposing  that  the  value  of  the  belief  "  this  is  useful  " 
itself  must  be  estimated  by  reference  to  a  standard  of  "  truth." 
"  It  is  true  that  this  practice  is  useful "  cannot  simply  mean  "  it  is 
useful  to  believe  that  this  practice  is  useful."  The  full  develop- 
ment of  the  thought  is  postponed  for  a  moment  by  the  introduction 
of  the  eulogy  of  the  contemplative  life. 

DIGRESSION. — The  Contemplative  Life  (1720-1760). — How  far 
the  pragmatist  criterion  is  from  being  self-evident  or  universally 
accepted  we  may  see  by  contrasting  the  whole  attitude  towards 
life  of  the  philosopher  or  true  man  of  science  with  that  of  the  "  man 
of  affairs,"  and  the  man  of  law.  The  former  is  free  where  the  latter 
is  a  slave,1  as  we  can  see  by  comparing  the  style  of  their  "  discourses." 

1  Theaet.  i  y2d.  The  distinctive  mark  of  the  "  free  man  "  is  that  all  his  time 
is  <rxo\i),  "  leisure,"  "  free  time,"  "  his  own  time."  The  "  life  of  business  "  is 
not "  free  "  because  in  business  a  man's  time  is  not  "  his  own  "  ;  it  is  engrossed 


THE  THEAETETUS  885 

The  one  can  follow  up  his  thoughts  wherever  they  lead  ;  time  is  no 
object  to  him,  and  the  length  of  an  argument  no  obstacle,  so  long  as 
it  leads  him  to  the  "  reality.11  The  other  has  to  plead  with  a  time- 
limit  and  under  a  double  control.  He  must  speak  "  to  his  brief  " — 
his  opponent  will  take  care  of  that — and  he  must  ad  ipt  himself  to 
the  prejudices  of  his  "lord  and  master,"  the  court,  or  he  may  have 
to  pay  dear  for  it,  and  thus  cannot  afford  to  have  a  single-minded 
eye  to  simple  truth.  The  other  is  free,  as  we  are  at  this  moment, 
to  follow  up  any  line  of  thought  which  seems  promising  ;  he  is  the 
master,  not  the  slave,  of  his  "  case/'  Hence  the  violent  contrast 
between  the  whole  characters  of  the  typical  thinker  and  the  typical 
"  practical  man."  The  former,  in  an  extreme  case,  barely  knows 
where  the  law-courts  and  places  of  public  assembly  are,  or  what  is 
being  done  in  them;  he  belongs  to  no  political  "club/1  and  cares 
as  little  about  the  social  as  about  the  serious  side  of  such  institu- 
tions. He  knows  nothing  of  the  current  political  and  social  gossip, 
and  is  not  even  alive  to  his  own  deficiency.  You  might  say  that, 
while  his  body  is  here  in  Athens,  his  mind  freely  roams  over  the 
universe  as  its  domain.  When  he  is  dragged  down  into  the  world 
of  petty  local  affairs,  proceeded  against  in  the  courts  for  example, 
he  is  lost  in  such  a  strange  situation,  and  the  practical  man  sets 
him  down  as  an  absent-minded  fool.  He  cannot  make  a  telling 
invective  because  he  is  quite  unaware  of  the  personal  scandals 
which  furnish  the  appropriate  matter.  He  is  equally  ineffective 
in  eulogy,  since  the  topics  of  the  ordinary  eulogy,  the  subject's 
illustrious  descent  and  splendid  wealth,  are  unimpressive  to  him. 
The  biggest  estate  seems  a  little  thing  to  one  who  is  accustomed  to 
think  in  terms  of  the  spaces  of  astronomy,  and  the  finest  pedigree 
laughable  to  one  who  knows  how  many  kings  and  how  many  beggars 
there  must  be  in  every  genealogy,  if  we  could  only  trace  it  back 
through  unrecorded  generations.  Hence  the  popular  contempt  oi 
him  as  a  man  who  is  so  wrapt  up  in  his  star-gazing  that  he  cannot 
see  what  is  under  his  nose. 

But  from  the  philosopher's  point  of  view,  the  brilliant  practical 
man  is  equally  absurd.  Take  him  away  from  the  field  of  small 
personal  concerns  and  set  him  to  think  about  the  ultimate  issues  of 
life,  what  are  right  and  wrong,  what  are  human  happiness  and 
misery,  and  how  is  the  one  to  be  found  and  the  other  shunned — in  a 
word,  take  him  out  of  the  realm  of  the  temporal  into  the  eternal, 
and  he  is  helpless  in  "  discourse,"  for  all  his  forensic  "  acumen." 

This  conflict  between  opposing  standards  of  valuation  is  inherent 
in  "  mortality,"  and  that  is  the  very  reason  why  the  man  who 
means  to  be  happy  must  make  it  his  supreme  aim  to  "  escape  " 
from  mortality.  The  only  way  of  escape  is  "  to  become  assimilated 

by  the  demands  of  those  whom  he  serves — his  customers,  patrons,  clients,  "  the 
public/'  The  thought  reappears  in  Aristotle's  Ethics  and  Politics,  where 
the  best  life  for  man  is  identified  with  the  "  noble  use  of  leisure,"  and  the 
standard  in  education  is  made  fitness  to  prepare  the  recipient  to  make  this 
right  use  of  his  "  leisure." 


836          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

to  God  as  wholly  as  may  be,"  to  exchange  temporality  for  eternity. 
And  "  assimilation  "  means  becoming  "  righteous  and  pious  and 
wise."  The  difficulty  is  to  convince  men  that  the  real  reason  for 
this  pursuit  of  goodness  is  not  the  advantage  of  a  reputation  for 
goodness,  but  the  fact  that  goodness  and  wisdom  make  us  like  God 
and  therefore  constitute  real  "  manhood,"  and  confer  the  only  real 
happiness. 

The  whole  passage  recalls,  and  is  obviously  meant  to  recall,  the 
spiritual  mood  and  even  the  phraseology  of  the  Gorgias  and  Phaedo. 
But  its  connexion  with  the  present  argument  is  loose,  and  hardly 
amounts  to  more  than  this,  that  the  worldly  man's  estimate  of  the 
philosopher  and  the  philosopher's  estimate  of  him  furnish  the  best 
proof  that  there  is  no  single  accepted  standard  of  valuation.  The 
most  natural  way  of  accounting  for  the  presence  of  the  digression  is 
that  of  Burnet,  that  it  is  an  expression  of  the  mood  in  which  Plato 
is  contemplating  his  own  coming  absorption  in  the  necessarily 
largely  uncongenial  mundane  life  of  the  Syracusan  court.  The 
ideal  of  the  world-renouncing  pure  "  scientist  "  had  never  been  his 
own ;  his  early  ambitions  had  been  definitely  political,  and  his 
mature  conviction  was  that  the  gifts  of  the  philosopher  ought  to  be 
consecrated  to  the  work  of  practical  administration,  but  we  can 
readily  understand  that  he  would  have  a  keen  sense  of  the  sacrifice 
he  was  making  to  public  duty  and  the  pettiness  of  the  personalities 
and  problems  with  which  he  was  now  called  to  mix  himself  up.1 
It  would  be  a  bad  mistake,  though  the  mistake  has  been  made,  to 
find  in  so  splendid  a  passage  a  polemic  against  the  aims  of  his  older 
rival  Isocrates.  Whatever  the  limitations  of  Isocrates  were,  Plato 
must  have  sympathized  with  his  attempt  to  give  his  pupils  at 
least  a  broader  and  nobler  outlook  on  the  problems  of  public  life 
than  that  of  the  mere  party-man  of  a  little  Greek  TroAts  ;  the  whole 
picture  of  the  "  man  of  affairs  "  who  is  pitted  against  the  philosopher 
suggests  in  its  details  an  admirer  of  Antiphon  or  Thrasymachus 
rather  than  a  figure  from  the  school  of  Isocrates,  the  last  place 
where  the  cult  of  "  successful  unrighteousness  "  would  be  likely 
to  be  in  favour. 

Second  Criticism  of  the  Protagorean  Thesis  concluded  (1760- 
1796). — To  return.  We  had  just  said  that  though  the  thinkers  who 
identify  reality  with  change  and  those  who  teach  that  "  what 
appears  to  anyone  is  for  him  the  reality,"  are  ready  enough  to 
extend  these  formulae  to  right  and  wrong,  no  one  seriously  con- 
tends that  what  a  city  agrees  to  regard  as  good  or  useful  must  really 
be  so,  so  long  as  the  agreement  continues.  Every  one  recognizes 
that  what  is  really  good  or  profitable  is  so  independently  of  the 
beliefs  which  may  be  entertained  about  it.  Now  this  suggests  a 
generalization  of  the  problem  raised  by  the  saying  of  Protagoras. 
When  a  city  makes  regulations  to  ensure  good  or  advantage,  it  is 
acting  with  a  view  to  the  future.  So  we  may  ask,  granting  that  the 
Homo  mensura  formula  is  valid  for  convictions  about  the  present, 
1  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I.  pp.  244-5. 


THE  THEAETETVS  837 

is  it  also  valid  for  convictions  about  the  future  ?  If  a  man  feels 
hot,  he  is  hot.  Soit;  but  if  a  man  believes  that  he  is  going  to  have 
a  fever  with  a  "  temperature,"  while  his  physician  denies  it,  what 
then  ?  In  such  a  case  the  physician's  forecast  is  certainly  a  better 
"  measure  "  of  what  is  going  to  be  the  layman's  "  reality  "  than  the 
layman's  opinion.  So  the  best  "  measure  "  of  the  sweetness  or 
dryness  of  next  autumn's  vintage  is  the  husbandman ;  a  skilled  cook's 
judgment  about  the  enjoyment  a  company  will  receive  from  the 
dishes  he  has  prepared  is  sounder  than  their  own.  Protagoras 
would  be  a  better  judge  than  one  of  us  about  the  effect  of  a  speech 
one  of  us  was  going  to  deliver.  Generally,  whenever  a  future  issue 
is  in  question,  the  specialist  will  be  the  best  "  measure  "  of  other 
men's  experiences  as  well  as  his  own.  The  Homo  mensnra  formula 
thus  is  invalid  in  all  cases  where  there  is  a  reference  to  future  ex- 
periences. And  this  rids  us  of  the  doctrine  that  any  and  every 
belief  is  true,  which  is,  moreover,  self -refuting,  since  it  implies  its 
own  contradictory.  But  we  have  still  to  examine  the  metaphysical 
theory  which  is  the  foundation  of  the  dictum  that  actual  present 
sensation  and  the  judgments  (8o£ai)  based  on  it  are  always  true. 

Final  Refutation  of  the  Identification  of  Knowledge  with  Sense- 
perception  (179^-186^). — The  complete  examination  of  the  theory 
that  actual  present  sense-perception  is  knowledge  demands  a 
consideration  of  the  already  mentioned  metaphysical  theory  that 
nothing  is  real  but  movement.  We  cannot  get  any  coherent  state- 
ment of  the  grounds  for  this  theory  from  its  official  representatives, 
the  Heracliteans,  who  disdain  connected  exposition  and  affect  to 
speak  in  cryptic  aphorisms  ;  we  must  try  what  we  can  make  of  the 
doctrine  for  ourselves  (179^-1800).  We  must  remember,  too,  that 
Melissus  and  Parmenides  maintain  the  very  opposite — that  what  is 
is  one  and  unmoving.  A  complete  examination  would  involve 
studying  the  views  both  of  the  "  men  of  flux  "  (the  peovrcs)  and  of 
the  "  faction  of  the  one-and-all  "  (the  rov  o\ov  orao-iamn) ;  it  might 
end  by  carrying  us  over  into  one  of  the  camps,  or  by  leaving  us  in 
the  comically  persumptuous  position  of  standing  alone  against  both 
parties.  Still  we  must  make  the  venture,  and  we  will  begin  by 
considering  the  Heraclitean  view  (1800-1816). 

Everything  is  always  in  motion  :  what  is  the  precise  sense  of 
this  ?  There  are  two  easily  distinguishable  types  of  "  motion  "  : 
(a)  one  which  includes  translation  and  rotation,  which  we  will  call 
locomotion  (<f>opd)  ;  (b)  another  illustrated  by  the  transition  from 
youth  to  age,  from  black  to  white,  from  hard  to  soft ;  we  will  call  it 
alteration  (dAAotWt?).  Is  it  meant,  then,  that  everything  is  at  every 
moment  changing  both  its  position  and  its  quality,  or  only  that 
each  thing  is  at  every  moment  exhibiting  one  or  other  of  these 
changes  ?  If  the  statement  that  there  is  no  rest  or  stability  in 
the  world  at  all  is  meant  strictly,  we  must  take  the  former  inter- 
pretation. Nothing  ever  keeps  the  same  quality  for  the  tiniest 
interval,  any  more  than  it  retains  the  same  position  (1810).  Other- 
wise there  would  be  some  sort  of  stability  about  things. 


888          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Let  us  bear  this  in  mind  and  remember  also  the  further  details, 
which  are  part  of  this  same  theory,  of  the  way  in  which  the  mutual 
interference  of  two  of  the  "  slower  "  motions  gives  rise  to  the  twin 
effect  sensation  +  sensible  quality.  The  theory  was  that  when 
two  such  "  slower  "  motions  meet,  the  result  is  a  definite  process  of 
sensation  +  a  definite  sensible  quality,  e.g.  a  "  seeing  of  white  "+ 
"  white  seen."  But  if  nothing  has  any  permanency,  there  is  no 
such  definite  process  of  seeing  white,  and  no  such  definite  white 
seen.  The  process  of  seeing  white  itself  is  at  any  moment  turning 
into  some  other  process,  and  the  white  seen  is  turning  into  some 
other  quality.  We  must  not  even  speak  of  "  colour-vision  "  and 
"  colour/1  since  both  process  and  quality  are  always  turning  into 
something  else.  It  will  be  no  more  true  to  say  at  any  moment  that 
a  man  is  seeing  or  having  sensation  of  some  other  kind  than  that  he 
is  not  having  it,  and  therefore,  if  sensing  is  knowing,  it  will  never 
be  more  true  to  say  that  a  man  is  knowing  than  to  say  that  he  is 
not  knowing.  The  safest  answer  to  any  question  would  be  to  say, 
"  It  is  so  and  it  is  not  so,"  but  even  this  is  more  than  we  should 
be  really  warranted  in  saying,  since  the  very  word  "  so  "  implies 
a  determination  which,  on  the  theory,  never  exists  (1836).  These 
considerations  dispose  finally  of  both  statements:  that  every  one 
is  the  "  measure,"  and  that  knowledge  is  sensation.  Both  must 
be  false,  if  the  theory  of  absolute  "  fluidity  "  on  which  they  them- 
selves rest  is  to  be  upheld.  Theaetetus  would  like  to  proceed  now 
to  consider  the  rival  Eleatic  theory  that  "  nothing  happens," 
there  is  no  "  fluidity  "  at  all.  But  his  wishes  must  not  be  indulged. 
Socrates  met  Parmenides,  who  was  then  an  old  man,  in  his  own 
youth  and  was  powerfully  impressed  by  his  "  noble  depth." l  If  we 
discussed  his  view,  we  should  very  likely  misunderstand  it,  the 
examination  would  have  to  be  very  long  and  searching,  and  we 
should  be  diverted  from  our  present  task,  which  is  to  practise 
"  spiritual  obstetrics  "  on  Theaetetus  (1846). 

Socrates  now  enters  on  a  line  of  thought  which  is  by  far  the 
most  important  contribution  the  dialogue  has  as  yet  made  to  the 
solution  of  its  problem.  He  calls  attention  to  the,  so  far  neglected, 
distinction  between  sensation  and  thought,  or  judgment.  We 
can  point  out  the  bodily  instruments  which  a  man  uses  in  seeing, 
hearing,  touching.  He  sees  with  his  eyes,  hears  with  his  ears, 
and  so  forth.  Or  to  be  still  more  accurate,  since  it  is  always  the 
man,  that  is  his  \[/v\r),  which  sees  and  hears,  we  should  do  well  to 
say  rather  that  he  sees  and  hears  through  his  eyes  and  ears  (184^). 2 

1  Theaet.  1830.  There  is  a  similar  reference  to  this  encounter  at  Soph.  2 1  jc, 
and  the  Parmenides  professes  to  be  a  third-hand  report  of  it.  It  seems  to  me 
that  the  emphatic  way  in  which  the  impression  made  on  the  youthful  Socrates 
is  insisted  on  in  both  references  shows  us  that  Plato  wishes  us  to  regard  the 
meeting  as  a  real  fact,  and  there  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  be  one  (see 
Burnet,  E.G.Ph*.  p.  168,  n.  3). 

*  The  point  of  the  distinction  here  made  between  that  with  which  (£)  and 
that  through  which  (fit  o5)  we  see  and  hear  can  be  better  expressed  in  English 
differently.  It  might  be  made  by  objecting  to  the  accuracy  of  the  expressions 


THE  THEAETETUS  889 

Eyes,  ears,  and  the  rest  of  the  body  are  not  the  agents  in  perception 
but  the  implements  (opyava)  of  it — the  first  appearance  of  the  word 
"  organ  "  in  this  sense.  For  each  "  implement  "  there  is  what 
Aristotle  was  later  to  call  its  "  proper  "  (iSiov)  sensible.  None 
can  do  the  work  of  another.  Colour  can  only  be  taken  in  by  the 
channel  of  the  eye,  sound  through  the  ear.  But  if  a  man  is  thinking 
about  two  such  sensibles  of  different  senses,  comparing  and  dis- 
criminating them,  or  counting  them  as  "  two/1  pronouncing  them 
like  or  unlike,  asserting  that  they  are  "  really  there,"  the  soul  is 
considering  the  matter  "  by  herself  "  (avrrj  Si'  ai-njs)  without  the 
employment  of  a  bodily  "  implement  "  (i&^d).1  If  we  try  to  make 
a  list  of  the  determinations  of  an  object  which  are  thus  made 
"without  any  bodily  organ,"  we  have  to  reckon  among  them  not 
only  "  reality  "  (ouon'a),  number,  sameness,  difference,  likeness  and 
unlikeness,  but  good  and  bad,  right  and  wrong  (i86a).  Thus  the 
ultimate  categories  of  value,  like  those  of  "  fact,"  are  apprehended 
by  thought,  not  by  sense.  In  fact,  they  are  asserted  as  the  result 
of  reflection,  comparison,  and  discrimination  :  this  explains  why 
animals  are  as  capable  of  sensation  as  men,  and  babies  as  adults 
(i86c),  but  sound  convictions  about  "  reality  and  value  "  (ovo-ia 
and  a><£e'\€ia)  are  only  attained  by  us  with  time  and  pains  and  educa- 
tion. Now  we  cannot  have  knowledge  without  apprehension  of  a 
"  reality  "  (ova-Ca)  which  is  known.  Hence  it  follows  that  "  know- 
ledge "  is  not  to  be  sought  for  in  the  affections  of  our  sensibility  (rols 
7ra0T7/m<ri)  but  in  the  mind's  reflection  upon  them  (ev  TU>  TT€pi  cxctVuv 
o-vAAoyioytw,  186^).  And  this  finally  proves  that  knowledge  is  not 
the  same  thing  as  sensation  (ibid.  b). 

SECOND  DEFINITION.    KNOWLEDGE  is  TRUE  JUDGMENT 
(1876-2000) 

The  common  name  for  the  process  of  reflection,  comparison,  and 
discrimination  to  which  the  occurrence  of  our  sensations  gives  rise 
is  "  belief  "  or  "  judgment  "  (Sofa,  TO  Sofa^iv).  The  word  Sofa 
is  being  used  here  in  a  way  characteristic  of  Plato's  later  dialogues. 
In  his  earlier  writing  Sofa  had  commonly  been  thought  of  as  con- 
trasted with  eTnoTi/fiij ;  it  had  meant  "  belief,"  with  the  implica- 
tion that  the  belief  is  a  mistaken  one,  or  at  any  rate  a  doubtful 
one  ;  in  our  dialogue,  and  henceforward,  the  meaning  is  judgment, 
intellectual  conviction  in  general,  without  any  suggestion  of  dis- 
paragement. This  is  one  of  the  many  indications  that  a  chief 

"  the  eye  sees,"  "  the  ear  hears,"  and  the  like,  on  the  ground  that  they 
obscure  the  point  that  both  seeing  and  hearing  are  functions  of  a  unitary 
central  consciousness.  This  is  what  Socrates  means  by  saying  that  there  are 
not  a  group  of  alffOfacis  seated  inside  a  man,  like  the  warriors  in  the  fabled 
"  vooden  horse  "  of  Troy. 

1  It  does  not  occur  to  Socrates  to  consider  the  view,  afterwards  taken  by 
Aristotle,  that  some  at  any  rate  of  the  functions  enumerated  here  might  be 
discharged  by  a  "  common  sensorium  "  (KOIV&V  alffeifrfyiov),  placed  by  Aristotle 
in  the  heart. 


340          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

difference  between  mature  Platonism  and  the  Socraticism  out  of 
which  it  developed  is  that  the  former  attributes  a  decidedly  higher 
value  to  beliefs  which  do  not  reach  the  level  of  demonstrated 
"  science,"  that  is,  to  our  "  empirical  knowledge  "  of  the  sensible 
world.  We  must  not  suggest  that  judgment  is  knowledge,  since 
there  are  such  things  as  false  judgments.  But  we  may  take  it  as 
an  amended  definition  that  knowledge  is  true  judgment  (1876). 

If  we  are  to  examine  the  truth  of  this  statement,  we  must  begin 
by  considering  the  difficulty  suggested  by  the  old  arguments  which 
have  been  used  to  show  that  a  false  judgment  is  impossible.  The 
old  argument,  which  we  have  met  in  the  Euthydemus,  was  that  either 
you  know  what  you  are  judging  about  or  you  do  not.  If  you  do 
know,  you  cannot  judge  falsely ;  and  if  you  do  not,  you  cannot 
make  any  judgment  at  all,  because  your  mind  is  a  mere  blank 
about  that  of  which  you  "  know  nothing."  The  point  has  now 
to  be  considered  elaborately  with  a  view  to  discovering  the  specific 
character  of  true  judgments.  If  a  man  knows  both  A  and  B,  it 
would  seem  that  he  cannot  mistake  one  for  the  other  ;  if  he  knows 
A  but  not  B,  how  can  he  compare  A  with  the  merely  unknown  ? 
If  both  A  and  B  are  unknown,  is  not  the  impossibility  of  a  confusion 
even  greater  (i880-c).  Perhaps  we  may  avoid  these  difficulties 
if  we  say  that  a  false  judgment  is  a  belief  in  "  what  is  not  "  (i&8d), 
thus  avoiding  all  reference  to  "  knowing  "  in  our  definition.1  But 
the  "unreal  "  (TO  prj  w),  it  may  be  said,  is  just  nothing  at  all,  and 
you  can  no  more  think  and  yet  think  nothing  than  you  can  see  and 
yet  see  nothing.  To  think  or  believe  is  always  to  think  or  believe 
something ;  to  think  nothing  is  all  one  with  not  thinking  at  all. 
(Just  as  Parmenides  had  long  ago  declared  that  "  what  is  not  "  can 
neither  be  thought  nor  spoken  of.)  This  consideration  leads  us 
to  try  a  third  explanation  of  what  we  mean  by  a  false  judgment. 
We  mean  thinking  that  one  reality  (one  o^)  is  some  other  reality, 
thinking  that  something  is  other  than  it  is  (dXAoSo£ta)  ;  false 
thinking  is  thus  the  mental  confusion  of  one  reality  with  another 
(1890),  e.g.  thinking  that  "  fair  is  foul  and  foul  is  fair."  In  the 
Sophistes  we  shall  find  that  this  is  the  true  account  of  the  matter 
and  can  be  successfully  defended  against  the  Eleatic  dialectic. 
But  the  defence  will  depend  on  recognizing  that  the  Eleatic  meta- 
physic  itself  requires  a  grave  modification  ;  there  is  a  sense  in 
which  "  the  unreal  "  can  be  both  thought  and  spoken  of.  In  our 
dialogue  Socrates  is  not  allowed  to  probe  the  question  to  the  bottom  ; 
he  has  already  explained  that  he  is  not  prepared  at  present  to 
examine  Eleaticism  as  a  metaphysical  theory.  He  contents  him- 
self therefore  with  raising  the  question  within  what  limits  the 
"  confusion  "  of  one  reality  with  another  would  seem  to  be  possible. 

1  The  difficulty  it  is  intended  to  avoid  by  the  new  formulation  arises  from 
the  ambiguity  of  the  word  e/dlrcu,  which  may  mean  cither  "  to  be  acquainted 
with  "  or  "  to  know  about."  It  is  suggested  in  effect  that  we  may  eliminate 
the  ambiguity  by  recourse  to  metaphysics;  we  will  say  that  false  belief  is 
belief  in  something  "  unreal "  (in  a  p4  ty-  But,  as  we  shall  see,  this  at 
once  raises  the  Eleatic  problem  how  it  is  possible  to  think  the  "  unreal  "  at  all. 


THE  THEAETETUS  841 

To  understand  the  very  possibility  of  such  a  confusion,  we  must 
begin  by  recognizing  that  thinking  is  a  kind  of  argument  (Xoyos) 
in  which  the  mind  carries  on  a  debate  within  itself,  asking  itself 
a  question  and  answering  its  own  query.  The  judgment,  once 
formulated,  is  the  verdict  or  conclusion  which  puts  an  end  to  this 
internal  dispute  (1900).  In  what  conditions  is  it  possible  for  this 
verdict  to  involve  "  confusion  "  of  one  thing  with  another  ?  At 
first  sight,  the  old  dilemma  about  the  impossibility  of  confusing  a 
thing  you  "  know  "  either  with  something  else  which  you  "  know  " 
or  with  something  you  do  not  "  know  "  appears  equally  formidable 
when  you  substitute  the  word  "  believe  "  or  "  think  "  for  "  know  " 
(Kjob-igia).  But  we  seem  to  have  been  wrong  in  admitting  the 
premisses  of  the  dilemma.  Clearly  a  man  who  "  knows  "  Socrates 
might  mistake  an  "  unknown  "  stranger  for  Socrates,  if  he  saw  the 
stranger  in  the  distance.  The  hard  and  fast  distinction  between 
"  what  I  know  "  and  "  what  I  do  not  know  "  is  false  to  fact  and 
rests  on  the  deliberate  ignoring  of  the  consideration  that  there  is 
such  a  thing  as  "  learning,"  "  getting  to  know  "  something  one  did 
not  know  before  (1910).  Let  us  consider  the  nature  of  this  process. 

We  may  represent  the  process  figuratively  thus.  There  is 
something  in  each  of  us  like  a  wax  block  prepared  to  receive  the 
"  impressions  "  of  signets  of  all  kinds  ;  the  quality  of  the  wax  is 
very  different  in  different  persons.  We  may  regard  sensation  as  a 
process  in  which  an  object  stamps  an  impression  of  itself  on  the 
wax  (the  whole  of  the  traditional  language  about  "  impressions  " 
and  "  ideas "  is  ultimately  derived  from  this  passage).1  How 
definite  this  impress  is  and  how  long  it  will  remain  undeformed 
depends  on  the  original  quality  of  the  wax.  So  long  as  the  impress 
remains,  we  may  say  that  a  man  has  memory  and  knowledge  (igid). 
Now  consider  the  case  of  a  man  who  "  knows  "  the  impresses  left 
on  the  block,  and  at  the  same  time  is  attending  to  his  present 
sensations.  We  may  say  that  the  confusion  with  which  we  have 
identified  error  can  only  arise  in  one  specific  way.  If  I  "  know 
both  Theodorus  and  Theaetetus  and  am  simply  thinking  about 
one  of  them,  I  cannot  confuse  him  with  the  other.  If  I  "  know  " 
only  one  of  them,  I  cannot  confuse  him  in  thought  with  the  other, 
who  is  wholly  unknown  to  me.  If  I  neither  "  know  "  nor  am 

1  In  particular,  the  Aristotelian  description  of  perception  as  a  process  in 
which  the  soul  "  receives  the  forms  of  sensibilia  without  their  matter,  as  the 
wax  receives  the  shape  of  the  iron  signet-ring  without  the  metal,"  is  seen  at 
once  to  be  directly  based  on  the  simile  of  the  wax  block,  which  is  consequently 
the  far-away  source  of  the  whole  mediaeval  doctrine  of  "  sensible  "  and  "  in- 
telligible "  species.  Note  that  the  suggested  theory  is  a  psychologizing  version 
of  the  doctrine  that  "  knowledge  is  recollection."  The  first  stamping  of  the 
wax  with  a  wholly  novel  pattern  gives  "  acquaintance  "  ;  ^Trio-T^w  arises  when 
the  wax  is  stamped  with  the  pattern  a  second  time  and  the  pattern  is  "  recog- 
nized "  as  already  familiar.  The  whole  argument  would  have  been  easier  to 
follow  if  Attic,  like  Ionic,  had  possessed  the  word  elftijo-is,  which  might  then 
have  been  specialized  to  mean  "  acquaintance."  Plato  can  discriminate  olSa 
from  tirlffrafuu,  but  he  has  no  verbal  noun  which  stands  to  oTSa  as  ^TKTT^/ZTJ  to 
CLi 

12 


842          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

actually  seeing  either,  confusion  of  thought  is  impossible.  It  can 
only  come  in  in  one  case ;  when  I  "  know  "  both  parties,  and  so 
have  the  "  impressions  "  made  by  past  perception  of  both  still 
remaining  in  the  waxen  block,  but  also  am  actually  seeing  both  or 
one  of  the  two,  I  may  try  to  "  fit  "  the  new  "  impression  "  or 
"  impressions  "  into  the  old  "  imprints/1  and  may  fit  them  into  the 
wrong  ones.  That  is,  I  may  make  an  error  in  recognition,  like  that 
of  the  man  who  tries  to  put  his  foot  into  the  wrong  shoe.  Thus 
"  false  judgment  "  will  depend  on  mistaken  recognition,  and  conse- 
quently will  only  be  possible  when  there  is  a  misinterpretation  of  an 
actually  present  sensation.  Such  misinterpretation  may  be  caused 
by  any  01  the  defects  of  memory  symbolized  by  the  various  defects 
which  make  a  given  block  of  wax  unsuitable  to  receive  a  clear-cut 
impression,  or  to  retain  it  permanently,  or  to  receive  many  such 
distinct  impressions  without  crowding  and  superposition  of  one  on 
another.  The  result  is  that  error  cannot  arise  in  sensation  taken 
by  itself,  nor  in  thought  taken  by  itself,  but  only  "  in  the  con- 
junction of  sensation  with  thought  "  (195^).  I-e.  a  false  judgment 
is  always  a  misinterpretation  of  present  sensation,  from  which  it 
would  seem  that  true  judgment,  which  the  definition  under  con- 
sideration identifies  with  knowledge,  is  always  the  correct  inter- 
pretation of  present  sensation  by  thought. 

On  reflection,  however,  this  theory  proves  to  be  unsatisfactory 
in  spite  of  its  attractiveness.  For  it  is  not  the  fact  that  all  error  is 
misinterpretation  of  present  sensation.  A  man  may  falsely  think 
that  7+5  =11,  and  most  men  do  make  arithmetical  errors  of  this 
kind  in  operating  with  big  numbers.  And  they  do  not  make  such 
mistakes  only  when  they  are  counting  things  present  to  their  senses, 
but  when  they  are  simply  thinking  of  numbers  and  numerical 
relations.  Thus  error  (and  by  consequence  true  judgment)  cannot 
be  restricted  to  the  interpretation  of  present  sensations.  There 
may  be  false  (and  also  true)  judgments  where  the  "  sensible  "  does 
not  figure  as  a  constituent  of  the  judgment  at  all  (195^-1966). 
Thus  our  simile  of  the  waxen  block  has  not  done  what  we  hoped 
it  would  for  us.  (It  has  the  merit  of  taking  into  account  the  facts 
of  learning  and  forgetting,  ignored  in  the  crude  old  argument 
against  the  possibility  of  "  false  beliefs,"  but  it  leaves  the  possi- 
bility of  sheer  intellectual  error  where  it  found  it.1) 

To  cover  the  case  of  purely  intellectual  error  we  must  amend  our 
account  of  dXXoSofia,  and  this  may  be  done  if  we  borrow  a  hint 
from  a  current  statement  about  knowledge.  (It  is  true  that  a  mere 
"  disputant  for  victory  "  would  deny  our  right  to  use  any  such 
statement  while  we  are  still  in  quest  of  a  definition  of  knowledge, 
but  the  fault,  if  it  is  one,  is  inevitable,  and  we  have  committed 

1  The  one  criticism  I  should  feel  inclined  to  pass  on  Burnet's  analysis  of  the 
dialogue  (Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  237-253)  is  that  he  seems  to  make  Plato  into 
a  Kantian  by  ascribing  to  him  the  view  that  all  knowledge  contains  as  a 
constituent  a  factor  supplied  by  the  "  manifold  of  sense.'*  This  seems  to  me 
to  miss  the  point  of  the  illustration  from  false  judgments  in  arithmetic. 


THE  THEAETETUS  848 

it  already  every  time  we  have  used  such  phrases  as  "  we  know 
that  .  .  .,"  "  we  understand  that  .  .  .,"  and  the  like.)  Knowing 
is  commonly  said  to  be  the  "  having  "  of  knowledge  (197^).  But  we 
might  improve  on  this  statement  by  distinguishing  "  possession  " 
and  "  having/1  A  man  may  "  possess  "  or  "  own  "  a  cloak  without 
actually  "  having  it  on."  So  possibly  a  man  may  "  possess  "  know- 
ledge without  "  having  "  it.  In  fact,  we  may  distinguish  "posses- 
sion "  from  "  having  in  use."  A  man  who  has  caught  and  caged  a 
multitude  of  wild  birds  "  possesses  "  them  all,  but  may  not  actually 
have  any  one  of  them  in  hand,  though  he  can  "  put  his  hand  "  on 
one  when  he  wants  it  (1970).  Let  us  then  introduce  a  new  simile. 
The  mind  is  like  an  aviary ;  when  we  are  babies  the  aviary  is 
empty  (Locke's  "  empty  cabinet  ")  ;  each  new  piece  of  knowledge 
we  acquire  is  like  a  wild  bird  caught  and  caged.  But  actual 
knowing  is  like  putting  our  hand  on  the  bird  we  want  and  taking 
it  out  of  the  cage.  Now  a  man  may  put  his  hand  on  the  wrong 
bird  instead  of  the  one  he  wants,  since  the  captured  birds  are 
alive  and  can  fly  about  in  the  cage.  So  we  may  "  possess  "  a 
certain  knowledge,  and  yet  when  we  want  to  use  it,  we  may  not 
be  able  to  recapture  it,  we  may  capture  the  wrong  piece  of  know- 
ledge, and  this  will  be  the  case  of  the  man  who  makes  a  false 
judgment  (197^-1990). 

Clearly  the  new  suggestion  has  advanced  the  argument.  As 
Socrates  says,  the  distinction  between  knowledge  in  possession  and 
knowledge  in  use  has  relieved  us  of  the  old  difficulty  that  false 
judgment  seems  to  involve  both  knowing  and  not  knowing  the  same 
thing  ;  there  is  no  difficulty  in  admitting  that  a  man  "  possesses  " 
what  he  cannot  lay  his  hand  on.  We  may  add  (i)  that  a  com- 
parison of  "  beliefs  "  with  living  creatures  is  psychologically  much 
sounder  than  the  old  comparison  with  "  impresses  "  made  once  for 
all  on  a  block  of  wax  ;  judgment  is  a  living  process,  not  the  mere 
retention  of  a  stamp  left  on  the  mind  once  for  all ;  (2)  that  the 
distinction  made  here  is  the  starting-point  for  the  more  extended 
antithesis  of  "potentiality"  and  " actuality " x  in  which  Aristotle 
was  to  find  the  universal  explanation  of  movement  and  becoming  ; 
(3)  that  the  formula  no  longer  requires  us  to  confine  the  possibility 
of  error  to  the  interpretation  of  present  sensation. 

But  there  is  still  a  grave  unsolved  difficulty.  Error  is  now  said 
to  be  due  to  a  wrong  "  use  "  of  knowledge  which  we  already  have 
in  possession.  If  this  is  so,  a  man's  knowledge  is  the  direct  source 
of  his  false  judgments  ;  he  only  confuses  A  with  B  because  he 
possesses  "  knowledge  "  of  them  both.  At  this  rate,  might  we  not 
equally  say  that  error  may  be  the  cause  of  knowledge,  or  blindness 
of  vision  ?  (This  difficulty  is  perhaps  not  meant  to  be  taken  wholly 

1  That  the  distinction  between  the  actual  and  the  potential  is  primarily 
due  to  the  Academy  seems  to  be  further  indicated  by  its  appearance  as 
something  needing  no  explanation  in  Aristotle's  Protrepticus  (Fr.  52,  Rose), 
which  is  shown  by  the  considerable  remaining  fragments  of  it  to  have  been  an 
eloquent  exposition  of  Platonism  and  was  probably  written  during  Plato's 
lifetime  (Jaeger,  Aristoteles,  c.  4). 


844          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

seriously.  It  is  true  that  the  more  you  "  know,"  in  the  sense  of 
"  having  the  knowledge  in  possession,"  the  graver  are  the  errors 
to  which  you  are  exposed.  As  Mr.  Chesterton  says  somewhere, 
"  a  man  must  know  a  great  deal  to  be  always  wrong."  Really 
grave  error  is  regularly  due  to  the  misuse  of  wide  knowledge.  But 
the  point  is  not  really  examined.  Socrates'  object  is  simply  to 
prelude  to  a  much  more  real  difficulty.  ) 

Theaetetus  suggests  that  we  might  elude  this  difficulty  by 
modifying  our  image.  We  might  say  that  there  are  "  ignorances  " 
as  well  as  "  pieces  of  knowledge  "  in  the  aviary,  and  that  the  man 
who  makes  a  false  judgment  is  putting  his  hand  on  an  "  ignorance." 
But  if  that  is  so,  since  he  really  believes  his  false  judgment,  he  must 
suppose  the  "  ignorance  "  to  be  a  piece  of  knowledge.  And  this 
gives  an  opening  to  the  eristic  for  raising  the  old  problem  once  more. 
Can  a  man  who  knows  what  knowledge  and  ignorance  are  confuse 
one  with  the  other  ?  And  if  he  does  not  know  what  both  are,  how 
can  he  confuse  something  he  knows  with  something  of  which  he  is 
quite  unaware,  or  one  thing  of  which  he  is  unaware  with  another  of 
which  he  is  equally  unaware  ?  If  we  try  to  meet  our  opponent 
by  suggesting  that  there  is  a  "  knowledge  of  the  difference  between 
knowledge  and  ignorance  "  which  is  a  sort  of  knowledge  of  the 
second  order,  and  that  false  judgment  arises  from  inability  to 
put  one's  hand  on  this  knowledge,  we  shall  clearly  be  involved  in 
an  impossible  "  infinite  regress  "  (aooc).  Thus  the  point  which 
Socrates  is  labouring  is  the  sound  one  that  it  is  impossible  to  have  a 
psychological  criterion  of  true  and  false  beliefs. 

Independently  of  this  impossibility  of  a  criterion,  there  is  an 
obvious  objection  to  the  identification  of  knowledge  with  a  "  true 
belief."  A  man  may  be  induced  to  hold  a  belief  which  in  fact  is 
true  not  by  proof  but  by  persuasive  dexterous  special  pleading.1 
Thus  the  court  which  is  led  by  clever  advocacy  to  find  a  man  guilty 
of  an  act  of  dishonesty  cannot  be  said  to  know  that  he  has  com- 
mitted the  crime  ;  to  know  that,  they  would  require  to  have  seen 
the  act  committed.  But  if  the  man  had  really  committed  the  act, 
the  court  has  a  "  true  belief  "  about  him.  This  proves  beyond  all 
dispute  that  there  is  true  belief  which  is  not  knowledge.  The  im- 
portance of  the  point  may  become  plainer  if  we  put  it  in  a  rather 
more  modern  way,  What  the  illustration  shows  is  that  there  is 
a  real  and  significant  difference  between  "  historical  "  and  "  scien- 
tific "  truths.  History  is  not,  and  never  can  be,  a  department  of 
"  demonstrative  science." 

THIRD  DEFINITION.    KNOWLEDGE  is  "TRUE  JUDGMENT 

ACCOMPANIED  BY  DISCOURSE 


Possibly  the  difficulty  just  raised  may  be  turned.  As  Theaetetus 
says,  he  had  forgotten  to  specify  that  a  true  judgment,  to  be 

*The  same  point  reappears  at  Timaeus  $ie,  where  it  is  put  into  the 
mouth  of  Timaeus  of  Locri.  Presumably  it  is  not  specially  Socratic  nor 
Platonic. 


THE  THEAETETVS  845 

knowledge,  must  be  accompanied  by  "  discourse "  (Xoyos).  If 
there  are  any  objects  of  which  there  is  no  "  discourse,"  they 
will  not  be  objects  of  knowledge,  though  we  may  have  true 
judgment  about  them.  At  least,  so  Theaetetus  has  heard  from 
some  one  whom  he  does  not  name.  The  point  of  the  correction 
is  to  distinguish  between  "  simple  apprehension "  and  appre- 
hension attended  by  "  discourse,"  and  to  deny  the  name  "  know- 
ledge "  to  simple  apprehension.  Thus  the  passage  is  the  source 
of  the  familiar  Aristotelian  and  mediaeval  doctrine  that  the 
"  complex  enunciation/'  or  proposition,  is  the  unit  of  know- 
ledge, as  well  as  of  the  notion  of  "  thought  "  as  "  discursive." 
We  note  also,  at  once,  that  the  theory  suggested  has  a  remark- 
able prima  facie  resemblance  to  that  put  forward  by  Socrates  him- 
self in  the  Meno,  where  it  was  said  that  "  beliefs  "  are  converted 
into  knowledge  when  they  are  "  secured  "  curias  A.oytoy/,<T,  by  a 
"  computation  of  the  grounds  "  for  them.  In  our  dialogue,  Socrates 
says  that  he  too  has  a  dream  to  tell.  He  seems  to  have  heard 
"  in  a  dream  "  that  there  are  certain  elementa  (o-roixcio)  which 
are  the  ABC  of  nature,  all  other  things  being  "  syllables,"  complexes 
of  these  "letters."  The  "letters "  can  be  simply  apprehended  and 
named,  but  we  can  say  nothing  about  them,  can  predicate  nothing 
of  them,  since  to  attribute  any  predicate  to  them  would  be  ad- 
mitting complexity  in  them  (contrary  to  the  hypothesis).  The 
complexes  composed  of  these  letters  have  a  Aoyos,  since  you  can 
analyse  the  complex  back  into  its  simple  constituents,  just  as  you 
can  spell  a  syllable.  The  complexes  then  are  "  knowable  and 
rational  "  (pjrd)f  but  their  elements  are  not ;  they  have  to  be 
seized  by  direct  simple  apprehension  (are  ol^Ovjra).  Knowledge, 
"  grounded  belief,"  is  always  of  the  complex.  Probably  this  theory 
is  the  same  as  that  of  which  Theaetetus  had  heard  (201^-2020).  We 
are  not  told  anything  of  the  authorship  of  this  interesting  theory, 
which  has  its  counterparts  in  our  own  day,  though  it  is  plain  that 
it  is  not  being  invented  by  Plato.  Where  it  comes  from  we  can 
only  guess.  The  atomists  have  been  thought  of,  but  without 
much  probability.  The  question  which  Socrates  goes  on  to  raise, 
whether  a  "  syllable  "  is  nothing  but  its  components  or  a  new  unity, 
would  have  no  significance  for  persons  who  disbelieved  in  the  reality 
of  all  "  composition,"  and  is  not  a  natural  criticism  to  address  to 
them.  It  would  be  more  reasonable  to  think  of  the  doctrine  of 
Empedocles,  which  admits  of  genuine  "  chemical "  composition. 
From  his  point  of  view,  the  "  four  roots  "  correspond  exactly  to 
the  ABC  of  the  book  of  Nature,  bone,  flesh,  and  other  tissues  to 
"  syllables,"  and  organisms  composed  of  these  tissues  to  complete 
words.  But  the  employment  of  the  epithet  foral  (' '  expressible  ' ')  to 
describe  the  "  syllables  "  of  Nature's  language  suggests  also  mathe- 
matical connexions  of  some  kind.  Thus  I  should  be  inclined  to 
attribute  the  theory  to  some  Pythagorean  of  the  type  who  were 
trying  in  the  later  part  of  the  fifth  century  to  find  room  within 
their  own  doctrine  for  the  "  four  roots  "  and  the  Empedoclean 


846         PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

biology.1  But  why  is  Socrates  said  only  to  have  heard  of  the 
theory  "  in  a  dream  "  ?  Possibly  because  the  person  who  is  respon- 
sible for  it  had  only  produced  it  after  the  death  of  Socrates,  or  be- 
cause it  only  became  known  at  Athens  after  that  date,  and  therefore 
some  apology  has  to  be  offered  for  making  Socrates  speak  of  it. 
Hence,  when  we  remember  the  precisely  parallel  doctrine  attri- 
buted by  Theophrastus  to  the  Pythagorean  Ecphantus  of  Syracuse, 
it  is  natural  to  suspect  with  Burnet  that  the  reference  is  to  him.* 

The  analogy  from  letters  and  syllables  is  specious,  but  we  must 
examine  it  more  closely.  It  is  true  that  the  first  syllable  of  Socrates' 
name,  the  syllable  So,  has  a  certain  Xoyos.  You  can  say  that  it  is 
S  and  o — the  letter  S  has  no  such  Xoyos.  You  can  make  statements 
about  it,  e.g.  that  it  is  a  "  hissing  "  sound,  but  you  cannot  explain 
the  sound  by  analysing  it  into  components.  But  now  arises  a 
difficult  question.  Is  the  syllable  So  simply  the  sounds  or  signs 
5  and  o,  taken  in  that  order,  or  is  it  a  new  unity  of  a  type  different 
from  that  of  its  "  component  "  sounds  or  symbols  ?  If  you  take 
the  first  view,  that  So  is  just  "  S  and  o,"  then  it  seems  ridiculous  to 
say  that  a  man  can  "know"  "5  and  o,"  and  yet  neither  knowS 
nor  know  o.  On  the  second  view,  So  is  itself  a  unity,  and  has  not 
really  5  and  o  as  "  constituent "  parts.  Hence  the  syllable  should, 
like  the  single  letter,  be  an  object  of  simple  apprehension,  and  there- 
fore, on  the  proposed  definition,  not  an  object  of  knowledge  (202^- 
2050).  Besides,  the  experience  of  our  own  early  schooldays  seems 
to  show  that  we  learned  to  recognize  syllables  simply  by  learn- 
ing to  recognize  the  letters  of  which  they  are  composed ;  this  tells 
forcibly  against  the  view  that  "  syllables  "  can  be  known  when 
their  component  "  letters  "  are  not  known  (2o6a-c). 

Apart  from  the  question  of  the  soundness  of  this  analogy  from 
letters  and  syllables,  what  may  we  suppose  to  be  meant  by  Xoyos 
("  discourse  ")  in  the  statement  that  knowledge  is  "  a  true  judgment 
accompanied  by  discourse "  ?  Three,  and  only  three,  possible 
meanings  occur  to  us.  (a)  "  Discourse  "  may  mean  actual  uttered 
speech  made  up  of  nouns  and  verbs.  This,  however,  cannot  be  the 
meaning  intended,  for  any  true  judgment  can  be  expressed  in 
speech,  even  if  it  is  not  entitled  to  rank  as  knowledge  (zo6d).  (b)  Or 
the  meaning  might  be  a  complete  enumeration  of  the  component 
"  parts  "  of  the  thing  thought  about.  Hesiod  says  that  a  hundred 
planks  go  to  a  waggon.  You  and  I  cannot  name  more  than  a  few  of 
them :  is  it  meant,  then,  that  we  have  only  a  "  true  judgment  " 
about  a  waggon,  but  should  know  what  a  waggon  is,  if  we  could 
name  all  the  hundred  ?  The  objection  to  this  interpretation  is 
that  we  cannot  say  that  a  man  really  knows  a  complex  unless  he 
can  recognize  its  components  not  merely  as  components  of  that 

1  Philolaus  is  now  known  to  have  been  a  Pythagorean  of  this  type  (Burnet, 
E.G.Ph.*,  277  ff .),  and  it  is  just  this  combination  of  Pythagorean  mathematics 
with  the  biology  and  medicine  of  Empedocles  which  is  expounded  at  length  in 
Plato's  Timaeus. 

*  For  the  doctrine  of  Ecphantus  see  Diels,  Fr.  d.  Vors.9,  i.  340-341.  The 
historical  reality  of  E.  is,  as  Diels  says,  guaranteed  by  the  fact  that  our  notices 
of  him  come  from  Theophrastus,  who  could  not  well  have  been  mistaken  on 
the  point.  Whether  he  belongs  to  the  fifth  or  the  fourth  century  is  not  clear- 


THE   THEAETETUS  847 

complex,  but  when  they  recur  in  another  setting.  E.g.,  we  should 
not  say  that  a  man  "  knew  "  how  to  spell  the  syllable  The,  if  he 
wrote  it  correctly  in  spelling  the  name  of  Theaetetus  but  wrongly 
when  he  had  to  spell  the  name  Theodoras.  And  a  man  might  be 
liable  to  make  the  same  sort  of  blunder  about  each  of  the  remaining 
syllables,  and  yet  might  spell  the  one  name  Theaetetus  right.  Thus 
he  would  have  enumerated  all  its  letters  correctly  and  yet  would 
have  mere  "  right  judgment/'  not  knowledge  (2086).  (c)  Or  was  it 
meant  that  a  true  judgment  about  a  thing  becomes  knowledge 
when  you  add  to  it  the  discourse  which  indicates  the  character 
which  distinguishes  that  thing  from  every  other  thing  ?  Is  know- 
ledge a  true  judgment  accompanied  by  a  statement  of  the  differentia 
(8ia<£opa,  Sia^opor^?)  of  the  subject  of  the  judgment  ?  l  This  account 
looks  as  though  it  ought  to  be  true,  but  when  you  examine  it 
closely  it  is  as  perplexing  as  theatrical  stage-paintings  seen  from  close 
quarters.  How  can  I  have  a  "  true  judgment  "  about  Theaetetus  at 
all,  if  I  am  not  alive  to  the  distinctive  individual  characters  which 
mark  off  Theaetetus  from  every  one  else  ?  If  I  am  unaware  of  them, 
how  can  my  judgment  be  said  to  be  about  Theaetetus  rather  than 
about  Theodoras  or  any  man  you  please  ?  Thus  it  would  seem  that 
to  make  a  true  judgment  about  Theaetetus,  I  must  already  have  the 
differentia  of  Theaetetus  in  mind.  Then  what  is  added  when  this 
true  judgment  is  converted  into  knowledge  by  the  addition  of  the 
"  discourse  "  of  the  differentia  ?  It  cannot  be  meant  that  we  are  to 
add  a  "  true  judgment  "  of  the  differentia  to  our  existing  true  judg- 
ment, for  we  must  clearly  have  possessed  that  in  order  to  make  a 
true  judgment  about  Theaetetus.  And  to  say  that  what  is  meant 
is  that  we  reach  knowledge  when  we  not  merely  think  but  actually 
know  the  differentia  amounts  to  the  circular  definition  that  "  know- 
ledge is  true  judgment  plus  knowledge  of  the  differentia  "  (2o8c-2io0). 

Thus  our  dialogue  of  search  ends  formally  with  a  negative  con- 
clusion. Three  suggestions  have  been  made  and  all  found  untenable. 
Theaetetus  has  no  further  suggestion  of  which  to  be  delivered.  If 
he  should  ever  find  himself  pregnant  with  any  further  suggestions  in 
future,  we  must  examine  them  in  the  same  fashion.  It  is  not  the 
function  of  Socrates  to  make  any  positive  contribution  to  knowledge, 
and  besides  it  is  time  that  he  went  to  the  "  king's  "  office  to  make 
his  formal  reply  to  the  indictment  preferred  by  Meletus  (2106-^). 

The  Theaetetus  has  thus  been  true  to  type  as  a  Socratic  dialogue 
in  ending  with  no  avowed  results.  But  negatively  we  have 
reached  a  series  of  results  of  the  highest  importance.  We  have 
disposed  of  the  identification  of  knowledge  with  sensation  or  any 
form  of  simple  apprehension.  We  have  also  seen  that  pure  rela- 
tivism is  untenable  alike  in  the  theory  of  knowledge  and  in  meta- 
physics. It  may  be  added  that  it  has  been  at  least  forcibly  sug- 
gested by  the  tenour  of  the  whole  argument  that  all  the  proposed 
definitions  have  failed  precisely  because  each  of  them  has  attempted 
to  provide  a  psychological  criterion  of  knowledge,  and  no  such 
psychological  criterion  is  possible.  The  most  important  positive 

1  The  first  occurrence  of  the  word  in  the  sense  which  Aristotle  was  to  stereo- 
type as  a  technicality  of  logic. 


848         PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

result  of  the  discussion  is  probably  the  recognition  that  the  dis- 
covery of  the  great  categories  both  of  existence  and  value  is  the 
work  of  thought,  "  the  soul  by  herself  without  any  instrument." 
We  may  note  also  the  appearance  for  the  first  time  of  a  whole 
series  of  technical  terms  of  the  first  importance :  "  quality " 
(noidrrjg),  "  organ  "  of  perception  (dgyavov),  "  criterion  "  (xQiTfaiav) , 
"  differentia  "  (dKupagd,  dia^ogdTrjg).  Also  we  see  the  very  funda- 
mental problems  connected  with  the  notion  of  "  simple  appre- 
hension "  and  the  difference  between  "  acquaintance  "  and  "  know- 
ledge about "  coming  into  prominence  and  receiving  illustration, 
though  without  the  formulation  of  a  definite  result. 

Possibly  the  most  striking  feature  of  the  whole  dialogue  is  its 
silence  on  a  matter  about  which  we  should  have  expected  to  hear 
something.  Plato  has  written  a  long  and  elaborate  discussion  of 
knowledge  without  making  a  single  reference  to  the  doctrine  of  forms, 
though  we  might  have  thought  it  almost  impossible  for  him  to  keep  it 
out  of  the  argument  against  relativism.  A  similar  silence  may  be  said 
to  occur  in  all  the  dialogues  we  still  have  to  examine.  The  forms  are 
mentioned  only  in  two  of  them  :  the  Parmenides,  where  the  doctrine 
is  said  to  be  that  of  Socrates  in  his  early  years  and  is  criticized  by 
Parmenides  and  Zeno,  and  the  Timaeus,  where  it  is  put  into  the 
mouth  of  a  fifth-century  Pythagorean.  I  do  not  see  how  to  account 
for  these  facts  on  the  view  that  Plato  had  himself  originated  the 
doctrine  and  regarded  it  as  his  special  contribution  to  philosophy. 
If  we  trust  his  own  accounts  of  the  matter,  we  shall  find  it  most 
natural  to  suppose  that  in  the  earlier  dialogues,  which  speak  of  the 
forms,  Plato  has  not  yet  developed  a  doctrine  which  he  feels  to  be 
specifically  his  own  ;  he  is  reproducing  the  common  inheritance  of 
Socratic  men.  If  that  is  so,  the  silence  about  the  forms  in  the 
Theaetetus  may  mean  either  that  when  he  wrote  that  dialogue  he  was 
feeling  the  necessity  for  a  "  Platonic  "  doctrine  which  had  not  yet 
been  definitely  worked  out,  or  else  that  he  had  already  arrived  at 
the  results  Aristotle  always  assumes  to  be  the  Platonic  teaching,  and 
felt  that  they  were  so  definitely  his  own  that  dramatic  versimilitude 
would  be  outraged  by  putting  them  into  the  mouth  of  Socrates. 

See  further : 

BURNET. — Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  234-253. 
CAMPBELL,  'L.—The  Theaetetus  of  Plato*.     (Oxford,  1883.) 
RITTER,  C. — Platon,  ii.  96-120  ;    Gedankengang  und  Grundan- 

schauungen  von  Platos  Thedtet  in  appendix  to   Untersuch- 

ungen  ueber  Platon.     (Stuttgart,  1888.) 
RAEDER,  H. — Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung,  279-297. 
DIELS,  H. — Elementum.     (Leipzig,  1899.) 
DIES,  A. — Autour  de  Platon,  450-452. 
STEWART,  J.  A. — Plato's  Doctrine  of  Ideas,  65-68. 
NATORP,  P. — Platons  Ideenlehre,  88-116. 
SACHS,  E. — de  Theaeteto  Atheniensi  (1914). 


CHAPTER    XIV 
THE  PARMENIDES 

IT  is  most  probable  that  the  Parmenides  and  the  Theaetetus 
were  composed  almost  simultaneously.  The  Parmenides 
cannot  well  be  a  decidedly  earlier  work  than  the  other,  since 
it  exhibits  the  same  interest  in  Eleaticism  and  its  great  founder 
Parmenides ;  it  cannot  well  be  later,  since  it  is  the  best  example 
in  Plato  of  that  cumbrousness  of  the  indirectly  reported  dialogue 
form  which  is  mentioned  in  the  Theaetetus  as  the  reason  for  return 
to  the  simpler  type  of  the  earliest  dialogues.  Indeed,  it  may  well 
be  that  it  was  just  the  difficulty  of  keeping  up  in  the  Parmenides 
the  fiction  that  the  whole  is  recited  by  a  speaker  to  whom  it  had 
been  formerly  recited  by  a  second  person,  who  in  his  turn  had 
heard  it  from  a  third,  which  led  Plato  to  renounce  this  type  of 
composition  for  the  future.  It  had  been  useful  so  long  as  his 
purpose  had  been  largely  dramatic,  but  was  found  to  be  worse  than 
useless  for  works  in  which  the  main  interest  lies  in  the  analysis  and 
criticism  of  ideas. 

The  dialogue  has  always  been  regarded  as  an  exceptionally 
puzzling  one,  and  the  most  divergent  views  have  been  held  about 
its  main  purpose.  Yet  if  we  attend  to  certain  plain  hints,  given 
by  Plato  himself,  we  may  find  that  his  object  is  indicated  with 
unusual  clearness.  The  general  scheme  of  the  dialogue  is  this. 
It  falls  into  two  parts  of  unequal  length.  In  the  first  and  briefer 
part  (126^-1350)  Socrates  is  represented  as  a  very  young  man 
expounding  his  nevrly  formulated  theory  of  the  "  participation  "  of 
sensible  things  in  forms  to  the  great  Parmenides  and  his  famous 
scholar  Zeno ;  Parmenides  subjects  the  theory  to  a  series  of 
criticisms  which  look  annihilating  and  to  which  Socrates  offers  no 
reply.  Still  he  maintains  that  philosophy  cannot  dispense  with 
the  conception  of  the  forms.  The  weakness  of  Socrates  is  that, 
being  very  young,  he  is  attempting  to  philosophize  without  a 
sufficient  logical  discipline  in  considering  all  the  consequences 
which  follow  from  the  acceptance  or  denial  of  a  fundamental 
"  hypothesis."  In  the  second  part  of  the  dialogue  (136^-1660), 
Parmenides  illustrates  the  kind  of  logical  discipline  he  has  in  mind 
by  taking  for  examination  his  own  thesis  that  "  Reality  is  One  " 
or  that  "  Things  are  a  Unity."  He  apparently  shows  in  a  series  of 
antithetical  "  antinomies  "  that  whether  this  thesis  is  affirmed  or 
denied,  the  consequence  is  that  a  host  of  pairs  of  contradictory 

349 


850          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

statements  may  either  be  simultaneously  affirmed  or  simultaneously 
denied.  In  either  case,  of  course,  the  principle  of  Contradiction 
has  been  violated.  The  dialogue  ends  without  a  word  of  comment 
on  this  portentous  result. 

Now  it  is  quite  certain  that  Plato  never  dreamed  of  denying 
the  law  of  Contradiction  ;  Aristotle  would  certainly  have  said 
something  on  the  point  if  that  had  been  so.1  We  get  a  clue  to 
Plato's  real  drift  when  he  makes  Parmenides  say  (135^)  that  the 
method  of  which  he  is  about  to  give  an  example  is  that  of  Zeno, 
the  inventor  of  "  antinomies.11  This  remark  is  clearly  meant  to 
send  us  back  to  the  earlier  sentences  (128  c-d)  in  which  Zeno  has 
been  made  to  explain  the  real  intention  of  his  own  famous  puzzles. 
His  purpose,  he  says,  was  simply  to  retort  on  opponents  who  said 
that  the  Parmenidean  doctrine  "  reality  is  one  "  leads  to  para- 
doxical conclusions  by  showing  that  their  rival  "  hypothesis  "  that 
"  reality  is  many  "  leads  to  still  worse  paradoxes.  If  we  interpret 
the  Parmenides,  as  we  clearly  ought  to  do,  in  the  light  of  these 
broad  hints,  we  shall  see  that  it  is  constructed  on  the  same  pattern 
as  the  paradoxes  of  Zeno.  A  series  of  attempts  to  show  that  the 
Socratic  "  hypothesis  "  of  forms  leads  to  impossible  results  is 
retorted  upon  by  an  elaborate  attempt  to  show  that  the  Eleatic 
hypothesis  is  in  still  worse  case.  It  is  not  safe  even  to  mention  it, 
for  whether  you  assert  it  or  deny  it,  in  either  case  a  clever  formal 
logician  can  compel  you  to  admit  either  that  all  assertions  whatso- 
ever are  true  or  alternatively  that  they  are  all  false. 

It  follows  then  that  the  objections  urged  against  the  doctrine  of 
sensible  things  as  "  partaking  of  "  forms  are  not  Plato's  own,  and 
are  not  meant  as  a  serious  criticism  by  himself  either  of  Socrates 
or  of  his  own  earlier  theories.  They  correspond  to  the  objections 
against  Parmenides  which  Zeno  had  in  view  in  composing  his  own 
work.  In  other  words,  we  are  directed  to  regard  these  criticisms 
as  coming  from  opponents  of  the  theory  of  "  participation."  And 
since  Plato's  imitation  of  the  Zenonian  method  takes  the  form  of 
raising  still  worse  puzzles  about  the  consequences  of  the  Eleatic 
doctrine,  it  is  clear  who  these  opponents  must  be.  We  must  look 
for  them  among  .the  formal  logicians  of  the  school  of  Megara  who 
were  the  continuators  of  Eleaticism.  It  is  hi  strict  keeping  with  this 
interpretation  that  the  main  point  of  the  objections  made  by 
Parmenides  to  Socrates  is  not  to  raise  difficulties  about  the  reality 
of  the  forms.  That  he  seems  to  concede.  What  he  criticizes  is 

1  Cf.  Aristot.  Met.  10056  25,  where  it  is  mentioned  that  "  some  persons  " 
suppose  Heraclitus  to  deny  the.  principle  of  contradiction,  "  but  it  does  not 
follow  necessarily  that  a  man  means  what  he  says. ' '  Ibid.  loojb  22,  the  ' '  argu- 
ment of  Protagoras  "  would  lead  to  the  denial  of  the  principle,  as  is  argued  at 
length  at  10090  6  ff.  Heraclitus  and  Protagoras  are  the  only  eminent  men 
named  in  the  course  of  the  argument,  and  of  them  Aristotle  only  says  that  by 
pressing,  in  one  case,  the  thinker's  mere  words  and,  in  the  other,  the  conse- 
quence of  his  thesis,  you  could  reach  this  result.  He  means  that  neither  really 
intended  to  reject  this  "  most  certain  of  all  principles.11  If  he  supposed  the 
antinomies  of  the  Parmenides  to  be  meant  seriously,  he  would  have  been  bound 
to  refer  to  the  point  in  this  context. 


THE  PARMENIDES  851 

the  view  of  Socrates  that  sensible  things  "  partake  "  of  the  forms, 
and  so  have  a  kind  of  secondary  reality.  This  is  exactly  as  it  should 
be  if  the  critics  Plato  has  in  view  are  the  Eleatics  of  Megara.  From 
their  point  of  view,  the  great  fault  of  the  doctrine  expounded  in  the 
Phaedo,  Republic,  and  other  dialogues  is  that  it  allows  any  kind  of 
reality  at  all  to  the  objects  of  sense.  Plato  does  not,  in  the  dialogue, 
offer  any  answer  to  these  extreme  "  idealists  "  ;  he  simply  sets 
himself  to  show  that  two  can  play  at  the  game  of  abstract  formal 
logic,  and  that  he  can,  if  he  pleases,  play  the  game  better  than  its 
professed  champions.  Their  own  methods  may  be  applied  to  their 
own  fundamental  doctrine  ;  let  them  see  how  they  will  like  the 
result. 

If  this  is  the  right  way  to  understand  the  dialogue,  and  Plato 
seems  to  tell  us  that  it  is,  it  follows  that  the  Parmenides  is,  all 
through,  an  elaborate  jeu  d' esprit,  and  that  all  interpretations  based 
on  taking  it  for  anything  else  (including  an  earlier  one  by  the  present 
writer),  are  mistaken  in  principle.  It  equally  follows  that  the 
ironical  spirit  of  the  work  must  not  be  forgotten  in  dealing  with 
isolated  passages.  E.g.,  when  Parmenides  gravely  censures  Soc- 
rates for  refusing  to  believe  in  forms  of  mud  and  dirt,  and  says 
that  he  will  get  the  better  of  such  a  prejudice  when  he  grows  older 
and  more  philosophical  (1300),  we  must  understand  the  remark  to 
be  a  piece  of  polite  irony.  In  Parmenides'  mouth,  it  can  only 
mean  that  a  man  who  is  going  to  admit  any  kind  of  reality  in 
sensible  things  ought  to  be  prepared  to  "go  the  whole  hog/'  and 
nothing  more.  Presumably  the  remark  is  a  reproduction  of  actual 
Megarian  criticism.  It  tells  us  nothing  of  Plato's  own  thought. 
More  than  any  other  Platonic  work  of  any  considerable  compass, 
the  Parmenides  bears  throughout  the  stamp  of  being  an  "  occasional' 
composition.  Its  purpose  is  to  "  have  some  fun  "  with  Monists 
who  regard  the  sensible  as  illusion,  and  very  little  more. 

There  are  several  interesting  points  to  be  noted  in  connexion 
with  the  introductory  narrative.  The  otherwise  unknown  speaker, 
Cephalus,  who  recites  the  dialogue,  is  a  citizen  of  Clazomenae,  the 
native  town  of  Anaxagoras.  It  is  not  said  where  he  is  speaking  or 
to  whom,  but  apparently  the  scene  is  in  one  of  the  Ionian  cities. 
The  assumption  is  that  he  had  gone  to  Athens  expressly  to  learn 
the  true  story  of  the  meeting  between  Socrates  and  the  great 
Eleatics  from  the  only  surviving  person  who  could  relate  it,  Plato's 
own  half-brother  Antiphon,  son  of  Perictione  by  her  second  husband, 
the  well-known  statesman  Pyrilampes.  Antiphon  could  tell  the 
tale  accurately  because  he  had  often  heard  it  when  he  was  younger, 
from  Pythodorus.  (The  person  meant  is  the  well-known  Pytno- 
dorus,  son  of  Isolochus,  prominent  in  the  Archidamian  war,  whom 
the  writer  of  the  Alcibiades  I  names  as  an  actual  pupil  of  Zeno.) 
Pythodorus  had  been  the  host  of  Parmenides  and  Zeno  on  their 
visit  to  Athens  at  the  time  of  the  great  Panathenaea  in  a  year 
when  Socrates  was  still  "  very  young."  It  follows  from  all  this 
that  we  are  to  suppose  the  meeting  of  Socrates  with  the  Eleatic 


852          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

philosophers  to  have  taken  place  about  450  B.C.,  nearly  a  quarter 
of  a  century  before  Plato's  own  birth.  The  visit  of  Cephalus  and 
his  friends  to  Antiphon  must  be  supposed,  as  Proclus  said,  to  be 
after  the  death  of  Socrates.  The  recital  of  Antiphon  was  needed 
precisely  because  all  the  persons  who  had  been  present  at  the 
original  meeting  were  dead. 

Why  does  Plato  make  this  unparalleled  assumption  that  a  con- 
versation of  Socrates  is  being  repeated  outside  Athens,  after 
Socrates'  death  and  a  good  half-century  after  the  holding  of  the 
conversation  ?  Clearly,  by  insisting  on  the  early  date  of  the  con- 
versation, and  the  fact  that  no  one  is  living  who  could  check  the 
third-hand  report  of  what  passed,  he  frees  himself  from  responsibility 
for  the  strict  accuracy  of  his  narrative.  If  we  find  the  conversa- 
tion so  d  propos  to  present-day  Megarianism,  well,  we  only  know 
what  Socrates  and  Parmenides  said  from  a  second-hand  story  told 
by  Antiphon,  a  younger  man  than  Plato  himself,  and  who  will  go 
bail  for  Antiphon  ?  I  think  it  ought  also  to  be  said  that  the  tale 
of  the  anxiety  of  the  Ionian  philosophers  to  hear  Antiphon's  story 
justifies  an  inference.  Why  the  lonians  of  Asia  Minor  should  feel 
this  interest  is  obvious.  They  would  be  members  of  the  school 
founded  in  Ionia  by  Anaxagoras  on  his  removal  from  Athens ; 
Socrates,  the  favourite  pupil  of  Anaxagoras'  successor  Archelaus, 
would  in  any  case  be  an  object  of  interest  to  such  a  group.  That 
Plato  thinks  it  a  plausible  fiction  that  their  interest  should  lead 
them  to  visit  Athens  in  order  to  gather  a  true  account  of  events 
fifty  years  old  seems  only  explicable  on  the  supposition  that  the 
encounter  of  Socrates  with  the  great  Eleatics  was  a  real  historical 
fact  and,  for  philosophical  circles,  a  memorable  one,  as  an  encounter 
between  two  great  chess-players  or  gamblers  is  memorable  for 
persons  interested  in  chess  or  gaming. 

The  situation  at  the  opening  of  the  conversation  is  this.  Zeno 
has  just  been  reading  aloud  his  famous  work  containing  the  anti- 
nomies for  which  he  is  still  remembered.  Socrates  fastens  on  one 
of  them,  an  argument  which  has  not  survived  and  of  which  the 
precise  sense  is  uncertain,  to  the  effect  that  "  if  things  are  many,  they 
must  be  like  and  must  also  be  unlike,  but  this  is  absurd,"  as  an 
example  of  the  rest.  He  proposes  to  regard  the  whole  work  as 
intended  to  establish  the  thesis  of  Parmenides  by  disproving  its 
contradictory.  Parmenides  says  "  reality  is  one,"  Zeno  that 
99  reality  is  not  many."  Zeno  accepts  the  statement  with  the  minor 
correction  that  his  object  was  not  to  prove  the  Parmenidean  thesis, 
but  simply  to  silence  its  critics  by  showing  that  their  own  rival 
"  hypothesis  "  has  even  more  impossible  consequences  than  those 
they  urge  against  Parmenides  (127^-1280).  Socrates  then  suggests 
that  if  we  will  only  accept  the  doctrine  of  forms  and  the  participa- 
tion of  things  in  forms,  there  is  really  no  paradox  in  saying  that 
the  same  "  things  "  may  "  partake  "  at  once  of  the  form  of  likeness 
and  of  that  of  unlikeness,  and  so  be  at  once  like  and  unlike.  But 
it  would  be  a  real  and  intolerable  paradox  (re/oas)  to  hold  that 


THE  PARMENIDES  858 

unlikeness  can  be  predicated  of  the  form  of  likeness  or  likeness  of 
the  form  of  unlike.  So  it  is  intelligible  enough  that  a  sensible 
thing,  my  body,  for  example,  should  be  one  body  out  of  the  six  or 
seven  human  bodies  present  in  this  room  and  also  have  many 
members.  But  it  would  be  quite  another  thing  to  hold  that  Unity 
is  many  or  Plurality  one  (1290-1 300).  Parmenides  and  Zeno  are 
both  impressed  by  the  ability  of  Socrates,  and  Parmenides  at  once 
asks  him  whether  the  theory  is  original.  "  Did  you  make  this 
distinction  between  forms  and  things  which  partake  of  them 
auTo's?  " — "for  yourself,1'  "out  of  your  own  head"  (1306)  ?  Par- 
menides asks  the  question,  as  Proclus  says,  because  it  might  be 
that  Socrates  had  "  heard  of "  some  such  distinction  from  some 
one  else.  The  noticeable  thing  is  that  it  is  not  the  doctrine  that 
there  are  "  intelligible  "  forms  which  strikes  Parmenides  as  novel ; 
the  original  point  which  impresses  him  is  that  Socrates  holds  that  the 
things  we  see  and  handle  "  participate  in  "  the  forms.  None  of 
the  difficulties  he  intends  to  raise  arises  from  the  belief  that  there 
are  forms ;  the  difficulties  all  concern  the  relation  of  "  participa- 
tion "  by  which  the  sensible  thing  is  connected  with  a  form.  It  is 
the  reality  of  the  "  phenomenal  "  world  which  he,  as  an  Eleatic, 
finds  a  stumbling-block.  The  conclusion  to  which  his  criticism 
is  meant  to  conduct  us  is  the  double  one  (a)  that  unless  we  admit 
the  reality  of  the  forms,  there  is  an  end  of  all  philosophy;  if 
we  do  admit  it,  the  form  cannot  be  "  present  in "  sensible 
things,  and  these  must  therefore  be  simply  unreal  (1350-c).1 
This  is  precisely  the  position  of  Euclides  and  his  friends,  who 
taught  that  "  reality  is  one  ;  the  '  other '  is  unreal  "  (Aristocles 
ap.  Euseb.  P.E.  xiv.  17,  R.P.  289).  Hence  we  shall  expect  to 
find  that  the  arguments  urged  against  Socrates  by  Parmenides 
are  theirs  also. 

I  may  summarize  these  arguments  the  more  briefly  that  they 
are  admirably  dealt  with  by  Professor  Burnet  in  Greek  Philosophy, 
Part  /.,  253-264,  and  other  writers  on  the  philosophy  of  Plato. 
I  have  attempted  a  complete  discussion  of  their  weight  and  deriva- 
tion elsewhere  in  "  Parmenides,  Zeno,  and  Socrates,1'  Philosophical 
Studies,  pp.  28-90,  whither  I  may  refer  a  reader  desirous  of  further 
information. 

Parmenides  begins  by  raising  the  question  what  precisely  is 
the  content  of  the  world  of  forms.  Socrates  professes  himself 
certain  that  there  are  forms  corresponding  to  the  fundamental 
notions  of  ethics — Right  (Sucatov),  Good  (ayaOov),  Noble  (KO\OV)  ;  he 
is  doubtful  about  forms  of  organisms  and  physical  things  (Man, 
Fire,  Water) ;  in  the  case  of  such  things  as  mud,  dirt,  hair — i.e. 

1  This  is,  in  fact,  the  position  of  the  historical  Parmenides  himself.  His 
"  one  "  is,  no  doubt,  corporeal ;  it  is  a  solid  homogeneous  sphere.  But  our 
eyes  and  ears  do  not  show  us  anything  of  the  kind.  Hence  the  apparent 
"  things  "  which  they  disclose  to  us  must  be  pure  illusion.  Though  the 
"  one  "  is  corporeal,  we  only  apprehend  it  by  thinking.  Its  sole  reality  is 
deduced  by  Parmenides  from  what  he  regards  as  the  postulates  of  coherent 
thought. 


854          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

sensible  things  which  do  not  appear  to  have  a  recognizable  type 
of  structure — he  is  inclined  to  think  that  there  are  no  forms.  In 
these  cases  there  is  no  reality  beyond  "  what  we  see."  But  he  is 
not  quite  sure  that  consistency  would  not  demand  forms  of  these 
too,  though  he  is  afraid  the  admission  might  lead  him  into  "  abysmal 
nonsense  "  (130  b-d).  What  he  means  by  this  "  nonsense  "  we 
can  see,  as  Burnet  suggests,  by  the  notices  preserved  to  us  of  the 
arbitrary  fashion  in  which  the  Pythagorean  Eurytus  attempted  to 
assign  "  numbers  "  to  man,  horse,  and  other  things.  The  main 
point  is,  that  though  Socrates  is  not  certain  about  the  contents  of 
the  system  of  forms,  the  forms  of  which  he  is  most  certain  are 
those  which  correspond  to  our  ethical  ideals.  (Since  we  can  define 
these  as  the  mathematician  defines  his  "  figures/'  they  must 
have  the  same  kind  of  reality  as  that  the  geometer  ascribes  to  his 
figures.) 

The  theory  then  is  that  all  the  "  particulars  "  of  which  a  common 
predicate  is  affirmed  owe  their  possession  of  that  predicate  to  their 
"  participation  "  in  the  corresponding  form,  and  Parmenides  sets 
himself  to  show  that,  however  we  understand  this  relation  of 
"  participation,"  we  are  led  to  consequences  which  are  logically 
absurd.  This  is  exactly  the  line  of  reasoning  adopted  by  Zeno  for 
the  confutation  of  the  Pythagorean  mathematicians  who  assume 
that  "  reality  is  many."  The  argument  may  be  analysed  as  follows : 
(a)  If  a  form  is  "  in  "  each  of  a  number  of  things,  either  the  whole 
of  it  is  "  in  "  each  of  them,  or  only  part  of  it  is  "  in  "  each.  In  the 
first  case  the  form  itself  being  as  a  whole  "  in  "  each  of  several 
separate  things  is  "  outside  "  itself  (i.e.  it  is,  after  all,  many  and  not 
one,  contrary  to  the  Socratic  thesis  of  its  unity).  In  the  second 
case,  the  form  is  divisible  (/xcptoroV),  and  thus  becomes  many  by 
division  just  as,  on  the  alternative  view,  it  becomes  many  by  multi- 
plication ;  the  whole  form  is  thus  "  in  "  no  one  of  the  things  called 
after  it,  and  thus  they  are  not  really  entitled  to  the  "  common 
name  "  (i^ia-e).  Thus  we  have  an  apparent  reductio  ad  absurdum 
of  the  "  hypothesis  "  of  "  participation  "  ;  it  permits  of  only  two 
alternative  interpretations  and  you  are  led,  by  a  slightly  different 
route,  to  the  same  denial  of  the  hypothesis  itself,  whichever  alter- 
native you  adopt.  The  hypothesis  is  thus  "  self -refuting."  (The 
precise  meaning  of  the  reasoning  by  which  the  second  of  the  alter- 
natives is  refuted  in  the  special  case  of  the  form  "  magnitude  "  is 
obscure,  but  seems  to  be  this.  If  you  say  that  one  thing  is  bigger 
than  another  in  virtue  of  the  presence  in  it  of  a  "  part  "  of  the  form 
of  "  magnitude,"  less  than  the  whole  of  the  form,  you  are  main- 
taining in  effect  that  there  is  such  a  relation  as  "  not  quite  bigger 
than."  Thus  you  are  committed  to  holding  that,  e.g.,  if  A  and  B 
are  segments  of  a  straight  line,  the  relation  between  them  may  be 
that  A  is  "  not  quite  longer  "  than,  or  "  nearly  longer  "  than  B, 
and  this  is  manifestly  nonsense.  So,  in  the  case  of  the  form  of 
"  smallness,"  you  are  committed  to  the  view  that  it  would  be 
significant  to  say  that  "  A  is  nearly  smaller  than  B,  but  not  quite 


THE  PARMENIDES  855 

smaller."  But  this  is  senseless.  Either  A  is  quite  smaller  than  B 
or  it  is  not  smaller  at  all.  If  there  is  any  departure  from  strict 
equality,  either  A  is  definitely  greater  than  B  or  it  is  definitely  less 
than  B,  a  perfectly  valid  argument  against  the  notion  of  strictly 
"  infinitesimal  "  differences,  which  is  exactly  on  a  par  with  the 
argument  of  Zeno  against  the  view  of  the  point  as  a  "  vanishing  " 
magnitude.)  We  note,  of  course,  that  the  reasoning  is  nci  directed 
against  the  reality  of  forms,  but  against  the  assumption  that  a 
form  can  be  "  in  "  or  "  present  to "  something  which  is  not 
a  form. 

(b)  The  reason  and  the  only  reason  for  Socrates'  doctrine  is 
the  assumption  that  when  several  things  have  a  common  predicate, 
it  is  assumed  that  there  is  a  single  determinate  reality  (the  form) 
denoted  by  this  predicate.  But  it  ought  to  follow  that,  since  the 
common  predicate  can  be  affirmed  of  the  form  itself,  there  must  be 
a  second  form  "  present  "  alike  to  the  first  form  and  the  things 
which  "  participate  "  in  it,  and  similarly,  by  the  same  reason,  a 
third,  and  so  on  in  indefinitum.  Thus  there  must  be  no  one  single 
form  of,  e.g.,  magnitude,  but  a  simply  infinite  series  of  forms  of 
magnitude ;  thus,  once  more,  the  Socratic  theory  is  shown  to  be 
self -refuting,  and  again  it  is  the  asserted  "  presence  "  of  forms 
to  things  which  has  created  the  difficulty  (132^-6). 

In  strict  logic  this  reasoning  is  not  conclusive,  since  it  turns  on  a 
confusion  between  a  predication  and  the  assertion  of  an  identity. 
E.g.  David  and  Jonathan  are  a  pair  of  friends,  Orestes  and  Pylades 
are  another  pair.  Both  pairs  have  something  in  common,  the 
cardinal  number  2,  which  is  the  number  of  the  members  of  each. 
But  the  number  2  is  not  itself  a  pair ;  it  is  a  number,  and  cannot  be 
said  to  have  a  number.  Since  Plato's  object  is  merely  to  rehearse 
the  objections  of  Eleatics  to  the  Socratic  doctrine  in  order  to  over- 
trump them  by  showing  that  their  own  methods  can  be  turned 
with  even  more  effect  against  their  own  theories,  we  need  not 
suppose  that  he  was  unaware  of  this  logical  flaw,  though  he  has  no 
occasion  to  expose  it.  He  had  already  made  Socrates  himself  in 
the  Republic  (5970)  remark  in  passing  that  if  you  once  surrender  the 
absolute  unity  of  the  form  by  admitting  that  there  can  be  two 
forms  of  the  same  thing,  you  are  committed  to  the  "  infinite 
regress/1  We  may  reasonably  infer  that  this  kind  of  reasoning  was 
already  current  in  Socrates'  own  lifetime,  not  invented  for  the  first 
time  after  his  death  by  Eleatic  critics  of  the  positions  ascribed  to  him 
in  the  Platonic  dialogues.  Hence  I  think  it  unlikely  that  this 
particular  difficulty  has  anything  to  do  with  the  difficulty  urged, 
as  Alexander  of  Aphrodisias  tells  us,  by  Polyxenus  the  Megarian 
against  the  doctrine  of  "  participation."  As  I  understand  the  state- 
ments of  Alexander,  the  point  of  Polyxenus  was  that  on  the  Platonic 
theory  there  ought  to  be  not  only  visible  men,  like  Socrates  and 
Plato,  and  a  form  of  man,  but  also  a  "  third  "  man,  intermediate 
between  the  two,  exactly  as,  on  the  Platonic  theory  itself,  there  are 
certain  "  mathematical  objects  "  intermediate  between  the  form  of 


856          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

circularity  and  the  visible  diagram  drawn  on  a  black-board.1  I 
think  also  that  when  Aristotle  talks  of  the  "  third  man  "  as  a 
difficulty  to  which  the  doctrine  of  forms  leads  us,2  he  is  always 
intending  to  refer  to  this  last-mentioned  argument  and  not,  as  is 
commonly  supposed,  to  the  "  indefinite  regress."  I  have  tried  to 
argue  the  point  fully  in  the  essay  already  referred  to  (Philosophical 
Studies,  pp.  52-69). 
Zeno,  and  Socrates,  pp.  255-270). 

(c)  At  this  point  Socrates  suggests  a  way  of  escape  from  the 
difficulty  about  the  unity  of  the  form.  How  if  a  form  is  really  a 
"  thought  "  (voTjfta)  and  therefore  is  not  "  in  "  things  at  all,  but 
"  in  our  minds  "  (eV  ^uxa^)  ?  We  could  then  maintain  its  unity 
without  exposing  ourselves  to  either  of  the  lines  of  argument  (a) 
and  (b).  Parmenides,  however,  has  a  reply  based  on  the  principle 
which  is  employed  in  his  own  poem  as  the  foundation  of  his  criticism 
of  all  his  precursors.  You  cannot  think  without  thinking  of  some- 
thing— that  is,  of  something  real  (to  think  of  nothing  would  be 
equivalent  to  not  thinking  at  all)  ;  this  something  is  some  one 
determinate  thing  which  "  that  thought  thinks,  as  being  there  in 
all  the  instances."  In  other  words,  what  the  thought  thinks  is 
always  a  form.  (E.g.,  when  you  think  of  Socrates,  Plato,  and 
Aristotle,  you  think  some  definite  predicate  about  them,  such  as, 
e.g.,  that  they  are  all  men,  and  thus  we  are  back  at  our  old  position. 
You  are  thinking  of  man  as  a  form  "  present  "  to  the  three.)  What 
then,  on  this  view  that  a  form  is  a  thought,  can  the  "  presence  " 
of  the  form  to  the  thing  mean  ?  Does  it  mean  that  a  thing  is  a 
complex  of  thoughts  and  that  everything  thinks  ?  Or  would  you 
admit  that  there  are  "  thoughts  which  do  not  think  "  ?  (1326-0). 

Once  more,  the  difficulty  is  one  not  about  the  reality  of  the 
form  but  about  the  possibility  of  the  "  presence  "  of  it  to  something 

1  Thus  we  can  distinguish  (i)  the  circle  of  which  we  give  the  equation  in 
analytical  geometry,  (2)  the  terrestrial  equator,  (3)  the  black  line  on  a  terrestrial 
globe  which  stands  for  the  equator.  (i)  is  the  form,  (2)  is  an  invisible  perfect 
"  instance  "  of  the  form,  (3)  a  visible  and  imperfect  embodiment  of  the  form. 
On  Polyxenus  see  Early  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I.,  pp.  254,  259-260.  It  has 
been  suggested  that  the  difficulties  urged  by  Parmenides  were  originally  raised 
against  Plato  himself  by  his  pupil  Aristotle,  and  that  it  is  in  acknowledgment 
of  this  that  the  Aristotle  who  was  afterwards  one  of  the  "  Thirty  "  figures  as  a 
character  in  the  dialogue  and  is  made  the  respondent  throughout  the  second 
part.  The  fancy  must  be  rejected  for  the  following  reasons  :  (i)  Aristotle  only 
entered  the  Academy  in  the  year  367,  the  very  year  of  Plato's  departure  for 
Syracuse,  as  a  mere  lad.  It  may  even  be  doubted  whether  he  can  have  held 
any  personal  intercourse  with  Plato  until  after  the  end  of  Plato's  first  visit  to 
Dionvsius  II  ;  (2)  the  one  real  point  of  contact  between  the  Aristotelian 
criticism  of  Plato  and  the  Parmenides  is  the  supposed  identity  of  the  rptroi 
dvQpuiros  with  the  argument  from  the  "  regress."  If  the  two  are  not  identical, 
this  point  of  contact  disappears.  Even  if  they  are,  the  very  fact  that  Aristotle 
refers  to  the  argument  by  such  a  nickname  indicates  that  it  was  something 
already  familiar.  (3)  As  has  been  finally  established  by  Jaeger  in  his  Aris- 
toteles,  Aristotle's  divergence  from  the  Academy  on  the  doctrine  of  forms 
was  first  indicated  in  the  work  Trept  <£tXo<ro0faj  shortly  after  Plato's  death.  His 
earlier  works,  so  far  as  we  know  them  (Eudemus,  Protrepticus),  are  wholly 
Platonic  in  spirit. 

1  Met.  9906  15  fi.  =  loyoa  n  ff.,  1039*1 1  ff.,  10596  8  ff. ;  S.E.  1786  36. 


THE  PARMEN1DES  857 

which  is  not  a  form.  Socrates  has  just  suggested  that  the  form 
or  univeisal  may  be  just  a  "  thought  in  our  minds,"  a  way  of 
looking  at  things.  The  theory  is,  in  fact,  that  historically  known  to 
us  as  Nominalism,  though  Conceptualism  would  be  a  better  name 
for  it.  It  treats  a  "  significant  universal  "  simply  as  a  point  of 
view  from  which  the  mind  contrives  to  look  at  a  plurality  of  things 
with  a  single  glance.  We  find  it  convenient,  as  making  for 
"  economy  of  mental  effort,"  to  look  at  Socrates,  Plato,  Aristotle, 
all  together  as  "  instances  of  the  universal  man  "  ;  according  to  the 
theory,  the  employment  of  this  common  name  "  man  "  only  ex- 
presses the  fact  that  we  have  effected  this  economy  and  nothing 
more  ;  what  is  common  to  Socrates,  Plato,  Aristotle,  is  simply  that 
we  have  succeeded  in  viewing  them  together  and  have  therefore 
given  them  the  common  name.  Parmenides'  objection  is,  in 
principle,  that  the  name  remains  insignificant  unless  there  really  is 
a  "  common  nature  "  which  justifies  the  common  name.  But  if 
the  common  "  nature  "  is  a  "  thought  in  our  minds,"  then  the 
things  which  are  said  to  have  this  common  nature  must  be  just 
complexes  of  thoughts,  and  we  shall  have  to  say  that  everything 
whatever  thinks,  or,  alternatively,  since  in  any  case  a  thing  is  assumed 
to  be  a  complex  of  forms,  and  forms  have  been  declared  to  be 
thoughts,  that  there  are  "  thoughts  which  do  not  think  "  (dvor/ra 
»/o7///,aTa).  The  suggested  Conceptualism,  it  should  be  noted,  would 
be  just  as  fatal  to  Aristotelianism  as  to  Platonism.  On  the  Aris- 
totelian view,  though  there  are  no  universals  ante  res,  there  are 
universals  in  rebus,  and  it  is  only  because  there  are  universals  in 
rebus  that  there  are  also  universals  in  the  intellectus  of  the  scientific 
thinker.  As  against  the  Conceptualism  which,  like  that  of  Mach 
or  Karl  Pearson,  denies  that  universals  exist  at  all  except  in  in- 
tellectu,  where  they  are  merely  labour-saving  devices,  "  conceptual 
shorthand,"  the  rejoinder  of  Parmenides  seems  decisive.  As  to 
the  source  of  this  Conceptualism,  it  is  not  easy  to  say  anything 
with  confidence.  The  best  suggestion  known  to  me  is  that  made 
ad  loc.  by  Grote,1  who  calls  attention  to  a  statement  of  Simplicius 
(commenting  on  Arist.  Cat.  86  25)  that  the  "  school  of  Eretria  " 
maintained  that  "  qualities  "  are  i/aAal  Zwoiai,  "  mere  thoughts," 
"  mere  notions."  Since  Menedemus  of  Eretria  and  his  followers 
were  famous  formal  logicians  and  agreed  with  the  Eleatics  of 
Megara  in  objecting  to  negative  predication  (Diog.  Laert.  ii.  135), 
it  seems  to  me  that  Grote  is  probably  on  the  right  track,  and  that 
we  are  still  dealing  with  a  criticism  on  the  theory  of  forms  derived 
from  Eleatic  sources. 

(d)  Socrates  next  falls  back  on  what  Aristotle  regarded  as  the 
Pythagorean  formula  for  the  relation  between  form  and  thing. 
The  form  is  an  archetype  or  model  (Tra/oa&ty/xa),  the  other  things 
called  by  its  name  are  likenesses  (6/xoiw/xara)  of  it,  so  that  the 
relation  between  sensible  thing  and  form  is  that  the  "  thing  "  is  a 

1  Grote,  Plato  and  the  other  Companions  of  Socrates  (ed.  1885),  vol.  iii. 
74  n.  2. 


858          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

"  copy  "  of  the  form.  (This  would,  apparently,  save  the  unity  oi 
the  form  by  suggesting  that  there  may  be  many  "  imitations  "  of 
one  form  just  as  there  may  be  many  copies  of  the  same  original.) 
Parmenides  again  argues  that  the  theory  refutes  itself.  For 
"  resemblance  '  is  a  symmetrical  relation.  If  A  is  like  B,  B  is  also 
like  A.  It  follows  that  the  form  must  be  like  the  things  which 
"  resemble  it."  And,  since  the  theory  itself  explains  the  likeness 
of  one  thing  to  another  by  the  existence  of  a  common  archetype 
of  both,  we  must  account  for  the  likeness  of  form  to  "  thing  " 
by  postulating  a  more  ultimate  archetype  of  both,  and  so  on  in 
indefinitum  (132^-1330). 

As  before,  the  difficulty  really  arises  from  a  fallacy.  As  Proclus 
rightly  says,  the  relation  of  copy  to  original  is  not  simply  one  of 
likeness.  (It  is  in  fact  a  relation  of  resemblance -{-derivation,  and 
this  relation  is  not  symmetrical.  My  reflection  in  the  glass  is  a 
reflection  of  my  face,  but  my  face  is  not  a  reflection  of  it.)  It 
should  be  specially  remarked  that  the  suggestion  that  the  relation 
between  form  and  "  thing  "  is  one  of  "  likeness  "  is  not  offered  as 
an  alternative  to  the  doctrine  of  "  participation,"  but  as  a  further 
specification  of  its  precise  meaning  (132^  3,  ^  ftefo&s  avny  .  .  .  TO>V 
ctSojv  OVK  aXXtj  TIS  ^  €iKacr0>)v<u  avrots),  and  that  Parmenides  meets 
both  formulae  with  precisely  the  same  objection  that  they  appear 
to  involve  the  "  indefinite  regress." 

(e)  The  gravest  difficulty  of  all  has  yet  to  be  faced.  It  is  that 
the  recognition  of  two  "  worlds,"  presupposed  by  Socrates,  a  world 
of  forms  and  an  "  other  "  world  of  "  things  "  which  somehow 
"  partake  "  of  the  forms,  leads  direct  to  complete  scepticism  (1330- 
T35C)-  For  the  world  of  which  each  of  us  is  a  member  is  ex  hypothesi 
not  the  world  of  forms,  but  the  "  other  "  world  (since  it  had  been 
observed  at  the  outset  that  each  of  us  is  a  man,  none  of  us  is  the 
"  form  of  man ").  Consequently  the  relations  between  forms 
will  belong  exclusively  to  the  world  or  system  of  related  forms ; 
corresponding  relations  of  which  "  we  "  are  terms  will  belong  to 
"  our  world  "  and  will  have  their  correlates  within  "  our  world." 
There  will  be  a  relation  between  "  master  "  as  such  and  "  servant  " 
as  such,  and  the  terms  of  this  will  be  the  form  of  master  and  the 
form  of  servant.  But  each  of  us  will  be  master  or  servant  to 
another  man,  and  the  relation  between  this  pair  will  fall  outside 
the  world  of  forms  ;  it  will  connect  one  man  with  another  man,  not 
with  a  form.  So  the  correlate  of  the  form  of  knowledge  will  be 
Reality  as  such.  But  the  correlate  of  our  knowledge  will  be  such 
reality  as  the  objects  of  our  world  possess.  And  it  is  admitted  that 
"  our  "  knowledge  is  not  the  form  of  knowledge  (that  is,  the  know- 
ledge we  have  is  partial  and  imperfect).  Its  counterpart  therefore 
is  not  the  completely  real.  We  are  precluded  from  knowing  what 
real  good  is,  for  the  counterpart  of  a  merely  relative  and  partial 
knowledge  must  be  a  relative  and  partial  reality.  And  we  may 
invert  the  argument  with  even  more  startling  results.  God,  at 
any  rate,  might  be  supposed  to  possess  "  absolute  "  or  "  perfect  " 


THE  PARMENIDES  859 

nowledge.  But,  by  our  previous  reasoning,  it  follows  that  God 
nows  nothing  of  our  imperfectly  real  world.  And  in  the  same 
ray,  we  may  deny  the  rule  of  God  over  us,  on  the  ground  that  the 
orrelate  of  human  subject  is  human  superior.  In  a  word,  the 
onsequence  of  a  theory  of  two  distinct  "  worlds  "  or  "  orders  " 
rill  be  that  every  relation  falls  wholly  within  one  of  the  two ; 
here  can  be  no  relation  connecting  a  member  of  the  one  world  with 
member  of  the  other.  (In  the  mouth  of  an  Eleatic,  of  course, 
his  means  that  one  of  the  two  "  worlds  "  is  an  illusion,  and  that 
ne  is  the  supposed  "  sensible  world."  Parmenides,  who  wrote 
he  words  ravro  yap  fan  votlv  re  KCU  ttvai  ("  it  is  the  same  thing 
rhich  can  be  thought  of  and  can  be  ") ,  has  no  intention  of  surrender- 
ig  the  "  intelligible  "  world,  and  any  interpretation  of  the  Par- 
lenides  which  assumes  that  its  object  is  to  discredit  the  reality  of 
he  intelligible  is  necessarily  false). 

Yet  to  deny  the  reality  of  forms  is  destructive  of  thought  itself, 
Ince  it  amounts  to  a  denial  of  the  possibility  of  definite  knowledge, 
f  Socrates  has  been  badly  perplexed  by  the  discussion  which  has 
ist  been  closed,  it  is  because,  in  his  zeal,  he  has  attempted  to 
nunciate  his  doctrine  about  forms  without  a  sufficient  preparatory 
iscipline  in  arid  and  apparently  "  useless  "  formal  logic.  The 
ind  of  discipline  required  may  be  exemplified  by  Zeno's  famous 
ntinomies,  but  needs  to  go  even  beyond  them.  Zeno  had 
ttempted  to  prove  the  thesis  that  "  reality  is  many  "  self-refuting 
y  showing  that  it  can  be  made  to  lead  to  pairs  of  contradictory 
onclusions.  For  a  really  searching  investigation  it  is  not  enough 
D  ask  what  follows  from  the  assertion  of  a  thesis,  but  also  what 
allows  from  the  denial  of  it.  E.g.  Zeno  should  have  asked  not 
lerely,  "  If  things  are  many,  what  can  be  asserted  about  the  many 
hings,  and  what  about  the  unit,  and  about  the  relation  of  the  two  ?  " 
ut  also,  "  If  things  are  not  many,  what  follows  about  plurality, 
he  unit,  and  their  relations  ?  "  (It  was  not  enough  to  argue  that  the 
onsequences  of  Pluralism  are  self-contradictory ;  the  same  issue 
hould  have  been  raised  about  the  consequences  of  denying 
luralism.)  Complete  investigation  of  any  proposed  philosophical 
rinciple  demands  this  twofold  consideration  of  the  implications 
ioth  of  its  assertion  and  of  its  denial  (1356-1 36$). 

In  these  remarks,  which  effect  a  transition  to  the  second  half  of 
he  dialogue,  there  are  two  interesting  implications.  If  Parmenides 
scribes  the  helplessness  of  the  young  Socrates  in  face  of  the  diffi- 
ulties  just  raised  to  want  of  training  in  formal  logic,  we  may  infer 
hat  the  suggestion  is  that  the  apparently  formidable  arguments 
re  themselves  fallacious  and  would  be  seen  to  be  so  by  a  more 
practised  logician.  That  is,  the  fault  of  Plato's  Megarian  critics 
5  not  that  they  are  logicians,  but  that  they  are  not  logical  enough. 
f  we  are  only  thorough  enough  with  our  logic,  the  alleged  logical 
bjections  to  the  metaphysic  of  forms  will  vanish  of  themselves, 
t  seems  further  to  be  meant  that  the  particular  fault  of  these 
Dgicians  is  one-sidedness.  They  scrutinize  the  consequences  of  the 


860          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Socratic  and  Platonic  assertion  of  the  "  participation  "  of  sensible 
things  in  forms,  but  they  forget  to  consider  whether  the  denial  of 
the  assertion  may  not  involve  worse  antinomies  than  those  they 
have  detected  in  the  Platonic  dialogues.  Plato  is,  in  fact,  suggest- 
ing that  he  knows  how  to  play  the  game  of  formal  logic  according 
to  the  rules  even  better  than  the  famous  professionals  themselves. 
Beyond  these  significant  hints  that  what  we  need  is  not  less  but 
more  logic,  the  dialogue  provides  no  solution  of  the  problem  it  has 
raised. 

In  the  second  part  of  the  dialogue  Parmenides  consents  to  give 
an  elaborate  example  of  the  kind  of  logical  method  he  has  been 
recommending,  choosing  as  the  respondent  to  his  questions  the 
youngest  member  of  the  party,  Aristoteles,  on  the  ground  that  his 
very  youth  will  be  a  guarantee  that  his  answers  will  be  given  without 
finesse  of  any  kind.  The  thesis  selected  for  examination  is,  natur- 
ally enough,  Parmenides1  own  principle  that  "reality  is  one." 
(1366-1370.  It  is  significant  that  he  speaks  of  the  whole  proceeding 
as  an  elaborate  "  game  "  (TratSta),  a  plain  hint  that  the  antinomies 
now  to  follow  are  not  to  be  taken  quite  seriously,  and  that  we  must 
not  be  surprised  if  there  is  a  touch  of  conscious  "  sophistry  "  about 
some  of  them.  In  fact,  it  is  incredible  that  Plato  should  not  have 
known  that  some  of  them  are  pure  fallacies.  But,  as  his  purpose  is 
simply  to  show  that  the  methods  of  his  critics  can  be  made  to  recoil 
on  themselves,  it  is  strictly  fair  that  he  should  play  their  game  by 
their  own  rules.  Any  kind  of  reasoning  they  permit  themselves 
is  equally  permissible  in  a  "  skit  "  upon  them.) 

According  to  the  programme  already  laid  down  by  Parmenides, 
we  should  expect  to  find  him  raising  four  problems :  (i)  if  the  real 
is  one,  what  can  be  asserted  about  this  one  real  ?  (2)  if  the  real  is 
one,  what  can*  be  said  about  "  the  many11?  (3)  if  the  real  is  not 
one,  what  can  be  said  about  the  one  ?  (4)  if  the  real  is  not  one,  what 
can  be  said  about  the  many  ?  But  by  a  further  refinement,  each 
of  these  questions  is  raised  twice  over,  the  purpose  being  to  show 
that  on  either  assumption  (that  the  real  is  one  or  that  it  is  not  one) 
you  can  make  it  appear  at  pleasure  either  that  contradictory 
predicates  can  be  both  affirmed  or  both  denied  alike  of  the  one 
and  of  the  many.  Thus  we  get  altogether  eight  arguments  forming 
four  "  antinomies  " — two  in  which  the  subject  of  both  thesis  and 
antithesis  is  the  one,  and  two  in  which  it  is  the  many.  The  issue  is 
that  the  apparent  dilemma  to  which  Socrates  had  been  reduced 
at  the  end  of  the  first  part  of  the  dialogue,  that  knowledge  of  the 
real  is  equally  impossible  with  or  without  his  theory  about  forms 
and  "  participation/1  is  more  than  matched  by  the  dilemma  offered 
to  the  Eleatics,  and  maliciously  offered  through  the  mouth  of 
their  own  founder  Parmenides  professing  to  be  applying  their 
own  peculiar  method,  that,  whether  you  accept  or  reject  their 
Monism,  you  must  either  simultaneously  assert  or  simultaneously 
deny  both  members  of  an  indefinite  series  of  contradictory  pairs  of 
propositions. 


THE  PARMENIDES  861 

The  formal  arrangement  of  the  eight  "  hypotheses  "  is  this  : 

(I.  //  the  real  is  one,  nothing  whatever  can  be  asserted  of  it 
(1370-1420). 
II.  //  the  real  is  one,  everything  can  be  asserted  of  it  (1426- 
I57C).1 

!IIL   If  the  real  is  one,  everything  can  be  asserted  of  "  things 
other  than  the  one  "  (1576-1596). 
IV.  //  the  real  is  one  nothing  can  be  asserted  of  "  things  other 
than  the  one  "  (1596-1606). 

(V.   If  the  one  is  unreal,  everything  can  be  asserted  of  it  (1606- 
1636). 
VI    //  the  one  is  unreal,  nothing  at  all  can  be  asserted  of  it 
(1636-1646). 
VIl.  //  the  one  is  unreal,  everything  can  be  asserted  about 

"  things  other  than  the  one  "  (1646-1650)- 
VIII.  //  the  one  is  unreal,  nothing  can  be  asserted  about  anything 


It  would  be  taking  Plato's  metaphysical  jest  too  gravely  to  make 
a  minute  examination  oi  all  the  details  of  these  bewildering  argu- 
ments. It  will  be  sufficient  to  point  out  the  peculiar  character  of 
the  dialectical  method  employed  and  to  summarize  the  results. 
The  peculiarities  of  the  method  are  dictated  by  the  consideration 
that  it  is  avowedly  a  parody  of  that  of  Zeno.  Now  Zeno's  special 
trick  of  fence,  a  perfectly  legitimate  one,  was  to  turn  one-half  of  the 
assumed  "  postulates  "  of  his  opponents  against  the  other  half. 
This  is  the  secret,  for  example,  of  the  famous  "  paradoxes  "  about 
motion.  The  double  assumption  of  the  geometers  whom  Zeno  is 
criticizing  is  that  (a)  any  finite  segment  of  a  straight  line  can  be 
bisected,  (6)  such  a  segment  is  a  path  between  two  end-points 
which  are  finite  minima  of  magnitude.  The  geometers  cannot  give 
up  (a)  without  ruining  their  whole  scientific  edifice*;  they  cannot 
give  up  (6)  without  destroying  the  parallelism  between  geometry 
and  arithmetic  which  is  part  of  their  system.  Zeno  turns  (a)  against 
(6).  From  (a)  it  follows  at  once  that  there  must  be  an  endless  series 
of  points  intermediate  between  any  two  given  "  end-  points/1  and 
this  is  fatal  to  the  view  that  the  point  has  a  finite  magnitude.  His 
reasoning  silences  his  opponents  because  they  are  not  prepared  to 
surrender  (a)  by  admitting  the  existence  of  "  indivisible  lines/' 
nor  yet  to  give  up  (6)  by  regarding  the  point  as  a  geometrical  zero. 
In  exactly  the  same  way,  the  "  hypothesis  "  of  the  Eleatics  —  "  if 
It  is  one  "  or  "  if  there  is  One  "  —  as  they  understand  it,  really  covers 
two  assumptions  —  (a)  unity  is  real,  (b)  reality  is  unity;  Plato's 
trick  is  to  play  off  one  of  these  assumptions  against  the  other.  This 
will  come  out  more  clearly  if  we  compare  the  main  positions  of  the 
antithetical  members  of  each  "  antinomy." 

A.  I.  "  It  is  one  ;  "  therefore,  "  it  "  is  not  many,  and  therefore 
is  not  a  whole  and  has  no  parts.  Ergo  it  has  neither  beginning, 

1  The  main  argument  ends  at  1550  3.  What  follows  down  to  1576  5  is  an 
appended  special  development  which  would,  in  a  modern  writing,  be  relegated 
to  a  note. 


a62          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

middle,  nor  last  part.  Ergo  it  is  unbounded  (&r«pov)  and  has  no 
figure  ((rxfifjia).  "  It  "  has  no  place,  since  it  cannot  be  "  in  " 
anything.  Ergo  "  it  "  cannot  change  its  place,  nor  can  it  change 
its  quality  without  ceasing  to  be  one.  Thus  "  it  "  cannot  move. 
Nor  yet  can  it  be  "  at  rest/1  since  we  have  seen  that  it  cannot  be 
"  in  "  any  place  at  all,  and  therefore  not  "  in  the  same  place  where 
it  was."  It  cannot  be  identical  with  or  other  than  anything.  For 
it  cannot  be  identical  with  anything  but  itself,  nor  yet  different  from 
itself.  Nor  can  it  be  different  from  something  "  other  "  than  itself. 
If  it  were,  it  would  be  different  from  the  other  in  virtue  of  some 
point  of  difference  ;  thus  it  would  have  two  characters  at  once  : 
it  would  be  one  and  also  "  different  "  from  something  in  some  specific 
way.  That  is,  it  would  "  be  "  two  things  at  once,  whereas,  by 
hypothesis,  it  is  one  and  only  one.  So  again,  it  cannot  be  identical 
with  itself.  For  "  to  be  one  "  and  "  to  be  identical  with  "  are  not 
the  same.  Once  more,  if  "  it "  were  "  identical  with  itself/1  it  would 
have  two  characters,  unity  and  identity,  and  so  would  be  two  and 
not  one.  For  similar  reasons,  "  it  "  can  neither  be  like  nor  unlike 
itself  or  anything  else.  Again,  it  can  be  neither  equal  nor  unequal 
to  itself  or  to  anything  else.  For  terms  are  equal  when  they  are 
of  "the  same  measures"  (TWV  avrwv  pcrpuv,  1406).  And  "it," 
as  we  have  seen,  cannot  be  "  the  same  "  with  anything  in  any 
respect  and  yet  remain  one.  Nor  can  it  be  unequal  to  anything. 
That  would  mean  that  it  has  "  more  "  or  "  fewer  "  measures  than 
something,  and  therefore  that  it  has  parts. 

So  it  can  have  no  temporal  predicates.  It  cannot  be  contem- 
porary with,  nor  more  nor  less  ancient  than  itself  or  anything  else 
(the  reasoning  being  exactly  like  that  just  used  about  equality  and 
inequality).  It  cannot,  then,  be  in  time  at  all.  For  we  may  say 
of  whatever  occupies  time,  but  of  nothing  else,  that  (a)  it  is  at  any 
moment  "  becoming  older "  than  itself  and  also  "  becoming 
younger  "  than  itself ;  and  (b)  that  its  existence  fills  just  the 
duration  it  does,  and  neither  more  nor  less,  and  so  it  is  "  simul- 
taneous with,11  "  of  the  same  age  as  "  itself.  Since  neither  state- 
ment can  be  made  about  the  one,  it  cannot  be  "  in  time."  There- 
fore, we  must  not  say  of  it,  "  it  was,"  "  it  became,"  "  it  will  be," 
"  it  will  come  to  be,"  since  all  these  expressions  involve  reference 
to  past  or  future,  that  is,  to  time.  But  the  very  word  "  is  "  or 
"  comes  to  be  "  also  involves  a  reference  to  time,  to  present  time. 
And  therefore  we  may  not  say  of  "  it  "  that  "  it  is  "  or  "  it  be- 
comes," since  "  it  "  is  not  in  time  at  all.  But  if  we  cannot  say 
"  is  "  of  the  one,  we  cannot  ascribe  being  to  it.  It  must  be  non- 
existent. And  if  it  is  non-existent,  it  cannot  even  be  one,  for  to  be 
one,  it  would  have  to  be.  But  what  is  nothing  at  all  can  neither 
be  named,  spoken  of,  thought  of,  known,  nor  perceived  by  the 
senses.  Thus  we  actually  deduce  from  the  proposition  "  it  is  one  " 
the  conclusion  that  nothing  whatsoever  can  be  thought  or  said 
about- "it." 

It  has  been  asked  what  the  "  it  "  presupposed  as  the  subject 


THE  PARMENIDES  868 

of  the  thesis  "  it  is  one  "  is.  The  answer,  as  the  character  of  the 
reasoning  shows,  is  "  anything  whatever  which  is  conceived  to  be 
a  mere  undifferentiated  unity  admitting  no  plurality  whatsoever." 
The  argument  is  that  all  affirmation  implies  plurality  of  some  kind, 
possibility  of  distinguishing.  If  there  is  anything  which  is  such  a 
mere  undifferentiated  unity  that  there  are  no  distinctions  within 
it,  you  cannot  even  affirm  of  it  that  it  is  one.  Tt  is  the  "  hypothesis  " 
of  the  Eleatics  that  their  "  One,"  which  is  the  only  thing  there  is, 
is  just  such  a  bare  unit,  and  this  hypothesis  is  self-refuting.  We 
note  then,  that  in  I.,  in  the  hypothesis  "  if  there  is  one,"  the  emphasis 
falls  on  the  unity  of  reality,  not  on  the  reality  of  unity.  The  assump- 
tion is  that  "  what  is  is  one,"  not  that  "  something  which  is  one  is." 
The  work  of  turning  that  part  of  the  Eleatic  "  hypothesis  "  against 
the  other  is  undertaken  in  II. 

II.  If  the  one  is  (lv  d  c<rr«/),  it  "partakes  of"  being.  It  has 
two  distinct  characters  ;  it  is,  and  it  is  one.  Thus  it  has  "  parts  " 
(or,  as  we  should  say,  distinct  "  aspects  ").  Unity  and  existence 
are  parts,  or  constituents  of  "  the  existing  one,"  which  is  therefore 
a  whole.  And  each  of  these  "  parts,"  on  inspection,  is  found  to 
have  itself  the  same  two  "  parts."  Each  is  a  constituent  of  the 
"  existing  one  "  and  each  is  one  such  constituent.  The  "  existing  " 
one  "  is  thus  an  infinite  manifold  (aircipov  7rAi)0os).  Again,  unity 
is  different  from  existence,  and  difference  is  itself  something 
different  from  both  existence  and  unity.  Here  then  are  several 
terms  —  unity,  existence,  difference  —  which  can  be  grouped  into  pairs. 
Each  pair  has  a  number  —  the  number  2.  We  have  thus  established 
the  existence  of  the  numbers  I  and  2,  and  the  addition  of  i  and  2 
establishes  the  existence  of  3.  We  can  then  go  on,  by  addition 
and  multiplication,  to  establish  the  existence  of  the  whole  integer- 
series  as  a  direct  consequence  of  the  existence  of  "  the  one."  Being 
thus  has  an  infinite  plurality  of  parts,  and  each  of  these  parts  is  one 
part  ;  there  are  as  many  units  as  there  are  "  parts  "  of  being.  Thus 
not  only  "  being  "  but  "  unity  "  itself  turns  out  to  be  infinitely 
many. 

Since  parts  are  parts  of  a  whole,  they  are  contained  by  the  whole 
and  thus  have  a  bound  (Wpas).  The  "existing  one,"  then,  is  not 
only  indefinitely  many  or  boundless,  but  is  also  bounded,  and  there- 
fore has  first,  last,  and  intermediate  parts—  beginning,  middle,  and 

a  of  some  kind. 


end.  Thus  it  has  a  shape  or  form  (o-^a)  of  some  kind.  It  is  "  in  " 
itself,  for  all  the  parts  are  in  the  whole,  and  "  the  one  "  is  at  once 
"  all  the  parts  "  and  "  the  whole."  But  equally  the  whole  is  not 
in  the  parts,  either  singly  or  taken  together.  To  be  in  them  all,  it 
would  have  to  be  in  each  singly,  and  that  is  impossible.  But  it 
must  be  somewhere,  if  it  is  anything,  and,  as  it  cannot  be  "  in 
itself,"  it  must  be  "  in  "  something  else.  Thus,  considered  as 
"  all  the  parts,"  it  is  in  itself  ;  considered  as  "  the  whole,"  it  is  in 
something  not  itself.  Since  it  is  "  in  itself  "  and  so  in  one  place 
(cv  ivt)  it  is  at  rest  ;  but  since  it  is  "  always  in  something  else,"  it 
cannot  be  at  rest,  and  so  is  moving.  The  one  is  neither  a  part  of 


864          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

itself  nor  related  to  itself  as  whole  to  part,  nor  different  from  itself  ; 
hence  it  is  identical  with  itself.  But,  as  we  said,  it  is  also  outside 
itself,  and  therefore  different  from  itself.  Of  course,  also  it  is 
different  from  the  things  which  are  other  than  itself.  But  it  is  also 
identical  with  these  other  things.  For  there  can  be  no  difference 
in  what  is  "  the  same."  Hence  "  difference  "  can  never  be  "  in  " 
anything,  for,  if  it  were  so  for  the  smallest  fraction  of  a  moment,  it 
would  be,  for  that  time,  "  in  the  same  thing."  Hence  the  things 
which  are  not  the  one  are  not  different  from  the  one.  Nor  do  they 
"partake  "  of  it ;  for  then  they  would  not  be  "  not  one/1  but, 
"  in  a  sense,  one."  So  they  are  not  a  whole  of  which  the  one  is  a 
part.  And  they  are  not  parts  of  the  one.  The  only  possibility 
left  is  that  they  are  identical  with  the  one. 

The  one  is  different  from  other  things,  and  they  are  neither 
more  nor  less  different  from  it,  but  to  a  "  like  "  degree.  Thus 
the  one  and  other  things  are  alike  because  different.  But  if  differ- 
ence implies  likeness,  identity  will  imply  unlikeness,  and  the  one 
and  other  things  have  just  been  shown  to  be  identical.  Therefore, 
because  identical,  they  are  unlike.  And  yet  again,  in  so  far  as  two 
terms  have  the  same  predicate  they  are  alike,  and  in  so  far  as  they 
have  different  predicates  they  are  unlike.  So  the  one  and  other 
things  will  be  alike  because  identical,  and  unlike  because  different. 
And  since  the  one  has  been  shown  to  be  both  identical  with  and 
different  from  itself,  it  must  be  both  like  and  unlike  itself. 

Since  the  one  is  both  "  in  "  itself  and  "  in  "  other  things,  it 
will  have  contact  with  itself  and  with  them.  But  things  which  are 
in  contact  must  occupy  adjoining  regions  (c^c^s  fcctb-ftu),  and 
that  which  is  one  cannot  occupy  two  adjoining  regions.  Hence  the 
one  is  not  in  contact  with  itself.  But  once  more,  nothing  has 
contact  with  itself,  and  if  there  are  to  be  n  contacts,  there  must  be 
n+i  things  in  contact.  Now  the  "things  other  than  the  one" 
cannot  have  any  number,  since  what  has  a  number  "  partakes  of 
unity."  There  can  therefore  be  no  contact  between  the  one  and 
other  things,  since  contact  implies  number. 

Again,  the  one  is  at  once  equal  to  and  unequal  to  itself  and  to 
"  other  things."  (a)  If  a  is  >  6,  this  means  that  the  form  of  /xe'yeflos 
is  in  a  relatively  to  b,  and  the  form  of  cr/uKpon??  in  b  relatively  to  a  ; 
if  a  is  to  be  absolutely  small  or  large,  this  means  that  the  form 
cr/uKpon/s  or  /icycdo?  is  "  in  "  a.  But  neither  /xe'yeflos  nor  oyujc/xm/s  can 
be  "  in  "  the  one  as  a  whole  or  in  any  part  of  it.  For  if  OTUK/DOTT/S  is 
in  the  one  as  a  whole  it  is  equal  with  the  one,  and  if  it  "  envelops  " 
it  it  is  greater  than  the  one  ;  in  either  case  the  form  CT/HKPOTTJS 
would  be  "  doing  the  function  "  of  the  different  form  to-or^s  or 
/Lt€yc0os.  And  the  same  reasoning  applies  if  we  suppose  o-fjuKporrjs 
to  be  in  any  one  part  of  the  one.  We  may  argue  in  the  same 
way,  mutatis  mutandis,  about  /u,eyc0os.  Thus  oyuKpori??  and  /xe'yeflos 
cannot  be  "  in  "  anything  whatever,  and  it  follows  that  nothing, 
except  the  form  of  fi€vc0os,  can  be  "  greater  than  "  anything,  and 
nothing  except  the  form  of  oyuKpoT^s  "  less  than  anything. 


THE  PARMENIDES  865 

Hence  neither  the  one  nor  what  is  other  than  the  one  can  be  greater 
or  smaller  than  the  other,  and  therefore  they  must  be  equal.  For 
the  same  reason,  the  one  can  be  neither  greater  nor  smaller  than 
itself,  and  is  therefore  equal  to  itself,  (b)  Since  the  one  is  "  in  " 
itself,  it  contains  and  is  contained  by  itself,  and  thus  must  be,  as 
container  greater,  as  contained  less  than,  itself.  Further,  there  is 
nothing  outside  the  one  and  things  other  than  the  one.  And  what- 
ever is  must  be  somewhere,  and  consequently  the  one  and  "  the 
others  "  must  be  in  each  other  reciprocally,  and  therefore  each  of 
these  terms  is  at  once  greater  and  less  than  the  other.  And  there- 
fore also  the  one  will  be  metrically  of  "  equal,"  "  more  numerous," 
"  fewer  "  measures,  and  so  numerically  equal  with,  higher  and 
lower  than,  itself  and  "  the  others." 

Once  more,  "  if  there  is  one,"  the  one  is.  And  is  expresses 
present  participation  of  being.  Hence  the  one  is  "  in  time."  And 
time  "  goes  on  "  (TropcvcTcu).  Hence  the  one  is  always  getting 
older  than  itself  as  time  goes  on,  and  therefore,  since  "  older  *' 
always  has  "  younger  "  as  its  correlate,  it  is  always  getting  younger 
than  itself  also.  And  at  any  moment  in  this  process,  it  is  both 
older  and  younger  than  itself.  And  yet  it  fills  the  same  duration 
as  itself,  neither  more  nor  less,  and  so  neither  is  nor  grows  older 
nor  younger  than  itself.  Again,  before  there  can  be  several  things, 
there  must  be  one  to  start  with.  Hence  the  "  one  "  must  have 
come  to  be  before  "  the  others  "  ;  it  must  be  more  ancient  than 
"  the  other  things."  Yet  we  proved  that  the  one  has  "  parts," 
beginning,  middle,  end.  Its  beginning  must  have  come  to  be  before 
itself ;  the  one  itself  will  not  be  there  until  its  end  also  comes  to  be. 
Thus  the  one  is  the  last  thing  to  come  to  be  ;  everything  else  is 
more  ancient  than  the  one.  But,  after  all,  each  "  part  "  of  the  one 
is  one  part,  and  thus  whenever  anything  comes  to  be,  the  one  comes 
to  be,  and  the  one  thus  comes  to  be  contemporaneously  with 
everything  else.  Next,  if  one  thing  is  older  or  younger  than 
another,  the  interval  in  age  between  the  two  never  grows  greater  or 
less.  So  we  may  say  that  the  one  is  more  ancient  or  more  recent 
than  other  things,  but  never  grows  more  ancient  or  more  recent. 
And  yet,  though  the  one  has  been  "  in  being  "  (ycyoi/c)  longer 
than  "  the  others,"  the  difference  between  their  respective  ages  is 
steadily  being  relatively  diminished  as  time  goes  on,  and  we  may 
therefore  say  that,  in  so  far  as  the  one  is  more  ancient  than  "  the 
others,"  it  steadily  becomes  less  ancient  relatively  to  them,  and 
they  more  ancient  relatively  to  it.  But,  in  so  far  as  it  is  less  ancient 
than  "  the  others,"  it  is  steadily  growing,  relatively  to  them,  older, 
and  they,  relatively  to  it,  younger.  And  finally,  in  so  far  as  a  time- 
interval  remains  the  interval  it  is,  the  one  is  neither  becoming  more 
nor  becoming  less  ancient  than  anything  else. 

In  conclusion,  the  one,  "  partaking  of  time,"  has  past,  present, 
future.  It  was,  is,  will  be,  was  becoming,  is  becoming,  will  become. 
It  stands,  has  stood,  will  stand,  in  various  relations.  There  can  be 
knowledge  of  it,  belief  about  it,  perception  of  it,  and  therefore  it 


866          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

can  be  named,  described,  and,  generally,  everything  which  was 
denied  in  I.  must  be  affirmed. 

Appendix  (1550-1576). — The  one,  then,  both  is  and  is  not,  and 
its  being  is  "  in  time."  It  is  during  some  intervals,  during  others 
it  is  not,  since  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  and  not  to  be  at  once.  It  must 
pass  through  transitions  from  being  to  not-being  and  from  not-being 
to  being.  It  undergoes  aggregation  and  disgregation,  assimilation 
and  dissimilation,  augmentation  and  diminution.  It  begins  to  move 
and  ceases  to  move.  So  these  reversals  of  the  sense  of  a  process 
must  also  be  "in  time.1'  And  yet  they  cannot  be  "  in  time  "  ;  the 
reversal  must  be  strictly  instantaneous,  occupying  no  time,  however 
paradoxical  we  may  find  the  conception  of  an  instant  (TO  c£<u'<£vi?s) 
which  is  strictly  without  duration.  At  the  instant  of  the  reversal  of 
sense,  both  members  of  a  pair  of  antithetic  processes  must  be  denied 
of  the  one.  At  such  an  instant,  it  is  not  "  coming  to  be  "  nor  yet 
"  passing  away,"  neither  being  aggregated  nor  being  disgregated, 
neither  being  assimilated  nor  dissimilated.  As  with  states,  so  with 
processes  ;  both  members  of  an  antithesis  must  be  asserted  of  the 
one  and  both  must  be  denied. 

Perhaps  the  most  striking  feature  of  this  argument  to  our  own 
minds  is  this  introduction  at  its  close  of  the  notion  of  an  unextended 
"  instant/'  Plato  is  plainly  stating  exactly  the  paradoxes  which 
beset  the  founders  of  the  Calculus  when  they  took  the  notion  of  the 
"  infinitesimal  "  seriously  and  mistakenly  supposed  that  the  Calculus 
really  deals  either  with  infinitesimal  increments  or  with  ratios 
between  infinitesimals.  But  the  subtlety  of  some  parts  of  the  long 
development  must  not  blind  us  to  the  fact  that  most  of  the  reasoning 
throughout  II.  is  purely  sophistical  and  much  of  it  clearly  con- 
sciously sophistical,  and  that  the  fallacies  committed  are  mostly  of 
a  very  obvious  kind,  such  as  equivocation  between  "  each  "  and  "  all 
collectively.11  Plato  can  and  does,  in  this  very  dialogue,  when  it 
suits  his  purpose,  expose  the  very  confusions  in  question  and  there- 
fore must  not  be  supposed  to  be  serious  when  he  commits  them.  It 
is  enough  for  his  purpose  to  perplex  the  "  eristics  "  by  availing 
himself  of  fallacies  of  the  kind  which  they  habitually  commit  in 
their  own  argumentation.  His  parody  of  their  elenchus  is  also  an 
exposure  of  it.  The  one  important  point  to  keep  in  mind  is  that 
the  conclusions  to  which  he  is  led  by  his  application  of  the  Eleatic 
methods  to  the  Eleatic  "  hypothesis  "  are  not  meant  to  be  asserted 
as  his  own.  They  are  simply  what  happens  to  the  "  hypothesis  " 
if  you  make  the  Eleatic  criticize  himself  by  his  own  methods.  If 
we  wish  to  know  what  Plato  himself  thought  of  the  Eleatic  thesis, 
we  must  turn  from  the  Parmenides  to  the  Sophistes,  where  he  is 
really  criticizing  it  by  the  rules  of  a  logic  which  is  his  own.  For 
the  present  it  is  enough  to  remark  that,  just  as  in  I., -the  emphasis 
was  laid  on  the  unity  of  "  what  is,"  with  the  consequence  that  being 
itself  has  to  be  denied  of  it,  so  in  II.  the  emphasis  is  laid  on  its 
reality,  with  the  consequence  that  the  unity  of  the  one  has  to  be 
simultaneously  affirmed  and  denied.  So  far,  and  no  further,  the 


THE  PARMENIDES  867 

aradoxes  of  the  Parmenides  prelude  to  the  positive  results  of  the 


III.  If  the  one  is,  what  of  "  other  things  "  ?     Since  they  are 
"  other  "  things,  they  are  not  the  one  ;   yet  they  must  "  partake 
of  "  it.     For  they  must  have  parts  (if  they  had  not,  they  would 
be  just  "  the  one  "),    and  therefore  parts  of  one  complete  whole. 
And  each  of  these  parts  must  again  be  itself  one  definite  part  of  the 
one  whole.    The   "  other   things  "   are   therefore   a   manifold  or 
aggregate  (irAct'o>).    They  must  be  a  numerically  infinite  manifold, 
since  each  "  part  "  participates  in  unity  and  therefore  is  not  itself, 
in  its  own  nature,  one.     And  yet,  in  the  act  of  participating  in  unity, 
each  part  is  "  bounded  "  or  "  limited  "  or  "  determinate  "  relatively 
to  the  whole  and  to  any  other  part ;    "  something  arises  in  it  " 
which  constitutes  a  bound  (Wpas).    The  "  other  things  "  are  thus 
at  once  infinitely  numerous  and  also  bounded.     In  so  far  as  all 
are  "  unlimited,"  each  is  like  every  other,  and  again  each  is  like 
every  other  in  exhibiting  "  limit."     But  in  so  far  as  each  is  at  once 
unlimited  and  limited,  each  is  unlike  itself  and  the  rest,  and  by 
similar  reasoning  we  may  show  that  all  the  antithetical  pairs  of 
predicates  canvassed  in  I.  and  II.  may  be  both  affirmed  and  denied 
of  the  "  other  "  things. 

IV.  But  let  us  consider  the  same  question  once  more.     "The 
one  "  and  "  the  others  "  form  a  complete  disjunction.     Neither  is 
the  other,  and  there  is  no  tertium  quid.    They  are  thus  completely 
"  separated "   (x^pts).      And  what  is   strictly  one   can    have   no 
"  parts."    From  these  two  premisses  it  follows  that  neither  the 
one  as  a  whole,  nor  a  "  part  "  of  it,  can  be  in  "  the  others.11    They 
cannot  participate  in  it  in  any  sense.    There  is  no  unity  in  them, 
and  therefore  they  are  not  even  a  manifold  (woAAa),  and  have  no 
number.    They  are,  after  all,  not  "  both  like  and  unlike  "  one  an- 
other; if  they  were,  each  of  them  would  have  in  it  two  opposed 
forms,  and  would  thus  "  partake  of  two,"  whereas  we  have  just 
seen  that  none  of  them  can  even  "  partake  of  one,"  and  therefore 
we  must  also  deny  that  either  member  of  the  alternative  "  like- 
unlike  "  can  be  asserted  of   "  the  others."    The  same  kind  of 
reasoning  will  show  that  no  predicates  at  all  can  be  asserted  of 
them. 

III.  and  IV.  thus  answer  in  inverted  order  to  I.  and  II.  In  III., 
as  in  II.,  the  emphasis  falls  on  the  reality  of  the  Eleatic  ov  Iv, 
in  IV.  as  in  L,  on  its  unity.  III.  proves  for  TO,  5AXa  what  IL  had 
proved  for  TO  «/.  IV.  undertakes  to  prove  of  them  what  I.  had 
established  for  TO  Iv.  The  total  result  of  I. -IV.  is  summed  up  for 
us  at  1606  2  :  "If  the  one  is,  the  one  is  everything  and  is  nothing 
at  all,  relatively  alike  to  itself  and  to  'the  others/  " 

V.  We  come  to  the  second  half  of  the  complete  dialectical 
investigation  proposed  at  1360-6.     //  the  one  is  not,  what  follows  ? 
When  a  man  says  "  if  the  one  is  not,"  or  "  if  magnitude  is  not," 
or  generally  "if  #  is  not,"  he  is  making  an  intelligible  supposition. 
Whether  we  say  that  "  the  one  "  is  or  that  it  is  not,  we  mean  the 


868          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

same  thing  by  "  one  "  in  both  cases,  and  we  mean  something  de- 
finite. So  we  may  put  our  question  in  the  form,  "  If  the  one  is  not, 
what  must  be  true  of  it  ?  "  (ri  ypy  cTwi).  It  must  be  knowable,  or 
the  statement  "  there  is  no  one,"  "  the  one  does  not  exist,"  would 
have  no  sense.  "  The  others  "  must  be  different  from  it,  and  it 
from  them.  Thus  we  must  be  able  to  call  the  one  "  that  "  or 
"  this  "  and  to  ascribe  relations  to  it.  We  must  not  say  that  it  is, 
but  we  are  bound  to  say  that  it  "  partakes  of  "  many  things  (has 
many  predicates).  It  is  unlike  anything  else,  but  like  itself.  It 
is  not  equal  to  rot  oXXa,  for  then  it  would  be  like  them ;  hence  it  is 
unequal  to  them,  and  therefore  has  magnitude,  is  greater  and  less. 
But  whatever  is  greater  than  %  and  less  than  y  is  equal  to  something. 
Thus  the  one  must,  after  all,  be  equal  to  something.  It  must 
also  have  being  of  some  kind  (/ACTC'XCIV  7177  owrtas),  because  we  can 
ascribe  true  predicates  to  it,  just  as  "  what  is  "  must  partake  of  not- 
being,  since  it  "  is  not  "  whatever  can  be  truly  denied  of  it,  so 
"  what  is  not  "  must  in  a  sense  be,  since  "  it  is  "  whatever  can  be 
significantly  predicated  of  it.  And  since  the  "  non-existent  one  " 
thus  both  is  and  is  not,  it  must  pass  from  one  of  these  conditions 
to  the  other  and  so  change.  It  must  exhibit  motion.  But  again, 
it  is  nowhere,  and  thus  cannot  change  its  place,  nor  rotate,  nor 
suffer  change  in  quality  (for  if  it  did,  it  could  no  longer  be  "the 
one").  Thus  it  has  no  motion,  and  so  is  at  rest.  But  it  is  also 
moving  and  therefore  does  change  in  quality,  for  whatever  has 
moved  "  is  no  longer  as  it  was  but  otherwise."  The  one,  then, 
alters  and  does  not  alter,  and  so  at  once  "  comes  to  be  "  and  "passes 
away  "  and  does  neither.  Everything  can  be  affirmed  of  it  and 
everything  denied.  (Thus  V.  corresponds  to  II. ;  all  that  had  been 
proved  of  the  one  in  II.  on  the  assumption  that  the  one  is,  is  proved 
of  it  in  V.  on  the  assumption  that  it  is  not.) 

VI.  And  yet  again,  "  if  the  one  is  not,"  that  means  that  being 
is  wholly  denied  of  it.    The  denial  is  absolute  and  must  be  under- 
stood without  qualification.    If  the  one  is  not,  it  cannot  come  to 
be,  nor  pass  out  of  being,  since  it  can  neither  get  nor  lose  what  is, 
ex  hypothesi,  wholly  foreign  to  it.     Neither  can  it  alter  in  any  way, 
for  the  same  reason,  and  therefore  it  cannot  move.    Nor  can  it  be 
at  rest,  for  to  be  at  rest  is  to  be  "  in  the  same  place  "  at  successive 
times.     It  can  have  no  predicates  or  relations,  for  if  it  had  any,  it 
would  be  whatever  you  truly  assert  of  it.    Hence  it  cannot  be 
known,  thought  of,  perceived,  spoken  of,  or  named.    (Thus  what 
was  proved  about  the  one  in  I.  on  the  assumption  that  it  exists,  is 
now  proved  on  the  assumption  that  it  does  not  exist.    In  either 
case  nothing  can  be  affirmed  or  denied  of  it.) 

VII.  "  //  the  one  is  not/'  what  must  be  said  of  "  the  others  "  f— 
They  must  be  "  other  than  "  and  therefore  different  (Ircpa)  from 
something  or  we  could  not  call  them  "  the  others."    As  there  is 
no  "  one  "  from  which  they  could  differ,  they  must  be  different 
from  one  another.    They  must  also  be  different  infinite  assemblages 

,  not  different  units,  since,  ex  hypothesi,  there  is  no  unit. 


THE  PARMENIDES  869 

Each  of  them  must  be  an  infinite  assemblage,  different  from  the 
rest  of  these  assemblages,  which  falsely  seems  on  a  distant  view  to 
be  one  single  thing.  Since  each  such  assemblage  seems  to  be  one 
thing,  there  will  seem  to  be  a  definite  number  of  them,  and  there 
will  seem  to  be  a  least  among  them,  though  this  again  will  seem  to 
be  many  and  numerous  by  comparison  with  its  own  components. 
Each  assemblage  will  be  bounded  by  others  (will  have  a  Wpas), 
but  will  have  in  itself  neither  first  term,  middle,  nor  last  term  (i.e. 
each  assemblage  will  be  an  infinite  series  without  end-terms,  and 
every  component  of  it  will  be  another  assemblage  of  the  same  type). 
Thus  each  will  seem  to  be  both  bounded  and  unbounded,  to  be  like 
or  unlike  any  other,  according  as  we  take  a  distant  or  a  near  view 
of  it.  (In  general,  all  that  III.  had  said  of  ra  aXXa  will  appear  to 
be  true  of  them.) 

VIII.  And  yet,  to  go  over  the  ground  for  a  last  time,  "  if  there 
is  no  one,11  TO.  oAAa  obviously  cannot  be  one.  And  they  cannot 
be  many,  for  then  each  of  the  many  would  be  one.  They  must  be 
zeros,  and  no  multitude  can  be  constructed  out  of  zeros.  And  they 
do  not  even  seem  to  be  one  or  to  be  many.  By  hypothesis,  "  the 
unit  "  is  just  nothing  at  all,  and  hence  nothing  can  even  seem  to  be 
a  unit ;  a  fortiori  nothing  can  seem  to  be  many,  a  collection  of  units. 
By  carrying  the  thought  out  it  would  follow  that  ra  aXXa  have  none 
of  the  positive  or  negative  determinations  we  have  ascribed  to 
them,  and  do  not  even  seem  to  have  any.  Nothing  can  be  thought 
or  said  of  them,  (a  conclusion  which  answers  to  that  drawn  in  IV.). 
Thus  we  may  summarize  the  result  of  our  whole  series  of  antinomies 
by  saying  that  "  whether  the  one  is  or  is  not,  it  and  '  the  others  ' 
alike,  are  and  seem  to  be,  and  also  are  not  and  do  not  seem  to  be, 
all  sorts  of  things  (Travra),  relatively  both  to  themselves  and  to  one 
another  "  (i66c  2). 

In  the  four  discussions  which  take  for  their  point  of  departure 
the  non-existence  of  the  "  one  "  or  "  unit,"  even  more  obviously 
than  in  those  which  have  preceded,  the  ultimate  source  of  our  per- 
plexities is  the  ambiguity  of  the  word  "is."  We  get  contradictory 
results  according  as  "  is  "  is  taken  to  be  the  symbol  of  predication 
(Peano's  e),  or  that  of  existence  (Peano's  3).1  Many  of  the  infer- 
ences turn  simply  on  this  confusion  of  a  predication  with  what  we 
now  call  an  "  existential  proposition."  It  is  legitimate  parody 
to  employ  this  fallacy,  because,  as  we  can  see  from  the  remains  of 
the  poem  of  Parmenides,  the  whole  point  of  Eleaticism  lies  in 
ignoring  the  distinction.  To  make  it  clear,  and  to  show  that 
Eleaticism  had  ignored  it,  is,  in  fact,  the  main  purpose  of  Plato's 
Sophistes.  So  long  as  he  is  merely  undertaking  to  show  that  the 
Eleatic  logic  would  be  even  more  damaging  to  the  Eleatic  "  postu- 
late "  than  to  the  Socratic  postulate  of  ftc'0c£is,  he  is  fully  entitled 

1  There  is,  of  course,  a  further  confusion  of  both  with  the  symbol  of 
identity  (»).  The  poposition  A  is  an  a  is  treated  on  occasion  as  implying  both 
A  exists  and  A  is  identical  with  o.  (Not  to  mention  the  further  refinement 
that  existence  also  appears  to  be  itself  a  vox  equivoca.) 


370          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

to  avail  himself  of  the  double-edged  tools  of  his  opponents.  It  does 
not  follow  that  Plato  himself  was  not  alive  to  the  ambiguity  when  he 
wrote  the  Parmenides  and  only  discovered  it  in  the  interval  between 
the  composition  of  that  dialogue  and  of  the  Sophistes.  The  pre- 
sumption from  the  skilful  way  in  which  he  makes  or  ignores  the 
distinction  in  the  Parmenides  just  as  it  suits  his  immediate  purpose 
is  that  his  own  logical  doctrine  is  already  complete  in  his  own  mind  ; 
the  parody  of  Megarian  dialectic  probably  serves  a  double  purpose. 
It  provides  a  highly  enjoyable  philosophical  jest,  and  also  provokes 
the  thoughtful  mind,  by  the  manifest  impossibility  of  the  conclusions 
reached,  to  reflections  which  may  prompt  the  reader  to  discover  the 
sources  of  the  trouble  for  himself,  without  waiting  to  have  them 
explained  to  him  by  Plato.  More  than  any  other  dialogue  the 
Parmenides  has  the  appearance  of  being  written  for  a  rather  circum- 
scribed group  of  readers  ;  it  was  presumably  meant  to  amuse  the 
literary  circles  but  to  fructify  in  the  students  of  the  Academy. 


See  further : 

BURNET. — Greek  Philosophy.  Part  /.,  253-272. 
RITTER,  C. — Platon,  ii.  63-96 ;    Platans  Dialogs,  1-24.     (Stutt- 
gart, 1903.) 

RAEDER,  H. — Platans  philosophische  Entwickelung,  297-317. 
NATORP,  P. — Platans  Ideenlehre,  215-217. 
APELT,  O. — Beitrdge  zur  Geschichte  der  griechischen  Philosophie, 

3-66.     (Leipzig,  1891.) 

STEWART,  J.  A. — Plato's  Doctrine  of  Ideas,  68-84. 
STALLBAUM,  G. — Platonis  Parmenides.     (Leipzig,  1848.) 
WADDELL,  W. — The  "  Parmenides  "  of  Plato.     (Glasgow,  1894.) 
WAHL,  J. — Etude  sur  le  Parme'nide  de  Platon.     (Paris  1926.) 
DIES,  A. — Platon,  Parmenide,  vi.— xix.,  1-53.     (Paris,  1923.) 
ROBIN,  L. — Platon,  119-140. 

HARDIE,  W.  F.  R.— A  Study  in  Plato.     (Oxford,  1936.) 
TAYLOR,  A.   E. — Parmenides  Zeno  and  Socrates   (Philosophical 

Studies,  London,   1934,  PP-  28-90). 
TAYLOR,  A.  E. — Plato's  Parmenides.     (Oxford,  1934.) 
LEE,  H.  P.  D. — Zeno  of  Elea.     (Cambridge,  1936.) 
TANNERY,  P. — Pour  I'Histoire  de  la  Science  Hellene  (ed.  2,  by 
A.  Dids,  Paris,  1930,  c.  x.  Zlnon  d'EUe}. 


CHAPTER    XV 
SOPHISTES-POLITICUS 

THE  dialogues  which  we  have  still  to  consider  all  reveal 
themselves,  by  steady  approximation  to  the  style  character- 
istic of  the  Laws,  as  belonging  to  the  latest  period  of  Plato's 
activity  as  a  writer.  In  particular  they  all  agree  linguistically  in 
the  adoption  of  a  number  of  the  stylistic  graces  of  Isocrates,  par- 
ticularly the  artificial  avoidance  of  hiatus,  a  thing  quite  new  in  the 
prose  of  Plato.  They  also  agree,  as  regards  their  form,  in  two 
important  respects.  All  of  them  are  formal  expositions  of  doctrine 
by  a  leading  character  speaking  with  authority ;  the  part  of  the 
other  speakers  is  merely  to  assent,  and  there  is  no  longer  any 
thoroughly  dramatic  eliciting  of  truth  from  the  clash  of  mind  with 
mind ;  in  every  case,  except  that  of  the  Philebus  where  there  is  a 
good  reason  for  the  exception,  Socrates  is  allowed  to  fall  into  the 
background,  and  in  the  Laws  he  is  absent.  To  account  for  so 
marked  a  change  in  manner  even  from  the  Theaetetus  and  Par- 
menides,  it  seems  necessary  to  suppose  a  reasonably  long  interval 
of  interruption  in  Plato's  literary  activity,  and  if,  as  we  have  seen 
reason  to  think,  the  Theaetetus  was  composed  just  before  Plato's 
visit  to  Syracuse  in  the  year  367,  we  can  account  for  the  interruption 
by  the  known  facts  of  his  life.  From  367  down  to  at  least  361-360, 
the  year  of  Plato's  second  and  longer  sojourn  with  Dionysius  II  and 
his  final  resolution  to  take  no  further  direct  part  in  the  affairs  of 
Syracuse,  he  rnust  have  been  too  fully  occupied  in  other  ways  to 
have  much  time  for  composition.  We  must  probably,  therefore, 
think  of  this  whole  group  of  latest  dialogues  as  written  in  the  thir- 
teen last  years  of  Plato's  life,  360-348/7.  Since  the  Sophistes  and 
Politicus  attach  themselves  outwardly  to  the  Theaetetus,  and  the 
former,  in  fact,  contains  the  critical  examination  of  Eleatic  prin- 
ciples which  that  dialogue  had  half  promised,  it  is  reasonable  to 
hold,  as  most  recent  critics  do,  that  the  Sophistes  opens  the  series. 
The  curious  state  of  the  text  of  the  Laws — it  is  not  permissible  to 
account  for  it  by  the  arbitrary  assumption  that  our  MSS.  are  less 
trustworthy  for  the  Laws  than  for  other  works — seems  to  show 
that  the  work  had  never  received  the  author's  final  revision.  Thus 
Plato's  activity  as  a  writer  has  no  assignable  terminus  ad  quern  earlier 
than  his  death.  Beyond  this,  we  have  no  special  evidence  by  which 
to  date  the  composition  of  the  individual  dialogues.  The  main  thing 

which  is  clear  about  the  whole  group  is  that  Plato  felt  that  the 

371 


872          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

logical,  cosmological,  and  juristic  matter  with  which  they  deal 
could  not  be  handled  by  Socrates  without  a  gross  violation  of 
historical  truth ;  hence  the  selection  of  other  characters  to  play 
the  principal  part,  except  in  the  Philebus,  which  deals  with  the 
same  ethical  problems  we  have  already  met  in  the  Gorgias  and 
Republic  as  the  "  speciality  "  of  Socrates.1 

In  a  biography  of  Plato  it  would  be  necessary  to  dwell  at  some 
length  on  the  precise  character  of  his  experiences  at  Syracuse,  as 
illustrated  by  his  extant  correspondence  with  Dionysius  and  Dion. 

I  must  be  content  to  refer  the  reader  for  all  details  to  the  excellent 
accounts  of  Grote  2  and  E.  Meyer,8  and  the  shorter  narrative  of 
Professor  Burnet.4    The  chief  points  which  have  to  be  borne  in 
mind  are  these.     Plato's  interposition  in  Syracusan  affairs  had 
from  the  first  a  very  practical  object.    The  immediate   political 
necessity  was  to  secure  the  future  of  Greek  civilization  in  Sicily 
and  the  West  against  the  double  peril  that  the  work  of  Dionysius  I 
might  be  undone  by  the  aggressions  of  Carthage,  or  that,  under  a 
successor  unequal  to  the  position,  the  Oscans  or  Samnites  whom 
that  vigorous  ruler  had  employed  might  usurp  the  sovereignty  of 
Syracuse  for  themselves.    The  project  of  Dion  and  Plato  was 
clearly  that  Dionysius  II  should  first  be  educated  into  statesman- 
ship himself,  and  should  then  use  his  position  to  convert  the  real 
though  informal   "  tyranny "   at   Syracuse   into   a  constitutional 
monarchy  embracing  the  cities  which  Dionysius  I  had  subdued,  and 
strong  enough  to  hold  both  the  Carthaginians  and  the  Italians  at 
bay.    The  hope  of  making  a  scientific  statesman  out  of  Dionysius 

II  appears  not  to  have  survived  Plato's  experiences  of  367/6,  and, 
indeed,  had  always,  according  to  Epistle  vii.,  been  a  very  remote 
hope  ;  the  more  modest  anticipation  that  the  personal  feud  between 
Dionysius  and  Dion  might  be  accommodated  and  that  constitutional 
monarchy  might  at  least  get  its  chance,  though  an  imperfect  chance, 
took  Plato  back  once  more  to  Syracuse  in  361.     It  even  outlasted 
his  final  disillusionment  about  Dionysius,  as  we  see  from  the  fact 
that  most  of  the  correspondence  with  that  monarch  belongs  to  the 
time  after  Plato's  last  departure  from  Syracuse.    For  the  years 
between  367/6  and  361/360  we  have  only  one  contemporary  docu- 
ment (Epistle  xiii.).    The  suspicions  which  have  been  felt  about  the 
letter  have  been  based  entirely  on  its  contents  ;  linguistically  it  is 
above  suspicion.     One  or  two  of  the  objections  commonly  raised 
are  curiously  captious.     It  is  said,  absurdly  enough,  that  the  refer- 
ence to  Plato's  mother  as  still  living,  and  to  the  existence  of  four 

1  The  Sophistes  and  Politicus  would  have  to  be  dated  earlier  if  E.  Meyer 
and  others  were  justified  in  identifying  them  with  the  8iatpt<reis  spoken  of  in 
Ep.  xiii.  as  sent  with  that  letter  to  Dionysius  (i.e.  in  366  or  at  latest  365).  But 
the  way  in  which  these  flteupAreu  are  mentioned  (op.  cit.  3606)  should  show  that 
the  reference  is  not  to  works  of  Plato,  but  to  specimens  or  samples  of  "  divi- 
sions ' '  (IT^/XTTW  trot.  T&V  diapeatw — partitive  genitive) . 

1  History  of  Greece,  chapters  Ixxxiv.-lxxxv. 

8  Geschichte  des  Altertums,  v.  497-528. 

4  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  294-3011 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  878 

great-nieces  whom  he,  as  their  most  well-to-do  kinsman,  may  be 
legally  required  to  portion,  are  ludicrous.  Yet  it  is  a  fact  that  old 
ladies  do  sometimes  live  to  be  centenarians,  especially  when  they 
belong  to  families  of  marked  longevity,  and  that  elderly  men  some- 
times have  a  number  of  young  nieces.  Plato  has  even  been  thought 
incapable  of  estimaling  the  expense  of  his  mother's  anticipated  death 
and  funeral  at  ten  minae,  on  the  ground  that  in  the  Laws  he  limits 
such  expenses  to  one  mina  ;  as  though  Plato  and  his  mother  were 
living  in  the  Cretan  colony  for  which  the  Laws  professes  to  legislate. 

Read  without  misconceptions  of  this  kind,  the  document  is  a 
natural  one  enough,  and  highly  creditable  to  the  writer.  Apart 
from  references  to  certain  small  commissions  undertaken  by  Plato 
at  the  request  of  Dionysius,  and  from  an  introduction  to  him  of 
Helicon,  who  had  studied  under  Eudoxus  and  Polyxenus  as  well 
as  in  the  school  of  Isocrates,  as  a  man  who  could  be  serviceable  to 
him  in  his  studies,1  the  writer  is  chiefly  concerned  with  a  friendly 
settling  of  accounts,  such  as  was  inevitable  in  the  situation.  Plato 
must  have  been  put  to  considerable  expense  and  inconvenience  in 
removing  himself  for  months  to  Syracuse  ;  he  is  anxious  to  be  as 
little  beholden  to  Dionysius  in  return  as  possible,  but  thinks  it 
reasonable  that  he  should  receive  what  assistance  he  may  need  in 
meeting  the  impending  expense  of  burying  his  mother  and  portioning 
the  eldest  of  his  grand-nieces,  who  is  on  the  point  of  marrying  her 
uncle  Speusippus.2  Dionysius  had  also  undertaken  to  defray  the 
expenses  of  his  voyage  to  Syracuse. 

Apart  from  this  settlement  of  accounts  between  the  parties, 
the  letter  deals  with  two  other  matters.  Dionysius  had  employed 
Plato's  offices  in  attempting  to  obtain  a  credit  on  the  Aeginetan 
banker  Andromedes,  who  declined  to  make  any  advance,  on  the 
ground  that  he  had  found  it  difficult  to  recover  advances  made  to 
Dionysius  I.  Application  in  another  quarter  was  more  successful, 
and  Plato  takes  the  opportunity  to  administer  a  courteous  homily 
to  the  young  king  on  the  importance  of  prompt  discharge  of  money 
obligations  and  attention  to  one's  accounts.  The  details  of  the 
transaction  in  question  are  only  hinted  at,  but  it  can  hardly  have 
been  concerned  simply  with  the  personal  settlement  between 
Dionysius  and  Plato.  More  probably  Dionysius  wanted  a  credit 
for  his  own  purposes,  and  found  it  difficult  to  obtain  one  from 
bankers  who  had  known  his  father  as  an  unsatisfactory  customer. 
This  would  explain  the  emphasis  laid  in  the  letter  on  the  necessity 
to  a  monarch  of  a  good  financial  reputation. 

1  Helicon  would  thus  represent  at  once  the  political  ideas  of  Isocrates,  the 
mathematics  of  Eudoxus  and  the  formal  logic,  of  Megara. 

*  The  request  is  not,  as  often  supposed,  for  portions  for  all  the  nieces.  Plato 
asks  to  be  helped,  if  necessary,  to  portion  the  eldest  niece,  now  on  the  point  of 
marrying.  He  mentions  the  portioning  of  the  others,  one  of  whom  is  an  infant, 
simply  as  possible  future  contingencies.  The  dowry  he  thinks  necessary, 
thirty  minae,  is  not,  as  some  have  supposed,  a  large  one,  but,  as  the  letter  says, 
a  "  moderate  "  or  "  middle-class  "  portion,  as  will  be  seen  by  reference  to 
contemporary  speeches  for  the  courts  which  deal  with  these  matters. 

13 


874          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

There  is  also  a  cryptic  reference  to  the  relations  between 
Dionysius  and  Dion,  who  was  at  the  moment  living  in  a  sort  of 
real,  but  not  technical,  banishment  at  Athens.  The  writer  says 
that  he  has  not  actually  approached  Dion  about  a  certain  matter, 
but  his  judgment  is  that  he  would  take  the  business  very  ill,  if  it 
were  proposed  ;  in  general,  Dion's  attitude  to  Dionysius  is  reason- 
ably amicable.  Probably  the  matter,  about  which  Dionysius  had 
clearly  asked  for  a  confidential  opinion,  may  be  his  own  desire  that 
Dion  should  dissolve  his  marriage  with  Arete,  aunt  of  Dionysius. 
This  would  be  a  way  of  showing  that  he  had  no  sinister  designs  on 
the  "  tyranny  "  of  Syracuse,  and,  in  fact,  when  Dionysius  became 
more  suspicious,  the  marriage  was  forcibly  dissolved  without 
Dion's  consent.  We  may  fairly  take  it  that  Dionysius  would  have 
preferred  a  "  parting  by  mutual  consent  "  and  had  asked  Plato's 
opinion  on  the  matter.  If  so,  Plato's  reply  amounts  to  a  tactful 
disapproval  of  the  project.  There  is  nothing  discreditable  to 
him  either  in  his  being  consulted  or  in  the  response  that  the  sugges- 
tion of  such  an  arrangement  would  gravely  embitter  Dion's  feelings.1 

SOPHISTES-POLITICUS 

Though  the  main  interest  of  the  Sophist es  is  logical,  that  of  the 
Politicus  political,  outwardly  the  two  form  a  single  whole,  and  both 
are  externally  linked  more  loosely  with  the  Theaetetus.  The 
assumption  is  that  we  are  still  in  the  spring  of  the  year  399.  The 
personages  of  the  Theaetdus  have  reassembled,  as  had  been  suggested 
in  the  last  words  of  that  dialogue  (2iod  3),  but  Theodorus  has 
brought  a  friend  with  him,  an  Eleatic  pupil  of  Parmenides  and 
Zeno,  who  is — the  words  imply  that  one  would  not  have  expected  it 
— a  really  profound  "  philosopher."  After  a  brief  initial  conversa- 
tion this  Eleatic  visitor  takes  the  conduct  of  the  conversation  into 
his  own  hands ;  Socrates  and  Theodorus  relapse  into  what  is  all 
but  unbroken  silence.  The  Eleatic  remains  throughout  anonymous, 
and  in  this  respect  stands  alone  among  the  characters  in  Plato,  but 
for  the  other  example  of  the  Athenian  who  plays  the  leading  part 
in  the  Laws.  We  could  hardly  be  told  more  plainly  that  these  two 
personages  are  purely  fictitious  ;  the  object  of  the  fiction  seems  to 
be  that,  as  they  have  no  historical  character  to  sustain,  they  may 
be  used  freely  as  simple  mouthpieces  for  the  views  of  their  creator. 
No  one  doubts  that  this  is  the  case  with  the  Athenian  of  the  Laws. 
We  are  not  entitled  to  say  that  he  is  meant  precisely  as  a  portrait 
of  Plato  by  himself,  but  he  is  certainly  meant  to  represent  the 
ethics  and  politics  of  the  Academy.  Our  Eleatic,  too,  turns  out 
to  be  a  respectful  but  exceedingly  outspoken  critic  of  the  main 
thesis  of  his  nominal  teacher,  Parmenides.  The  suggestion  plainly 

1  There  is  no  question  of  a  private  plot  between  Plato  and  Dionysius 
against  Dion's  family  happiness.  The  dissolution  of  a  "  royal  "  marriage,  if 
that  is  really  the  matter  in  question,  is  an  "  affair  of  state."  and  it  would  be 
quite  proper  in  a  young  monarch  to  ask  confidential  advice  on  such  a  point. 
Plato's  answer  is  plainly  meant  as  a  strong  dissuasive. 


SOPH1STES-POLITICUS  875 

is  that,  in  spite  of  all  divergences,  it  is  Plato,  and  not  the  professed 
Eleatics  of  Megara,  who  is  the  true  spiritual  heir  of  Parmenides. 
One  of  the  objects  of  the  Sophistes  in  particular  is  to  justify  this 
claim. 

Formally  there  is  a  further  link  between  the  Sophistes  and  the 
Polilicus.  The  question  propounded  at  the  opening  of  the  Sophistes 
is  whether  sophist,  statesman,  philosopher,  are  three  different 
names  for  the  same  person,  or  three  names  for  two  types  of  person, 
or  names  for  three  different  types.1  The  answer  of  the  "  Eleatic  " 
is  that  the  three  characters  are  all  distinct.  The  object  of  the  two 
dialogues  is  ostensibly  to  prove  this  by  denning  first  the  sophist 
and  then  the  statesman  ;  both  definitions  are  obtained  by  elaborate 
and  repeated  use  of  the  characteristically  Academic  method  of 
subdivision  of  a  genus  (cTSos)  into  its  constituent  species.  The 
method  itself  has  consequently  to  be  explained  and  illustrated 
by  simple  and  half-playful  examples.  Incidentally  this  explains 
what  might  at  first  seem  a  strange  feature  of  the  Politicus.  We  can 
understand  the  silence  of  Socrates  in  the  Sophistes,  where  the  logical 
matter  of  the  discussion  takes  us  far  away  from  the  circle  of  ideas 
commonly  represented  by  Plato  as  familiar  to  him.  But  the 
problems  of  politics  are  precisely  those  in  which  the  Socrates  of  the 
Gorgias  and  Republic  had  been  peculiarly  interested,  and  we  might 
have  expected  that  here  he  would  be  given  his  old  part  of  chief 
speaker.  What  makes  this  impossible  is  not  so  much  the  particular 
character  of  the  results  arrived  at,  though  they  do  depart  to  a  marked 
degree  from  the  uncompromising  "  idealism  "  of  the  Republic,  but 
the  necessity  of  employing  the  precisely  formulated  "  method  of 
division/'  The  peculiarity  of  both  dialogues  is  that  each  has  thus 
a  double  function.  Each  has  certain  definite  results  to  be  arrived 
at ;  each  is  meant,  at  the  same  time,  independently  of  its  special 
conclusions,  to  be  an  elaborate  exercise  in  the  careful  employment 
of  logical  method.  As  far  as  "  results  "  go,  we  might  say  that  the 
object  of  the  one  is  to  explain  the  true  character  of  a  significant 
negative  proposition,  of  the  other  to  justify  "  constitutionalism  " 
in  politics.  But  we  must  not  allow  ourselves  to  forget  that  both 
have  further  the  common  purpose  of  presenting  us  with  an  "  essay 
in  philosophical  and  scientific  method."  Hence  the  chief  speaker 
in  both  must  be  a  logician  ;  it  is  because  the  speaker  is  a  "  formal 
logician,"  with  a  sounder  logic  than  that  of  the  Eleatics  of  Megara, 
that  he  is  represented  as  the  true  continuator  of  Parmenides  and 

1  Thus  the  question  arises,  Did  Plato  intend  to  devote  a  further  dialogue 
to  the  character  of  the  "  philosopher,"  and  if  he  did,  must  we  suppose  that 
he  abandoned  his  design,  or  are  we  to  identify  the  Philosopher  with  some 
existing  dialogue  ?  In  antiquity  some  persons  thought  of  the  Epinomis 
(D.L.  Vit.  Plat.  60 ;  so,  doubtfully,  Raeder,  Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung, 
354).  Moderns  have  thought  of  the  Parmenides  (Stallbaum,  at  one  time, 
Zeller),  Phaedo  (Schleiermacher),  Republic  vi.-vh.  (Spengel),  Symposium 
(Schleiermacher).  Chronological  reasons,  even  if  there  were  no  others,  make 
all  these  suggestions  impossible  except  the  first.  This  also  seems  excluded 
by  the  impossibility  of  regarding  the  Epinomis  as  anything  but  a  part  of 
the  Laws. 


876          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Zeno.  The  true  cure  for  the  "  antinomies  "  of  the  "  eristic  "  is  not 
to  desert  logic  for  some  method  more  "  varied  and  flexible/'  but 
to  be  more  in  earnest  with  it. 

i.  THE  SOPH/STES. — The  opening  words  of  the  dialogue  show 
us  how  keenly  Plato  feels  that  the  Megarian  formal  logic  is  a  de- 
parture from  the  genuine  Socratic  spirit  of  pursuit  of  real  truth. 
He  is  greatly  relieved  to  learn  that  the  Eleatic  friend  of  Theodorus 
is  a  "  truly  philosophic  soul  "  ;  from  his  antecedents  he  had  ex- 
pected rather  to  find  in  him  a  foos  cXcyKTiKos,  a  "  fiend  "  in  con- 
structing dilemmas,  (like  those  of  the  Parmenides).  But  the  true 
philosopher  is  not  always  easy  to  recognize  ;  he  is  taken  sometimes 
for  a  sophist,  sometimes  for  a  statesman,  and  sometimes  for  a 
downright  madman.  Now  this  raises  the  question  whether  the 
philosopher,  the  sophist,  the  statesman,  are  three  distinct  characters, 
or  two,  or  possibly  are  all  the  same.  The  genuine  Eleatic  tradition 
is  that  they  are  three  distinct  types,  though  it  is  hard  to  define  the 
precise  differences  between  them  (2175).  The  Eleatic  undertakes, 
if  Theaetetus  will  act  as  respondent,  to  attempt  a  precise  delineation 
of  one  of  the  three  types,  the  sophist,  though  he  warns  his  audience 
that  the  discussion  will  be  long  and  tedious,  a  distinct  hint  that  the 
name  "  sophist  "  will  be  found  to  stand  for  something  less  readily 
recognizable  than  the  familiar  type  of  the  fifth-century  teacher  of 
"  goodness/'  We  discover,  as  the  dialogue  proceeds,  that  the 
persons  meant  are,  in  fact,  the  Megarian  pedants  of  an  uncritical 
formal  logic.  They  are  "sophists/'  not  genuine  philosophers, 
precisely  because  they  have  never  subjected  the  principles  on  which 
their  own  logic  rests  to  a  thorough  critical  scrutiny.  (In  fact,  they 
are  "  dogmatists  "  in  Kant's  sense  of  the  word.)  This  special  use 
of  the  word  cro</>io-r??s  is  a  real  innovation  in  terminology,  though  its 
adoption  by  Aristotle,  who  regarded  his  Megarian  opponents  as 
conscious  tricksters,  has  given  rise  to  the  modern  conception  of 
sophistry  as  the  deliberate  abuse  of  logic.  The  length  of  the  dis- 
cussion is  due  to  the  difficulty  of  analysing  so  elusive  a  thing  as  the 
spirit  of  uncritical  logical  formalism. 

Illustration  of  Method  (2i8d-22ic).— Our  problem,  then,  is  to 
frame  a  satisfactory  definition,  and  it  is  to  be  solved  by  a  method 
characteristic  of  Plato  and  the  Academy,  the  method  of  accurate 
logical  division  of  a  genus  into  its  constituent  species.  As  this 
method  was  definitely  a  creation  of  Plato  and  his  immediate 
followers,  it  is  necessary  to  explain  and  illustrate  it  for  the  reader  by 
applying  it  to  a  simple  and  familiar  case  ;  Plato  chooses  that  of  the 
angler.  Of  course,  as  Burnet  has  said,  the  example  is  half-playful  ; 
the  very  baldness  of  the  illustration  chosen  is  an  advantage  since 
the  simplest  and  most  obvious  illustrations  are  the  best  for  the 
purpose  of  setting  the  principle  of  the  procedure  in  the  clearest 
light.  In  practice  the  use  of  the  method  in  the  Academy  led  to 
results  of  great  importance.  Thus  the  tenth  book  of  Euclid's 
Elements,  that  great  repertory  of  demonstrated  propositions  about 
"quadratic  surds/'  is  at  bottom  concerned  with  the  attempt  to 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  877 

make  a  systematic  classification  of  such  expressions,     The  vast 
zoological  work  of  Aristotle,  again,  belongs  mainly  to  the  years 
before  he  had  finally  separated  himself  from  the  Academy,  and  thus 
has  to  be  taken  in  connexion  with  the  similar,  though  no  doubt 
inferior,  work  in  the  same  field  of  Speusippus  and  other  Academics, 
and  their  starting-point,  as  we  can  see  from  the  remaining  fragments 
of  the  book  of  Speusippus  on  Homologies,  was  the  search  for  a 
satisfactory    classificatory    system.     The    Laws    again    offers    us 
repeated  examples  of  the  importance  of  the  same  problem  in  the 
field  of  jurisprudence  and  political  theory.    The  services  rendered 
to  science  by  Plato's  elaboration  of  the  method  of  division  have  to 
be  measured  by  results  of  this  kind,  not  by  the  easy  examples 
furnished  to  the  "  general  reader  "  in  the  Sophistes  and  Politicus. 
In  principle  the  procedure  is  this.     If  we  wish  to  define  a  species 
x,  we  begin  by  taking  some  wider  and  familiar  class  a  of  which  x  is 
clearly  one  subdivision.     We  then  devise  a  division  of  the  whole 
class  a  into  two  mutually  exclusive  sub-classes  b  and  c,  distin- 
guished by  the  fact  that  b  possesses,  while  c  lacks,  some  character- 
istic ft  which  we  know  to  be  found  in  x.    We  call  b  the  right-hand, 
c  the  left-hand,  division  of  a.    We  now  leave  the  left-hand  division 
c  out  of  consideration,  and  proceed  to  subdivide  the  right-hand 
division  b  on  the  same  principle  as  before,  and  this  process  is  re- 
peated until  we  come  to  a  right-hand  "  division  "  which  we  see  on 
inspection  to  coincide  with  x.     If  we  now  assign  the  original  wider 
class  a  and  enumerate  in  order  the  successive  characters  by  which 
each  of  the  successive  right-hand  divisions  has  been  marked  off, 
we  have  a  complete  characterization  of  x  ;    x  has  been  defined. 
The  Aristotelian  rule  of  definition  by  "  genus  and  difference,  or 
differences  "  is  simply  the  condensation  of  this  Academic  method 
into  a  formula  ;  a  still  more  exact  reproduction  of  it  has  been  given 
in  our  own  times  in  W.  E.  Johnson's  account  of  the  progressive 
determination  of  a  "  determinable  "  (Logic,  i.  xi).     It  is,  of  course, 
presupposed  that  we  are  already  adequately  acquainted  with  the 
"  determinable  "  or  "  genus  "  a  itself,  and  that,  at  each  step  in  its 
further  determination,  we  have  the  "  gumption  "  to  select  as  the 
character  constitutive  of  the  new  "  right-hand  "  division  one  which 
is  relevant  to  the  specification  of  x  and  also  itself  admits  of  further 
"  division  "  ;  finally  that  we  recognize  the  point  at  which  the  process 
can  stop  because  %  has  now  been  sufficiently  specified.    The  satis- 
faction of  these  conditions  depends  on  our  native  acumen  and  our 
acquaintance  with  the  subject-matter,  and  no  rules  can  be  given 
for  it,  precisely  as  no  rules  can  be  given  for  the  discovery  of  a  prom- 
ising   explanatory   hypothesis.      The    method,   like    all    scientific 
methods,  will  not  work  in  vdcuo.     This  is  what  Aristotle  seems  to 
ignore  in  his  depreciatory  remarks  about  the  "  method  of  divisions  " 
(Analyt.  Prior.  A  460  31  ff.).      He  complains  that  the  method  in- 
volves a  petitio  principii.     From  man  is  an  animal,  an  animal  either 
is  mortal  or  is  immortal,  it  does  not  follow  that  man  is  mortal,  but 
only  that  man  either  is  mortal  or  is  immortal ;  and  so  with  the  other 


878          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

v 

successive  steps  of  the  division,  so  that  nothing  is  really  proved 
when  the  division  has  reached  its  end.  As  a  criticism  of  Plato,  the 
complaint  misses  its  mark.  When  we  are  told  in  the  Sophistes 
that  hunters  capture  their  prey  either  by  snaring  or  by  wounding, 
and  that  the  angler  is  a  hunter  who  makes  his  capture  by  wounding, 
we  are  presumed  to  know  from  our  acquaintance  with  the  facts  of 
life  that  a  rod  and  line  are  not  a  snare ;  there  is  no  intention  to 
prove  the  point  by  making  the  division.  We  are  as  much  entitled 
to  draw  on  our  general  stock  of  information  for  guidance  as  we  are 
to  go  to  the  same  source  for  our  information  that  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  is  a  man  when  we  infer  his  mortality  from  the  admitted 
mortality  of  men.  Neither  the  syllogism  nor  any  other  formal 
logical  device  can  enable  us  to  dispense  with  first-hand  acquaintance 
with  facts.  Possibly  some  members  of  the  Academy  may  have 
overlooked  this  limitation  in  their  enthusiasm  for  their  own  method, 
but  Aristotle  seems  equally  to  be  forgetting  for  the  moment  that  his 
own  method  of  syllogism  is  subject  to  precisely  the  same  conditions. 

DEFINITION  OF  THE  SOPHIST  (2210-237^) 

The  actual  "  division  "  by  which  the  definition  of  angling  is 
obtained  need  not  detain  us  long.  So  far  as  it  is  anything  more 
than  a  simple  illustration  of  the  method  to  be  adopted  in  char- 
acterizing the  sophist,  its  further  point  lies  in  the  playful  suggestion 
of  certain  un pleasing  features  which  we  shall  rediscover  in  the  sophist 
himself,  who  is  also,  among  other  things,  a  kind  of  "  angler/1  The 
division  itself  may  be  graphically  represented  by  the  following  tree : 

Arts 
of  making    of  acquiring 

A 

of  acquiring    of  capture 
by  consent 

A 

of  open     of  stealthy  capture 
capture  =  hunting 

of  lifeless     of  living 
things         things 

of  terrestrial     of  animals  which 
animals  live  in  a  fluid 

of  birds    of  fishes 

A 

fishing  by  nets     fishing  by  striking 

by  night     by  daylight 

A 

by  a  stroke     by  a  stroke 

from  above     from  below 

**  angling. 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  879 

By  a  summing  up  of  the  "  differences  "  constitutive  of  the 
successive  "  right-hand  "  divisions  we  get  the  definition  that 
angling  is  an  art  of  acquiring  by  stealthy  capture  creatures  which 
inhabit  the  water,  the  capture  being  made  by  daylight,  by  a 
stroke  delivered  from  below.  We  might,  of  course,  have  carried 
the  division  further,  but  our  acquaintance  with  the  facts  makes 
this  superfluous.  It  is  a  linguistic  fact  that  we  give  the  name 
angling  to  every  procedure  which  has  the  characteristics  enumerated 
and  to  no  other. 

We  now  proceed  to  apply  this  method  several  times  over  to  the 
sophist.  (Thus  Plato  is  fully  alive  to  the  point  that  the  same 
species  may  be  determined  by  the  division  of  different  genera, 
the  same  term  may  have  more  than  one  adequate  definition  ; 
relevancy  to  the  purpose  in  hand  will  be  the  principle  which  guides 
us  in  the  selection  of  a  genus  to  be  divided.  Each  of  the  successive 
divisions  is  meant  to  throw  some  one  characteristic  of  the  sophist 
into  strong  relief.) 

(a)  We  might  follow  the  precise  example  we  have  just  chosen 
down  to  the  point  where  we  divided  the  art  of  hunting  living  things, 
and  then  turn  our  attention  to  the  left-hand  division  of  this.     For 
the  sophist  is  a  hunter  of  "  civilized  living  beings/'  that  is,  of  men. 
He  hunts  them,  not  like  kings,  pirates,  and  kidnappers,  by  violence, 
but  by  the  arts  of  persuasion.     Persuasion  may  be  practised  in 
public,   or,  as  the  sophist  practises  it,  on  individuals.     And  the 
persuading  may  be  done  by  one  who  gives  a  present  (the  lover),  or 
by  one  who  takes  a  fee.     And  the  fee  may  be  taken  for  making  one's 
self  agreeable  and  amusing  (as  in  the  case  of  the  *oAa£  or  "  parasite  ") 
or  got  by  promising  to  impart  "  goodness."    This  gives  us  a  possible 
definition  of  the  sophist  as  a  professional  of  the   art  of  hunting 
rich  young  men  individually  for  a  cash  payment,  on  the  pretence 
of  educating  them  (2236).    Thus  the  points  brought  out  are  the 
sophist's  commercialism,  the  unreality  of  his  "  wisdom,"  and  his 
suspicious  family  likeness  to  the  "  parasite." 

(b)  The  sophist,  however,  has  more  guises  than  one.     We  might 
detect  him  again  if  we  started  by  dividing  the  left-hand  branch 
of  the  art  of  acquisition,  namely,  acquisition  by  exchange,  and  then 
subdivided  exchange  into  exchange  of  presents  and  exchange  of 
commodities  (dAAcucriKi?).     Exchange  of  commodities  again  includes 
the  transactions  of  the  man  who  sells  his  own  produce  and  those 
of  the  middleman  who  sells  that  of  others.     And  middlemen  may 
be  engaged  either  in  the  home  retail  traffic  (icam/Xt*)/)  or  in  inter- 
state  trade    (l^TroptK^)  .      One  branch    of    such  inter-state   trade 


is  traffic  in  mental  wares  (\j/vxwiropiKrj)  ,  serious  or  trifling.     Under 
this  head  falls  inter-state  traffic  in  sciences  (^a^ara),   and  one 


form  of  this  traffic  is  the  selling  of  scientific  knowledge  of  "  good- 
ness." This  enables  us  to  define  the  sophist  again  as  a  retail  ex- 
porter of  the  knowledge  of  goodness  (224*2),  though  we  must  add 
that  he  sometimes  retails  his  merchandise  in  the  home  market,  and 
occasionally  even  manufactures  some  of  it  himself.  As  before, 


380          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

stress  is  laid  on  the  commercialism  of  this  peddling  of  spiritual 
wares  for  a  living,  and  a  new  point  is  introduced  by  the  suggestion 
that  the  "  ideas  "  which  the  sophist  sells  ?.re  usually  not  his  own, 
but  come  to  him  "  second-hand." 

(c)  Yet  again,  we  might  diverge  from  our  original  division  at  a 
different  point.     We  spoke  of  an  art  of  acquisition  by  open  capture. 
We  may,  if  we  please,  divide  this  into  two  branches,  competition 
and  combat.     (Plato  is  thinking  of  competition  for  prizes  in  the 
great  games,  at  the  Dionysia,  and  the  like.)     And  combat  may  be 
physical  or  mental  ;   the  latter  being  contention,  of  which  "  dis- 
courses "    (Xoyot)    are    the    weapons.      When    the    "  discourses  " 
employed  are  question  and  answer,  we  call  this  sort  of  contention 
disputation,  and  disputation  about  right  and  wrong  (ircpl  SIKOLLWV 
CLVTWV  Kal  dSi/ccoy)  carried  on  under  regular  rules  of   the  game  is 
what  we   call  eristic.      When  eristic  is  practised  for  gain,  it  is 
sophistry.    Thus  the  sophist  now  appears  as  a  man  who  makes 
a   paying   business   of   contentious  disputation  about   right   and 
wrong    (2260).    He  invents  insincere   paradoxes  about  morality 
for  gain. 

(d)  We  have  not  done  with  him  even  now.     Making  an  entirely 
new  start,  we  observe  that  there  are  a  host  of  familiar  occupations 
which  are  all  alike  in  being  ways  of  separating  different  materials 
from  one  another.    Now  some  of  these  separate  like  from  like, 
others  aim  at  separating  a  better  from  a  worse,  and  all  these  we  may 
group  together  under  the  common  rubric  of  purifying  or  refining. 
Purification  or  refining,  again,  may  be  either  of  the  body  or  of  the 
soul.     And  purification  of  the  soul  itself  may  be  of  two  kinds, 
since  there  are  two  "  vices  "  which  affect  the  soul  :  spiritual  disease 
and  spiritual   deformity  (ato-^o?),  villainy,  "wickedness"  as  it  is 
commonly   called,   and    mere    ignorance    (ayvota).      The    soul    is 
purified  from  wickedness  by  justice,  "  the  art  of  discipline  "  ;  from 
ignorance    by    teaching    (fttSao-KaAuo?).     But  "there    are    different 


kinds  of  ignorance  and  correspondingly  different  kinds  of  teaching. 
The  worst  form  of  ignorance  is  the  self-conceit  which  believes  itself 
to  know  what  it  does  not  know  ;  the  teaching  which  purifies  from 
this  is  what  we  mean  by  iraiSeux,  "  education,"  "  culture/'  and  all 
other  teaching  is  merely  subservient  to  it  (229*2).  There  are,  again, 
two  forms  of  ira&ctn.  There  is  the  old-fashioned  method  of  the 
pire  de  famille  who  relies  for  success  on  rebuke,  mingled  with  ex- 
hortation ;  this  we  may  call  admonition  (I/OV&TT/TIK??)  .  But  some 
of  us  are  convinced  by  reflection  that  all  error  is  involuntary, 
and  that  no  one  can  be  expected  to  "  learn  better  "  until  he  has 
been  convinced  that  as  yet  he  does  not  know.  They  adopt  the 
milder  method  of  trying  to  convince  the  man  who  has  a  false  conceit 
of  his  wisdom  by  asking  questions  which  lead  him  to  discover 
his  ignorance  for  himself  and  to  feel  the  longing  for  knowledge 
foob-e).  We  cannot  well  give  the  name  sophist  to  those  who 
practise  this  kind  of  teaching  (which  is,  in  fact,  the  familiar  "  ob- 
stetric "  of  Socrates)  ;  the  title  would  perhaps  be  too  high  an 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  881 

honour  for  them.1  There  is  a  certain  resemblance  between  the 
eristic  and  these  dialecticians,  but  it  is  such  a  resemblance  as  that 
of  the  wolf  to  the  high-bred  dog.  Still,  for  the  sake  of  argument, 
let  us  waive  this  scruple  and  define  the  sophist  once  more  as  a  pro- 
fessional of  the  art  of  purifying  the  soul  from  its  false  conceit  of 
wisdom  (2316).  (Here,  of  course,  it  at  last  becomes  clear  what 
quarry  Plato  is  hunting.  The  definitions  already  suggested  would 
cover  Protagoras  and  his  rivals  ;  the  specialization  of  the  sophists' 
method  to  "  contention  by  question  and  answer  "  definitely  indi- 
cates that  the  persons  meant  are  inferior  imitators  of  the  Socratic 
dialectic  who  abuse  its  resources  for  a  purpose  which  Plato  regards 
as  at  bottom  commercial.) 

(e)  We  have  still  not  gone  quite  to  the  root  of  the  matter.  The 
sophist  has  exhibited  the  guises  successively  of  :  (i)  a  paid  hunter 
of  rich  youths  ;  (2)  an  exporter  of  spiritual  lore  ;  (3)  a  retailer  of 
such  lore  in  the  home  market  ;  (4)  a  small  manufacturer  of  it  ; 
(5)  an  "  athlete  "  of  controversy  ;  (6)  a  "  refiner  "  of  convictions 
which  are  hostile  to  knowledge  (though  his  title  to  this  last  dis- 
tinction is  not  uncontested).  To  penetrate  deeper  we  must  ask 
what  one  calling  there  is  which  can  masquerade  in  all  these  guises 
(2330).  The  answer  is  suggested  by  the  consideration  that,  as  we 
have  seen,  the  sophist  is,  among  other  things,  an  avnXoyiKos,  a 
pitter  of  discourse  against  discourse,  a  contradiction-monger.  He 
undertakes  to  discover  antinomies  everywhere — in  divinity,  in 
nature,  in  morals  and  politics — and  writes  books  explaining  how  the 
specialist  in  all  these  departments  can  be  reduced  to  silence.  Now 
obviously  one  man  cannot  really  be  an  "  expert  "  in  all  knowledge. 
The  secret  or  miracle  (Oavpa)  of  sophistry  lies  in  contriving  to  appear 
to  be  such  a  universal  expert.  A  clever  illusionist  might  delude 
children  into  the  belief  that  he  can  make  anything  and  everything 
by  showing  them  pictures  of  all  sorts  of  things  at  a  sufficient  dis- 
tance. (If  a  child  were  young  enough,  it  would,  e.g.,  take  the  men 
and  horses  in  a  cinema  picture  for  real  animals.)  Why  then  should 
there  not  be  an  analogous  art  of  illusion  by  means  of  discourses 
which  imposes  "  imitations  "  of  truth  on  the  youthful  mind  ?  May 
we  not  say  that  at  bottom  the  sophist  is  an  "  imitator  "  and 

1  2  3  la  3,  fj.rj  nd$ov  cu'rots  vpoff&irruncv  ytpas.  Ostensibly  the  remark  is 
ironical.  Socrates,  for  example,  who  made  it  a  point  in  his  defence  that  he 
had  never  professed  to  be  able  to  "  educate  men,"  would  say  that  he  had  never 
aspired  to  so  fine  a  name  as  <ro0i<rr7js.  But  the  suggestion  is  intended  that  the 
practitioner  of  the  Socratic  method  is  the  "  philosopher  "  whom  it  is  the 
nominal  purpose  of  the  dialogue  to  distinguish  from  the  sophist.  0i\<too0oy,  as 
we  have  learned  from  the  Symposium,  is  a  less  assuming  designation  than  <ro06s 
(or  its  equivalent  0-o0i<rr?Js),  but  the  character  is  the  loftier.  (Campbell's 
interpretation  in  loc.  cit.  that  "  the  sophist  seems  scarce  worthy  of  so  high  a 
dignity  "  seems  to  me  to  miss  the  irony  and  to  be  grammatically  impossible.) 
The  connexion  of  23 la  with  what  follows  in  2316  is  simply  that  the  speaker 
proposes,  for  the  time  being,  to  disregard  the  scruple  he  has  just  raised  and  to 
define  the  sophist  in  terms  which  are  really  applicable  only  to  the  true  dialecti- 
cian. This  is,  as  we  are  to  see,  irony.  He  professes  for  the  moment  to  take 
the  eristic  at  his  own  valuation.  The  expression  ^  ytvci  yewala  <ro0i(rrun5  (23 16  7), 
which  has  been  oddly  misunderstood,  is  meant  merely  to  point  the  irony. 


382          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

"illusionist11  (yoV)  or  "wizard"  (OavpaTowoios,  235^).  This  yields 
us  a  new  "  division.'1  The  sophist's  "  illusionism  "  is  clearly  a 
branch  of  ctSuAoTrouKTJ,  the  art  of  making  images.  But  there  are 
two  kinds  of  "  images."  Some  are  "  likenesses  "  (CHCWCS),  exact 
reproductions  of  an  original  in  all  its  proportions  and  colouring. 
But  in  some  cases,  as  in  that  of  the  makers  of  "  colossal " 
figures,  the  artist  has  to  distort  the  real  proportions  to  get  a  result 
which  will  look  right  when  seen  from  below ; 1  we  may  call  his  product 
a  "  phantasm  "  (a  deceptive  reproduction),  to  distinguish  it  from 
an  exact  likeness.  The  question  then  arises  whether  the  sophist's 
product  is  a  "  likeness  "  or  a  "  phantasm  "  of  truth.  If  we  say 
that  it  is  a  "  phantasm,"  a  distorted  reproduction  of  a  reality,  we 
commit  ourselves  to  the  view  that  there  are  such  things  as  false 
appearances,  false  discourses,  false  beliefs.  We  are  assuming  that 
there  can  be  an  "unreal  something,"  that  "what  is  not"  can  be.a 
This  has  always  been  felt  to  be  a  paradox,  ever  since  Parmenides 
called  attention  to  the  difficulty,  and  we  must  therefore  examine 
the  question  to  the  bottom  (237^-6).  This  leads  us  straight  up  to 
what,  though  formally  a  digression,  is  materially  the  main  topic 
of  the  dialogue. 

Criticism  of  Eleaticism  (2376-249^). — The  difficulty  must  first 
be  fairly  stated.  If  we  say  seriously  "  x  is  not,"  it  seems  clear  that 
the  subject  of  the  statement  x  cannot  be  anything  that  is  (an  ov), 
and  therefore  cannot  be  a  "  somewhat  "  (rt),  since  "  somewha't  " 
always  means  a  "  being,"  an  "  existent."  Hence  he  who  speaks  of 
"  what  is  not  "  seems  to  be  speaking  about  "  nothing."  Yet  can 
we  say  that  he  is  "  saying  nothing  "  (making  an  "  unmeaning 
noise,"  2370)  ?  This  is  bad,  but  there  is  worse  behind.  If  we  are 
to  talk  about  "  non-entity  "  at  all,  we  must  do  so  either  in  the 
singular  (py  ov)  or  in  the  plural  (^  oi/ra).  But  mere  non-entity 
can  have  no  predicates,  and  so  neither  unity  nor  plurality  can  be 
significantly  asserted  of  it.  Hence  it  seems  we  can  neither  think 
nor  speak  of  it  at  all  (238^).  Yet  in  the  very  act  of  saying  that  "  it 
is  unthinkable,"  by  using  the  word  "  it  "  we  are  talking  of  non- 
entity as  though  it  were  one  thing  (2390).  It  seems  then  that  we 
must  say  nothing  whatever  about  "  what  is  not,"  and  this  ruins 
our  attempt  to  characterize  the  sophist  as  an  artist  in  illusion. 
He  would  argue  that  an  illusion  is  "  what  is  not,"  and  therefore 
that  "  maker  of  an  illusion  "  is  a  meaningless  sound.  Unless  the 
sophist  really  "  takes  us  in  "  by  producing  a  false  belief  in  us, 
there  is  no  illusion,  and  if  he  succeeds  for  a  moment  in  producing 
the  illusion,  a  false  belief  must  be  something  real  ;  but,  as  we  have 
just  seen,  that  is  what  the  sophist  will  not  admit.  He  will  say  that 

1  Plato's  example  (2355)  is  that  in  the  case  of  the  colossal  work  of  art,  the 
upper  parts  (the  head  of  the  statue,  the  capital  of  the  column,  etc.)  must  be 
made  larger  in  proportion  than  it  really  should  be  if  it  is  to  look  duly  pro- 
portioned when  seen  from  the  ground. 

1  And  if  you  try  to  get  over  the  difficulty  by  saying  that  the  illusion  is  really 
something,  it  is  a  "  real  illusion/'  he  will  merely  reply  that  "  real  illusion" a* 
"  real  unreality  "  (2406). 


SOPHISTES-POLITICVS  883 

in  calling  a  belief  "  false  "  we  are  involving  ourselves  in  the  contra- 
dictions we  have  just  exposed.  If  we  are  to  defend  ourselves  against 
this  attack,  we  shall  have,  with  all  respect,  to  correct  the  funda- 
mental principle  of  the  great  Parmenides,  to  say  that  "  what  is 
not  in  a  way  is,  and  what  is,  also,  in  a  sense  is  not  (241^."  If 
the  Eleatic  principle  "  what  is  is,  what  is  not  is  not  "  is  maintained 
in  all  its  rigour,  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  a  "  likeness  "  or 
"  image/'  and  no  "  false  beliefs." 

We  may  say  that  Parmenides  and  all  the  early  thinkers .  have 
dealt  with  the  problem  too  light-heartedly,  almost  as  though  they 
were  merely  "  telling  a  fairy-tale  "  (^Wov,  2420).  Some  of  them  have 
said  that  what  is  is  three  things  (PPherecydes);  another  (PArchelaus),1 
that  it  is  two,  e.g.  the  hot  and  the  cold,  or  the  moist  and  the  dry ; 
Xenophanes,  and  our  own  school  of  Elea,  that  it  is  one.  Heraclitus 
and  Empedocles  say  that  it  is  both  one  and  many :  the  "  austerer  " 
Heraclitus  that  it  is  both  at  once,  the  "laxer  "  Empedocles  that  it 
is  each  by  turns.  Every  one  of  them  is  too  anxious  to  get  on  with 
his  story  to  trouble  himself  about  our  ability  to  follow  him 
(2420-243^).  But  if  we  look  into  the  matter,  these  different  state- 
ments about  what  is  are  just  as  puzzling  as  we  have  found  the 
current  statements  about  what  is  not.  We  have  to  ask  what  these 
thinkers  really  meant  by  being  (243^).  When  a  man  says,  e.g., 
that  "  the  hot  and  the  cold  are  "  and  are  all  that  there  is,  he  says 
of  each  of  them  that  it  is,  and  thus  he  means  by  "  being  "  something, 
and  one  something,  which  is  different  both  from  "  being  hot  " 
and  from  "  being  cold  "  (243^-0)  (he  is  making  a  "  synthetic  " 
judgment).  So  the  Eleatic  who  says  that  "  there  is  just  one  thing," 
can  hardly  mean  that  "  one  "  and  "  being  "  are  just  two  equivalent 
names  for  the  same  thing  ;  if  he  means  what  he  says,  he  cannot  well 
admit  that  there  are  names,  since  no  name  is  a  name  for  itself 
(2446-^).  Parmenides  complicates  matters  still  more  when  he 
talks  of  "  what  is  "  as  a  whole.  He  implies  that  it  has  parts,  but 
how  can  this  be  if  it  is  "  just  one  "  ?  If  "  wholeness  "  is  a  char- 
acter of  the  one,  then  there  are  two  significant  terms,  "  one  "  and 
"  whole,"  and  not  merely  one  ;  if  "  wholeness  "  is  a  significant  term 
but  "  what  is  "  is  not  a  whole,  it  is  not  something,  and  so  there  is  some- 
thing wanting  in  "  what  is."  If  "  wholeness  "  means  nothing  at  all, 
there  is  the  additional  complication  that  "  what  is  "  cannot  even 
come  to  be,  for  "  whatever  has  come  to  be  in  every  case  has  come 
to  be  as  a  whole."  *  Thus  we  see  that  the  theory  of  those  who 

1  Or  is  the  reference  to  some  Pythagorean  cosmology  ?     In  any  case, 
the  "  opposites  "  are  those  which  play  the  chief  part  in  the  various  Ionian 
cosmologies. 

2  rb  yci>6n€vov  del  ytyovcv  6\ov,  245^  4.    The  meaning  is  that  a  ytvccrts  or  process 
of  "  being  evolved  "  is,  at  any  moment  of  its  duration,  unfinished,  a  process  to 
a  goal  not  yet  reached.     So  long  as  the  process  is  still  going  on,  that  of  which 
it  is  the  "  evolution  "  is  not  yet  there.     When  it  is  there,  the  process  is  over 
and  complete.    That  process  is  finished.    This  is  the  principle  used  by  Aristotle 
in  N.E.  x.  to  prove  that  a  feeling  of  pleasure  is  not  a  ytvcw.     Note  the  way 
in  which  this  short  section  of  the  Sophistes  assumes  and  recapitulates  the 
difficulties  already  developed  in  the  second  part  of  the  Parmenides. 


384          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

draw  this  precise  and  fine  line  of  distinction  between  "  what  is  " 
and  "  what  is  not  "  involves  difficulties  about  being  quite  as  serious 
as  any  of  those  raised  by  the  Eleatics  about  "  what  is  not  "  (2450). 

To  complete  our  survey  of  the  difficulties  about  being,  let  us 
consider  what  "  the  other  side  "  l  have  to  say  about  it.  This  "  other 
side  "  falls  into  two  main  sections  who  are  at  loggerheads  with  one 
another,  like  the  giants  with  the  gods  in  the  old  tale.  The  "  giants  " 
insist  that  nothing  is  but  what  can  be  laid  hold  of  and  felt  ;  "  being  " 
and  "  body  "  are  the  same  thing.  The  other  party  maintain  that 
real  being  consists  of  "  intelligible  bodiless  forms/'  and  that  the 
bodies  which  their  opponents  regard  as  the  only  being  are  "  be- 
coming/1 not  "  being."  We  need  not  say  much  about  the  thesis 
of  the  "  materialists/'  but  we  may  imagine  them  to  be  at  any  rate 
so  far  better  than  they  actually  are  as  to  deign  to  answer  our  ques- 
tions civilly.  We  will  then  ask  them  whether  there  is  not  such  a 
thing  as  a  soul  ;  whether  some  souls  are  not  righteous  and  wise, 
others  wicked  and  foolish.  If  they  say  Yes,  as  they  must,  we  shall 
ask  whether  this  does  not  imply  that  wisdom  and  the  other  "  virtues  " 
are  something,  and  whether  they  are  anything  that  can  be  seen  or 
handled.  Even  if  they  try  to  save  themselves  by  saying  that  the 
soul  is  a  kind  of  body,  they  will  hardly  venture  to  say  that  wisdom 
is  a  body,  nor  yet  to  say  that  it  is  nothing  at  all,  though  a  genuine 
and  persistent  materialist  would  have  to  take  this  second  alter- 
native. We  shall  have  gained  our  point  with  any  of  them  who  will 
admit  that  anything  whatever  can  be  and  yet  not  be  a  body.  To 
put  it  most  simply,  we  shall  ask  them  to  admit  no  more  than  this, 
that  anything  which  has  any  "  power/1  however  slight,  of  acting 
or  being  acted  upon,  certainly  is  —  in  fact,  that  "  what  is  "  is  SiW/xts 
("  force  "),  active  or  passive  (2450-2470). 

It  is  not  clear  precisely  what  persons  are  meant  by  the  "  giants  " 
of  materialism.  They  are  certainly  not  atomists,  as  has  sometimes 
been  fancied.  The  atomists  who  insisted  on  the  reality  of  the 
ai/a</>i/9  Averts  (vacuum)  cannot  be  classed  among  persons  who  say 
that  only  what  can  be  seen  and  felt  is.  Nor  could  Theaetetus 
say,  as  he  does  (2466),  that  he  has  met  "  lots  "  of  these  men  ;  he 
would  not  meet  many  disciples  of  Leucippus,  to  say  nothing  of 
Democritus,  in  the  Athens  of  399  B.C.  It  seems  to  me  most  probable 
that  Plato  has  in  view  the  crass  unthinking  corporealism  of  the 
"  average  man/'  rather  than  the  doctrine  of  any  particular  "  school." 
We  must  also  be  careful  not  to  make  the  mistake  of  taking  the 
proposed  definition  of  "  being  "  as  "  force  "  for  one  seriously  in- 
tended by  Plato.  It  is  given  simply  as  one  which  the  materialist 
could  be  led  to  concede  if  he  were  willing  to  reflect,  and  we  are 
warned  that,  on  further  consideration,  we  might  think  better  of  it. 


1  ro«)s  <SXXo>s  X^yovras,  2450  8.  Since  they  are  opposed  to  the 
6vros  re  irtoi  Kal  juij,  i.e.  the  Eleatics,  this  "other  side  "  must  be  pluralists  of 
various  kinds  ;  the  men  of  Megara  cannot  be  included  among  them,  as  they 
were  always  regarded  in  antiquity  as  Eleatics  of  a  kind,  and  are,  of  course, 
among  the  duucpipoXoyounevoi  irepl  6?rof.  This  point  is  important. 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  885 

The  point  is  simply  that  the  "  materialist  "  who  uses  the  notion  of  a 
"  force  "  has  already  surrendered  his  materialism. 

We  have  now  to  consider  the  view  of  the  "  friends  of  forms," 
the  immaterialists  already  referred  to.  They  hold  that  "  becoming  " 
and  "  being  "  are  sharply  contra-distinguished.  Our  body  is  in 
touch  with  "  becoming  "  through  sense-perception  ;  our  mind  in 
touch  with  real  and  unchanging  "  being  "  through  thought  (2480). 
We  have  to  ask  them  what  they  mean  by  "  being  in  touch  with  " 
(TO  Kou/cDvcti/) .  Do  they  mean  "  acting  or  being  acted  on  by  a 
force  "  ?  Theaetetus  may  not  be  able  to  say,  but  the  Eleatic 
speaker  is  familiar  with  the  persons  who  are  being  criticized,  and 
consequently  knows  that  they  would  reject  the  statement.  So  far 
from  accepting  the  identification  of  being  with  "  the  power  to  act 
or  be  acted  on/1  they  would  say  that  both  action  and  passion  belong 
to  the  realm  of  "  becoming  "  ;  "  being  "  neither  acts  nor  is  acted 
on.1  But  we  shall  then  ask  them  whether  they  do  not  admit  that 
"  being  "  is  known  by  the  mind,  and  whether  "  being  known  "  is 
not  "  being  acted  on  "  and  knowing,  acting.  To  be  consistent, 
they  will  have  to  deny  both  statements.  If  "  being  "  is  acted  on  in 
being  known,  it  Traced  ("  has  something  done  to  it "),  and  therefore 
is  "  moved,"  and  it  is  not  true  that  being  is  simply  "quiescent " 

{fipefjiovVt  2480). 

We  cannot  seriously  think  that  "  what  utterly  is,"  the  perfectly 
real,  neither  thinks  nor  lives,  or  that  it  thinks  but  does  not  live. 
If  it  thinks  and  is  alive,  it  must  have  a  soul,  and  if  it  has  a  soul,  it 
cannot  stand  everlastingly  still ;  it  must  have  movement.  If  mind 
is  to  be  real,  there  must  be  both  motion  and  variety  and  also  rest 
and  uniformity  in  things  (2480-249^). 

It  has  been  a  much-discussed  question  who  are  the  thinkers 
to  whom  the  dialogue  ascribes  the  doctrine  just  criticized.  From 
the  statement  of  their  theory,  it  is  clear  that  they  are  extreme 
dualists,  who  regard  "  being  "  and  "  becoming  "  as  absolutely 
sundered.  They  then  identify  "  becoming "  with  the  sensible 
world,  and  consequently  hold  that  the  sensible  world  has  no  real 
existence.  To  put  the  same  thing  from  the  epistemological  stand- 
point, they  deny  that  sensation  has  any  cognitive  value,  or  plays 
any  part  in  the  apprehension  of  truth.  This  shows  that  the  refer- 
ence cannot  be  to  the  type  of  theory  ascribed  to  Socrates  in  the 
Phaedo  and  Republic.  The  whole  point  of  the  doctrine  of  "  partici- 
pation "  of  sensible  things  in  forms  was  just  to  break  down  the 
absolute  severance  between  a  real  world  of  "  being  "  and  an  illusory 
world  of  "  becoming,"  by  ascribing  a  partial  and  secondary  reality 
to  the  sensible.  So  the  doctrine  of  "  recollection  "  was  intended  to 
assign  sensation  a  genuine,  if  a  humble,  part  in  the  process  of 
reaching  truth  ;  sensation  is,  on  that  theory,  just  what  "  suggests  " 
or  "  calls  into  our  minds  "  the  thought  of  the  forms.  A  fortiori, 

1  248$  7-9.  The  view  suggested  is  that  acting  and  being  acted  on,  both 
involve  process  and  change  :  hence  neither  can  be  found  in  the  realm  of  eternal 
and  changeless  being. 


886          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

if  the  criticism  is  not  aimed  at  Socrates,  it  is  not  directed  against 
Plato's  "  earlier  self  "  or  disciples,  if  there  were  any,  who  retained 
a  doctrine  which  Plato  had  once  held,  but  had  outgrown.  Nor, 
again,  can  the  persons  meant  be  Euclides  and  his  friends  at  Megara. 
They  were  strict  rationalistic  monists  who  did  not  admit  the  exist- 
ence of  even  an  "  illusory  "  world  of  "  becoming,"  and  regarded 
themselves  as  Eleatics,  whereas  the  "  friends  of  forms  "  are  one  of 
two  groups  who  have  both  been  carefully  distinguished  at  2450 
from  the  Eleatic  monists.  The  one  hint  of  their  identity  is  given 
by  the  Eleatic  visitor  when  he  says  (2486)  that  Theaetetus  probably 
will  not  know  their  views,  but  he  is  acquainted  with  them  himself 
Sta  o-w7?0eiav,  because  he  has  lived  with  the  men  in  question.  As 
the  speaker  is  certainly  an  Italian  Eleatic — he  refers  to  his  own 
personal  recollections  of  Parmenides  (2370) — we  must  plainly  look  to 
Italy  for  these  rationalistic  dualists.  Hence  Proclus  is  pretty  likely 
to  be  right  when  he  says  that  the  persons  meant  are  "  wise  men  in 
Italy  "  whom  he  also  calls  Pythagoreans,  especially,  as  Burnet 
remarks,  since  he  makes  the  statement  without  any  discussion  as 
though  it  were  the  recognized  traditional  interpretation.1  The 
Pythagorean  formula  that  "  things  are  numbers  "  would  readily 
lend  itself  to  development  along  these  lines. 

The  Meaning  of  Significant  Denial. — The  Platonic  Categories 
(2490-2590). — So  far  we  have  reached  the  result  that  though  move- 
ment and  rest  are  contraries,  both  of  them  certainly  are.  There  is 
movement  and  there  is  rest,  and  when  I  say  "  rest  is,"  I  do  not 
mean  that  rest  is  motion,  nor  when  I  say  that  "  motion  is"  do  I 
mean  that  motion  is  rest.  Motion,  rest,  being,  are  all  distinct, 
and  being  embraces  both  of  the  others ;  though  it  is  neither  of 
them.  It  thus  seems  as  difficult  to  say  what  "  being  "  is  the  name 
for,  as  we  found  it  to  say  what  "  what  is  not  "  is  the  name  for.  If 
we  can  answer  the  one  question  we  shall  probably  find  that  we  have 
learned  how  to  answer  the  other  2  (2500-251^). 

Every  one  knows  that  we  are  always  making  assertions  about, 
e.g.,  a  man,  in  which  we  do  not  confine  ourselves  to  the  statement 
that  "  a  man  is  a  man,"  but  say  something  further  about  his  com- 
plexion, his  shape,  size,  good  or  bad  qualities,  and  the  like,  and  in 
all  these  cases  we  are  saying  that  a  man  is  not  one  thing  only,  but 
at  the  same  time  many  (not  merely  a  man,  but  ruddy,  tall,  lanky, 
patient,  etc.).  Raw  lads  and  men  who  have  begun  their  thinking 
too  late  in  life  8  fasten  eagerly  on  such  "  synthetic  "  propositions, 

1  Proclus  in  Pavmen.,  p.  562  Stallbaum  (Cousin,  iv.  149) ;  Greek  Philosophy, 
Part  I.,  91  n.  i,  280. 

2  This  means,  to  use  language  more  familiar  to  ourselves,  that  if  we  can 
solve  the  question,  What  is  implied  by  an  affirmative  "  synthetic  "  proposition  ? 
the  answer  will  also  solve  the  problem  about  significant  denial.     The  upshot 
of  the  whole  discussion  is  to  be  a  general  theory  of  the  conditions  of  significant 
non-identical  assertion. 

1 1  can  see  no  allusion  to  Antisthenes  in  the  use  of  the  adjective  <J^ijLta^f 
(2516  6).  There  is  no  reason  why  he  should  be  dragged  into  the  discussion, 
and,  as  he  had  been  a  pupil  of  Gorgias  (D.  L.  vi.  i),  the  epithet  tyi/ta^s  is  really 
not  quite  applicable  to  him. 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  887 

and  declare  them  to  be  absurd,  on  the  ground  that  they  all  imply 
that  one  can  be  many  and  many  one.  They  plume  themselves 
on  the  discovery  that  only  identical  propositions  can  be  true. 
This  is  the  thesis  we  have  really  to  combat  (2510-^). 

If  we  consider  the  three  concepts  being,  rest,  motion,  there  are 
just  three  logical  possibilities  :  (a)  that  they  all  "  partake  in  "  one 
another,  i.e.  any  one  can  be  predicated  of  any  other ;  (b)  that 
none  of  them  can  be  conjoined  with  any  other,  i.e.  none  can  be 
predicated  of  another  ;  (c)  that  some  of  them  can  be  predicated  of 
("  partake  in  ")  others.  We  can  reject  (b)  at  once,  since  it  would 
forbid  us  to  say  both  that  there  is  motion  and  that  there  is  rest. 
This  would  make  an  end  of  the  views  alike  of  Heracliteans,  Eleatics, 
"  friends  of  forms/'  as  well  as  of  all  the  physicists  who  account  for 
things  as  due  to  the  aggregation  and  disgregation  of  "  elements," 
whether  infinite  in  number  (Anaxagoras)  or  finite  (Empedocles) . 
The  theory  is  actually  self-refuting,  since  you  cannot  state  it  with- 
out using  such  words  and  phrases  as  "  is,"  "  apart  from  everything 
else,"  "  by  itself,"  and  the  like  (2520).  You  cannot  even  deny  the 
possibility  of  "  synthetic  judgments  "  except  by  making  such  a 
judgment.  The  proposition  "  only  identical  propositions  are  true  " 
is  not  itself  an  identity  ;  (a)  is  an  even  more  absurd  theory,  since 
it  would  require  us  to  affirm  that  rest  is  motion  and  motion  rest 
(252^).  Thus  the  only  possible  alternative  is  (c)  that  some  "  con- 
cepts "  will  "  combine  "  and  others  will  not  (2520),  just  as  some 
letters  can  be  combined  to  form  syllables,  others  cannot. 

This  illustration  suggests  a  further  point  of  supreme  importance. 
Vowels  hold  a  "  favoured  position  "  among  the  elementary  sounds 
of  language.  Every  syllable  must  contain  a  vowel,  and  the  vowels 
are  thus  the  "  connecting  links  "  which  make  syllabic  composition 
possible.  There  is  a  special  art  (TC'XVT?),  that  of  the  "  teacher  of 
letters,"  which  considers  what  combinations  of  consonants  by  the  help 
of  a  vowel  are  possible  and  what  are  not,  just  as  another  art,  music, 
considers  what  combinations  of  notes  of  different  pitch  will  make 
a  tune  and  what  will  not.1  So  there  clearly  must  be  a  science  which 
considers  what  "  concepts  "  will  "  blend  "  so  as  to  give  rise  to  "  dis- 
courses "  (Xoyot)  and  what  will  not,  and  again  whether  there  is  a  class 
of  concepts  which,  like  the  vowels  in  spelling,  make  all  combina- 
tions possible,  and  another  class  which  gives  rise  to  distinctions  (2530). 
Thus  logic  is  here,  for  the  first  time  in  literature,  contemplated  as 
an  autonomous  science  with  the  task  of  ascertaining  the  supreme 
principles  of  affirmative  and  negative  propositions  (the  combina- 
tions and  "  separations  "). ,  But  this  task  of  dividing  things  rightly 
according  to  their  "  kinds,"  detecting  one  "  form  "  (ISca)  where  it  is 
disguised  by  complication  with  others,  and  distinguishing  several 
which  form  a  single  complex,  is  precisely  that  of  "  dialectic." 
Thus  we  have  unexpectedly  identified  the  true  philosopher  before 

1  The  reference  is,  of  course,   to  permissible  and  un permitted  melodic 
intervals,  not  to  the  construction  of  '  chords."    Thus  the  parallel  between 
and  /iov<n*ij  is  kept  exact. 


888          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

we  have  come  to  an  end  with  our  identification  of  the  sophist. 
The  philosopher  is  the  dialectician  who  knows  how  to  find  the  many 
in  the  one  and  the  one  in  the  many  (2530-6).  We  had  already  been 
told  much  the  same  thing  by  Socrates  in  the  Phaedrus,  but  there  is 
an  important  point  in  which  the  problem  now  under  discussion 
marks  a  great  advance  on  the  theories  ascribed  to  Socrates  in  the 
earlier  dialogues.  In  them,  the  combinations  or  complications 
considered  seem  always  to  be  the  "  things  "  of  the  everyday  world 
of  sense.  The  sensible  "  thing  "  had  been  treated  in  the  Phaedo 
and  Republic  as  a  sort  of  complex  "  partaking  "  at  once  in  a  plurality 
of  forms — in  fact,  as  a  bundle  of  "  universals."  Each  form  had 
been  spoken  of  as  something  independent  of  every  other,  and  the 
only  "  combination  "  of  several  forms  contemplated  had  been  their 
simultaneous  "  presence "  in  the  same  ai<rOrjr6v.  Or,  to  put 
the  same  thing  from  the  opposite  point  of  view,  the  question  had 
never  been  raised,  what  constitutes  the  particularity  of  the  partic- 
ular thing.  Plato  is  now  raising  a  different  issue.  We  are  to  see 
that  forms  as  such  can  "  combine,'1  so  that  you  can  predicate  one 
"  universal  "  of  another,  and  it  is  the  special  function  of  the  new 
science  Plato  is  contemplating  to  specify  the  lines  on  which  such 
combination  is  possible.  The  doctrine  of  forms  as  known  to  us 
from  the  "  Socratic  "  dialogues  throws  no  light  on  this  problem, 
and  this,  no  doubt,  is  why  it  is  never  referred  to  in  our  dialogue. 
It  is  not  that  it  is  disavowed,  or  even  called  in  question,  but  that  it  is 
simply  not  relevant  to  the  issues  which  Plato  now  finds  himself 
called  on  to  face.  We  might,  perhaps,  say  that  the  language  of 
the  Phaedrus  about  the  dialectician's  task  of  seeing  the  one  in  the 
many  and  the  many  in  the  one,  if  followed  up,  raises  precisely 
the  same  question.  But  the  Phaedrus  is,  to  all  appearance,  one  of 
the  very  latest  "  Socratic  "  dialogues,  and  Plato  is  probably  there 
on  the  verge  of  straining  the  limits  of  historical  accuracy. 

We  cannot  now  work  out  the  whole  inquiry  into  the  "  com- 
munion "  between  forms,  but  we  may  deal  with  it  for  the  special 
case  of  a  few  of  the  most  important  and  all-pervading.  As  we  have 
said,  "  being,"  "  motion/'  "  rest,"  are  three  of  these  universalissima 
or  /Acyio-Ta  ytvy.  Two  of  them — rest  and  motion — refuse  to  com- 
bine. But  the  third  will  combine  with  both  of  the  two,  since  both 
motion  and  rest  are.  Moreover,  each  of  the  three  is  distinct  or 
different  (crc/aov)  from  the  other  two,  but  identical  with  itself. 
And  difference  and  identity,  again,  are  neither  motion  nor  rest. 
Nor  is  either  of  them  the  same  as  "  being."  We  ascribe  being  alike 
to  motion  and  to  rest,  but  this  is  not  to  assert  that  motion  is  identical 
with  rest.  For  "  different  from  "  is  always  a  relative  term,  whereas 
being  has  an  absolute  sense.1  Thus  we  have  five,  not  merely 

1  255*2  3-7.  The  meaning  is,  that  I  cannot  intelligibly  say  "  x  is  different  " 
without  specifying  some  y  from  which  x  differs.  But  I  can  intelligibly  say 
not  only  that "  x  is  a  z,"  but  that  "  x  is,"  "  there  is  an  x."  To  this  absolute  sense 
of  "  is  "  there  is  no  corresponding  sense  of  "  is  different."  See  Campbell's 
note,  loc.  cit. 


SOPH1STES-POLIT1CV&  889 

three,  Forms  (€1817,  yeVi/,  both  words  are  used  interchangeably)  to 
consider — being,  motion,  rest,  identity,  difference.  Difference 
manifestly  pervades  all  the  others,  for  each  of  them  is  different  from 
the  rest,  and  so  "  partakes  of  the  form  of  different  "  (2546-255^). 

Let  us  now  consider  the  relations  between  these  five  all-pervading 
forms.  (It  is  never  said  that  the  list  of  the  universalia  universalis- 
sima  is  complete,  though  later  Platonists,  like  Plotinus  in  Ennead 
vi.  1-3,  treat  them  as  a  complete  list  of  Platonic  "  highest  uni- 
versals,"  or  categories.)  Motion  is  not  rest,  nor  rest  motion.  But 
both  are  and  are  identical  with  themselves,  and  thus  "  partake  " 
(|Di€T€x«)  of  being  and  identity,  and  also,  since  each  is  different 
from  the  other,  of  difference.  Thus  we  can  say,  e.g.,  that  motion  is — 
it  is  motion]  but  also  is  not — it  is  not  rest.  But  in  just  the  same 
way  we  can  say  that  motion  "  partakes  of  "  being  and  so  is — 
there  is  such  a  thing  as  motion ;  but  motion  is  not  identical  with 
being,  and  in  that  sense  we  may  say  that  it  is  not,  i.e.  it  is  not- 
being.  The  same  line  of  thought  shows  that  "  not-being  "  may  be 
asserted  of  all  the  five  forms  already  enumerated,  even  of  being 
itself,  since  each  of  them  is  different  from  any  of  the  others,  and 
thus  is  not  any  of  the  others  (255^-257^). 

Now  these  considerations  enable  us  to  dismiss  the  difficulties 
which  have  been  raised  about  "  not-being.'*  When  we  say  that 
something  "is  not  so-and-so,"  by  the  not-being  here  asserted  we 
do  not  mean  the  "  opposite  "  (Ivavrlov)  of  what  is  but  only  some- 
thing different  from  what  is.  "  A  is  not  %  "  does  not  mean  that  A 
is  nothing  at  all,  but  only  that  it  is  something  other  than  anything 
which  is  x  (257 b-c).  Not-beautiful,  for  example,  is  the  name  not 
of  nothing  but  of  all  the  things  other  than  the  things  which  are 
beautiful.  And  the  things  which  are  not-beautiful  are  just  as  truly 
as  those  which  are  beautiful.  The  "  not-large  "  is,  every  whit  as 
much  as  the  "  large/1  the  "  not-right  "  as  much  as  the  "  right.11 
In  making  a  denial  we  are  not  asserting  an  antithesis  between  noth- 
ing and  something,  but  an  opposition  of  something  and  something 
else  different  from  it  (2586).  We  may  say,  then,  that  "  not-being  " 
is  as  real  and  has  as  definite  a  character  as  being.  This  is  our 
answer  to  Parmenides.  We  have  not  merely  succeeded  in  doing 
what  he  forbade,  asserting  significantly  that  "  what  is  not,  is  "  ; 
we  have  actually  discovered  what  it  is.  It  is  "  the  different  " 
(TO  OoiTcpov),  and  since  everything  is  different  from  all  other  things, 
we  may  say  boldly  that  "  not-being  "  is  thoroughly  real  (OI/TWS  6v, 
2576-2580).  Henceforth  we  shall  not  give  ourselves  any  further 
concern  about  the  alleged  paradox  that  "  what  is  not  "  is  that 
unthinkable  thing  "  the  absurd,"  the  "  opposite  "  of  what  is. 
It  is  childishly  easy  to  see  that  any  thing  is  different  from  other 
things  and  so  may  be  said  to  be  "  what  is  not  "  ;  the  true  difficulty 
is  to  determine  the  precise  limits  of  the  identity  and  difference  to 
be  found  among  things  (259^). 

Application  of  our  Result  to  the  Problem  of  "  False  Opinion  "  : 
Final  Definition  of  the  Sophist  (26oa-268c). — Our  identification  of 


890          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

"  not-being  "  with  difference  shows  that  "  not-being  "  itself  is  a 
pervasive  and  categorial  feature  in  things.  We  have  now  to 
consider  whether  this  pervasive  characteristic  can  "  combine  " 
with  discourse  and  belief  (Sofa).  If  it  cannot,  if  we  cannot  say  or 
think  "  what  is  not/'  falsehood  of  speech  or  thought  will  not  be 
possible,  and  consequently  there  will  be  no  such  thing  as  error  or 
illusory  belief,  and  no  "  resemblances,"  "  likenesses/1  or  "  phan- 
tasms/' all  of  which  seem  to  be  what  they  are  not.  The  sophist's 
last  retreat  will  be  to  the  position  that  at  any  rate  discourse  and 
belief  will  not  "  blend  "  with  "  what  is  not  "  :  there  is  no  such 
"  complex  "  as  utterance  of  or  belief  in  what  is  not,  and  therefore 
no  such  art  as  the  fabrication  of  "  phantasms."  This  is  the  posi- 
tion from  which  we  have  now  to  dislodge  him  (2610).  Let  us 
begin  by  an  analysis  of  discourse.  Just  as  not  all  combinations 
of  letters  yield  a  syllable,  not  all  complexes  of  forms  a  concept, 
so  not  all  combinations  of  words  yield  a  significant  discourse.  The 
words  of  a  language  fall  in  the  main  into  two  great  classes :  nouns 
(ovopaTa)  and  verbs  (prj^ara).  The  verbs  are  vocal  symbols  of 
actions  (Trpafcis),  the  nouns  are  the  names  of  the  agents  in  these 
actions.  A  string  of  verbs,  e.g.  "  walks,  runs,  sleeps,"  is  not  a 
Xoyos  or  significant  statement,  neither  is  a  string  of  nouns,  e.g. 
11  lion,  deer,  horse."  The  simplest  discourse,  the  unit  in  discourse, 
is  the  complex  of  a  noun  and  a  verb,  e.g.  "  a  man  learns."  Here 
not  only  is  something  named,  but  something  is  signified  (2,620). 
Further,  a  discourse  or  statement  must  be  "  of  "  or  "  about "  some- 
thing and  it  must  have  a  certain  "  quality,"  must  be  TTOIO?  TIS. 
Thus,  take  the  two  statements,  "  Theaetetus  is  sitting  down," 
"  Theaetetus,  to  whom  I  am  now  speaking,  is  flying."  The 
"  quality  "  of  the  first  statement  is  that  it  is  true,  of  the  second 
that  it  is  false,  for  Theaetetus  is  not  at  this  moment  flying  but 
sitting1  (2636).  And  both  the  statements  are  about  Theaetetus, 
the  false  statement  no  less  than  the  true.  A  statement  which  was 
not  about  (or  "of  ")  some  subject  would  not  be  a  statement  at  all 
(2630).  Thus  some  complexes  of  nouns  and  verbs  are  false.  Now 
thinking  is  an  internal  conversation  in  which  the  mind  asks  itself 
a  question ;  belief  or  judgment  (Sofa)  is  the  statement,  affirmative 
or  negative,  in  which  the  mind  answers  its  own  question,  without 
audible  words.  Sometimes  the  internal  conversation  is  accom- 
panied by  sensation,  and  then  we  call  it  "  fantasy  "  (i.e.  when  the 
debate  of  the  mind  is  started  by  the  attempt  to  interpret  a  present 
sensation).  Hence,  from  the  possibility  of  false  statement  or 
discourse  follows  the  equal  possibility  of  false  belief  or  judgment 
and  false  "  phantasy "  (erroneous  interpretation  of  sensation, 

1 1  cannot  agree  here  with  Burnet  (Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  287  n.)  that 
what  is  meant  by  the  quality  of  propositions  is  tense.  It  is  clear  from  2636  2-3 
that  the  speaker  means  "  truth- value, "  as  has  usually  been  supposed.  His 
point  is  that  the  two  statements  about  Theaetetus  have  opposed  "quality"  ; 
but  both  of  them  have  the  same  tense.  For  a  similar  reference  to  "  true  " 
and  "  false"  as  the  "  qualities  "  of  propositions,  which  Burnet  has  overlooked, 
see  Philebus,  376  io-c2. 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  891 

a-b).  A  false  belief  that  Theaetetus  is  now  flying  is  not  a  belief 
about  nothing  at  all  but  a  belief  about  Theaetetus  which  asserts 
of  him  that  he  is  performing  a  definite  ?rpa£is  different  from  that 
which  he  is  in  fact  performing.  This  disposes  of  the  old  objection 
to  our  assumption  that  there  are  "  images  "  and  "  phantasms/' 
and  so  we  may  go  back  to  our  attempt  to  define  sophistry  as  a  branch 
of  the  art  of  making  images  (2640).  We  now  proceed  to  divide  the 
making  of  images  more  carefully. 

We  said  that  we  could  divide  it  into  the  making  of  accurate 
likenesses  (ei/coVcs)  and  the  making  of  inaccurate  images  (<£ai/Tao7xara), 
both  of  which  are  forms  of  "  imitation.'*  Let  us  reconsider  this 
more  in  detail.  The  making  of  imitations  is  a  branch  of  creative 
art,  as  distinguished  from  the  arts  of  acquisition,  as  we  said  long 
ago.  We  may  now  divide  creative  art  into  divine  creative  art 
and  human  creative  art.  The  difference  is  that  God  (not,  as  the 
thoughtless  say,  unintelligent  "  nature  ")  creates  all  real  things 
without  any  pre-existing  material  (rrporfpov  OVK  wra,  265^)  *•  ; 
man's  "  creating  "  only  originates  fresh  combinations  of  materials 
thus  created  by  God.  Next  we  may  take  a  new  principle  of 
division,  and  subdivide  both  divine  and  human  creation  into  creation 
of  actualities  and  creation  of  images.2  The  images  created  by  God 
are  such  things  as  dreams,  shadows  thrown  by  a  light,  reflections 
in  a  polished  surface  ;  those  created  by  man  are  pictures  of  things 
made  by  man  (houses,  etc.),  and  the  like.  Here  we  bring  in  again 
our  former  and  now  justified  subdivision  of  images.  Man-made 
"  images  "  are  either  accurate  likenesses  or  phantasms.  Phantasms 
again  are  of  two  kinds  :  those  produced  by  tools  of  some  kind  (like 
the  painter's  brush),  and  those  for  which  the  producer  acts  as  his 
own  tool,  as  when  another  man  (e.g.  an  actor)  imitates  the  physical 
bearing  or  the  tone  of  voice  of  Theaetetus  by  his  own  facial  gestures 
and  his  own  voice,  and  this  kind  of  imitation  is  what  we  call  mimicry 
(jjiinrjo-is).  Mimicry,  again,  is  twofold.  A  man  may  know  what  he 
is  mimicking  or  he  may  not  know  it.  Many  persons  who  have  no 
knowledge  of  the  true  figure  (o-xv/*a)  of  justice  or  goodness  generally 
try  to  make  their  speech  and  action  exhibit  the  appearance  of  what 
they  fancy  to  be  goodness  and  justice,  and  some  of  them  succeed 
in  conveying  the  impression  they  are  aiming  at.  This  is  a  plain 
case  of  mimicry  by  a  man  who  does  not  know  (267^).  There  is  no 
recognized  name  for  this  specific  "  mimicry  by  the  man  who  does 
not  know,"  so  we  coin  one  for  the  moment  and  call  it 


1  The  language,  perhaps,  must  not  be  unduly  pressed,  but  it  proves  at  least 
that  the  idea  of  "  creation  ex  nihilo  "  was  quite  intelligible  to  Plato. 

8  The  language  of  2660  i  about  the  division  in  n-Xdros  presupposes  this 
diagram  : 


Divine  creation 
of  actualities. 

Human  creation 
of  actualities. 

Divine  creation 
of  images. 

Human  creation 
of  images. 

892          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

("counterfeiting ").  But  there  are  also  two  varieties  of  the  art  of 
counterfeiting.  The  maker  of  the  sham  may  honestly  believe  that 
he  knows  the  reality  which,  in  fact,  he  does  not  know.  Or  he 
may  have  an  uneasy  suspicion  all  the  time  that  he  does  not  really 
know  what  he  poses  as  knowing  (2680).  In  the  second  case  he  is 
an  "  ironical  imitator,"  a  conscious  "  humbug/'  as  well  as  a  mere 
counterfeiter — in  fact,  an  impostor.  The  professional  sophist  has 
had  too  much  practice  in  "  discourse  "  to  be  a  mere  honest  pre- 
tender ;  he  must  have  his  suspicions  of  the  unsoundness  of  his  own 
"  discourse,"  and  thus  his  "art "  falls  under  the  head  of  conscious 
counterfeiting — imposture  or  charlatanism.  Only  one  further 
distinction  remains.  The  charlatan  may  practise  his  imposture 
in  lengthy  discourses  before  a  public  audience,  or  he  may  employ 
brief  discourses  with  an  individual  in  which  he  tries  to  make  his 
interlocutor  contradict  himself.  The  one  type  of  impostor  is  the 
(fy/xoAoyiKos,  the  dishonest  "  spell-binder  "  passing  himself  off  for  a 
statesman ;  the  other  is  the  sophist  who  counterfeits  the  "  wise  man," 
more  than  half  knowing  himself  to  be  a  fraud  (268c). 

One  closing  remark  may  be  made  on  the  main  result  of  the 
whole  dialogue.  Plato's  solution  of  the  old  puzzle  about  "  what  is 
not  "  and  the  later  paradox,  grafted  on  it,  of  the  impossibility  of 
error,  turns,  as  we  see,  on  distinguishing  what  we  should  call  the 
use  of  "  is  "  as  the  logical  copula,  or  sign  of  assertion,  from  the 
existential  sense  of  "is."  To  us  the  distinction  may  seem  almost 
trivial,  but  it  only  seems  so  because  the  work  of  making  it  has  been 
done  so  thoroughly,  once  for  all,  in  the  Sophistes.  Though  Plato 
lets  us  see  that  he  thought  the  ordinary  Megarian  a  good  deal  of  a 
conscious  impostor,  the  difficulty  about  the  possibility  of  error 
and  of  significant  denial  was  a  perfectly  serious  one  with  its 
originators  and  remained  so  until  the  ambiguity  had  been  thoroughly 
cleared  up.  It  is  impossible  to  overestimate  the  service  to  both 
logic  and  metaphysics  rendered  by  Plato's  painstaking  and  searching 
examination.  We  shall  realize  the  magnitude  of  the  issue  better  if 
we  are  careful  to  remember  that,  as  Plato  himself  knew,  the  problem 
is  at  bottom  one  which  affects  all  assertion.  His  point  is  that  all 
significant  propositions  are  "  synthetic,"  in  the  sense  that  they  are 
more  than  assertions  of  the  equivalence  of  two  sets  of  verbal  symbols, 
and  that  they  are  all  "  functions  "  of  an  "  argument  "  which  is 
"  not  null."  This  would  be  a  mere  paradox  if  there  were  no  other 
sense  of  "  is  "  than  the  existential.  We  can  see  that  a  completed 
logic  would  have  to  carry  the  work  of  distinction  further  than  it  is 
carried  in  the  dialogue.  Notably  the  "  is  "  which  asserts  the  identity 
of  the  object  denoted  by  two  different  descriptions  (e.g.  "  the  victor 
at  Pharsalia  is  the  consul  of  the  year  59  B.C.")  needs  to  be  distin- 
guished both  from  the  "  copula  "  and  the  existential  "  is."  But 
the  first  step  and  the  hardest  to  take  is  the  recognition  of  the 
"  copula  "  and  its  functions  for  what  they  are.  Since  the  Sophistes 
takes  this  step  for  the  first  time,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  it 
definitely  originates  scientific  logic. 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  893 

2.  THE  POLITICUS. — We  must  deal  much  more  briefly  with  the 
application  of  the  method  of  division  to  the  definition  of  the  states- 
man. We  may  be  content,  now  that  we  have  grasped  the  principle 
of  the  method,  to  concentrate  our  attention  in  the  main  on  the  solid 
result  it  is  used  to  establish.  Plato's  real  purpose  in  the  dialogue 
is  much  less  merely  to  continue  his  lesson  in  logical  method  than 
to  deal  with  a  fundamental  problem  in  the  theory  of  government 
on  which  men's  minds  even  now  continue  to  be  divided.  The  issue 
is  whether,  as  the  actual  world  goes,  "  personal  rule  "  or  impersonal 
"  constitutionalism  "  is  the  better  for  mankind,  and  Plato  means 
to  decide  definitely  for  constitutionalism  and,  in  particular,  to 
commend  "  limited  monarchy."  His  reading  of  the  facts  of  the 
political  situation  is  that  monarchy  has  to  be  revived,  as  it  was 
in  fact  revived  by  Philip,  Alexander,  and  their  successors,  but 
that  whether  it  is  to  be  a  great  blessing  or  a  great  curse  will 
depend  on  the  question  whether  it  is  revived  as  constitutional 
monarchy  or  as  irresponsible  autocracy.  Democracy,  with  all 
the  defects  it  has  shown  at  Athens,  is  the  most  tolerable  form 
of  government  where  there  is  no  fixed  "law  of  the  constitu- 
tion," autocracy  the  most  intolerable  ;  where  there  is  such  a 
fixed  law,  a  monarch  is  a  better  head  of  the  executive  and 
administrative  than  either  a  select  "  oligarchy  "  or  a  "  town's 
meeting." 

In  form,  the  dialogue  is  a  continuation  of  the  Sophistes,  with  one 
change  in  personnel.  Theaetetus  is  present  as  a  silent  character, 
but,  to  save  him  from  undue  fatigue,  his  place  as  respondent  is 
taken  by  his  companion,  a  lad  named  Socrates,  who  has  been  present 
without  speaking  through  the  Theaetetus  and  Sophistes.  (The  great 
Socrates,  as  in  the  Sophistes,  is  completely  silent  but  for  one  or  two 
opening  remarks.)  The  "  younger  "  Socrates  has  been  introduced 
by  one  phrase  in  the  Theaetetus  (147^  i)  as  studying  mathematics  in 
company  with  Theodorus  and  Theaetetus.  He  is  known  to  have 
been  an  original  member  of  the  Academy.  There  is  one  further 
reference  to  him  in  a  letter  belonging  to  the  later  years  of  Plato's 
life,  usually  condemned  by  the  editors  as  spurious,  though  for 
no  obvious  reasons  (Ep.  x.  3580).  We  learn  there  only  that  he  is 
in  poor  health  at  the  time  of  writing.  Aristotle  mentions  him  once 
(Met.  B  10366  25)  in  a  way  which  shows  that  he  belonged  to  the 
Academic  group  reproached  elsewhere  by  Aristotle  for  their  "  pam- 
mathematicism."  l  I  think  it  all  but  certain  that  it  is  he,  not  the 

1  The  statement  of  Aristotle  is  that  "  the  younger  Socrates  "  used  to  regard 
the  "  material  "  constituent  in  the  human  organism  as  falling  completely 
outside  the  definition  of  man,  exactly  as  the  bronze  of  which  a  disc  is  made 
falls  outside  the  definition  of  circle.  Aristotle's  own  view  is  that  there  is  a 
difference  in  this  respect  between  a  "  physical  "  and  a  mathematical  definition. 
It  is  indispensable  to  mention  in  the  "physical"  definition  the  fact  that  the 
material  constituents  in  which  the  formula  is  embodied  are  such-and-such. 
(Just  as  it  would  be  no  adequate  definition  of  water  to  say  that  it  is  "  two 
units  of  something  with  one  of  another  "  :  you  must  specify  that  the  twg 
units  are  units  of  hydrogen,  and  the  one  a  unit  of  oxygen.) 


394  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

great  philosopher,  to  whom  Aristotle's  practice  has  given  a  spurious 
immortality  as  a  "  logical  example."  l 

The  dialogue  begins  (257^-267^)  with  an  attempt  to  characterize 
the  science  or  art  (TC'XI/TJ,  ITTLCTTYJ^)  of  the  king  or  statesman 
(TToXirtKi;,  /3a<Ti\LKr'i)  by  assigning  it  a  place  in  the  classification 
of  the  sciences.  Some  "  sciences  "  merely  provide  us  with  know- 
ledge, others,  including  all  the  industrial  arts,  produce  results  em- 
bodied in  material  objects  (orw/iara).  So  we  begin  by  dividing 
sciences  into  the  practical  (irpaKTiKaC)  and  the  purely  cognitive 
(yvcooriK(u).  The  science  of  the  statesman  involves  little  or  nothing 
in  the  way  of  manual  activitjr ;  it  consists  wholly  or  mainly  in 
mental  insight.  Thus  we  class  it  as  cognitive  (259^).  But  there 
are  two  kinds  of  cognitive  sciences.  Some  of  them  are  concerned 
merely  with  apprehending  truths,  and  may  be  called  critical 
(arithmetic  is  an  example) ;  others  issue  directions  or  orders  for  the 
right  performance  of  actions,  and  may  be  called  directive  (cTrtraKTtAcat), 
and  the  science  of  the  statesman  is  of  this  kind  (260^).  Again,  some 
of  the  arts  which  direct  merely  pass  on  instructions  which  do  not 
originate  with  the  practitioner  (as  a  "  herald  "  communicates  the 
directions  of  his  commander),  others  give  sovereign  directions,  are 
sovereignly  directive  (avTcmTaKTiKai,  z6oe).  Among  these  we  may 
distinguish  those  which  have  the  sovereign  direction  of  the  produc- 
tion of  living  beings  from  those  which  are  concerned  with  the  pro- 
duction of  lifeless  things  (like  the  science  of  the  master-builder). 
This  puts  the  king,  or  statesman,  in  the  class  of  persons  exercising 
sovereign  control  over  the  production  and  nurture  (rpo^rj)  of 
animals.  Next,  there  is  a  distinction  between  the  groom,  who 
exercises  this  calling  on  a  single  animal,  and  the  herdsman  who 
practises  it  upon  a  whole  herd  or  flock  ;  the  statesman,  like  the 
latter,  has  a  flock  or  herd  to  deal  with  (261^.). 

We  are  thus  on  the  point  of  identifying  the  ruler  with  the  shep- 
herd of  a  human  flock  (a  metaphor  as  familiar  to  the  Greeks  from 
their  recollections  of  Homer  as  it  is  to  us  from  the  language  of  Old 
Testament  prophecy).  But  it  would  be  a  violation  of  the  rules  of 
method  to  divide  "  herds  "  at  once  into  herds  of  men  and  herds  of 
other  animals.  We  must  observe  the  rule  that  a  division  must 
proceed  in  regular  order  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  classes,  not 
make  sudden  leaps.  It  is  unscientific  to  single  out  mankind  as  one 
class  and  to  throw  all  the  rest  of  the  animal  world,  irrespective  of  all 
differences  of  structure,  into  the  one  ill-constituted  group  "  other 
animals/'  just  as  it  would  be  unscientific  to  divide  mankind  into 
Greeks  and  "  barbarians  "  (262^)  or  integers  into  "  the  number 
10,000  "  and  "  all  other  numbers."  A  reflective  crane  might  be 

1  This  seems  to  be  proved  by  the  illustration  of  Topics  i6ob  28  ff.,  where  it 
is  supposed  that  "  if  Socrates  is  sitting,  he  is  writing."  Obviously  the  allusion 
is  to  a  scene  in  the  lecture-room  ;  Socrates  is  one  of  the  audience  and  it  is 
wrongly  inferred  that  he  must  be  taking  notes  of  the  lecture.  So  the  common 
examples,  S  is  \cvK6s  (pale),"  "  is  pownick."  are  not  naturally  understood 
of  the  famous  Socrates.  He  is  not  likely  to  have  been  "  pallid  "  ;  it  is  impos« 
sible  to  see  an  allusion  to  the  Phaedo  in  his  "  sitting  "  and  his  "  music  " 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  895 

supposed  just  as  reasonably  to  divide  animals  into  "  cranes  "  and 
"  brutes "  (263^).  We  must  take  care  to  avoid  constituting 
infimae  species  so  long  as  our  division  permits  of  being  continued. 
Animals  may  be  divided  into  the  "  wild  "  and  the  "  domesticated  " 
(Titfaow,  2640),  domesticated  animals  into  the  aquatic  and  the 
terrestrial  (the  tame  fishes  of  Egypt  belong  to  the  one  class;  our 
familiar  domestic  quadrupeds,  domesticated  geese,  and  the  like 
to  the  other).  The  terrestrial,  again,  are  either  birds  which  fly 
or  beasts  which  walk.  From  this  point  we  may  proceed  by  either 
of  two  alternative  routes,  a  longer  or  a  shorter,  to  the  same  result. 
The  longer  route  is  to  divide  "  gregarious  domesticated  beasts  " 
into  the  horned  and  the  hornless,  the  hornless  once  more  into 
those  which  can  be  "  crossed  "  and  those  which  cannot,  and  the 
last  group  into  quadruped  and  biped  (2666)  (or,  alternatively,  we 
might  have  divided  the  hornless  class  into  those  with  undivided 
and  those  with  divided  hoof).  A  division  like  this  has  a  comic  side 
to  it ;  it  ranks  that  most  dignified  of  beings,  a  king,  much  on  a 
level  with  a  swine-herd.  But  science  has  no  concern  with  our 
conventions  about  dignity,  and  is  anxious  only  to  get  at  the  true 
facts  (266^).  The  shorter  procedure  would  be  to  divide  "  gregarious 
domestic  animals  "  into  quadrupeds  and  bipeds.  Since  observation 
teaches  us  that  man  is  the  only  wingless  biped,  we  might  then  divide 
the  bipeds  into  winged  and  wingless,  with  the  same  result  as  before 
(2660). 

The  effect  of  our  division  then  is  to  define  the  statesman  as  a 
kind  of  herdsman  of  gregarious  animals,  with  a  trade  of  the  same 
kind  as  the  cow-keeper  or  the  pig-drover,  except  that  his  herd 
consists  of  unusually  "  kittle  "  beasts.  But  there  is  a  difficulty 
of  which  such  a  definition  takes  no  account.  In  the  case  of  the 
statesman  there  are  a  goodly  number  of  rivals  who  might  challenge 
this  description.  Farmers,  corn-dealers,  physicians,  professors  of 
"  gymnastic/'  might  all  urge  that  the  definition  "  raiser  of  the 
human  herd  "  applies  to  themselves  as  much  as  to  the  ruler.  This 
difficulty  does  not  arise  in  the  other  analogous  cases  of  the  shepherd, 
ox-herd,  swine-herd,  because  every  one  of  them  is  at  once  breeder, 
feeder,  and  physician  of  his  herd.  As  this  is  not  the  case  with  the 
ruler  of  men,  there  must  be  something  faulty  about  the  classifica- 
tion we  have  followed  ;  our  business  is  next  to  see  where  the  error 
has  come  in.  We  may  get  a  hint  from  a  tale  we  all  heard  as  children, 
the  story  that  the  sun  reversed  his  daily  path  in  horror  when 
Thyestes  started  the  series  of  crimes  which  disgraced  the  line  of 
Pelops  by  stealing  the  "  golden  lamb  "  (2680). 

The  imaginative  myth  which  now  follows  (2680-2740)  is  built 
up  on  the  basis  of  ideas  of  which  we  may  find  traces  in  the  early 
cosmogonists,  combined  with  fancies  known  to  have  been  specially 
affected  by  the  Pythagoreans.  From  the  cosmogonists  we  have 
the  notion  of  a  past  "  golden  age  "  before  Zeus  had  dethroned 
Cronus ;  many  of  the  details  about  this  age  of  gold  seem  to  be 
"  Hesiodic."  The  conception  of  the  life  of  the  universe  as  an 


896          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

alternation  of  half-cycles  with  opposite  senses  is  most  familiar 
to  us  from  the  fragments  of  Empedocles  ;  the  thought  of  the  world 
as  a  ship  sailing  over  the  stormy  waters  of  the  airfipov  is  specifically 
Pythagorean,1  though,  no  doubt,  both  Empedocles  and  the  Pytha- 
goreans were  availing  themselves  of  the  suggestions  of  pre-scientific 
cosmologists.  Thus  dramatic  propriety  is  observed  by  making 
the  Eleatic  visitor  utilize  for  his  story  precisely  the  materials  which 
would  be  specially  familiar  to  a  native  of  Magna  Graecia.  The 
tale  is  told  simply  to  make  an  immediate  point.  It  is  wrong  on 
principle  to  take  any  part  of  it  as  scientific  cosmology  meant 
seriously  by  Plato,  and  to  attempt,  like  Adam,  the  impossible  task 
of  fitting  the  story  into  that  of  the  Timaeus.  In  outline  the  story 
runs  as  follows.  The  tale  of  the  sun's  return  on  his  track,  like 
much  ot  the  existing  mythology,  is  a  fragment  of  a  very  ancient 
tradition  about  the  transition  from  the  age  of  Cronus  to  the  age  of 
Zeus.  The  whole  may  be  reconstructed  thus.  Only  God  has 
complete  immortality.  The  universe  as  a  whole,  being  corporeal, 
cannot  be  quite  immutable,  but  makes  the  nearest  approximation  it 
can  to  immutability  by  alternately  revolving  round  the  same  axis 
in  opposite  senses.  There  are  periods  when  God  himself  is  at  the 
helm  of  the  world-ship  with  his  hand  on  the  rudder,  and  there  are 
alternate  periods  when  he  "  retires "  to  his  look-out  (nspuonrj, 
2720)  and  leaves  the  ship  to  follow  its  own  course.  The  immediate 
result  is  a  complete  reversal  of  sense  of  all  biological  as  well  as 
cosmological  processes.  Life  runs  backward,  in  "  looking-glass  " 
fashion.  The  reversal  of  sense  is  attended  by  gigantic  cosmic 
catastrophes,  but  when  the  first  confusion  is  over,  the  ship  settles 
down  once  more  to  a  uniform  course,  though  with*  a  reversed 
sense  ;  at  first  the  regularity  of  its  processes  is  almost  as  complete 
as  when  God  was  steering.  But  as  time  goes  on,  the  world  "  forgets 
God  its  Maker/'  and  the  irregularities  due  to  the  "  lusts  "  inherent 
in  its  bodily  frame  accumulate  ;  all  regularity  is  on  the  point  of 
vanishing,  the  ship  nearly  founders  in  the  "  sea  "  of  the  "  infinite," 
when  God  puts  his  hand  to  the  tiller  again,  and  once  more  reverses 
the  sense  of  the  cosmic  movements. 

The  stories  of  the  golden  age,  when  men  lived  peacefully,  without 
agriculture,  clothes,  or  laws,  are  reminiscences  of  the  condition  of  the 
world  "  under  Cronus,"  when  God  was  actually  steering  the  ship, 
and  acting  literally  as  the  "  shepherd  "  of  mankind,  with  depart- 
mental gods  under  him  as  "  deputy  shepherds."  Our  own  age, 
that  of  Zeus,  belongs  to  the  period  when  the  world  is  left  to  itself, 

1  For  the  "  world-ship  "  see  E.G. Ph.9  294,  with  notes  in  he.  ctt.  On  the 
whole  "myth"  cf.  Stewart,  The  Myths  of  Plato,  173-211;  Adam,  Republic  of 
Plato,  ii.  295  ff.  As  to  the  "  sea,"  see  Politicks,  273*  T,  where  the  true  reading  is 
not  rfaov,  as  given  by  MSS.  and  editors,  but  ir6rrov.  This  is  not  a  conjecture 
of  Stallbaum,  but  the  best  authenticated  text,  as  it  is  the  only  reading  recog- 
nized by  Proclus,  who  frequently  refers  to  the  passage.  The  variant  roirov  is 
senseless,  but  may  be  ancient,  since  it  appears  at  Plotinus,  Enn.  i.  8,  13,  lv  r<J 
-rift  dvo/uotdrT/Tos  TO  Try-— a  passage  where  the  metaphor  of  the  ship  is  missing, 
ynless,  indeed,  Plotinus  also  wrote  irovTy,  as  is  just  possible. 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  897 

and  is  separated  from  the  "  golden  age  "  by  the  catastrophic  reversal 
of  all  motions.  At  this  reversal  the  gods  withdrew  from  their 
immediate  direction  of  the  human  flock.  Mankind  were  left 
naked,  needy,  uncontrolled ;  all  our  arts  of  industry  and  govern- 
ment have  been  slowly  acquired  in  the  gradual  conquest  of  nature. 
(The  "  noble  savage  "  is  thus  not  a  figure  in  our  history  ;  he  belongs 
to  a  world  where  men  are  born  as  full-grown  out  of  the  earth  and 
"  live  backwards/')  l 

Were  the  men  of  the  golden  age  really  happier  than  ourselves 
who  belong  to  the  "  iron  time  "  ?  It  depends  on  the  use  they 
made  of  their  immunity  from  the  struggle  with  nature  for  physical 
existence.  If  they  used  their  freedom  from  the  cares  of  life  to 
glean  wisdom  from  the  beasts  and  one  another,  no  doubt  they 
were  happier.  If  they  used  it  merely  to  fill  themselves  with  meat 
and  drink,  and  to  tell  idle  stories  to  the  beasts  and  one  another,  we 
know  what  to  think  about  that  kind  of  life  (2720). 

The  moral  of  the  story  is  that  our  attempt  to  define  the  states- 
man as  the  "  shepherd  of  men  "  has  involved  two  errors — one 
serious,  the  other  comparatively  light.  The  serious  error  is  that  we 
have  confused  the  work  of  a  statesman  in  our  historical  world  with 
that  of  one  of  the  gods  of  the  "age  of  Cronus.11  They  actually 
"  fed  "  their  flock  ;  the  statesman  of  the  historical  world  does  not. 
The  minor  fault  was  that  we  said  truly  that  the  statesman  is  a 
ruler,  but  made  no  attempt  to  specify  the  kind  of  "  rule  "  he  exer- 
cises. We  ought  to  have  reserved  the  work  of  "  feeding  and  breed- 
ing "  the  flock  for  a  god  ;  of  the  statesman,  who  is  a  man  among 
men,  we  should  have  said  more  modestly  that  his  business  is  the 
"tendance*"  (eVi//,e'Aeia,  fcpaTrcta)  of  the  flock  (2756-276^).  (The 
object  of  the  remark  is  to  eliminate  the  "  superman  "  from  serious 
political  theory,  and  so  to  strike  at  the  root  of  the  worship  of  the 
"  man  who  can,"  the  autocrat  or  dictator  paternally  managing 
the  rest  of  mankind  without  the  need  of  direction  or  control  by 
law.)  If  we  had  made  this  clear,  we  should  not  have  found  the 
provision-dealers  and  others  claiming  that  our  description  was  as 
applicable  to  them  as  to  the  statesman.  As  to  the  other  fault, 
it  arises  from  overlooking  an  important  step  in  our  division.  We 
forgot  that  the  "  feeding,'1  or,  as  we  now  propose  to  say,  the  "  tend- 
ance," may  be  either  forced  on  the  flock  (/?t'<uov)  or  freely  accepted 
by  them  (cKownov).  This  is  what  makes  all  the  difference  between 
the  true  "  king  "  and  the  "  tyrant  "  or  "  usurper."  The  "  tyrant  " 
1  The  humorous  zest  of  the  description  of  life  in  the  days  when  it  began 
with  old  age  and  ended  with  babyhood  ought  of  itself  to  prevent  us  from  taking 
the  story  seriously.  The  cosmological  story  of  Timaeus  is  given,  not  indeed 
as  science,  but  as  a  "  likely  story,"  and  Plato  is  careful,  for  that  reason,  to 
allow  no  such  extravagances  in  it.  We  may  reasonably  infer  that  Plato 
regards  the  whole  conception  of  the  happiness  of  the  alleged  "  state  of  nature  " 
as  a  mere  unhistorical  fancy.  In  the  real  world  to  which  we  belong,  man  has 
painfully  fought  his  way  up  out  of  hunger,  nakedness,  and  savagery.  The 
state  of  nature"  dreamed  of  by  sentimentalists  belongs  to  the  unhistorical 
world  where  animals  talk.  Adam  (loc.  cit.)  is  an  example  of  the  danger  of 
reading  Plato  without  a  sense  of  humour. 


398          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

forces  his  tendance  on  his  subjects ;    the  "  king  "  is  the  freely 
accepted  ruler  of  freemen,  a  "  free  tender  of  free  bipeds  "  (2760). 

Yet  we  must  not  be  too  much  in  a  hurry  to  accept  this  as  an 
adequate  account  of  statesmanship.  We  have,  it  may  be,  drawn 
the  outline  of  our  portrait  of  the  statesman  correctly,  but  we  still 
have  to  get  the  colouring  of  the  picture  right  (277^-0).  To  explain 
what  we  mean  by  this,  we  shall  do  well  to  illustrate  our  point  by  a 
familiar  example.  And  before  we  do  this,  we  may  even  illustrate 
the  use  of  examples  by  a  preliminary  example.  This  preliminary 
example  shall  be  taken  from  the  way  in  which  small  children  are 
taught  their  letters.  At  first  they  may  be  given  a  set  of  very  simple 
syllables  which  they  soon  read  off  exactly.  But  they  still  make 
mistakes  in  recognizing  these  very  same  combinations  when  they 
meet  with  them  elsewhere.  We  correct  their  mistakes  by  making 
them  compare  the  combinations  they  have  misread  with  the  stand- 
ard alphabet  or  syllabary  they  have  already  mastered.  This  is 
their  exemplar  ;  the  purpose  of  repeatedly  referring  them  back  to 
it  is  to  make  them  able  to  detect  unerringly  any  combination  given 
them  when  they  meet  with  it  again  in  a  new  setting.  This  is  the 
function  of  every  example  (2770-278^). 

Now  for  our  example  of  the  kind  of  discrimination  which  will  be 
necessary,  if  we  are  to  distinguish  the  statesman's  "  tendance  "  of 
the  community  from  all  cognate  or  analogous  occupations.  We 
may  take  it  from  the  humble  industry  of  weaving  woollen  garments. 
If  we  set  to  work  to  distinguish  the  weaver's  industry  from  every 
other,  a  series  of  obvious  "  divisions  " — we  need  not  repeat  them, 
though  Plato  gives  them — soon  leads  us  to  the  result  that  it  is  the 
industry  of  fashioning  defences  against  climate  and  weather  by  the 
intertexture  of  wools  (2796-280^).  But  this  statement,  though 
true,  is  not  sufficiently  precise.  If  we  described  the  weaver  as 
occupied  with  the  "  tendance  "  of  clothes,  wool-carders,  fullers, 
stitchers,  and  others,  to  say  nothing  of  the  makers  of  the  imple- 
ments they  all  use,  might  put  in  a  claim  to  be  called  "  weavers." 
If  we  are  to  avoid  this  difficulty,  we  must,  in  the  first  place,  distin- 
guish carefully  between  the  art  which  actually  makes  a  thing,  and 
those  which  only  contribute  in  a  subsidiary  way  to  its  production 
— the  principal  and  the  subordinate  arts  (2&id-e).  Next,  among 
principal  "  arts  "  concerned  with  clothes,  we  must  set  aside  those 
which  have  to  do  with  cleansing,  repairing,  and  adorning  the 
material ;  this  is  "  tendance  of  clothes/'  but  not  the  kind  of  tend- 
ance exercised  by  the  weaver  (2820).  Next,  if  we  consider  the  work 
of  actually  making  the  clothes,  which  we  will  call  "  working  in 
wool "  (raXacrtovpyiJci?),  we  can  divide  it  into  two  kinds,  each  of 
which  may  be  subdivided  again.  Part  of  the  work  consists  in 
separation  of  the  composite  (the  carding  of  the  wool  is  an  illustra- 
tion) ;  part  consists  in  combining  the  separate  into  one.  And  this 
work  of  combining  may  take  either  of  two  forms,  twisting  or  inter- 
lacing (282*2).  Both  the  warp  and  the  woof  of  the  intended  web 
are  made  by  twisting  (or  spinning),  the  one  being  spun  closer  and 


SOPHISTES-POLIT1CUS  899 

the  other  less  close  ;  the  weaving  is  the  subsequent  interlacing  of 
the  threads  of  warp  and  woof  to  make  the  web  (2830).  We  might, 
of  course,  have  made  so  simple  a  statement  without  going  through 
the  tedious  series  of  divisions  which  have  led  up  to  it.  They  might 
be  thought  superfluous  and  unduly  prolix.  This  leads  us  into  a 
digression  on  the  true  standard  of  proportion  in  discourse  generally 
(2830). 

We  may  distinguish  two  kinds  of  measurement  (^rprjTiK^)  and 
two  standards  of  measure — one  extrinsic  and  relative,  the  other 
intrinsic  and  absolute  (the  actual  names  arc  mine,  not  Plato's). 
We  may  measure  things  as  great  and  small  simply  by  reference 
to  one  another,  or  by  reference  to  the  standard  of  TO  /xeVptov, 
the  right  amount,  or,  as  it  is  also  expressed,  in  words  meant  to 

SOUnd  paradoxical,   Kara  TT/V  rr/s  yevcVcws  avayKatav  ovcn'ai/  ("  by  the 

standard  of  the  being  which  is  indispensable  to  the  production/1 
283^).  (The  meaning  is,  to  take  a  simple  example,  that  a  tea- 
spoonful  of  a  liquid  may  be  "  very  little  "  by  comparison  with  a 
bucketful;  but  it  is  dreadfully  "too  much,"  a  dreadful  "over- 
dose," if  the  liquid  contains  a  concentrated  poison,  medicinal  in 
minute  doses.)  The  arts  and  their  products,  for  example  both 
statesmanship  and  the  art  of  weaving,  of  which  we  have  just  spoken, 
are  constantly  employing  this  standard  of  the  "  just  proportionate  " 
in  estimating  excess  and  defect  ;  it  is  by  adhering  to  it  that  "  all 
good  things  "  are  produced  and  preserved.  To  demonstrate  the 
reality  of  this  intrinsic  standard  of  measurement  might  prove  as 
long  a  business  as  we  found  it  to  demonstrate  the  reality  of  "  what 
is  not,"  and,  as  we  do  not  wish  to  be  led  too  far  away  from  our 
immediate  topic,  it  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  point  out  that 
unless  we  recognize  it  we  shall  have  to  deny  the  very  possibility 
of  applying  science  to  the  regulation  of  action  (2840-^.  (This 
thought  of  a  "  just  right  mean  "  and  its  significance  for  action  will 
meet  us  again  still  more  prominently  in  the  Philebus.  From  the 
use  made  of  it  in  the  Ethics  it  has  come  to  be  spoken  of  familiarly  as 
the  Aristotelian  principle  of  the  Mean.  In  justice  to  both  Aristotle 
and  Plato  it  is  necessary  to  point  out  that  the  whole  doctrine  is 
Platonic,  and  that  Aristotle  never  makes  any  claim  to  its  author- 
ship, though  he  is  careful  to  call  attention,  throughout  the  Ethics, 
to  the  points  on  which  he  believes  himself  to  be  correcting  Plato 
and  the  Academy.) 

Thus  the  sciences  generally  fell  into  two  classes — those  which 
measure  numbers,  lengths,  areas,  velocities,  etc.,  against  one 
another,  and  those  which  take  as  the  standard  of  their  measure- 
ments the  right  mean  (^rpiov),  the  appropriate  (TrpeVov),  the 
seasonable  (KCU/OO'S),  the  morally  necessary  (Se'oi/).  The  saving 
that  "  all  science  is  measurement  "  is  only  true  on  the  condition 
that  we  remember  this  distinction  between  two  kinds  of  measure- 
ment. (Thus  Plato  combines  the  view  that  "  science  is  measure- 
ment "  with  strict  adherence  to  the  principle  of  the  absoluteness  of 
moral  and  aesthetic  values.)  As  an  illustration  of  the  point,  we 


400          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

cannot  answer  the  question  whether  the  disquisitions  of  the  present 
conversation  or  of  yesterday's  are  "  excessively  long  "  except  by 
considering  that  our  primary  object  has  not  been  to  define  the 
weaver's  work  or  even  the  statesman's,  but  to  train  our  souls  in  the 
accurate  apprehension  of  the  most  important  realities — those  which 
are  incorporeal  and  unseen.  If  this  purpose  could  not  have  been 
equally  effected  by  a  quicker  method,  our  longest  digressions  cannot 
be  said  to  have  been  "  too  long  "  (2840-2876). 

We  now  return  to  the  main  argument.  The  example  has 
impressed  it  on  us  that  in  defining  a  science  it  is  indispensable  to 
discriminate  it  from  others  which  are  (a)  subsidiary  to  it ;  (b) 
analogous,  but  not  identical  with  it.  We  must  try  to  make  this 
double  discrimination  for  the  case  of  the  statesman  (2876-305^). 

Arts  or  callings  subsidiary  to  a  principal  "  art  "  will,  with  a 
little  forcing,  come  under  one  of  the  following  heads  : 

1.  Those  which  make  the  instruments  used  by  the  principal 

art  as  its  implements  ; 

2.  Those  which  make  vessels  for  the  safe  keeping  of  products 

of  all  kinds ; 

3.  Those  which  make  stands  and  vehicles  (ox>?Vara)  » 

4.  Those  which  make  coverings  and  defences  of  all  kinds  ; 

5.  Those  which  ornament  and  embellish  a  product,  and  make 

it  tasteful— arts  of  "  play  "  ; 

6.  Those  which  fabricate  what  the  principal  art  uses  as  its 

"  raw  material  "  ; 

7.  Those  which  provide  nutriment  of  all  kinds  (287^-2890). 
If  we  add  one  other  branch  of  art,  "  the  rearing  of  herds/1 

already  often  mentioned,  this  classification  will  cover  all  our 
"  property  "  (/cr^/x-ara),  except  slaves  and  personal  servants  (i.e. 
except  those  human  "  chattels  "  who  directly  assist  a  man,  in  a 
subordinate  way,  in  the  actual  living  of  his  life).  (The  thought  is 
that  the  only  piece  of  "  property  "  which  cannot  be  reckoned, 
roughly  speaking,  under  the  head  of  "  implements  "  or  "  provisions," 
is  the  "  chattel  "  who  is  also  your  assistant  in  the  work  of  living. 
You  could  not  well  apply  to  the  services  of  your  confidential  clerk — 
who  at  Athens  would  have  been  your  "  property  " — the  formula 
that  his  business  is  to  make,  or  to  take  care  of,  that  which  you  use. 
He  really  is,  in  his  degree,  contributing  to  the  actual  "  tendance  " 
of  your  soul.)  Thus  there  is  the  same  sort  of  analogy  between  the 
work  of  the  king  and  that  of  a  personal  servant  or  slave  as  between 
the  work  of  the  weaver  and  that  of  the  carder  or  spinner.  The 
person  whom  it  would  be  most  excusable  to  mistake  for  the  king — 
the  irony  is  characteristically  Platonic — is  the  "  menial  "  (2890). 
For  all  his  pomp  and  circumstance,  the  king  really  is  very  much 
like  a  "  menial  servant/' 

We  should  expect,  then,  that  the  most  plausible  false  pretender 
to  the  functions  of  the  king  would  be  some  class  of  menials.  On 
inspection  we  find,  however,  that  most  menials  never  dream  of 
advancing  such  pretensions.  If  we  extend  the  range  of  the  term 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  401 

to  include  all  who  render  "  personal  services/'  we  may  bring  seers 
(//aVrcts)  and  priests  under  it ;  both  seer  and  priest  are  "  messen- 
gers "  or  "  errand-runners "  of  a  sort  (2900-0*).  Now  we  are 
getting  on  the  track  of  the  pretender  we  wish  to  detect.  Seers 
and  priests  are  persons  of  self-importance  and  "  prestige/'  as  we 
see  from  many  examples,  particularly  from  that  of  Egypt,  where  it 
is  a  rule  that  the  king  must  be  a  priest.  But  the  pretender  whom 
it  is  hardest  to  distinguish  from  the  true  statesman  or  king  is  a 
rather  different  creature,  who,  like  the  sophist,  has  many  disguises, 
and  may,  in  fact,  be  said  to  be  the  greatest  "  wizard  "  (yo^s)  and 
sophist  of  all  (2910).  What  he  really  is  we  may  discover  from  the 
following  considerations. 

There  are  three  well-known  types  of  government:  monarchy 
(the  rule  of  a  single  person),  oligarchy  (rule  by  a  small  select  group), 
democracy  (rule  by  the  general  citizen  body) .  But  we  may  add  that 
the  first  two  have  two  forms,  so  that  the  whole  number  of  types 
should  be  reckoned  as  five.  The  single  person  may  rule  in  accord 
with  law  and  with  the  consent  of  the  ruled,1  or  he  may  rule  by 
mere  force,  without  law  ;  in  the  first  case  we  call  him  a  monarch, 
in  the  second  a  "  tyrant  "  (dictator,  usurper).  So  the  rule  of  the 
few,  based  on  law,  is  aristocracy  ;  the  lawless  rule  of  the  few  by 
mere  force  is  oligarchy.  Democracy  commonly  retains  the  name 
whether  it  is  based  on  law  or  on  mere  force  (291^-2920).  This  is 
the  current  popular  classification  of  forms  of  government.  (It  is, 
in  fact,  that  regularly  insisted  on  by  Isocrates,  a  good  representative 
of  "  popular  culture.")  But  is  the  classification  really  scientific  ? 
We  have  already  seen  that  kingship  or  ruling  is  a  directive  science. 
The  one  relevant  distinction  between  claimants  to  be  rulers  is 
therefore  their  possession  or  want  of  this  science,  not  the  distinctions 
between  rule  by  the  rich  and  rule  by  the  poor,  rule  by  fewer  or  more 
persons,  on  which  the  current  classification  is  founded  (2920). 
Now  real  knowledge  of  the  science  of  ruling  men  is  a  very  rare  thing 
— rarer  even  than  first-rate  knowledge  of  draughts,  though  even  that 
is  rare  enough.  The  number  of  genuine  statesmen  must  be  exceed- 
ingly few  (2930).  Those  few,  because  they  have  scientific  knowledge 
of  principles,  will  be.  true  kings  or  statesmen,  whether  they  exercise 
their  profession  with  the  popular  consent  or  not,  with  a  written 
law  as  a  control  or  not,  just  as  the  man  who  knows  the  science  of 
medicine  is  the  true  physician  whether  his  patients  like  his  treat- 
ment, whether  he  follows  the  prescriptions  of  a  textbook,  or  not 
(2930-6).  In  any  case,  he,  and  only  he,  does  the  work  of  the 
physician,  preserves  the  bodily  health  of  the  patients  he  "  tends." 
So  the  one  ideally  right  form  of  statesmanship  is  rule  by  the  man 
who  has  true  scientific  knowledge  about  the  "  tendance  of  the  soul," 

1  It  is  assumed  that  government  resting  on  a  law  of  the  constitution  Is  the 
same  thing  as  government  by  consent  of  the  governed.  This  is  in  accord  with 
the  current  view  that  vdfios  is  ffwOfaii  WO\IT&V  ("  the  convention  of  the  citizens  "). 
It  is  not  meant  that  anything  like  the  original  formal  "  social  compact "  has 
ever  passed. 


402          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

and  makes  the  souls  of  the  citizens  healthy,  be  his  methods  what 
they  may  (2932). 

Yet  it  is  a  hard  saying  that  it  is  indifferent  whether  government 
is  carried  on  by  law  or  without  it,  and  our  position  requires  further 
examination.     Legislation  is,  in  a  sense,  part  of  the  work  of  a  states- 
man, and  yet  the  ideally  best  thing  would  be  the  supremacy  not 
of  the  laws  but  of  the  embodied  wisdom  of  the  true  king.     For 
no  law  can  be  trusted  to  produce  the  best  effects  in  every  case  ; 
this  is  impossible,  since  the  law  cannot  take  account  of  the  infinite 
variations  of  individual   character,   situation,   and  circumstance. 
Any  law  will  give  rise  to  "  hard  cases  "  (294^).      Why,  then, 
is   legislation   indispensable  ?     Because   it   is   impossible   for   the 
ruler,  who  is  a  man  with  the  limitations  of  humanity,  to  give  in- 
dividual direction  in  each  of  the  countless  cases  which  have  to  be 
considered.     He  has  to  fall  back  on  giving  general  directions  which 
will  suit  the  "  average  "  man  and  the  "  average  "  situation  (2950). 
Now  suppose  that,  over  and  beyond  this,  any  practitioner  of  a 
directive  science,  e.g.  a  physician,  were  compelled  to  absent  himself 
from  his  patients  for  long  and  frequent  intervals,  how  would  he 
meet  the  risk  of  their  forgetting  his  directions  ?     He  would  provide 
them  with  written  memoranda  of  the  regimen  they  were  to  follow 
in  his  absence  ;   but  if  he  came  back  sooner  than  he  had  expected, 
he  would  have  no  scruple  about  changing  these  written  regulations 
if  the  case  demanded  it.     So  the  true  statesman,  if  he  could  return 
after  an  absence,  would  have  no  scruple  in  modifying  his  institutions 
and  regulations  for  similar  reasons,  nor  a  second  true  statesman  in 
changing  those  of  a  first  (2950).     It  is  popularly  said  that  an  in- 
novation in  the  laws  is  permissible  if  the  proposer  can  persuade  the 
city  to  adopt  it,  but  not  otherwise.     Yet  we  should  not  say  that  a 
medical  man  who  insisted  on  breaking  through  a  written  rule  of 
treatment  when  he  thought  it  necessary  to  do  so  had  committed  a 
fault  in  medical  treatment  because  the  patient  had  objected  to  the 
departure  from  the  "  books  "  ;  so  if  a  statesman  makes  the  citizens 
better  men  by  forcing  them  to  innovate  on  their  written  and  in- 
herited laws,  we  must  not  say  that  he  has  committed  a  fault  in  his 
science,  a  "  crime  "  or  a  "  wrong  "  (2960).     Nor  does  a  man's  claim 
to  make  such  innovations  depend  on  superior  wealth  ;  the  one  and 
only  relevant  qualification  is  his  wisdom  and  goodness.     If  he  has 
these  qualifications,  he  is  entitled  to  save  the  "  vessel  of  the  State  " 
as  his  goodness  and  wisdom  direct,  just  as  an  actual  pilot  shapes  his 
course  by  his  living  "  art,"  not  by  a  written  rule.     The  wise  ruler 
has  only  one  rule  which  is  inviolable,  the  rule  of  doing  what  is  wise 
and  right   (TO    /ACTU,    vov    KOL    Ttxyrjs    St/catorarov,   297^).     The  one 
perfect  "  form  of  government  "  would  be  government  by  the  living 
insight    of    such  an    ideal  ruler ;    all  others  are  mere  imperfect 
"  imitations,"  of  varying  degrees  of  merit. 

In  the  absence  of  such  an  ideal  ruler,  that  is,  in  the  actual 
circumstances  of  human  life,  the  best  course  is  the  very  one  we  have 
just  pronounced  absurd  where  the  ideal  ruler  is  presupposed.  The 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  403 

laws  ought  to  be  absolutely  sovereign,  and  violation  of  them  should 
be  a  capital  crime  in  a  public  man  (2970).  We  may  illustrate  the 
point  by  recurring  to  the  examples  of  the  navigator  and  the 
physician.  It  is  quite  true  that  the  competent  navigator  or 
physician  frequently  puts  us  to  grave  inconvenience  anrl  discomfort, 
and  actually  expects  to  be  paid  for  doing  so.  But  if  this  led  us  to 
make  a  rule  that  no  one  should  practise  these  callings  avTOKparup 
(with  full  authority),  but  that  anyone  who  pleased  might  follow  them 
on  the  condition  of  always  adhering  to  regulations  approved  by  a 
public  assembly  of  laymen,  we  should  get  very  strange  results, 
and  still  stranger,  if  we  further  went  on  to  appoint  our  practitioners 
annually  by  lot  or  by  a  property  qualification,  and  required  them, 
at  the  end  of  the  year,  under  heavy  penalties,  to  satisfy  a  court  that 
they  had  infringed  none  of  the  regulations  (2<)Sa-2()gb) .  If  we 
went  the  further  length  of  enacting  that  anyone  who  made  a  new 
discovery  in  these  or  any  other  of  the  practical  sciences  might  be 
prosecuted  as  a  traitor  and  "  corrupter  of  youth,"  and  put  to  death 
if  convicted,  there  would  soon  be  an  end  of  science  and  of  life  itself 
(2996-0).  But  the  case  would  be  even  worse  if  the  courts  entrusted 
with  the  enforcement  of  the  supposed  regulations  were  not  expected 
to  follow  any  regulations  themselves,  but  were  free  to  give  their 
verdicts  as  personal  considerations  prompted  (3000).  After  all, 
there  was  some  experience  (Trctpa)  which  suggested  these  rules,  and 
some  intelligence  employed  in  getting  them  generally  accepted ; 
they  were  not  the  expression  of  mere  individual  greed  or  vanity 
or  caprice. 

The  laws  are  at  least  an  approximate  "  imitation  "  of  the 
principles  on  which  the  living  ideal  "  king  "  would  act.  As  we 
said,  such  a  man  would  refuse  to  be  bound  by  formulae  when  they 
do  not  really  apply.  In  this  one  respect  of  departing  from  formula 
and  precedent,  the  politicians  who  disregard  the  law  are  like  the 
true  statesman.  But,  since  they  are  by  hypothesis  ignorant  of  the 
principles  of  statesmanship,  they  imitate  his  "  innovations  "  badly 
they  depart  from  law  and  precedent  in  the  wrong  cases  and  for 
wrong  reasons.  In  any  community  where  the  ruler  is  not  the  ideal 
scientific  statesman,  and  that  means  in  every  society  where  the 
"  sovereign  "  is  a  body  of  several  men,  and  most,  if  not  all,  when 
he  is  one  man,  the  law  ought  to  be  absolutely  paramount  (3010). 
(This  means  that  we  must  eliminate  from  "  practical  politics  " 
the  "  rule  of  the  saints  "  at  which  the  Pythagorean  brotherhood 
had  aimed  in  the  cities  of  Magna  Graecia.  The  infallible  ruler 
would  be  a  god  or  a  superman.  Supermen  are  not  found  in  the 
historical  world  ;  there,  the  sovereignty  of  law  is  the  succedaneum 
for  an  actual  theocracy,  as  is  further  explained  in  the  fourth  book 
of  the  Laws.) 

These  considerations  explain  why  in  actual  fact  we  find  five, 
not  merely  three,  distinguishable  forms  of  government.  When  the 
"  well-to-do  "  govern  with  strict  regard  for  law  we  have  aristoc- 
racy ;  when  they  disregard  law,  oligarchy.  One  person  ruling  with 


404          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

reverence  for  law  is  so  near  an  imitation  of  the  ideal  statesman  that 
we  give  him  the  same  name  of  king.  When  he  "  pretends  to  act, 
like  the  true  statesman,  always  for  the  best,  unhampered  by  regula- 
tions," but  is  really  inspired  by  ignorance  and  lust,  we  call  him  a 
tyrant.  Democracy  receives  one  and  the  same  name,  whether  it 
rests  on  a  fundamental  law  or  not.  Since  the  perfect  scientific 
statesman  is  not  met  in  actual  life,  and  his  place  has  to  be  taken 
by  very  imperfect  laws  which  must  not  be  contravened,  it  is  not 
surprising  that  the  public  life  of  states  should  be  as  unsatisfactory 
as  it  is ;  the  real  marvel  is  that  some  of  them  exhibit  as  much 
vitality  and  prmanence  as  they  do  (3020). 

It  is  an  important,  if  not  strictly  relevant,  question  which  of 
these  various  constitutions  is  least  unsatisfactory.  We  may  say 
at  once  that  monarchy,  the  rule  of  a  single  person,  is  the  best  of  all, 
if  it  is  strictly  subject  to  good  fundamental  laws  ;  in  the  form  of 
sheer  personal  rule  without  laws,  "  tyranny,"  it  is  worst  of  all.  As 
for  the  "  rule  of  a  few,"  it  is  "  middling  "  ;  the  rule  of  the  multi- 
tude, from  the  inevitable  subdivision  of  the  sovereign  power,  is 
weakest  of  all  for  good  or  evil.  Thus,  where  there  is  a  fundamental 
law,  monarchy  is  the  best  constitution,  aristocracy  the  second, 
democracy  the  worst ;  where  caprice  rules  instead  of  law,  democracy 
is  least  bad,  oligarchy  worse,  despotism  worst  of  all.  (There  is  likely 
to  be  more  "  fundamental  decency  "  in  a  big  crowd  than  in  a  little 
"  ring,"  and  least  of  all  in  an  uncontrolled  autocrat,  3026-3036.) 

We  can  now  at  last  say  who  are  the  serious  pretenders  to  the 
name  of  the  statesman  or  king,  from  whom  it  is  so  important  to 
discriminate  him.  They  are  the  men  of  affairs  in  the  imperfect 
constitutions,  who  delude  themselves  and  their  admirers  into  false 
belief  in  their  practical  wisdom ;  they  call  themselves  TroAmKof 
(statesmen),  but  are  really  o-Tao-iaon-iKoi  (party  politicians).  These 
are  the  supreme  "  wizards  "  and  "  sophists  "  of  the  world  (3030). 

We  have  now,  so  to  say,  purged  away  all  the  dross 
from  our  concept  of  statesmanship  ;  only  good  ore  is  left.  But 
as  "  adamant,"  itself  a  precious  thing,  is  separated  from  gold 
in  the  last  stages  of  the  process  of  refining,  so  we  have  still  to 
distinguish  statesmanship  from  the  tasks  of  the  soldier,  the  judge, 
the  preacher  of  righteousness  who  "  persuades  men  "  into  goodness 
by  the  noble  use  of  eloquence.  Reflection  satisfies  us  that  the 
business  of  the  statesman  is  not  to  persuade  or  to  win  battles,  but 
to  decide  whether  persuasion  or  enforcement  shall  be  adopted, 
whether  war  shall  be  made  or  not.  So  his  business  is  not  to  ad- 
minister the  laws  but  to  make  the  laws  which  the  courts  then  ad- 
minister. Each  of  the  callings  just  mentioned  has  charge  of  one 
action,  the  proper  performance  of  which  is  its  contribution  to  the 
"  tendance  "  of  the  city ;  the  statesman's  superior  function  is  to 
control  and  co-ordinate  all  these  inferior  activities  (303^-3050).  His 
task  is  to  weave  together  all  classes  in  the  State  into  the  one  fabric 
of  the  life  of  the  whole. 

Just  as  a  web  is  made  by  the  intertexture  of  the  stiffer  threads 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  405 

of  the  warp  and  the  softer  of  the  woof,  so  the  garment  of  national 
life  or  character  has  corresponding  components  :  there  are  the 
harder  and  sturdier  and  the  softer  and  gentler  temperaments,  as 
material.  Speaking  generally,  there  are  two  main  types  of  tem- 
perament— the  adventurous,  keen,  and  masculine,  and  the  quiet 
and  gentle.  The  very  "  virtues  "  of  the  two  are,  in  a  way,  opposed  ; 
that  of  the  one  is  valour,  that  of  the  other  modesty  and  orderliness 
(crox^poo-wT?) .  And  either,  carried  to  the  extreme  and  untempered 
by  the  other,  degenerates,  the  one  into  harshness,  violence,  and  fury, 
the  other  into  softness  and  sloth.  If  the  life  of  a  society  permanently 
takes  its  tone  from  the  predominance  of  the  softer  type,  it  begins 
by  being  unambitious,  peaceful,  and  neighbourly,  but  there  is  the 
risk  that,  for  sheer  want  of  grit  and  backbone,  the  city  will  end  by 
being  enslaved  ;  where  the  adventurous,  ambitious  type  prevail, 
the  same  result  is  likely  to  follow  from  the  hostilities  in  which  such 
a  society  is  sure  to  be  entangled  by  its  aggressiveness  (3080).  The 
task  of  true  statesmanship  is  just  to  weave  these  two  contrasted 
strains  well  and  deftly  together.  The  true  statesman  would  begin 
by  a  careful  testing  of  the  temperaments  in  the  State  ;  he  would 
then  demand  that  the  educator  should  train  the  characters  of  the 
young,  so  as  to  make  them  into  the  right  kind  of  material  from 
which  to  weave  the  fabric  of  a  sound  public  life,  as  the  weaver  of 
cloth  looks  to  the  carder  and  others  to  provide  him  with  properly 
prepared  yarn  (308^).  Thoroughly  intractable  temperaments 
would  be  excluded  by  death  and  banishment,  or  at  least  reduced 
to  the  status  of  slavery  (3090). 

The  statesman  then  proceeds  to  give  instruction  for  the  inter- 
weaving of  the  threads  he  has  selected,  the  characters  who  can  be 
trained  into  the  combination  of  valour  with  sophrosyne.  He  will 
regard  as  the  threads  of  his  warp  the  temperaments  in  which  the 
original  bias  is  to  action  and  adventure,  as  the  threads  of  the  woof 
the  tamer  and  quieter.  The  actual  weaving  of  the  two  together 
is  a  double  process  ;  the  "  everlasting  "  in  the  souls  of  the  citizens 
will  be  knit  by  a  "  divine  "  bond,  the  merely  "  animal  "  by  a 
"  human.'1  The  "  divine  "  bond  is  constituted  by  "  true  and 
assured  beliefs  "  about  good  and  right,  bad  and  wrong.  These 
the  statesman  will  look  to  the  educator  to  provide.  The  effect  of 
such  an  education  is  to  make  the  naturally  daring  soul  gentler  by 
teaching  it  respect  for  the  rights  of  others,  and  to  develop  the  natural 
orderliness  of  the  quiet  and  unambitious  into  sophrosyne  and  wisdom. 
This  education,  which  corrects  the  bias  of  each  type,  is  the  "  divine  " 
bond  which  most  effectively  produces  unity  of  life  and  character, 
but  it  will  only  produce  its  full  effect  in  the  finest  souls.  The 
"  human  "  and  inferior  way  of  producing  unity  in  the  society  is  to 
take  care  that  marriages  are  contracted  on  the  right  principles. 

At  present,  to  say  nothing  of  marriages  based  on  equality  in 
fortune  or  rank,  the  tendency  is  for  persons  of  the  same  type  of 
temperament  to  mate  with  one  another,  the  adventurous  with  the 
adventurous,  the  quiet  with  the  quiet.  But  this  is  a  false  principle, 


406         PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

and  militates  against  real  unity  of  spirit  in  the  community.  The 
right  principle  would  be  that  persons  in  whom  either  bias  is  present 
should  be  mated  with  partners  of  the  other  bias.  This  would  not 
only  prevent  the  society  from  falling  outwardly  into  two  groups 
without  close  relations,  but  would  lead  to  a  cancelling  out  of  one- 
sided bias  in  the  children  of  the  marriage,  and  so  make  for  the 
permanent  continuance  of  the  type  of  citizen  whom  we  must  have 
if  the  community  is  to  endure.  The  main  necessity  is  to  provide 
by  the  right  kind  of  education  that  both  "  temperamental  "  types 
shall  have  the  same  convictions  about  good  and  evil ;  if  this  is  once 
attained,  the  further  unification  of  the  community  by  proper  re- 
gulations about  marriage  and  the  like  is  an  easy  task  (3096-3110). 
When  the  fabric  has  been  thus  duly  woven,  it  only  remains  for  the 
statesman  to  constitute  the  officials  necessary  for  the  administra- 
tion. Where  a  single  official  is  required,  he  will  take  care  to  select 
one  who  exhibits  the  union  of  the  two  strains  of  temperament  of 
which  we  have  spoken.  Where  a  board  has  to  be  constituted,  he 
will  see  that  both  types  are  properly  represented,  so  that  the  energy 
and  vigour  of  one  part  of  its  members  tempers  and  is  tempered  by 
the  gentleness  and  caution  of  the  other  part  (3110-6).  This  is 
how  the  science  of  the  statesman  directs  and  controls  the  con- 
struction of  the  most  glorious  of  all  fabrics,  the  garment  of  a 
righteous  and  happy  national  life. 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  dialogue  is  peculiarly  rich,  apart 
from  its  immediate  political  teaching,  in  ideas  which  have  passed 
over  into  the  substance  of  Aristotelian  ethics.  Thus,  in  addition 
to  the  conception  of  the  "  intrinsic  "  standard  of  the  Right  Mean, 
we  may  mention  the  distinction  between  Cognitive  and  Practical 
Science,  which  corresponds  to  Aristotle's  fundamental  distinction 
between  Theoretical  and  Practical  Philosophy ;  l  the  conception 
of  the  relation  of  a  "  directive,"  or,  as  Aristotle  says,  "  architec- 
tonic "  science  to  its  subordinate  disciplines,  together  with  the 
specification  of  the  two  marks  of  the  "  directive  "  science — that  it 
uses  what  its  subordinate  disciplines  make,  and  that  it  superintends 
and  regulates  their  practitioners ;  the  conception  of  the  science  of 
the  statesman — Politics — as  being,  in  virtue  of  its  concern  with  the 
production  of  the  good  life  for  the  community,  the  single  supreme 
directive  practical  science ;  the  insistence  upon  education,  which 
provides  the  statesman  with  his  proximate  raw  material,  men  and 
women  with  the  right  type  of  character,  as  the  most  important  of 
all  the  disciplines  subservient  to  statesmanship.  All  these  con- 
ceptions happen  to  be  more  tamiliar  to  us  from  the  Ethics  and 
Politics  than  from  the  Politicus,  but  it  is  from  the  Politicus  that 

1  There  is  the  difference  that  Aristotle,  unlike  Plato,  insists  that  Politics  is  a 
practical  science.  This  is  a  mere  verbal  difference.  Plato's  reason  for  calling 
it  cognitive  is  that,  though  it  deals  with  *7>d£ei$,  its  work  is  not  manipulative, 
but  the  giving  of  directions,  an  intellectual  task.  Aristotle's  real  reason  for 
denying  Politics  the  name  of  "  theoretical"  science  is  that  he  is  preoccupied, 
in  a  way  in  which  Plato  is  not,  by  his  distinction  between  necessary  and 
contingent  subject-matter. 


SOPHISTES-POLITICUS  407 

Aristotle  took  them,  as  is  shown  by  the  frequency  with  which  he 
echoes  his  master's  phraseology  and  repeats  his  illustrations. 

See  further : 

BURNET. — Greek    Philosophy,    Part    /.,    273-301  ;      Platonism 

(1928),  c.5. 
RITTER,   C. — Platon,  ii.    120-165,    185-258,    642-657  ;     Platons 

Dialoge,  25-67  ;    Neue  Untersuchungen  ueber  Platon,  1-94. 
RAEDER,  H. — Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung,  317-354. 
NATORP,  P. — Platons  Ideenlehre,  271-296,  331-338. 
APELT,  O. — Platonische  Aufsdtze,  238-290.     (1912.) 
APELT,  O. — Platonis  Sophista.     (Leipzig,  1897.) 
STEWART,   J.  A. — Plato's  Doctrine  of  Ideas,  84-91  ;    Myths  of 

Plato,  173-211   (The  Politicus  Myth). 
DIES,  A. — Antour  de  Platon,  ii.,  352-399,  450-522. 
BARKER,  E. — Greek  Political  Theory  :  Plato  and  his  Predecessors, 

276-291. 
CAMPBELL,    L. — Sophistes    and    Politicus    of    Plato.     (Oxford, 

1867.) 
DIES,  A. — Platon,  Le  Sophiste  (Paris,  1925)  and  Platon,  Politique 

(Paris,  1935)- 
CORNFORD,  F.  H. — Plato's  Theory  of  Knowledge.     (Translation 

of   Theactetus   and   Sophistes   with   Commentary,    London, 

I935-) 

STENZEL,  J. — Zahl  und  Gestalt  bei  Platon  und  Aristoteles,  10-23, 
126-133.     (Leipzig,   1924.) 

And    for    the    history    of    Plato's    relations  with    Dion    and 
Dionysius  II,  the  full  treatment  in 

MEYER,  E. — Geschichte  des  Altertums,  v.  497-528. 


CHAPTER    XVI 
THE  PHILEBUS 

IN  the  Philebus  we  are  once  more  dealing  with  "  practice," 
and    more    specifically    with    "  individual  '    morality.      The 
dialogue    is    a    straightforward    discussion    of    the    question 
whether  the  "  good  for  man  "  can  be  identified  either  with  pleasure 
or  with  the  life  of  thought.     Socrates  once  more  takes  the  part  of 
chief  speaker,  a  place  given  him  in  no  other  dialogue  later  than  the 
Theaetetus.    The  explanation  of  this  is  no  doubt,  as  Burnet  has  said, 
that  the  subject-matter,  the  application  of  Pythagorean  "  cate- 
gories "  to  problems  of  conduct,  is  precisely  that  which  Plato 
represents  as  having  always  been  his  chief  interest.     I  think  it 
significant  that,  as  we  shah1  see,  all  through  the  discussion  the  "  cate- 
gories "  with  which  Socrates  works  are  the  Pythagorean  concepts 
of  the  Unbounded,  the  Limit,  and  their  synthesis.     We  know  from 
Aristotle  that  one  of  the  characteristic  divergences  of  Plato  from 
the  Pythagoreans  was  that  he  substituted  for  their  antithesis  of 
the  Boundless  and  the  Limit  that  of  the  Boundless,  conceived  as 
"unbounded  in  both  directions"  (the  Great-and-Saiall),  and  the 
One.  l    (On  the  Pythagorean  view,  the  One,  or  Unit,  was  the  simplest 
synthesis  of  the  Boundless  with  Limit.)     It  is  clear,  since  Aristotle 
never  hints  at  any  change  in  Plato's  teaching,  that  the  doctrine 
he  calls  Platonic  must  have  been  taught  in  the  Academy  as  early 
as  his  own  arrival  there  in  367  ;  the  Philebus  is  certainly  one  of  the 
latest  works  of  Plato's  life,  and  must  have  been  written  years  after 
367,  but  it  still  uses  the  Pythagorean,  not  the  Platonic,  antithesis. 
I  can  see  no  explanation  except  the  simple  one  that  for  the  purposes 
of  the  discussion  the  Pythagorean  categories  are  satisfactory,  and 
that  Plato  is  unwilling  to  make  Socrates  expound  what  he  knows  to 
be  a  novelty  of  his  own. 

There  are  no  data  for  determining  the  relative  dates  of  composi- 
tion of  Philebus,  Timaeus,  Laws.  Presumably  the  composition 
of  the  Laws  was  going  on  when  the  other  two  were  written.  The 
dramatic  date  of  the  conversation  cannot  be  fixed,  except  that  from 
Philebus  580  7  we  see  that  it  is  later  than  the  first  visit  of  Gorgias 
to  Athens  ;  the  scene  is  also  left  unspecified,  though  it  is,  no  doubt, 
"  somewhere  in  (or  about)  "  Athens.  The  two  young  men  who 
figure  as  interlocutors,  Protarchus  and  Philebus,  are  entirely 


1  Met.  A  9876  25,  T&  5'  tori  roC  direfpou  ws  Mt  5vdfla  irot^aai  *al  rb  Airapov 
fji(yd\ov  Kal  /turpoG,  TOUT*  tdiov. 


THE  PHILEBUS  409 

unknown  to  us.1  Socrates  addresses  the  former  as  "  son  of  Callias," 
but  the  name  Callias  was  a  common  one,  and  we  cannot  say  what 
Callias  is  meant,  except  that  it  cannot  be  Socrates'  acquaintance 
Callias  the  "  millionaire/1  whose  children  were  mere  boys  at  the 
time  of  Socrates1  trial  (ApoL  200). 

If  we  know  so  little  about  the  date  of  the  dialogue,  we  seem 
able  to  say  much  more  definitely  than  for  most  of  the  dialogues 
what  were  the  circumstances  which  occasioned  its  composition. 
The  object  of  the  discussion  is  to  examine  two  rival  theses  about 
the  "  good  "  :  (a)  that  it  is  pleasure  (17801/7?),  (b)  that  it  is  "  thinking  " 
TO  (frpovw,  TO  vociv.  The  way  in  which  the  theses  are  formulated 
at  the  outset  (nb)  suggests  at  once  that  we  are  dealing  with  a 
quaestio  disputata  within  a  regular  philosophical  school.  When  we 
find  that  the  purpose  of  the  dialogue  is  to  criticize  both,  to  dismiss 
both  as  inadequate,  and  to  suggest  a  via  media,  the  impression 
naturally  arises  that  Plato,  as  head  of  the  Academy,  is  acting  as 
"  moderator  "  in  a  dispute  within  his  own  school.  The  evidence 
of  Aristotle's  Nicomachean  Ethics  seems  to  convert  the  possibility 
into  a  certainty.  As  is  well  known,  Aristotle  there  deals  twice  over 
with  the  problem  of  the  relation  between  good  and  pleasure.  In 
the  discussion  of  the  seventh  book,  he  starts  with  an  anti-Hedonist 
thesis  that  pleasure  is  not  good  at  all,  examines  the  arguments 
adduced  by  its  defenders,  and  urges  that  they  are  so  inconclusive 
that  they  do  not  even  prove  that  pleasure  is  not  the  supreme  good. 
The  arguments  are  all  taken  from  Platonic  dialogues,  including  the 
Philebus  itself,  but  employed  to  prove  something  different  from  the 
conclusions  drawn  in  Plato.  Since  one  of  these  is  that  "  pleasure 
must  be  bad,  because  it  hinders  thought  " — a  misrepresentation 
of  the  argument  of  Phaedo  66a  ff . — the  persons  who  advanced 
them  clearly  held  that  the  good  is  "thinking"  (TO  <£/>oi/€tv),  the 
thesis  pitted  against  the  identification  of  good  with  pleasure  at 
the  opening  of  our  dialogue.  Aristotle  incidentally  mentions 
among  their  arguments  the  contention  that  pleasure  cannot  be  the 
good  because  pleasure  and  pain  are  both  bad  things  which  a  wise 
man  avoids,  and  names  the  author  of  the  doctrine,  Speusippus.2 
In  the  second  discussion  of  the  subject,  he  also  tells  us  who  the  person 
who  identified  "  the  good  "  with  pleasure  was  ;  it  was  the  famous 

1  It  is  assumed  that  there  is  also  a  considerable  number  of  young  men  who 
form  a  silent  audience  (i6a  4).     Socrates  is  even  said  to  be  granting  the  party  a 
ffwovvta  (igc  5),  a  word  which  has  the  suggestion  of  a  formal  "lecture"  or 
conference.     It  is  clear,  in  spite  of  the  opposite  view  of  some  editors,  that 
Philebus,  who  is  almost  silent  throughout  the  dialogue,  is  a  mere  lad,  much 
more  immature  in  mind  than  Protarchus.     This  explains  the  touch  of  petul- 
ance about  his  declaration  (120)  that  nothing  will  ever  persuade  him  out  of  his 
Hedonism.     His  worship  of  ytiov-fi  is  just  a  boy's  zest  for  the  joie  de  vivre. 

2  E.N.  115365.     Speusippus  argued  that  the  badness  of  pain  does  not 
prove  the  goodness  of  pleasure ;    both  are  opposed  to  the  "  good,"  as  "  the 
greater  "  and  "  the  less  "  are  both  opposed  to  "  the  equal."     I.e.  the  good 
condition  is  absence  of  both  pleasurable  and  painful  excitement.     Hence  the 
point  that  "  the  good  man  pursues  not  the  pleasant  but  the  painless  "  (E.N. 
11526  15)  will  be  part  of  his  argument. 


410          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

mathematician  Eudoxus,  and  his  argument  was  precisely  that  which 
is  hinted  at  in  the  opening  words  of  the  Philebus  (n&  5)  and  alluded 
to  again  at  its  close  (676  i),  that  pleasure  is  the  one  end  which 
all  living  things  instinctively  and  spontaneously  pursue.1  These 
references  seem  to  make  it  certain  that  the  issue  discussed  in  the 
dialogue  is  one  which  had  actually  divided  the  members  of  the 
Academy,  the  question  what  is  really  meant  by  the  Platonic  "  Form 
of  Good."'  One  party  thinks  that  it  means  pleasure,  the  other 
that  it  means  thought.2  The  attitude  taken  by  Plato  in  the 
dialogue  to  this  discussion  is,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  precisely 
that  of  the  "  moderator  "  in  the  schools  of  the  Middle  Ages  "  deter- 
mining" a  quaestio  dispntata.  The  arguments  produced  by  both 
parties  arc  reviewed  and  weighed,  and  the  balance  is  struck  between 
the  disputants.  It  is  decided  that  the  issue  shall  be  narrowed  down 
to  a  consideration  of  the  "  good  for  man  "  in  particular.  When  the 
question  has  thus  been  delimited,  it  is  "  determined  "  by  the 
answer  that  neither  pleasure  alone  nor  thought  alone  is  the  "  good  " 
or  best  life  for  men  ;  the  best  life  must  include  both  thought  and 
grateful  feeling ;  bat  of  the  two,  thought  is  the  "  predominant 
partner."  This  is,  in  fact,  the  conclusion  to  which  the  discussion 
is  made  to  lead  ;  it  is  also  the  verdict  given  on  the  same  issue  in 
Aristotle's  Ethics,  which  owe  more  of  their  inspiration  to  the  Philebus 
than  to  any  other  Platonic  dialogue. 

THE  QUESTION  PROPOUNDED  (na-2ob). — What  is  "the  good"? 
Philebus  has  an  answer  to  this  question:  "pleasure,  joy,  delight," 
this  is  the  good  for  all  living  creatures.  Socrates  disputes  this : 
"  thought,  intelligence,  memory,  true  judgment,"  are  better  than 
pleasure  "  for  all  who  can  share  in  them  "  (lib).  Thus  Philebus 
originally  makes  an  assertion  not  simply  about  the  good  for  man 
in  particular,  but  about  good  universal,  "  the  "  good.  Socrates 
commits  himself  to  no  assertion  about  good  universal,  but  asserts 
that  for  an  intelligent  being,  like  man,  there  is  something  better 
than  pleasure,  namely,  the  exercise  of  intelligence.  If  we  are  to 
decide  between  those  conflicting  views,  we  must  at  least  agree  on 
the  sense  to  be  put  on  the  phrase,  "the  good  for  man."  We  may 
take  it  that  both  of  us  mean  by  this  phrase  "a  condition  and  state 
(<;£is  KOI  &d0e<ris)  of  soul  which  can  make  any  man's  life  happy  " 
(n^).3  The  question  is  whether  pleasure,  or  again,  thought,  or 
possibly  something  better  than  either,  is  that  "  state  and  condition." 

1  E.N.  11726  9-15. 

1  Few  scholars  would  now  make  the  old  mistake,  which  unfortunately 
persists  in  some  of  the  best  expositions  of  the  dialogue,  of  supposing  the 
Hedonists  and  anti-Hedonists  aimed  at  to  be  Cyrenaics  and  Cynics  respec- 
tively. 

3  This  is  the  definition  of  Aristotle  also,  except  that  Aristotle  holds  that 
the  true  genus  of  happiness  is  not  ££is  (state)  but  Mpyeia  (activity).  This  is 
a  valuable  correction  of  the  language  of  the  Academy,  but  no  more  than  a 
correction  of  their  language.  Aristotle  never  suggests  that  Plato,  or  any 
member  of  the  Academy,  meant  that  the  "  good  "  is  a  mere  passive  state. 
He  blames  their  terminology  for  not  marking  the  difference  between  such  a 
"  state  "  and  an  "  activity." 


THE  PHILEBUS  411 

In  this  last  case,  we  should  have  to  say  that  neither  pleasant  feeling 
nor  thought  is,  by  itself,  the  good  for  man,  but  we  should  still  have 
to  say  that  whichever  of  the  two  is  most  akin  to  the  complete  good 
for  man  is  the  better  of  them  (lie).  (These  remarks  foreshadow 
the  coming  conclusion  that  the  "good  for  man"  includes  both 
components,  but  that  thought  is  the  more  valuable  of  the  two.) 

Now  "  pleasure  "  is  a  word  with  many  shades  of  meaning.  A 
"  life  of  pleasure  "  often  means  a  vicious  life,  yet  we  say  that  the 
continent  man  finds  his  very  continence  pleasant  ;  we  talk  of  the 
"  pleasures  "  of  folly  and  extravagant  day-dreams,  but  we  also  say 
that  the  "  thinking  man  "  finds  his  thinking  pleasant.  Thus  there 
may  be  pleasures  of  many  kinds,  and  we  have  no  right  to  assume 
that  all  must  be  good  (i2d).  You  may  say,  as  the  Hedonist  does, 
that  the  difference  of  which  Socrates  speaks  is  a  difference  in  the 
sources  from  which  pleasure  is  derived,  not  in  the  pleasure  yielded, 
but  this  would  be  evading  the  real  issue.  All  pleasant  experiences 
agree  in  being  pleasant,  just  as  all  coloured  surfaces  agree  in  being 
coloured.  But  there  are  more  or  less  marked  colour-contrasts 
also.  Why  then  may  there  not  be  pleasure-contrasts  within  the 
genus  pleasure  ?  If  there  are,  this  will  be  a  reason  for  hesitating  to 
ascribe  the  predicate  good  to  all  pleasures. 

"  Pleasure  is  good  "  is,  in  fact,  a  synthetic  proposition  (130), 
and  therefore  we  cannot  assume  the  impossibility  of  regarding 
some  pleasures  as  good,  but  others  as  bad.  They  are  all,  of  course, 
pleasant,  but  pleasantness  might  be  present  both  in  good  and  in 
bad  experiences.  Similarly,  if  we  consider  the  rival  thesis,  that 
thought  is  "  the  good/'  we  can  see  that  it  is  one  thing  to  make 
the  analytic  propositions  "  science  is  science,"  "  knowledge  is 
knowledge,"  another  to  say  that  "  science  (or  knowledge)  is  good." 
If  there  are  a  plurality  of  "  sciences,"  or  other  activities  of  intellect, 
some  of  them  may  conceivably  be  good,  others  bad  (140).  Thus 
we  see  that  our  present  discussion  raises  the  old  and  eternally 
recurring  problem  of  the  one  and  the  many  (140). 

One  form  of  this  problem  may  now  be  regarded  as  long  ago 
disposed  of,  the  ancient  difficulty  of  the  possession  of  many  qualities 
or  parts  by  the  same  individual  (i^d-e).  This  was  the  form  in  which 
the  problem  had  arisen,  e.g.  in  the  Phaedo ;  presumably  Plato 
means  that  the  solution  given  there  is  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the 
question.  The  case  which  still  needs  investigation  is  that  in  which 
the  "  one  "  is  not  a  thing  which  comes  into  or  passes  out  of  being, 
but  belongs  to  the  non-phenomenal  order.  This  case  gives  rise 
to  three  questions  :  (a)  whether  there  really  are  such  non-pheno- 
menal "  units  "  ;  (b)  how  we  are  to  reconcile  their  unity  with  their 
reality  or  being ; l  (c)  how  we  can  think  of  such  units  as  being  at 

1  Phileb.  i$b  2-4.  The  wording  of  this  second  question  is  a  little  obscure, 
but  the  meaning  seems  to  be  made  plain  if  we  read  the  words  in  the  light  of  the 
"  antinomies  "  of  the  Parmenides.  When  we  try  to  think  of  an  6»>  tv,  a  real 
unit,  we  seem  driven  either  to  deny  its  unity  in  order  to  maintain  its  reality, 
or  to  deny  its  reality  in  order  to  save  its  unity.  This  is  also  how  Burnet 
takes  the  words  (Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  326,  n.  2). 


412          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

once  one  and  many.  (This  last  question  is  manifestly  the  same 
which  has  met  us  in  the  Sophistes,  the  problem  of  the  "  communion  " 
of  a  form  itself  with  other  forms.)  These  are  the  problems  which 
still  give  rise  to  vehement  discussion  (i^a-c). 

We  certainly  cannot  evade  these  problems  ;  they  are  perpetually 
turning  up  in  all  our  "  discourses/'  and  we  must  meet  them  as  best 
we  can  (15^-166).  There  is  no  better  way  of  dealing  with  them 
than  that  of  which  Socrates  has  always  been  a  lover.  (Compare 
the  way  in  which  he  speaks  in  the  Phaedrus  of  his  reverence  for  the 
true  dialectician  who  knows  how  to  "  divide  "  a  subject  rightly.) 
There  was  long  ago  a  Prometheus — Pythagoras  is  the  person  meant 
— who  revealed  the  art  by  which  such  problems  may  be  treated. 
His  followers  have  handed  down  to  us  the  tradition  that  "  whatever 
is  at  any  time  said  to  be  "  is  composed  of  the  constituents  limit 
and  the  unlimited.  No  matter  what  subject  we  study,  we  can  find 
these  elements  in  it.  We  can  always  find  a  single  form  (the  allusion 
is  to  the  Pythagorean  doctrine  that  the  "  unit  "  is  the  first  combina- 
tion of  limit  and  unlimited) — and  on  inspection  we  shall,  with 
care,  be  able  to  discover  two,  or  three,  or  some  other  number  of 
definite  further  forms  included  in  'it.  We  should  next  take  each 
of  these  forms  and  look  for  a  definite  number  of  forms  included  in 
them,  and  continue  this  process  as  long  as  fresh  forms  are  to  be 
found.  It  is  only  when  we  can  no  longer  repeat  the  process  that 
we  should  let  things  "go  to  infinity."  In  this  way,  the  only  way 
worthy  of  a  dialectician,  we  shall  discover  not  only  that  every  form 
is  at  once  one  and  infinitely  many,  but  also  how  many  it  is  (i6c-ija). 
(That  is,  we  must  not  be  content  to  say,  for  example,  that  animal, 
or  anything  else,  is  one  kind  and  also  that  there  are  an  indefinite 
number  of  animals  ;  we  must  attempt  to  make  a  logical  division 
which  will  show  us  exactly  what  and  how  many  species  of  animals 
we  can  distinguish.  It  is  only  when  we  have  reached  an  infima 
species  incapable  of  further  logical  subdivision  that  we  may  consider 
the  indefinite  multiplicity  of  individuals.  So  long  as  you  can  go 
on  with  the  logical  division,  each  genus  has  not  an  indefinite 
plurality  but  a  determinate  number  of  constituents.)  Thus  the 
grammarian  must  not  say  that  articulate  sound  is  in  a  sense  one, 
and  yet  that  there  are  "  any  number  "  of  different  articulate 
sounds ;  he  must  know  how  many  distinct  sounds  his  alphabet 
has  to  represent.  To  do  this  he  has  to  divide  articulate  sounds 
into  vowels  and  consonants,  and  the  consonants  again  into  "  stops  " 
and  "  sonants/'  It  is  only  if  he  finds  that  these  classes  cannot 
be  subdivided  into  sub-classes  that  he  may  then  enumerate  the 
individual  vowels,  stops,  or  sonants.  Thus  definite  number  (the 
number  of  the  constituent  species  and  sub-species)  is  everywhere 
the  intermediate  link  between  the  one  genus  and  its  indefinitely 
numerous  members  (176-18^). 

We  must  apply  this  consideration  of  method  to  our  special 
moral  problem.  Before  we  can  decide  whether  all  pleasure  or  all 
thinking  is  good  or  not,  we  must  know  not  only  that  pleasure  is  one 


THE  PHILEBUS  413 

and  knowledge  one,  and  again  that  there  are  "  ever  so  many  " 
pleasures  and  forms  of  knowledge,  but  also  how  many  there  are. 
The  question  is,  in  fact,  whether  we  can  discover  distinct  "  forms  " 
or  "  kinds  "  (eufy)  of  pleasure  or  of  thinking,  and  hew  many  (196). 
But  this  is  a  long  and  perplexing  inquiry,  and  Protarchus  would 
be  glad  if  Socrates  could  find  some  way  of  deciding  the  immediate 
question  whether  thinking  is  better  than  pleasure  without  raising 
this  more  fundamental  issue  (zoa-b). 

PRELIMINARY  DELIMITATION  OF  THE  PROBLEM. — Neither 
Pleasure  nor  Thought  alone  is  the  Good  for  Man  (200-220). — Socrates, 
as  we  shall  see,  has  no  serious  intention  of  allowing  the  question 
whether  there  are  "  kinds  "  of  pleasure  to  be  shirked.  But  we  can  get 
rid  of  one  of  the  issues  raised  without  going  so  deep  into  the  matter. 
He  seems  to  remember  hearing — perhaps  in  a  dream — that  "  the 
good  "  is  neither  pleasure  nor  thought,  but  something  better  than 
both.  If  that  should  be  true,  we  can,  at  any  rate,  dispose  of  the 
doctrine  that  pleasure  is  the  good,  and  we  can  deal  with  this  point 
without  going  into  the  question  about  "  kinds  "  of  pleasure  (200), 
if  we  can  agree  on  certain  "  notes  "  l  characteristic  of  the  supreme 
good  and  find  that  pleasures  do  not  exhibit  these  notes.  Obviously 
it  is  a  note  of  the  good  that  it  is  something  "  finished  "  or  "  com- 
plete "  (TC'ACOV),  and  consequently  that  it  is  "  sufficient  "  (iicavdv), 
and  finally,  therefore,  that  it  is  the  one  thing  and  the  whole  of  the 
thing  at  which  any  creature  which  apprehends  it  ever  aims,  the 
whole  and  complete  fulfilment  of  desire  (2pd). 2  We  may  thus  make 
it  a  criterion  of  the  good  for  man  that  it  is  what  any  one  of  us  who 
knows  what  it  is  would  choose  in  preference  to  anything  else,  and 
would  be  completely  satisfied  by.  Judged  by  this  criterion,  neither 
pleasure  nor  "  thought  "  can  be  that  good.  Even  a  professed 
Hedonist  would  not  choose  by  preference  a  life  simply  made  up  of 
moments  of  intense  pleasurable  feeling  and  nothing  else.  He 
would  want  to  be  aware  that  he  is  feeling  pleasure  in  the  present, 
to  remember  that  he  has  felt  it  in  the  past,  and  to  anticipate  that 
he  will  feel  it  in  the  future.  Thus  he  would  demand  intellectual 
activity  as  well  as  feeling  to  make  him  happy ;  a  life  all  feeling  would 
be  that  of  an  oyster  rather  than  of  a  man.  The  same  thing  is  true 
about  a  life  which  is  all  thinking  and  no  feeling.  No  man  would 
choose  a  life  of  mere  intellectual  activity  entirely  neutral  in  feeling- 
tone.  Any  man  would  prefer  a  "  mixed  "  life,  which  contains  both 
"  thought  "  and  pleasant  feeling.  The  "  mixed  life  "  is  thus  better 
for  man  than  the  unmixed.  A  life  of  "  unmixed  "  feeling  would 
only  be  "  complete  "  and  "  sufficient  "  for  a  brute,  or  perhaps  a 
plant ;  a  life  of  "  unmixed  "  intellect  may  perhaps  be  suitable  to 

1 1  use  the  word  much  as  Newman  uses  it  when  he  talks  of  the  "  notes  " 
of  the  true  Church 

2  These  same  notes  are  adopted  by  Aristotle  from  the  dialogue  as  the 
characters  which  must  be  exhibited  by  the  "  good  for  man  "  (N,E.  10970  25  ff.). 
The  X67os  of  which  it  is  there  said  that  it  "  comes  to  the  same  thing  "  as  Aris- 
totle's own  is  the  Academic  theory  of  the  "  good  for  man,"  as  given  in  the 
Philebits, 


414,          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

God,  but  not  to  man.  The  good  for  man  must  exhibit  both  factors* 
But  the  real  problem  of  our  dialogue  still  remains.  Does  the 
"  mixed  life  "  owe  its  goodness  primarily  to  the  presence  of  thought 
in  it,  or  to  the  presence  of  pleasant  feeling  ?  Which  is  preponder- 
antly the  cause  of  its  goodness  ?  Socrates  must  not  expect  to  be 
"  let  off  "  this  discussion,  and  to  deal  with  it  we  shall  require  to 
follow  a  long  and  difficult  line  of  thought.  This  brings  us  to  the 
main  argument  of  the  dialogue. 

THE  RELATIVE  SIGNIFICANCE  AND  PLACE  OF  PLEASURE  AND 
THOUGHT  IN  THE  GOOD  FOR  MAN  (230-66^). — Formal  Character  oj 
Each  (230-300) . — Anything  which  is  actual  can  be  placed  in  one  of 
four  classes :  (a)  infinite  or  unbounded  (TO  aTmpov)  ;  (b)  limit 
(Trc'pas)  ;  (c)  the  "  mixture  "  or  combination  of  both  these  con- 
stituents ;  (d)  the  catise  which  brings  them  together  (z^c-e).  To 
explain  a  little  more  precisely :  "  temperature/'  or,  in  the  Greek 
phrase,  "  hotter  and  colder,"  is  an  example  of  what  we  mean  by 
(a).  We  can  call  it  "  infinite"  or  "  boundless"  because  anything 
can  always  be  made  hotter  or  colder  than  it  is  ;  there  is  no  tempera- 
ture which  is  the  maximum  or  minimum  conceivable,  and  again, 
if  you  have  two  different  degrees  of  temperature,  you  can  insert 
between  them  an  endless  number  of  intermediate  temperatures 
different  from  both.  Since  temperature  may  be  increased  or 
diminished,  we  may  also  call  it  a  "  great  and  small  "  or  "  a  less  and 
more  "  (a  ^e'ya  *eu  jjiiKpov),  and  this,  as  we  know  from  Aristotle, 
was  Plato's  own  name  for  what  the  Pythagoreans,  whose  language 
Socrates  is  using  in  our  dialogue,  called  the  airapov.  And  what  we 
can  say  about  temperature,  we  can  equally  say  about  everything 
which  allows  of  indefinite  variation  in  magnitude  or  in  degree, 
admits  of  "more  and  less,"  or  such  qualifications  as  "intense," 
"  slight."  We  may  thus  class  together  all  that  admits  of  such  var- 
iation under  one  single  head  as  the  "infinite  "  (245).  The  "  infin- 
ite "  is  thus  what  we  should  call  quality  with  a  continuous  range. 

By  the  "  limit,"  again,  as  a  single  "  form  "  we  mean  whatever 
does  not  admit  "  the  more  and  the  less,"  but  admits  such  predicates 
as  "  the  equal,"  "  the  double,"  in  a  word,  whatever  is  "  as  an  in- 
teger to  an  integer  or  a  measure  to  a  measure  "  (256).  The  limit 
(Trc/oas)  means  thus  precise  mathematical  determination,  number, 
ratio,  measure.  (The  last  is  added  to  cover  the  case  of  "  surd  " 
ratios,  like  that  of  i  :  ^'2  or  side  of  square  :  diagonal.) 

The  "mixed  "  class,  or  "  mixture  of  the  two,"  means  a  precise 
and  definitely  determined  magnitude  or  intensity  of  any  quality. 
(Thus,  e.g.,  temperature  is  an  awtipov,  20°  is  a  Tre/oas,  a  temperature 
of  20°  C.  is  an  instance  of  the  "  mixture  " ;  rainfall  is  an  airupov,  6  is 
a  7TC/M19,  but  a  rainfall  of  6  inches  is  a  /ACIKTOV,  and  so  on,)  The 
introduction  of  determination  into  a  "  more  and  less  "  is  precisely 
what  we  call  a  ycWts,  or  process  of  becoming  (250).  (E.g.,  to  raise 
water  to  a  temperature  of  100°  C.  is  the  "  process  "  of  making  it  boil, 
it  is  also  the  introduction  of  the  "  limit  "  100°  into  the  aw€ipov, 
temperature.) 


THE  PIIILEBUS  415 

Now  we  note  that  health  in  the  body,  proper  attunement  in 
music,  beauty  and  proportion  in  a  body  or  a  face,  good  climate,  and 
the  like,  all  depend  on  the  production  of  definite  "  limit  "  or  ratio 
in  an  aTmpov  of  some  kind  ;  departure  from  this  proper  ratio  pro- 
duces disease,  false  intervals  in  music,  ugliness,  bad  climate.  And 
the  same  thing  holds  about  goodness  in  the  soul  (266  6).  The  point 
to  be  made  is  thus  that  the  right  or  sound  or  good  state  of  anything 
is  marked  by  definite  proportion  and  "  limit  "  ;  there  may  be  in- 
finitely numerous  divergences  from  this  one  right  proportion  or 
equilibrium,  but  they  are  all  in  varying  degrees  bad.  This  is  what 
is  meant  by  calling  the  development  which  leads  up  to  and  stops 
at  the  production  of  the  right  proportion  a  yeVeo-ts  ck  ovo-iar,  a 
development  leading  to  a  stable  being  (26^).  The  point  is  that  the 
physician  producing  health  in  his  patient,  for  example,  may  do  so 
by  steadily  increasing  the  proportion  of  the  "dry,"  or  again  of  the 
"  moist,"  in  the  invalid,  but  he  does  not  aim  at  increasing  this 
beyond  limits.  There  is  a  definite  ratio  of  the  "  hot  "  to  the 
"  cold,"  or  of  the  "  moist  "  to  the  "  dry,"  which  is  characteristic 
of  health.  When  the  ycVeo-is  set  up  by  the  physician's  treatment 
has  secured  this  ratio,  he  dismisses  the  patient.  Health  once 
attained,  you  don't  make  the  man  healthier  in  indefinitum  by  passing 
further  and  further  beyond  the  "  limit  "  ;  you  would  only  give  him 
a  new  disease  instead  of  the  old  one.  This  explains  why  we  shall 
be  told  directly  that  all  the  good  things  in  life  belong  to  this  class 
of  the  "  mixed." 

As  for  the  "  cause,"  we  mean  by  it  the  agent  which  sets  up 
such  a  process  as  we  have  described,  TO  TTOLOVV  (26^).  We  have 
therefore  to  distinguish  it  both  from  that  which  it  produces,  the 
process  or  yeVeoris,  and  that  which  "subserves  it  for  the  process," 
the  "  matter "  of  the  process.  The  process  we  have  already 
referred  to  our  third  class  ;  the  "  matter  "  of  the  process  is  just 
the  factors  which  are  brought  into  combination,  the  unlimited  and 
limit.  This  is  why  we  had  to  add  the  fourth  class  to  the  other  three. 
We  note  here  that  the  account  of  the  "  mixed  "  class  is  the  direct 
source  of  the  "  right  mean "  in  Aristotle's  Ethics.  "  Moral  " 
goodness,  according  to  Aristotle's  familiar  account  in  E.N.  ii., 
is  a  fixed  and  habitual  right  "  mean  "  or  proportion  in  our  appetitions 
and  tempers,  and  the  process  of  becoming  good  is  one  of  "  qualifying  " 
them,  i.e.  training  them  to  exhibit  just  the  proportion  demanded  by 
the  "right  rule"  (opObs  Xoyos).1  Thus  it  is  just  such  a  process 
of  ycVco-ts  ets  ovcri'ai/  as  has  just  been  described,  the  aircipov  in  the 
case  being  the  indefinite  degrees  of  frequency  and  intensity  which 
tempers  and  appetitions  admit,  and  the  W/oas  the  exact  degree 
demanded  by  the  "  right  rule." 

1  The  6pObs  Xdyos  itself  is  Platonic  too,  and  appears  to  come  from  Laws,  659^, 
where  education  is  said  to  be  the  "  drawing  and  attracting  of  children  to  the 
right  discourse  (6p0bs  \6yos)  uttered  by  the  law."  That  Aristotle  was  influenced 
by  this  passage  is  shown  by  his  allusion  to  it  as  excellently  said  by  Plato  at 
E.N.  11046  12. 


416          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Now  let  us  apply  what  we  have  just  said  to  our  particular 
problem.  We  see  that  the  "  mixed  life,"  including  both  intellectual 
activity  and  agreeable  feeling,  on  the  face  of  it,  falls  in  our  third 
class,  because  it  has  these  two  distinct  factors.  (It  is  intended  to 
hint  at  the  result  to  be  established  later,  that  the  two  factors  need 
to  be  combined  according  to  definite  law  and  proportion.)  But 
what  about  the  life  of  pleasure  recommended  by  Philebus,  which 
consisted  in  having  as  much  pleasure  and  as  intense  pleasure  as 
you  can  get  ?  Pleasure,  and  again  pain,  clearly  belong  to  the  class 
of  the  "  infinite,"  since  neither,  in  its  own  nature,  has  a  minimum 
or  a  maximum  (270).  Philebus  thinks  that  it  is  this  impossibility 
of  ever  exhausting  the  possibilities  of  pleasure  which  makes  it  so 
good.  But  you  might  also  say  that  it  is  the  same  impossibility 
of  exhausting  those  of  pain  which  makes  pain  so  bad  (280).  Hence 
it  is  clear  that  the  mere  indefinite  range  of  pleasure  is  no  proof  of  its 
goodness.  What,  again,  about  the  "  intelligence  "  (wCs),  know- 
ledge, wisdom,  preferred  by  Socrates  ?  Into  what  class  does  this 
fall?  (2&a).  We  are  agreed  to  reject  the  theory  that  the  course  of 
the  universe  is  random  (ciKfJ,  28^),  and  to  agree  with  the  traditional 
belief  that  it  is  directed  by  a  supreme  wisdom  ((frpovya-is)  and  in- 
telligence (vovs)  in  every  particular.  Now  when  we  look  at  our 
own  constitution,  we  see  that  the  materials  of  which  our  body  is 
made  are  only  small  parcels  of  the  great  cosmic  masses  of  similar 
materials,  and  that  these  constituents  are  found  in  a  much  higher 
degree  of  purity  from  other  ingredients  elsewhere  in  the  universe 
than  in  our  bodies.  The  "  fire  "  in  us  l  is  small  in  bulk  and  "  im- 
pure "  in  substance  by  comparison  with  the  fire  in  the  sun.  And 
again  the  "  fire  "  or  "  water  "  in  us  is  fed  and  kept  up  by  that  in 
the  larger  world  (29^).  And  generally  our  little  body  is  fed  by  the 
mass  of  body  without  us  (290).  By  analogy,  we  may  infer  that 
since  there  is  soul  in  us,  it  too  comes  from  a  greater  and  brighter 
soul  in  the  universe.  Also,  we  see  in  our  own  case  that  when  things 
are  amiss  with  the  body,  it  is  the  intelligence,  resident  in  the  soul, 
which  re-establishes  order  by  means  of  the  medical  art.  So  we 
may  reasonably  hold  that  in  the  universe  at  large,  the  same  holds 
good.  The  order  in  it  is  due  to  intelligence  (vovs),  and  intelligence 
is  only  found  in  souls.  So  we  may  hold  that  there  are  superhuman 
souls,  and  that  it  is  their  inteDigence  which  is  the  cause  of  cosmic 
order  (30^).  And  we  may  answer  the  question  now  before  us  by 
saying  that  vovs  (intelligence)  belongs  to  the  fourth  of  our  classes, 
the  class  of  "  the  cause  of  the  mixture  "  (300). a 

1  Plato  may  be  thinking,  e,g.t  of  the  "  animal  heat "  of  the  organism  and  its 
dependence  on  a  proper  supply  of  solar  warmth,  but  more  probably  his 
allusion  is  to  the  theory,  adopted  in  the  Republic  and  Timaeus,  that  the  im- 
mediate organ  of  vision  is  itself  a  ray  of  light  issuing  from  the  eye,  and  is 
itself  derived  from  the  sun's  light. 

f  I  have  given  the  general  sense  of  the  passage  from  300  8  to  305  3  without 
going  into  the  question  of  precise  reading  and  interpretation  of  particular 
phrases.  I  think  Plato  clearly  means  to  identify  vovs  with  the  "  cause  of  the 
mixture."  This  is  not  inconsistent  with  his  view  that  the  good  for  man  is  not 


THE  PHILEBUS  417 

There  has  been  a  great  deal  of  discussion  on  the  point  of  the 
place  to  be  assigned  to  the  forms,  as  we  know  them  from  earlier 
dialogues,  in  the  classification  of  the  Philebus.1  No  one  has  imagined 
that  they  could  be  reckoned  as  examples  of  the  aTmoov,  but  different 
scholars  have  placed  them  in  each  of  the  other  three  classes.  I  do 
not  propose  to  spend  much  time  on  the  problem,  since  it  seems  plain 
that  the  fourfold  classification  has  been  devised  with  a  view  to  a 
problem  where  the  forms  are  not  specially  relevant,  and  the  true 
solution  is  thus  that  they  find  no  place  in  this  classification.  We 
must  not  look  for  them  in  the  class  of  the  "cause,"  since  cause 
has  been  explicitly  equated  with  agent,  and  it  is  quite  certain  that 
the  forms  of  the  Phaedo  and  Republic  are  not  agents.  (At  least, 
we  could  only  ascribe  agency  to  the  "  Form  of  Good,"  and  that, 
as  Socrates'  difficulty  in  speaking  of  it  shows,  holds  a  unique  place 
in  the  scheme.)  Limit,  again,  has  been  defined  in  a  way  which 
shows  that  it  means  specifically  mathematical  ratio.  Hence, 
though,  in  a  way,  the  forms  may  be  said,  as  defining  and  deter- 
mining the  character  of  the  sensibles  which  "partake"  them,  to 
function  as  "  limits,"  they  must  not  be  identified  with  the  Wpas  of 
this  dialogue.  Again,  though  this  is  a  matter  which  must  not  be 
discussed  until  we  reach  our  final  chapter,  it  is  plain  from  Aristotle's 
allusions  2  that,  according  to  the  doctrine  taught  in  the  Academy 
as  early  as  367-6,  the  forms,  "  man,"  "  animal,"  and  the  rest 
actually  contain  two  factors,  a  "  great-and-small  "  and  a  limiting 
factor,  "  the  one  "  or  "  unit."  So  far  they  resemble  the  "  mixed 
class  "  of  our  dialogue,  and  Professor  H.  Jackson  did  right  to  call 
attention  to  this.  But  all  the  examples  of  the  "  mixed  "  class  in 
the  Philebus  are  taken  from  the  world  of  "  events,"  and  the  forms 
clearly  are  not  "  mixtures  "  of  that  kind.  Not  to  dwell  on  the 
further  point  that  the  7re/>as  of  the  Philebus  stands  for  any  definite 
ratio,  whereas  the  Trc/oas  element  in  the  forms,  according  to 
Aristotle,  was  the  "  one,"  and  the  "  one  "  in  the  Philebus  is  only 
spoken  of  as  equivalent  to  any  genus  regarded  as  a  single  whole. 
It  is  clear  that  the  line  of  thought  which  leads  to  the  classification 
in  the  Philebus  brings  us  nearer  to  what  Aristotle  knew  as  the  central 
doctrine  of  Platonism  than  anything  else  in  Plato's  writings.  But 
it  seems  equally  clear  that  Plato's  final  thought  is  not  disclosed 
even  here.  From  his  own  language  in  Epistle  vii.  we  may  infer 
that  he  never  intended  the  reading  of  a  written  work  to  do  more 
than  supply  hints  which  might  put  a  really  original  mind  in  the 
position  to  discover  his  thought  after  a  great  deal  of  hard  personal 
thinking,  and  that  he  did  not  expect  even  as  much  as  this  apart 

i/ous.  It  is  clear  from  the  Republic  (5066)  that  the  general  question  whether  the 
good  can  be  knowledge  or  pleasure  is  older  than  the  speculations  of  Speusippus 
and  Eudoxus.  What  is  distinctive  in  the  Philebus  is  the  appeal  to  psychology 
as  relevant  to  the  issue. 

1  See  Burnet,  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  L,  332  ;  R.  G.  Bury,  Philebus,  pp. 
Ixiv-lxxiv ;  H.  Jackson,  Journal  of  Philology,  x.  253  ff.  ;  Raeder,  Platons 
philosophische  Entwickelung,  370  ff. 

•Cl.  e.g.,  Aristot.  Met.  9876  18-27 


418          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

from  the  actual  daily  contact  of  the  student's  living  mind  with  his 
own.1  Hence  I  shall  defer  anything  I  have  to  say  about  the  central 
mystery  of  the  Platonic  philosophy  for  consideration  in  a  final 
chapter.  Provisionally,  I  will  merely  say  what  is  quite  obvious, 
that,  viewed  in  their  relation  to  the  things  which  "  partake  "  of 
them,  the  forms,  as  we  have  so  far  met  with  them,  act  as  an  element 
of  "  limit  "  and  determination,  but  that,  as  the  recognition  in  the 
Sophistes  of  a  "  communion  "  of  forms,  as  such,  with  one  another 
shows,  this  is  quite  consistent  with  the  view  that  a  form  which 
functions  as  a  "  limit  "  should  itself  also  be  analysable  into  a 
combination  of  an  "  unlimited  "  and  a  "  limit." 

THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  (31^-530). — We  have 
seen  to  what  class  pleasure  and  pain  themselves  belong  ;  they  are 
ttTretpa.  We  must  next  consider  "  that  in  which  they  arise  "  (the 
subject  of  them),  and  the  7ra0os,  or  state  of  things,  which  gives 
rise  to  them,  in  other  words,  the  actual  conditions  of  their  occur- 
rence. To  begin  with  pleasure.  "That  in  which  pleasure  (or  pain) 
arises  "  is  always  a  living  creature,  the  creature  which  feels  the 
pleasure  (or  pain),  and  as  such  it  belongs  to  the  "  class  of  the  mix- 
ture," since  its  organism  is  a  complex  of  a  plurality  of  ingredients 
(310).  The  way  in  which  they  arise,  the  irdOrj  which  occasion  them, 
are  that  "  when  the  attunement  (that  is,  the  proper  balance  between 
the  ingredients  of  the  organism)  in  an  animal  is  disturbed,  pain  is 
felt,  and  when  it  is  restored  after  disturbance,  pleasure  is  felt." 
Disturbance  of  organic  equilibrium  is  attended  by  pain,  restoration 
of  the  equilibrium  by  pleasure  feid-e).  Thu^  when  the  body  is 
unduly  heated  or  chilled,  we  have  a  Xvo-is  T>}S  <£vVeo>s  or  disturbance 
of  the  normal  organic  equilibrium,  and  it  is  painful ;  the  anti- 
thetic process  of  recovering  the  normal  temperature,  which  is  a 
return  to  the  ovo-ta  (the  "  natural  state  "),  is  pleasant.  This  defines 
for  us  one  kind  or  form  (cTSos)  of  pleasure,  namely,  the  agreeable 
processes  of  return  to  the  normal  condition  of  the  organism  after 
disturbance,  or,  as  the  defenders  of  the  same  type  of  theory  in 
modern  times  usually  say,  the  process  of  recovery  from  organic 
waste  (2za-b)*  Next,  there  is  a  second  "form"  or  "kind"  of 
pleasure  which  depends  on  processes  purely  mental,  and  is  not 
attended  by  either  disturbance  or  recovery  of  the  balance  in  the 
organism.  A  simple  example  is  that  the  mental  anticipation  of  a 
painful  disturbance  of  the  organic  balance  is  itself  painful,  the 
expectation  of  the  agreeable  antithetic  recovery  from  disturbance 
is  itself  pleasant,  and  in  these  cases  there  is  no  actual  accompanying 
organic  process,  the  pleasure  and  pain  belong  in  a  special  way  to 
"  the  soul  by  herself  "  (320).  These  are  the  two  distinct  €1877  of 
pleasure  and  pain  it  is  necessary  to  begin  by  discriminating,  if 
1  Ep.  vii.  340c-<?,  3410-*,  343^-344^. 

1  Like  Aristotle,  Plato  confines  the  waste-and-repair,  or  depletion-repletion 
theory  of  pain  and  pleasure  to  the  case  of  pains  and  pleasures  connected  with 
the  body  and  its  needs.  He  does  not  regard  it  as  applicable  to  pain  and 
pleasure  generally.  For  a  criticism  of  this  type  of  theory,  when  extended  to 
all  pains  and  pleasures,  see  Stout's  A  nalytic  Psychology,  ii.  c.  12. 


THE  PHILEBUS  419 

we  are  to  judge  soundly  on  the  question  whether  all  pleasures  are 
good. 

Next,    if  there   are   antithetic  processes   of   disturbance   and 
recovery  of  the  organic  balance,  and  these  are  respectively  painful 
and  pleasant,  there  must  also  be  an  intermediate  case,  that  in 
which  the  balance  is  maintained  without  deflection  in  either  direction, 
and  this,  on  our  theory,  must  be  neutral  in  respect  of  feeling- tone, 
neither  pleasant  nor  painful  (32^).    This  would  be  the  condition, 
so  far  as  feeling-tone  is  concerned,  of  the  life  of  thought  unmixed 
with  pleasure  or  pain  already  spoken  of,  and  there  is  no  impossibility 
in  the  notion  that  there  might  be  such  a  life,  a  life  of  permanent 
maintenance  of  equilibrium.     Very  possibly  it  is  the  life  appropriate 
to  a  god  (33&)  and  so  the  best  of  all.     But  we  are  discussing  a 
different  matter,   the   part  which   thought   and  pleasant   feeling 
should  play  in  the  life  of  men  like  ourselves  (for  whom  such  an 
existence  without  any  rhythmic  alternation  is  out  of  the  question). 
For  our  purposes,  we  must  pursue  the  psychology  of  the  second  class 
of  pleasures  and  pains  further.    They  are  all  dependent  on  memory 
(since,  of  course,  without  memory  we  could  have  no  anticipations), 
and  this  makes  it  necessary  to  explain  briefly  what  memory  is  and 
what  sensation  itself  is.    We  may  say  that  some  bodily  processes 
die  away  before  they  can  reach  the  soul,  but  others  penetrate  to  the 
soul :  the  first  we  may  call  unconscious ;  the  second  are  conscious. 
This  enables  us  to  define  sensation  as  a  movement  (KH/T/O-IS)  which 
affects   the   body  and   soul  together  (KOU/T?,  340).      Memory  (i.e. 
primary  memory)  is  the  retention  (o-wnjpia)  of  sensation  as  thus 
defined  (ibid.)  ;  and,  finally,  recollection  (dva/xvT/o-is)  is  the  recovery 
(reproduction)  by  the  soul  "  by  herself  "  of  a  lost  memory  or 
sensation  (346-0).    These  considerations  will  make  it  clearer  what 
we  mean  by  a  "  purely  mental  "  pleasure,  and  also  throw  light  on  the 
nature  of  desire  (ImOvfila,  340).    To  understand  what  desire  is, 
we  may  consider  it  in  its  simplest  form,  such  as  hunger  or  thirst. 
A  thirsty  man  desires,  or  lusts  after  drink.    To  speak  more  pre- 
cisely, the  thirsty  man  is  in  a  state  of  depletion,  his  organism  has 
been  depleted  of  its  normal  supply  of  liquid,    What  he  really 
desires  is  not  simply  "  drink,"  but  to  be  "  filled  up  "  with  the  liquid 
he  will  drink.     (He  desires  not  the  water,  but  the  drinking  of  it.) 
Thus  he  actually  is  in  one  state  (a  state  of  depletion),  but  desires 
the  antithetic  state  (the  corresponding  repletion).    To  desire  to 
drink  the  thirsty  man  must  "  apprehend  "  (c<£a7rre<r0cu)  repletion. 
He  does  not  "  apprehend  "  it  with  his  body.    That  is  just  what  is 
undergoing  the  unnatural  depletion,   and  it  cannot  be  passing 
through  two  antithetic  processes  at  once.    Thus  it  must  be  with 
his  soul  that  he  "  apprehends  "  the  repletion  he  lusts  after.    The 
importance  of  the  example  is  that  it  shows  that  (in  spite  of  popular 
language),  there  is  really  no  such  state  as  a  "  bodily  "  desire  or 
lust.    All  desiring  is  a  state  of  soul  (35c),  since  desire  is  endeavour 
towards  the  opposite  of  the  present  state  of  the  organism,  and  it 
is  in  virtue  of  memory  that  this  "  opposite  "  is  apprehended, 


420          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

These  considerations  show  that  all  impulse  and  desire  belong  to  the 
soul. 

They  also  suggest  an  important  problem.  When  a  man  is 
actually  in  a  state  of  pain  due  to  organic  "  depletion,1'  but  re- 
members and  thinks  of  the  pleasant  experiences  which  would 
remove  the  depletion,  can  we  say  that  his  condition  is  either  purely 
painful  or  wholly  pleasant  ?  If  he  despaired  of  ever  realizing  the 
anticipation  of  "  filling  up/'  no  doubt,  he  would  be  doubly  wretched, 
but  suppose  he  is  feeling  the  painful  depletion  but  expecting  the 
repletion  (like  a  really  hungry  man  who  expects  to  be  fed)  ?  The 
anticipation  that  his  want  will  be  removed  is  pleasant,  but  the  felt 
want  must  surely  be  painful,  and  thus  it  appears  that  we  must  say 
that,  in  the  case  assumed,  the  experience  is  a  mixed  one,  pleasurable 
and  painful  at  once  (366). 

(The  conception  of  "  mixed  "  states  which  are  half  pleasant, 
half  painful,  is  so  characteristic  of  Plato  and  so  important  in  itself 
that  it  cannot  be  passed  over  without  some  comment.  Hedonists 
naturally  refuse  to  accept  it,  since  it  is  quite  inconsistent  with  the 
treatment  of  pain  as  equivalent  to  subtraction  of  pleasure  which  lies 
at  the  root  of  the  Hedonic  calculus.  They  have,  accordingly,  to 
explain  the  facts  to  which  Plato  appeals  in  one  or  other  of  two 
ways.  They  have  to  hold  that  the  total  feeling-tone  of  any  moment 
of  life  is  either  simply  pleasant  or  simply  painful.  It  is  then  open 
to  them  either  to  interpret  the  facts  about  still  unsatisfied  craving 
by  holding  that  the  experience  is  one  of  rapid  alternation  between 
pleasure  and  pain,  or  by  holding  that  it  is,  according  to  circumstances, 
one  of  a  low  degree  of  pleasure,  or  one  of  pain,  though  of  a  moderate 
degree  of  pain.  Neither  view  seems  to  me  to  be  in  accord  with  fact. 
When  I  am  genuinely  and  acutely  thirsty,  e.g.  in  the  course  of  a 
long  tramp  in  hot  weather,  but  confidently  anticipating  arrival  at 
a  place  of  refreshment  in  an  hour's  time,  it  is  not  the  fact  that  I 
oscillate  rapidly  between  pure  misery  and  pure  delight  according 
as  my  attention  is  directed  to  my  present  condition  or  to  the  con- 
dition I  anticipate  ;  nor  yet  is  it  true  that  I  am  continuously  feeling 
a  qualified  pleasure  or  a  qualified  pain.  I  certainly  feel  the  tension 
between  the  pleasant  anticipation  and  the  actual  pang  of  thirst  in 
a  single  pulse  of  experience.  And  there  is  no  real  difficulty  in 
understanding  why  this  is  so,  if  we  remember  that  the  physical 
correlate  of  my  mental  condition  is  made  up  of  a  great  complex  of 
neural  excitations.  No  one  of  the  constituent  neural  excitations 
can  have  two  antithetic  senses  at  once,  but  the  complex  may  perfectly 
well  contain  elements  with  opposite  senses.  Hence  it  seems  to 
me  that  Plato's  doctrine  of  "  mixed  states,"  which  coincides  with 
the  standing  thought  of  great  poets  about  the  "  unrest  which  men 
miscall  delight,"  is  strictly  true  to  the  facts  of  common  experience, 
and  that  the  criticisms  levelled  against  it  are  all  based  on  false 
simplification  of  the  facts.) 

TRUE  AND  FALSE  PLEASURE  (360-536). — We  have  thus  dis- 
tinguished two  "  kinds  "  of  pleasures :  (a)  those  directly  due  to  ao 


THE  PHILEBUS  421 

actual  organic  process  of  recovery  of  equilibrium  or  repair  of  waste ; 
(b)  those  dependent  on  mental  anticipation,  where  no  such  actual 
organic  process  is  taking  place.  The  recognition  of  this  second 
class  at  once  suggests  a  further  question  of  first-rate  ethical  im- 
portance :  Can  we  admit  of  a  second  and  different  distinction  of 
pleasures  (and  pains)  as  true  and  false,  real  and  merely  apparent  ? 
(360).  In  other  words,  when  we  come  to  the  valuation  of  pleasures 
as  ingredients  in  the  good  for  man,  must  we  make  any  deduction 
for  the  "  illusoriness  "  of  some  of  them  ?  This  is  the  vital  dis- 
tinction for  the  Platonic  ethics  ;  it  is  to  lead  up  to  and  justify  it 
that  the  whole  psychological  discussion  has  been  introduced. 
Protarchus  denies  the  validity  of  the  distinction.  Beliefs  or  judg- 
ments can  be  true  or  false,  but  not  feelings  (36^).  Hedonists,  like 
Grote,  have  naturally  taken  his  side  and  argued  that  Socrates  is 
merely  in  the  wrong  in  making  the  distinction.  For,  it  is  argued, 
a  pleasure  or  a  pain  is  exactly  what  it  is  felt  to  be  ;  its  esse  is  simply 
the  fact  of  its  being  felt.  If  I  feel  pleased  or  pained,  I  am  having 
pleasure  or  pain  ;  if  I  feel  greatly  pleased,  I  am  having  a  great 
pleasure  ;  the  pleasure  always  exists  when  it  is  felt,  and  it  is 
always  just  as  great  as  it  is  felt  to  be.  This  reasoning,  however, 
is  irrelevant  to  Socrates'  contention.  He  is  not  asking  whether  I 
am  pleased  when  I  feel  pleased,  or  greatly  pleased  when  I  feel  greatly 
pleased;  he  is  asking  whether  I  am  always  pleased  when  I  think 
I  am  pleased,  or  intensely  pleased  when  I  think  I  am  intensely 
pleased,  and  this  is  a  perfectly  reasonable  question,  and,  as  he 
says,  one  which  needs  careful  examination.  To  put  it  simply, 
the  issue  is  this  :  Is  the  excitement  in  an  exciting  experience  a 
true  measure  of  its  pleasantness  ?  l  May  not  the  excitingness  of 
an  experience  lead  to  an  over-estimate  of  its  pleasantness?  To 
answer  this  question,  we  need  to  make  a  considerable  apparent 
digression. 

There  is  such  a  process  as  judging,  and  such  a  process  as  feeling 
pleased.  When  we  judge,  we  make  a  judgment  about  something, 
and  when  we  feel  pleased,  we  are  pleased  with  something.^  And  a 
judgment  does  not  cease  to  be  an  actual  judgment  because  it  is 
false  ;  similarly  a  false  feeling  of  pleasure  would  still  be  an  actual 
feeling  of  pleasure  (376).  (This  last  remark,  of  itself,  shows  that 
Plato  has  no  intention  of  denying  that  a  "  false  "  pleasure  is  a 
pleasure  ;  it  is  its  worth,  not  its  actuality,  which  is  in  question.) 
The  question  is  whether  pleasure  and  pain,  like  judgment,  permit 
of  the  qualifications  true  and  false.  They  certainly  permit  of  some 
qualifications,  such  as  "great/1  "small/*  "intense";  and  Protarchus 

1  The  question  is  vital,  since  the  "  intensity  "  regarded  by  all  Hedonists 
as  a  dimension  of  pleasure  or  pain  is  primarily  a  character  of  the  situation  by 
which  we  are  pleased  or  pained.  We  can  only  measure  the  intensity  of  the 
pleasantness  or  painfulness  by  measuring  the  intensity  of  an  objective  feature 
of  the  situation,  and  this  makes  it  all-important  to  know  whether  such 
a  measurement  can  be  implicitly  trusted.  For  example,  the  satisfaction  of 
the  impulses  of  sex  is  normally  an  intense  organic  excitement,  but  is  its 
pleasantness  equally  intense  ? 


422          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

allows  that  they  may  permit  of  the  further  qualification  "  bad." 
But  he  denies  that  a  pleasure  can  be  said,  like  a  judgment,  to  be 
"  erroneous  "  or  false  (372)  ;  if,  as  often  happens,  a  false  belief 
yields  us  pleasure,  the  falsity  belongs  to  the  belief,  not  to  the 
pleasure. 

Let  us  look  at  the  facts.  Pleasure  and  pain  sometimes  accom- 
pany true  beliefs  or  judgments,  sometimes  false.  Now  these  beliefs 
may  be  regarded  as  answers  given  by  the  soul  to  questions  which 
she  has  put  to  herself ;  sometimes  the  answer  is  right,  sometimes 
it  is  wrong.  We  have,  so  to  say,  a  scribe  and  a  painter  within  our 
souls.  The  interpretation  of  present  sensation  by  the  aid  of 
memory  involved  in  all  perception  is  the  work  of  the  scribe  writing 
"  discourses "  in  the  soul ;  the  painter  (imagination)  designs 
illustrations  (el/coves)  to  the  scribe's  text  (39#-c),  and  his  pictures 
may  be  called  true  or  false  "  imaginings  "  according  to  the  truth  or 
falsity  of  the  "  discourse  "  they  illustrate.  These  discourses  and 
pictures  concern  the  future  as  well  as  the  present  or  the  past ;  we 
are  all  through  life  full  of  "  fancies  "  (e'XTrffie?)  about  the  future,  and 
when  we  anticipate  pleasure  or  pain  to  come,  we  take  an  "  antici- 
patory "  pleasure  or  pain,  which  has  already  been  classed  as  strictly 
"  mental "  in  entertaining  such  expectations  (39^-0).  This  is 
true  of  good  and  bad  men  alike,  but,  since  the  good  are  "  dear  to 
God,"  their  pleasant  anticipations  are  commonly  fulfilled,  those  of 
the  bad  are  not  (400-6) .  (The  good  man  gets  pleasure  in  anticipating 
sequences  which  are  in  accord  with  the  order  God  maintains  in  the 
world  ;  the  bad  man  gets  his  pleasure  from  day-dreams  of  sudden 
enrichment  and  other  events  which  do  not  come  about  in  the 
''world  as  God  made  it.")  Thus  the  bad  man's  pleasure  in  his 
anticipations  is  as  actual  as  the  good  man's,  but  the  good  man,  as  a 
rule,  gets  the  pleasure  which  he  anticipates,  the  bad  man  does  not. 
This  affords  one  sense  in  which  the  bad  man  may  be  said  to  have 
false,  or  unreal,  pleasures ;  he  derives  present  pleasure  from  antici- 
pations which  will  not  be  realized,  and  this  pleasure  may  rightly  be 
said  to  be  deceptive,  a  caricature  of  true  pleasure,  and  the  same 
argument  will  apply  to  pains  due  to  anticipation  (4oc)  as  well  as 
to  emotions — fear,  anger,  and  the  like — generally  (400) .  Like  beliefs, 
all  these  states  may  have  a  foundation  in  reality  or  may  have  none. 
Now  the  goodness  of  a  belief  lies  in  its  truth,  and  its  badness  in  its 
falsity ;  only  true  beliefs  are  good,  and  only  false  beliefs  are  bad. 
(For,  of  course,  the  raison  d'etre  of  a  belief  is  that  it  should  be  true  ; 
that  is  what  every  belief  aims  at  being.)  May  we  not  say  then 
that  the  badness  of  bad  pleasures — Protarchus  has  allowed  that 
there  are  such  states — is  simply  falsity  and  nothing  else?  a  bad 
pleasure  means  a  "  false  "  or  "  deceptive  "  pleasure. 

}  Protarchus  is  unconvinced.  There  may  be  "  wicked  "  (wovypaC) 
pleasures  or  pains,  but  pleasures  and  pains  are  not  made  wicked 
by  being  "  false."  We  will,  however,  reserve  the  consideration 
of  wicked  or  sinful  pleasures  for  a  moment,  and  call  attention  to 
a  second  sense  in  which  it  might  be  possible  to  speak  of  many 


THE  PHILEBUS  428 

pleasures  as  "  false  "  (410-6).  Consider  once  more  the  case  already 
mentioned  of  unsatisfied  appetite,  where  the  soul  is  craving  for 
the  removal  of  a  state  of  painful  organic  want  now  present  in  the 
body.  In  this  case  we  simultaneously  apprehend  the  present  pain- 
ful want  and  the  pleasant  anticipated  reaction  against  it.  "  The 
body  supplies  us  with  a  certain  feeling,  and  the  soul  desires  the 
opposite  condition  "  (410).  And  both  pleasure  and  pain  admit  of 
"  the  more  and  the  less."  Hence  the  problem  constantly  arises 
how  to  estimate  the  painfulness  of  the  present  state  against  the 
pleasurableness  of  the  desired  "  opposite  condition  "  (or,  again, 
the  pleasureableness  of  the  present  state  against  the  painfulness  of 
the  "  opposite  ").  In  making  such  estimates  we  are  always  liable 
to  errors  of  perspective  ;  the  anticipated  "  opposite  "  is  over- 
estimated by  contrast.  We  expect  the  coming  pleasure  to  be 
greater  than  it  will  really  prove  to  be,  by  contrast  with  the 
present  pain,  and  an  expected  pain  is  over-estimated  in  the  same 
way  by  contrast  with  present  pleasure  (410-420).  There  is  thus 
an  element  of  illusion  in  all  such  cases,  which  must  be  allowed  for 
before  our  estimate  of  anticipated  pleasure  or  pain  can  be  admitted 
as  correct. 

The  illusion  is  still  more  marked  in  other  cases.  As  we  said 
before,  disturbance  of  the  organic  balance  is  painful,  restoration 
of  the  balance  is  pleasant.  But  suppose  the  organism  is  undergoing 
neither  process.  It  is  true  that  many  of  the  wise  deny  that  this 
case  actually  occurs  ;  they  say  that  "  everything  is  always  flowing 
either  up  or  down/1  or,  in  Leibniz's  phrase,  that  the  "  pendulum 
never  is  at  rest."  But  they  must  concede  at  least  that  we  are 
not  always  conscious  of  its  oscillations.  Small  oscillations  either 
way  are  ''infinitesimal."  It  is  only  considerable  oscillations  which 
are  attended  by  pleasure  and  pain  (430).  Thus  we  have  to  admit 
the  possibility  of  a  life  which  is  neither  pleasant  nor  painful,  but 
just  painless.  There  are  persons  who  actually  say  that  this  painless 
life  is  the  "  most  pleasant  "  of  all  (440).  But  this  statement  cannot 
be  strictly  true.  To  feel  no  pain  is  manifestly  not  the  same  thing 
as  to  feel  pleasure,  though  this  is  the  thesis  of  the  real  "  enemies  of 
Philebus,"  the  downright  anti-Hedonists.  These  anti-Hedonists 
are  eminent  scientific  persons,  who  maintain  that  there  really  is 
no  such  thing  as  a  pleasure  and  that  the  experience  Philebus  and 
his  friends  call  pleasure  is  merely  "  relief  from  pain  "  (440). l 
Though  we  cannot  accept  this  doctrine,  which  is  really  due  to  the 
scorn  of  fastidious  souls  for  vulgar  pleasures,  it  will  yield  us  a  useful 
hint  towards  the  discovery  of  the  kind  of  pleasures  which  deserve 
to  be  called  "  true  "  (44^).  Their  thought  is  this.  If  we  want  to 

1  Phileb,  446  9,  /cai  /tdXa  Seipofo  \eyontvovs  ret  Trepl  <j>vffu>.  The  words  are 
enough  to  prove  that  neither  Antisthenes  nor  Diogenes  is  meant.  They  could 
not  be  called  deivol  wepl  <j>ij<riv.  But  the  phrase  exactly  fits  the  anti-Hedonists 
of  the  Academy — Speusippus,  Xenocrates,  and  their  followers.  The  reference 
is  probably  rather  to  their  views  about  forms  and  numbers,  discussed  in 
Aristotle's  Metaphysics,  than  to  such  things  as  the  works  of  Speusippus  on 
zoological  classification.  It  is  meant  that  they  are  ftaXemirof. 


424          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

understand  any  "form"  or  quality,  we  do  well  to  study  it  in  its 
extreme  and  most  marked  manifestations.  So,  if  we  want  to  know 
what  pleasure  really  is,  we  ought  to  start  by  considering  the  most 
vehement  and  violent  pleasures.  But  these — this  is  given  as  the 
reasoning  of  the  anti-Hedonists — are  the  pleasures  connected  with 
the  body  (450).  Now  such  pleasures  are  found  in  their  most 
exciting  degree  not  in  health,  but  in  disease.  The  delight  of 
refreshing  thirst  with  a  cool  draught,  for  example,  is  much  more 
intense  when  one  is  suffering  the  heat  of  a  raging  fever  than  at 
another  time,  because  the  preceding  want  (IvScta)  or  craving  is  so 
much  more  violent.  We  are  not  arguing,  of  course,  that  pleasures 
are  more  numerous  in  disease  than  in  health  ;  our  point  is  that  they 
are  more  violent  and  exciting  (450).  And  so  the  life  of  "  sin  " 
(u/fyts)  is  marked  by  violent  and  exciting  pleasures  which  make  a 
man  "  beside  himself  "  ;  the  life  of  virtue  by  moderate  pleasures, 
regulated  by  the  rule  of  "  nothing  too  much  "  (45^-0).  The  most 
exciting  and  violent  pleasures,  as  well  as  the  most  violent  pains,  are 
to  be  found  in  the  diseased  or  bad  body  or  soul. 

Now  let  us  consider  one  or  two  examples  of  these  exciting  experi- 
ences. A  man  who  has  an  itching  spot  on  his  body  gets  great  enjoy- 
ment from  scratching  or  chafing  it ;  but,  of  course,  he  is  only  stimu- 
lated to  do  so  by  the  irritation  of  the  itching.  This  is  typical  of  a 
host  of  experiences  which  language  calls  "  bitter-sweet."  They 
depend  on  a  tension  between  antithetic  processes ;  these  processes 
may  be  both  bodily,  or  one  may  be  bodily  and  the  other  purely 
mental,  or  both  may  be  mental.  In  all  cases  the  violently  exciting 
character  of  the  experience  depends  on  the  tension.  There  must 
be  a  highly  painful  factor  in  order  that  the  rebound  may  be  intensely 
pleasant  (466-0).  (Thus  the  difference  between  this  case  and  that 
of  the  "  illusions  of  perspective  "  already  mentioned  is  that  the 
element  of  contrast  and  antithetical  tension  is  now  an  ingredient 
in  the  actual  concrete  single  experience.)  The  point,  then,  is 
that  in  such  a  "  mixed  "  experience,  there  may  be  an  exact  balance 
of  pleasurable  and  painful  ingredients,  so  that,  exciting  as  it  is, 
its  "  net  pleasure  value  "  would  be  nil,  of  pleasure  may  predominate, 
or  pain  may  predominate.  But  in  no  case  is  the  "  pleasure  value  " 
simply  measured  by  the  intensity  of  the  excitement,  and  the 
"  ticklish  "  person,  for  example,  who  gets  so  excited  when  he  is 
tickled  that  he  says  he  is  "  dying  with  pleasure/'  is  not  really 
getting  anything  like  the  "  quantity  of  pleasure  "  he  supposes. 
For  the  intensity  of  the  excitement  is  due  to  the  simultaneous  con- 
trast between  the  fully  stimulated  region  of  the  skin  and  a  neigh- 
bouring region  which  is  uneasily  aching  for  similar  stimulation, 
46^-47^).  Here  is  a  plain  case  where  a  man's  own  estimate  of  the 
pleasure  he  is  getting  is  erroneous.  The  cases  of  tension  already 
mentioned,  where  the  antithesis  is  between  the  actual  condition  of 
the  body  and  a  mentally  anticipated  "  opposite  "  condition,  may, 
of  course,  give  rise  to  the  same  "  mixture  "  of  pleasure  with  pain 
and  the  same  errors  in  estimation  (470). 


THE  PHILEBUS  425 

There  is  still  a  third  case  where  both  factors  in  the  tension  belong 
to  the  soul.  There  are  a  whole  range  of  painfully  toned  emotions- 
anger,  fear,  malice,  and  others — and  we  know,  and  the  poets  con- 
stantly tell  us  that,  though  they  are  painfully  toned,  to  give  them 
full  expression  may  be  pleasant.  To  let  yourself  go,  when  you 
are  angry,  Homer  says,  is  sweeter  than  honey  (tfd-e),  and  it  is 
possible  to  revel  in  lamentation.  So  people  in  the  theatre  enjoy 
a  sensational  tragedy  which  sets  them  crying  for  the  distresses  of 
the  hero  (480).  Our  feelings,  when  we  see  a  comedy,  are  a  still 
subtler  example  of  a  " mixed"  state,  half  painful,  half  pleasant. 
This  leads  Plato  to  indulge  in  an  acute  psychological  analysis  of 
the  emotion  aroused  by  comedy.  We  have  just  spoken  of  <t>66vos 
(malice)  as  an  unpleasantly  toned  emotion,  and  yet  by  malice  we 
mean  "  being  pleased  by  the  misfortunes  of  our  neighbour"  (486). 
Now  ignorance  and  folly  are  certainly  misfortunes.  But  what  is  it 
which  amuses  us  in  a  "  comic  situation  "  ?  A  certain  kind  of 
badness  (Trovrjpta)  in  the  comic  character,  namely,  want  of  "  self- 
knowledge."  (It  is  the  discrepancy  between  his  real  character  or 
situation  and  his  own  estimate  of  them  which  makes  him  "  comic.") 
"  Ignorance  of  self "  may  be  :  (i)  ignorance  of  one's  financial 
position,  as  when  a  man  fancies  himself  richer  than  he  is ;  (2)  ignor- 
ance of  one's  physical  defects,  as  when  a  man  has  an  empty  conceit 
of  his  beauty  or  strength ;  (3)  ignorance  of  the  state  of  one's  soul, 
especially  a  false  conceit  of  one's  own  wisdom  (490).  All  these 
states  are  bad,  but  we  may  make  a  distinction.  They  may  be 
accompanied  with  feebleness  or  they  may  not.  In  the  former  case 
a  man's  vain  conceit  of  self  does  not  lead  to  any  serious  harm  to 
anyone,  and  is  merely  "  funny  "  ;  in  the  latter  it  is  not  funny,  but 
dangerous.  It  is  the  "  harmless  self-conceit "  of  the  hero  which 
we  find  comic  and  laugh  at  (49^-0). 

Now  to  explain  why  the  feeling  this  spectacle  rouses  in  the 
audience  is  "mixed."  It  might  seem  that  it  is  wrong  to  enjoy 
the  misfortunes  of  our  friends  ;  yet  we  do  find  self-conceit  in  per- 
sons we  like  "  funny,"  when,  as  has  just  been  explained,  it  is  quite 
harmless.  (The  connexion  with  comedy,  I  take  it,  is  that,  if  we 
are  to  enjoy  a  comedy,  we  must  feel  that  we  "  like  "  the  person 
who  is  being  exposed,  for  all  his  failings.  If  we  could  not  find  him 
likeable,  the  comedy  would  cease  to  be  comic,  as  Tartuffe  does, 
for  the  simple  reason  that  we  detest  Tartuffe  seriously.)  Thus 
our  sense  of  the  "  comic  "  is  a  kind  of  malice  (<£0oVos),  and  this  is,  in 
its  nature,  a  painful  emotion  ;  yet  our  laughter  shows  that  we  are 
enjoying  the  experience,  which  must  therefore  be  a  "  mixed  "  one 
(490-500).  (The  observation  appears  true  and  subtle  ;  when,  for 
example,  we  see  Malvolio  on  the  stage,  there  is  an  element  of  the 
painful  in  our  mirth.  It  is,  in  a  way,  humiliating  to  see  another 
man  "  make  such  a  fool  of  himself."  If  the  absurdity  were  carried 
a  little  further,  or  the  exhibition  of  it  a  little  more  prolonged,  the 
painful  would  distinctly  predominate.  Even  as  it  is,  we  can  detect 
its  presence  by  a  careful  examination  of  our  feelings.)  Now  this 


426          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

is  true  also  of  the  "  tragedy  and  comedy  "  of  actual  life  ;  the  situa- 
tions of  real  life  are  constantly  provoking  emotional  reactions  in 
which  the  painful  and  the  pleasing  are  blended,  no  less  than  the 
situations  in  a  stage-play.  We  may  take  it  as  certain  then  that  the 
fusing  of  the  pleasant  and  the  painful  in  a  single  experience  occurs 
where  the  sources  of  both  factors  lie  in  the  soul,  no  less  than  where 
the  source  of  one  or  both  is  in  the  body  ($ob-e). 

We  may  now  consider  the  question  what  experiences  are  purely 
pleasant  without  any  admixture  of  painfulness.  On  our  general 
theory  of  the  connexion  of  feeling-tone  with  organic  process,  we  can 
see  at  once  that  in  any  case  where  a  "subliminal "  or  unconscious 
process  of  "  depletion  "  is  followed  by  a  conscious  process  of  "  re- 
pletion," there  will  be  an  experience  which  is  wholly  pleasant. 
This  may  explain  the  case  of  the  pure  aesthetic  pleasure  we  get 
from  the  contemplation  of  pattern  (^xn^ra) ,  colour  (xpw/Aara),  tone 
(<£0oyyot),  and  the  great  majority  of  odours  (^la-b).1  These 
pleasures  are  not  preceded  by  a  painful  sense  of  craving,  like  those 
of  the  satisfaction  of  hunger  or  thirst,  and  do  not  owe  any  part  of 
their  apparent  intensity  to  contrast ;  they  are  "  pure/'  in  the  sense 
of  being  pleasant  through  and  through,  without  any  admixture  of 
painfulness.  We  may  suppose  that  they  correspond  to  processes 
of  organic  repletion  after  depletion,  but  that  the  depletion  has  been 
insensible.2  We  must  note,  however,  that  we  are  not  referring 
here  to  pleasure  got  by  seeing  "  patterns  "  which  are  likenesses  of 
animals  or  the  like,  where  the  pleasure  arises  from  our  perception 
of  the  resemblance  of  the  copy  to  the  original,  but  strictly  to  the 
pleasure  we  take  in  geometrical  form  as  such,  and  the  same  remark 
applies  to  the  pleasantness  of  colours  and  sounds,  and  still  more  to 
odours  (5ic-d).3 

Again  the  "  intellectual  pleasure  "  which  we  get  from  the 
"  sciences  "  (/xa^i//x,aTa)  is  of  this  "  unmixed  "  kind.  There  is 
no  felt  pain  antecedent  to  it  ;  merely  not  to  possess  geometrical 
knowledge,  for  example,  is  not  painful  as  hunger  is  painful ;  and 
again,  the  process  of  forgetting  something  we  have  learned  is  not 
attended  by  pain.  Of  course  it  may  be  disagreeable  to  find  that  we 
have  forgotten  something  which  it  would  now  be  advantageous  to 
know,  but  the  process  of  forgetting  itself  is  not  painful,  as  the 
process  of  growing  hungry  again,  after  we  have  eaten,  is  (520-6) . 

1  He  says  "  most  "  odours,  of  course,  to  exclude  the  case  of  those,  e.g.,  of 
articles  of  food,  or  those  which  indicate  to  the  male  animal  the  proximity  of 
a  female.     The  pleasantness  of  these  would  depend  on  a  previous  sense  of  un- 
satisfied want. 

2  Timaeus  expressly  teaches  that  this  is  the  case  (Tim.  640-656). 

3 1  do  not  take  this  to  mean  that  Plato  regards  the  pleasure  we  get  from 
seeing  the  "  faithfulness  "  of  a  picture  to  its  original  as  aesthetically  illegitimate. 
His  purpose  is  simply  to  exclude  from  the  list  of  unmixed  pleasures  any  which 
depend  on  a  previous  sense  of  want  for  their  existence  or  their  intensity.  Thus 
the  degree  of  pleasure  got  from  contemplating  a  "  nude  "  clearly  may  be 
affected  by  unsatisfied  sexual  desire  in  the  beholder  ;  the  pleasure  with  which 
we  hear  the  sound  of  a  beloved  voice  will  often  depend  for  its  intensity  on  a  pre- 
existing longing  to  hear  that  voice  again. 


THE  PHILEBUS  427 

By  comparison  of  these  now  discriminated  types  of  pleasures, 
we  can  see  that  the  "  mixed  "  type,  which  depend  on  antecedent 
painful  craving,  are  marked  by  violence  and  "  want  of  measure," 
and  exhibit  the  fluctuations  of  the  "  more  and  less  "  ;  the  "  un- 
mixed "  type,  on  the  other  hand,  exhibit  "  restriction  by  measure," 
are  "  moderate  in  intensity  "  (52^).  But  we  may  make  a  further 
distinction  between  the  two  types.  They  differ  in  "  truth  "  or 
"  genuineness "  (dA.r;0€ia).  Just  as  a  small  expanse  of  white 
colour,  for  example,  if  it  is  a  pure  white,  with  no  admixture,  is 
more  truly  white  than  a  vast  expanse  which  is  not  equally  pure,  so 
even  a  "  small  "  pleasure  which  is  pleasure  through  and  through,  is 
more  truly  pleasure,  deserves  that  name  better,  than  a  "  big  " 
pleasure  which  is  mixed  throughout  with  its  opposite,  pain  (52^-530). 
I.e.  the  highly  exciting  experiences  which  are  commonly  reckoned 
the  "  greatest  pleasures/1  since  their  exciting  character  actually 
depends  on  tension  and  contrast  with  a  painful  factor  equally 
indispensable  to  the  effect,  are  not  the  "  truest  to  type."  It  is 
the  "  moderate  "  pleasures,  preceded  by  no  painful  craving  and 
independent  of  internal  tension,  which  are  pleasant  through  and 
through,  and  thus  deserve  the  name  of  pleasures  most  completely. 
It  is  in  this  sense  that  Plato  speaks  of  this  class  as  "  true,"  of  the 
others  as  "  false  "  or  "  deceptive  "  pleasures.  The  first  are  what 
they  are  taken  to  be ;  the  others  are,  to  a  large  extent,  something 
different  from  what  men  take  them  to  be. 

THE  METAPHYSICS  OF  PLEASURE. — Can  it  be  an  End  ?  (53^-550). — 
We  may  remind  ourselves  of  a  second  doctrine  of  the  "  wits  " 
(KO/A^OI),  which  we  shall  find  suggestive.  They  say  that  pleasure 
is  always  a  "process  of  becoming"  (yeWts) ;  that  it  has  no  stable 
and  determinate  being  (ovo-ta,  530).  That  is,  the  theory  is  that 
pleasure  is  an  accompaniment  of  transitions,  incompleted  develop- 
ments. It  is  felt  while  the  development  is  going  on,  but  falls 
away  when  the  definite  and  permanent  goal  of  the  "evolution"  is 
reached.  We  must  not  be  misled  into  identifying  the  "  wits  "  of 
this  passage  with  the  third-century  Cyrenaics  who  called  pleasure 
a  "  gentle  motion,"  nor  have  we  any  right  to  ascribe  their  doctrine 
by  anticipation  to  the  elder  Aristippus.  We  meet  it  again  in 
Aristotle's  Ethics,  where  one  of  the  string  of  arguments  against  the 
goodness  of  pleasure,  all  taken  from  recognizable  passages  in  Plato, 
is  said  (11526  13)  to  be  that  "every  pleasure  is  a  sensible  transition 
(or  development)  into  a  natural  condition "  (yeWts  cis  <£vW 
ala-OrjTrj) ,  an  obvious  allusion  to  the  section  of  the  Philebus  we  are 
now  considering.  We  may  take  this  as  an  indication  that  the 
Kofj^l/oi  to  whom  the  doctrine  is  due  are  the  anti-Hedonist  party  in 
the  Academy,  a  view  which,  as  we  shall  see,  is  borne  out  by  the 
language  of  Aristotle  in  dismissing  their  doctrine.  The  thought 
arises  by  a  natural,  though  illegitimate,  extension  of  the  depletion- 
repletion  formula  to  cover  all  cases  of  pleasures.  On  this  theory, 
the  good,  healthy,  or  normal  state  is,  of  course,  that  of  balance  or 
equilibrium ;  pain  and  pleasure  are  both  felt  only  when  there  is  a 


428          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

departure  from  this  ideal  condition  —  pain  while  the  process  of 
depletion  is  going  on,  pleasure  while  that  of  repletion,  restoration 
of  the  balance,  is  happening.  The  natural  end  or  goal  of  this 
"  repletion  "  is  the  establishment  of  an  equilibrium,  and  the  best 
that  could  befall  a  man  is  that  the  equilibrium,  once  restored,  should 
be  permanent.  But,  on  this  theory,  pleasure  is  only  felt  during  the 
"  filling-up  "  by  which  we  approach  this  best  condition.  When  we 
have  reached  it  and  are  steadily  persisting  in  it,  there  is  no  longer 
any  process  of  "  filling-up/'  and  consequently  no  pleasure.  Pleasure 
attends  our  progress  to  the  "  good/'  but  not  our  fruition  of  it  ; 
that  will  be  the  "  neutral  condition,"  painless  but  not  pleasurable. 
This  is  what  is  meant  by  the  view  that  pleasure  is  always  "  becom- 
ing," never  is  "  being." 

We  can  now  express  this  thought  in  a  general  formula.  The 
end  or  goal  is  always  of  more  worth  and  dignity  than  the  means  or 
road  to  it.  The  means  is  "  for  the  sake  of  "  the  end,  not  the  end 
for  the  sake  of  the  means.  And  a  process  which  culminates  in  the 
establishment  of  a  permanent  condition  is  to  that  condition  as 
means  to  end.  Thus  the  processes  of  shipbuilding  and  all  the 
appliances  and  raw  material  they  employ  are  "  for  the  sake  of  " 
what  comes  out  of  them,  the  vessel.  (E.g.  the  naval  architect's  skill, 
his  implements,  the  timbers  of  which  he  makes  the  vessel,  all  of 
them  only  have  worth  because  the  vessel  itself  has  worth  —  in  this 
case,  an  "  economic  "  worth  (540).  x)  If  pleasure  is  a  "  becoming," 
then  it  must  be  relative  to  an  end  in  which  it  culminates,  must  be 
the  coming-to-be  of  something.  That  something  will  be  in  the 
fjioipa.  or  category  of  the  good,  i.e.  will  have  "  intrinsic  value." 
But  'the  end  and  the  process  by  which  it  is  reached  are  never  in  the 
same  category,  and  therefore,  on  the  hypothesis,  pleasure  will  not 
be  a  good.  The  "  wits  "  from  whom  we  have  borrowed  this  sug- 
gestion will  therefore  think  it  ridiculous  to  say  that  life  is  not  worth 
having  without  pleasure.  This  would  amount  to  saying  that  life 
is  worth  having  when  it  is  an  alternation  of  aspiring  after  a  good  we 
have  not  yet  attained  and  losing  one  we  have  attained,  but  not 
when  it  is  the  fruition  of  present  good  (54^-55^). 

We  note  that  Socrates  is  not  made  to  accept  the  doctrine  that 
pleasure  is  only  felt  in  the  transition  from  an  "  unnatural  "  to  the 
"  normal  state  "  as  his  own.  He  clearly  does  not  accept  it  without 
reserve  (as  Spinoza  does  in  his  definitions  of  laetitia  and  tristitia, 
Ethics,  iii.  Appendix,  def.  2,  3).  He  cannot  do  so  because  he  holds, 
as  we  shall  see,  that  some  pleasures,  the  "  pure  "  or  "  unmixed  " 
class,  are  themselves  good,  whereas  the  theory  under  criticism,  as  he 
is  careful  to  point  out,  compels  us  to  hold  that  no  pleasure  is  good, 
since  no  pleasure,  according  to  it,  can  be  an  end.  The  criticism 
of  Aristotle  on  the  theory  is  based  on  the  same  conviction  of  the 


1  The  (pdpimxa  of  54^  i  are,  of  course,  the  paints  employed  for  coating  the 
sides  of  the  vessel,  etc.  So  the  ti\r)  mentioned  along  with  the  "  tools  "  does 
not  mean  "  raw  material  "  in  general,  but  the  "  timber  "  from  which  the 
planks  gf  the  ship  are  made. 


THE  PHILEBUS  429 

goodness  of  these  unmixed  pleasures,  and  is  one  of  the  most  valuable 
things  in  the  Ethics.  As  he  points  out,  even  the  pleasures  of  "  re- 
pletion "  cannot  be  proved  not  to  be  good,  or  even  the  good,  by 
this  line  of  reasoning.  For  what  gives  rise  to  the  feeling  of  pleasure 
which  accompanies  return  to  the  "  normal  state  "  after  disturb- 
ance, is  not  the  process  of  return  itself,  but  the  successful  reassertion 
of  the  activities  of  the  organism  which  were  not  affected  by  the 
disturbance.  The  "  filling-up  "  only  gives  rise  to  the  pleasure 
accidentally  because  it  is  attended  with  removal  of  an  inhibition. 
The  thought  is  that  the  feeling-tone  of  normal  organic  life  is  itself 
pleasant.  A  disturbance  of  the  "  balance "  partially  inhibits 
function.  Recovery  from  the  inhibition  is  pleasant  because  it  is 
the  successful  reassertion  of  a  normal  activity  which  has  persisted, 
though  under  inhibition,  all  through  the  antecedent  "  depletion." 
Hence  we  need  to  correct  the  proposed  definition  of  pleasure  as 
"  sensible  transition  to  a  natural  state  "  into  "  unimpeded  exercise 
of  a  natural  activity."  The  pleasure-giving  process  is  not  a 
"  coming-to-be  "  (yc'vco-is)  but  the  discharge  in  act  (cpc/Dycta)  of 
an  already  developed  function.1  The  insistence  on  the  difference 
between  the  two  kinds  of  process,  "coming-to-be  "  and  "  activity/' 
is  a  correction  of  first-rate  importance  in  the  Academic  terminology. 
We  need  not  suppose  that  Aristotle  is  correcting  Plato's  views 
about  the  worth  of  pleasures,  which,  in  fact,  agree  with  his  own. 
It  is  Speusippus  and  Xenocrates,  not  Plato,  whose  anti-Hedonism 
he  is  criticizing,  though  he  rightly  notes  that  the  want  of  a  word 
like  his  own  cvepyeia  makes  it  easy  for  the  Academic  to  employ  this 
unconvincing  argument  against  the  goodness  of  pleasures. 

We  may  add  the  further  consideration  that  it  is  a  paradox  to 
hold  that  all  goods  are  mental,  that  pleasant  feeling  is  the  only 
mental  good,  and,  by  consequence,  that,  e.g.,  beauty  and  strength, 
valour,  temperance,  intelligence,  have  no  inherent  value,  and  that  a 
man's  intrinsic  worth  depends  on  the  question  how  much  pleasure 
he  is  feeling  (55&).  This,  we  see,  is  a  valid  argument  against  the 
Hedonist,  independently  of  the  worth  of  the  contention  that  all 
pleasure  is  a  ycvco-i?. 

THE  INTELLECTUAL  VALUES  (55^-59^). — We  have  seen  that 
there  are  two  types  of  pleasures,  the  "pure"  and  the  "mixed," 
and  we  shall  expect  to  find  that  they  have  different  values  for 
human  life.  We  must  now  consider  intellectual  activities  and  their 
worth  in  the  same  way.  As  with  pleasures,  so  with  forms  of  know- 
ledge, we  have  to  discover  which  are  "  truest  to  type,"  most  fully 
deserving  to  be  called  knowledge.  We  may  begin  by  dividing 
"  knowledges  "  or  "  sciences  "  into  those  which  have  to  do  with 
making  things,  the  "  industrial  "  arts  (xctpoTc^viKat  eVicrriJ/Luu),  and 
those  which  are  w€pl  iratSctav  KCU  rpo^v,  have  to  do  with  the  cultiva- 
tion of  the  soul  itself,  the  "  cultural  "  arts  and  sciences.  (This 
is,  in  effect,  the  Aristotelian  distinction  between  "  theory  "  and 
"practice.")  We  may  begin  by  considering  the  "industrial," 

1  E.N.  11531  7-14 


430          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

manual,  or  operative  arts  themselves,  and  ask  whether  some  of  them 
do  not  contain  more,  others  less,  of  genuine  knowledge,  so  that  we 
can  introduce  again  the  distinction  between  "  purer  "  and  "  more 
mixed  "  forms  of  knowledge.  We  see  at  once  that  if  we  eliminated 
from  the  industrial  arts  all  that  they  derive  from  the  exact  know- 
ledge of  number,  measure,  weight,  very  little  which  we  can  call 
knowledge  would  be  left.  What  these  arts  contain  beyond  the 
application  of  number,  weight,  and  measure  is  little  more  than 
empirical  guess-work.  We  see  the  presence  of  this  empirical  factor 
in  such  callings  as  those  of  the  musician  (who  has  largely  to  depend 
on  his  "ear"),  the  practising  physician,  the  soldier;  we  might 
fairly  say  that  there  is  more  genuine  science  in  the  builder's  business 
than  in  any  of  these  professions,  because  he  is  so  much  more  con- 
cerned with  the  exact  processes  of  measuring,  so  dependent  at  every 
point  on  his  implements  of  precision,  plumb-line,  compass,  and  the 
rest.  So  we  will  divide  these  crafts  into  a  more  exact  and  scientific 
class  of  which  building  is  the  type,  and  a  less  exact,  of  which  music 
is  typical  (55c~56c).  (The  notion  of  "  exact  "  science  seems  to  be 
definitely  formulated  here  for  the  first  time  in  literature  ;  the 
thought  is  that  of  Kant,  that  every  branch  of  knowledge  contains 
just  as  much  science  as  it  contains  mathematics.) 

Again,  if  we  consider  the  "  exact "  sciences  themselves,  we 
have  to  make  a  similar  distinction.  There  are  two  "  arithmetics  "  : 
that  of  the  "many,"  and  the  much  more  scientific  arithmetic  of 
the  "  philosopher."  The  former  operates  with  "  concrete  "  and 
very  unequal  units,  such  as  one  man,  one  army,  one  ox,  and  dis- 
regards the  fact  that  the  men,  oxen,  armies,  counted  may  be  un- 
equal ;  the  other  operates  with  units  which  are  absolutely  and 
in  every  way  equal — in  fact,  with  numbers,  not  with  numbered 
things.  So  there  are  two  forms  of  "  mensuration  "  :  the  loose 
measurement  of  the  architect  or  the  retail  trader,  and  the  accurate 
measurement  of  the  geometer  and  calculator.1  Thus  one  "  know- 
ledge," no  less  than  one  pleasure,  may  be  "  purer,"  truer  to  type, 
than  another.  The  "  exact  "  forms  of  knowledge  which  are  con- 
cerned with  number,  measure,  weight,  are  much  more  exact  and 
"  truer  "  than  all  others,  and  the  "  philosopher's  "  or  "  theorist's  " 
arithmetic  and  geometry  are  much  more  exact  and  true  than  those 
of  the  mechanician  or  engineer  (56^-57^).  And  we  cannot,  without 
blushing,  deny  that  dialectic,  whose  business  it  is  to  study  the 
absolutely  real  and  the  eternal,  must  insist  on  a  still  more  rigid 
standard  of  exactness  and  truth  than  any  other  kind  of  knowledge. 
It  must  be  still  more  intolerant  of  mere  approximation  than  any 
other  science.  Gorgias,  to  be  sure,  used  to  claim  the  first  place 
among  the  sciences  for  rhetoric,  on  the  ground  that  it  can  secure 

1  The  simple  man  who  undertook  to  settle  the  value  of  T  by  fitting  a 
string  round  a  disc,  unrolling  it,  and  measuring  it  with  a  measuring-stick  was 
confusing  the  "  tradesman's  "  mensuration,  which  is  always  rough  approxima- 
tion, with  the  geometer's,  which  must  be  accurate  within  a  known  and  very 
precise  "  standard  of  approximation." 


THE  PHILEBUS  481 

the  voluntary  services  of  the  professionals  of  all  the  rest.  We 
need  not  quarrel  with  him  about  this.  Our  question  is  not  what 
"  art  "  has  the  highest  prestige  or  the  greatest  utility- value,  but 
simply  which  sets  up  the  most  severe  standard  of  truth  and 
accuracy,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  claims  of  dialectic 
in  this  particular.  Most  of  the  "  arts  "  are  content  to  build  on 
8o£at,  contested  beliefs,  and  even  the  cosmologists  confine  their 
attention  to  "  actual  fact/'  what  "  happens  "  ;  absolutely  exact 
knowledge  of  actual  fact  is  never  to  be  had  ;  there  is  always  an 
element  of  the  incalculable  and  contingent  about  it.  The  know- 
ledge which  is  through  and  through  knowledge  must  therefore  be 
"  abstract "  ;  that  is  the  price  it  pays  for  its  exactness.  It  must 
be  concerned  with  the  non-temporal  (57^-59^). 

THE  FORMAL  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  GOOD  LIFE  (590-66^). — The 
best  life  for  men,  we  saw,  must  be  a  blend  of  two  constituents — 
intelligent  activity  and  pleasant  feeling.     We  have  now  examined 
each  genus  of  the  two  apart,  and  distinguished  in  each  a  variety 
which  is  truer,  and  one  which  is  less  true,  to  type.     We  have  now 
to  consider  on  what  principle  the  two  ingredients  should  be  blended. 
What  will  be  the  formula  which  appears  as  the  Trcpas  in  this 
"  mixture  "  ?     Our  task  is  like  that  of  the  man  who  mixes  the 
ingredients  of  a  sweet  drink ;  pleasure  is  the  honey  for  our  mixture, 
intelligent  thought  the  water ;    the  problem  is  to  mingle  them  in 
just  the  right  proportion  (6ic).     It  would  be  rash  to  assume  that 
we  shall  succeed  in  doing  this  by  simply  blending  every  form  of 
pleasure  with  every  form  of  "  thought  "  ;  we  need  to  proceed  more 
cautiously.     It  will  be  prudent  to  begin  by  considering  first  those 
pleasures  and  those  forms  of  knowledge  which  we  have  found  to  be 
most  genuine,  most  true  to  type  (aX-rjOia-rara)  ;  if  we  find  that  the 
blend  does  not  completely  satisfy  our  original  condition  that  the 
11  good  "  must  be  "  sufficient/'  all  a  man's  life  requires,  we  can  then 
consider  admitting  the  inferior  pleasures  and  arts  into  the  mixture 
(610).     There  can  be  no  dispute  about  stipulating  that  the  good  is 
to  include  all  knowledge  of  the  "  truer  "  type,  the  exact  knowledge 
of  the  timeless  things  ;   we  shall  certainly  require  for  the  best  life 
a  knowledge  of  "  righteousness  itself  "  and  the  intelligence  to  use 
the  knowledge,  and  the  same  considerations  will  apply  to  all  such 
knowledge  of  the  "  absolute/'    But  will  this  be  enough  for  the 
purposes  of  life  ?     If  a  man  is  to  live  a  life  among  men,  he  must  have 
some  at  least  of  the  inferior  knowledge  which  is  inexact.     A  man 
who  knew  only  the  "  absolute  "  and  exact  lines  and  circles  of  the 
geometer,  but  knew  nothing  of  the  rough  approximations  to  them 
with  which  life  presents  us,  would  not  even  know  how  to  find  his 
way  home.     (As  we  might  say,  a  chemical  balance  is  a  beautiful 
thing,  but  it  won't  do  to  weigh  your  butter  and  cheese  in.)     So  the 
intervals  we  make  on  our  musical  instruments  are  only  approxima- 
tions, they  are  not  "  true  " ;  but  a  man  must  be  conversant  with 
them,  as  well  as  with  the  mathematical  theory  of  harmonics,  unless 
he  is  to  go  through  life  with  none  but  the  "  unheard  "  melodies  for 


432          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

his  companions.  In  fact,  we  may  reasonably  let  in  the  whole  crowd 
of  second-class  knowledges;  some  of  them  we  really  need  if  we 
are  to  live  as  men  among  men,  and  none  of  them  will  do  us  any  harm, 
if  we  have  the  superior  knowledge  too,  and  so  are  not  in  danger 
of  mistaking  the  rough  approximation  for  something  better  (62a-d). 

Thus  we  have  let  all  the  "  water  "  go  into  the  bowl  in  which 
the  draught  of  "  happiness  "  is  to  be  brewed.  We  must  now  con- 
sider what  we  are  to  do  with  the  "honey."  Here,  again,  it  will  be 
safer  to  consider  the  ''unmixed  "  pleasures  first  and  the  "  mixed," 
which,  as  we  have  seen,  are  not  wholly  true  to  type,  afterwards. 
It  is  clear  that  we  shall  not  be  able  to  let  in  all  this  second  class 
without  reflection.  If  there  are  any  of  them  which  are  "  unavoid- 
able "  (dvayicauu,  sc.  such  as  arise  directly  from  the  functions  of 
sound  and  healthy  life  themselves),  they  must,  of  course,  be  ad- 
mitted. But  whether  we  can  admit  all  the  rest  depends  on  the 
question  whether  all  pleasures,  like  all  knowledges,  are  profitable, 
or,  at  worst,  harmless  (630).  To  decide  this  question  we  may  ask 
the  pleasures  themselves  whether  they  would  prefer  to  keep  house 
with  all  wisdom  and  knowledge,  or  by  themselves.  We  may  be 
sure  (since  we  have  seen  that  the  best  life  is  the  "  mixed  "  one)  that 
the  pleasures  would  reply  that  it  is  not  good  to  live  alone,  and  that 
the  best  companion  with  whom  to  keep  house  would  be  "  knowledge 
of  all  things  and  in  especial  of  ourselves  "  (630). 

Now  we  put  the  same  question  to  the  various  knowledges. 
"  Do  you  need  the  company  of  pleasure  ?  "  "In  particular,  do  you 
need,  over  and  above  our  class  of  true  pleasures,  the  company  of 
the  intense  and  violent  pleasures  ?  "  Knowledge  would  say  that, 
so  far  from  desiring  these  exciting  pleasures,  she  finds  them  a 
perpetual  hindrance  ;  they  vex  the  souls  in  which  she  has  taken 
up  her  abode  with  mad  frenzies,  and  destroy  her  offspring  by  pro- 
ducing forge tfulness  and  neglect.  She  would  claim  kinship  with 
Socrates'  class  of  "true"  and  "unmixed"  pleasures;  of  the  rest — 
those  which  are  "mixed"  satisfactions — she  would  accept  such  as 
accompany  health  and  a  sober  mind  and  any  form  of  goodness, 
but  reject  those  of  "  folly  and  badness  "  in  general,  as  obviously 
unfit  to  find  a  place  in  such  a  "  blend  "  as  we  are  contemplating 
(63^-640). x  There  is  only  one  further  ingredient  for  which  we  must 
stipulate — dA^eia,  "truth,"  "reality,"  "genuineness."  If  this  is 
left  out,  the  result  of  the  blending  itself  wfll  not  be  real  or  genuine. 
(The  bearing  of  this  remark  is  a  little  obscure,  but  it  is  probably 
meant  to  lead  up  to  the  next  stage  of  the  argument,  the  considera- 
tion of  the  relative  importance  to  be  laid  on  the  different  constituents 
cf  the  "  mixed  life  "  for  man  and  the  assigning  of  the  first  place  in 
it  to  its  rational  structure,  the  last,  to  the  "  harmless  "  pleasures.) 

We  have  now  tracked  down  the  good,  so  to  say,  to  its  very 

1  Thus  a  place  would  be  found  in  the  "  good  for  man  "  for  all  the  pleasure 
which  attends  the  healthy  and  morally  virtuous  satisfactions  of  bodily 
appetite."  It  is  not  expected  that  the  best  man  shall  not  enjoy  his  dinner 
when  he  is  hungry.  But  dinners  are  not  things  he  cares  supremely  about. 


THE  PHILEBUS  483 

doors.  It  only  remains  to  discriminate  the  relative  values  of  its 
various  ingredients  and  so  to  answer  the  question  we  have  been 
considering  so  long,  whether  intelligence  or  pleasure  is  more  akin 
to  the  principle  or  cause  which  makes  the  good  life  so  satisfactory 
to  us  all  (640).  We  may  say  at  once  that  what  makes  any  mixture 
or  blend  a  good  one  is  measure  and  proportion  (pfrpov,  y  TOV 
0-vp.fjitTpov  <£ixm).  Neglect  of  the  rule  of  due  proportion  makes  a 
"  mixture  "  unstable  and  vitiates  the  components.  Where  the 
rule  is  neglected,  you  get  not  a  genuine  "  mixture  "  but  a  mere 
"  mess.'1  The  good  is  thus  a  form  of  the  beautiful  (icaXdV),  for 
measure  and  proportion  are  the  secret  of  all  beauty  (6^c-e).  We 
may  thus  take  measure  or  proportion  (o-u/^cTpia),  beauty,  and  truth 
(or  reality,  dX??0€ia)  as  three  " forms"  (iSeat)  or  "notes'1  found  in 
the  good  and  say  that  the  goodness  of  our  "  mixture  "  is  due  to  the 
presence  of  this  trinity  in  unity  (650).  Our  business  is  now  to 
confront  first  intelligence  and  then  pleasure  successively  with  these 
three  distinguishable  but  inseparable  notes  of  the  good.  Let  us 
begin  with  the  note  of  dXr;0aa  (truth,  genuineness).  Pleasure  is  the 
"hollowest "  (dXa£on'oraToi/)  of  all  things,  i.e.  it  promises  to  be  so 
much  more  satisfactory  than  it  proves  to  be  ;  the  illusoriness  of  the 
"  pleasures  of  sex  "  is  a  notorious  case  in  point.  Intelligence  (vovs)  is 
either  the  same  thing  as  dX^eta,  or,  at  any  rate,  it  is  the  most  "genuine  " 
thing  in  the  world  (the  least  illusory,  6^c-d).  Next,  as  to  the  note  of 
"  measure  "  :  pleasure  notoriously  tends  to  wild  excess ;  there  is 
nothing  more  "  measured  "  than  intelligence  and  science  (65^).  And 
finally,  as  to  beauty.  There  is  no  uncomeliness  (ovSw  alcrxpov)  in 
wisdom  and  intelligence,  but  the  intensest  pleasures  are  so  unseemly 
that  we  think  the  spectacle  of  a  man  who  is  indulging  in  them  is 
either  ridiculous  or  disgraceful.  We  are  actually  ashamed  to  see  such 
a  sight,  and  think  that  it  ought  to  be  covered  by  darkness  (66a). 

We  may  now  draw  our  conclusion.  Pleasure  is  neither  the  best 
nor  the  second-best  thing.  We  must  give  the  first  place  to  "  measure, 
the  measured,  that  which  is  'in  place1"  (TO  Kcupun/);1  the  second 
to  proportion,  beauty,  completeness  (TO  o-v/^cTpov  KCU  KaXov  KCU 
TO  rc'Xcov  /cat  t/cavoV) ;  the  third  to  intelligence  and  wisdom  (vovs 
Kal  ^povrjcris) ;  the  fourth  to  "  sciences  and  arts  and  true  convictions  " 

(€7r«TT>7/Acu    Kal    Te^vai    Kal    So£ai    opOat)  \    the    fifth    to    the    class    of 

pleasures,  whether  involving  actual  sensation  or  not,  which  have  no 
pain  mixed  with  them  (the  "  pure  "  pleasures  of  the  discussion) : 
we  stop  short,  like  Orpheus,  with  the  sixth  "  generation  "  (66a-d).* 

1  The  concluding  words  of  66a  8  are  the  worst  textual  crux  in  Plato. 
The  mischief  is  in  the  dldiov.  Burnet's  suggestion  ryv  a  (—irp^r^v)  I8tav  is 
highly  attractive,  or  conceivably  we  might  read  alrlav,  rendering,  "you 
may  say  that  .  .  .  the  cause  has  been  hunted  down  in  the  region  of  pirpov, 
M.  Dies  holds  that  W  supports  a  variant  birbvoL  Tomura,  xM  vopl{eiv  nvb  %8tov 
ijprjjffai.  But  is  ijSiov  quite  in  place  here  ? 

2  This  might  mean  that  the  moderate  satisfactions  of  appetite,  which  we 
expect  to  find  in  the  sixth  place,  are  excluded  from  the  "good"  (on  the 


484          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

(For  the  precise  meaning  of  this  enumeration  I  would  refer  the 
reader  to  Appendix  B  in  Mr.  R.  G.  Bury's  edition  of  the  dialogue. 
I  understand  the  passage  in  a  way  which  is,  I  suppose,  much  the 
same  as  Mr.  Bury's.  Measure,  proportion,  rational  structure  are 
mentioned  first  because  they  have  a  cosmic  significance  ;  they  are 
found  in  the  "  great  world  "  without,  no  less  than  in  the  lesser 
world  of  man's  soul,  and  they  are  the  "  notes  "  of  good,  wherever 
found.  Then  €7ricnr?}/xai  and  "  pure "  pleasures  are  mentioned, 
in  that  order,  because  they  are  the  two  aspects  in  which  rational 
structure  and  law  show  themselves  in  human  mental  life,  and 
ImarTrjfJLaL  are  put  first,  because  we  have  just  seen  that  intelligence 
is  "  more  akin  to  "  rational  structure,  reveals  it  more  manifestly 
and  clearly  than  feeling.  There  is  no  question  of  introducing  into 
the  good  for  man  any  constituents  beyond  the  two  which  have  been 
contemplated  all  along,  intellectual  activity  and  grateful  feeling.) 

FORMAL  EPILOGUE  TO  THE  DISCUSSION  (66^-676). — Philebus 
had  originally  said  that  the  good  for  us  is  the  plenitude  of  pleasure 
(r/Sovi;/  Traora  *at  TrarreA^s) ,  Socrates  that  "intelligence"  (i/o9s)  is  at 
any  rate  (ye)  a  far  better  thing  for  man's  life  than  pleasure.  We 
long  ago  convinced  ourselves  that  neither  can  be  the  whole  of 
human  good,  since  neither  would  be  "  all-satisfying,"  apart  from 
the  other.  But  our  investigation  has  shown  us  that  "  intelligence  " 
is  at  any  rate  infinitely  (pvplw)  more  closely  related  to  the  "  victor  " 
(the  "  mixed  life  'f  which  proved  to  be  the  best  of  all  for  a  man)  than 
pleasure.  (The  point  is  that  though  the  best  life  includes  both 
elements,  it  is  the  element  of  rationality  which  gives  it  its  specific 
character.  A  man  is  not  a  creature  who  uses  an  intellect  to  contrive 
ingenious  devices  for  getting  pleasures,  but  a  creature  who  finds  it 
pleasant  to  practise  intellectual  activities.  Hume's  view  that  in 
action  reason  "is  and  ought  to  be  the  slave  of  the  passions  "  just 
inverts  the  true  relation.  Human  "  passions "  should  be  the 
servants  of  intelligence.)  Pleasure  is  not  the  good,  even  though 
all  the  horses  and  oxen  of  the  world  should  say  it  is,  with  the  assent 
of  the  "  many  "  who  think  the  "  lusts  of  beasts  "  better  evidence 
than  the  discourses  of  philosophers  (676). 

The  last  sentence  obviously  alludes,  in  its  reference  to  the  Ovjpiw 
epwras,  to  the  argument  of  Eudoxus,  afterwards  adopted  by 
Epicurus,  that  pleasure  must  be  "  the  good  "  because  it  is  that 
which  "  all  living  creatures  "  pursue  when  left  to  themselves  (E.N.  x. 
nj2b  9  ff.).  The  supposed  unmannerly  reference  to  Aristippus 
in  the  remark  about  the  "  horses  "  (tWoi)  is  a  mere  unhistorical 
fancy.  Even  if  Aristippus  had  been  aimed  at  in  the  criticism  of 
Hedonism,  such  an  allusion  would  be  impossible,  for  the  simple 
reason  that  the  leading  anti-Hedonist  of  the  Academy,  Speusippus, 

ground  that  they  are  not  actually  good  but  merely  harmless).  As  they  were 
admitted  at  63*,  however,  the  meaning  may  be  that  the  "  sixth  degree  "  is 
actually  counted  in  as  the  lowest  and  last.  This  makes  the  allusion  to 
"  Orpheus  "  (Fr.  14,  Kern)  more  apt.  The  theogonic  poet  quoted  must  have 
described  his  "  sixth  generation  "  of  deities  as  well  as  the  preceding  five. 


THE  PH1LEBUS  485 

whose  views  we  have  found  Plato  expressly  reproducing  in  two 
places,  had  a  "  horse  "  in  his  name  too. 


See  further : 

BURNET. — Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I.,  324-332. 

RITTER,  C. — Platon,  ii.  165-258,  497-554;  Platons  Dialog*,  68- 

97  ;   Neue  Untersuchungen  ueber  Platon,  95-173. 
RAEDER,  H. — Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung,  357-374. 
NATORP,  P. — Platons  Ideenlehre,  296-331. 
NETTLESHIP,  R.  L. — Plato's  Conception  of  Goodness  and  the  Good. 

(Works,  i.  307-336.) 
BAEUMKER,    C. — Das   Problem   der  Materie   in   der  griechischen 

Philosophie,  193-196.     (1890.) 

POSTE,  E. — The  "  Philebus  "  of  Plato.     (Oxford,  1860.) 
BURY,  R.  G.—The  "  Philebus  "  of  Plato.     (Cambridge,  1897.) 
DIES,  A. — Autour  de  Platon,  ii.,  385-399. 
STEWART,  J.  A. — Plato's  Doctrine  of  Ideas,  92-100. 
ROBIN,  L. — Platon,  c.    iv. 


CHAPTER   XVII 
TIMAEUS  AND  CRITIAS 

THE  Timaeus  stands  alone  among  the  Platonic  dialogues  in 
being  devoted  to  cosmology  and  natural  science.  Owing  to 
the  fact  that  the  first  two-thirds  of  it  were  continuously 
preserved  through  the  "  dark  ages  "  in  the  Latin  version  and  with 
the  commentary  of  Chalcidius,  it  was  the  one  Greek  philosophical 
work  of  the  best  age  with  which  the  west  of  Europe  was  well 
acquainted  before  the  recovery  of  Aristotle's  metaphysical  and 
physical  writings  in  the  thirteenth  century ;  it  thus  furnished  the 
earlier  Middle  Ages  with  their  standing  general  scheme  of  the 
natural  world.  In  the  present  volume  it  is  impossible  to  deal  with 
the  contents  of  the  dialogue  in  any  detail ;  I  have  tried  to  perform 
the  task  in  my  Commentary  on  Plato's  Timaeus  (Oxford,  1928), 
with  which  the  later  commentary  of  Professor  Cornford  (Plato's 
Cosmology,  London,  1937)  should  be  compared. 

The  date  of  composition  cannot  be  precisely  determined.  There 
is  no  external  evidence,  and  the  internal  evidence  of  style  only  serves 
to  show  that  the  dialogue  belongs  to  the  last  period  of  Plato's 
authorship  ;  thus  we  must  place  the  composition  at  some  time  after 
the  Sophistes,  i.e.  within  the  years  360-347.  It  is  quite  uncertain, 
so  far  as  I  can  see,  whether  we  should  regard  the  Timaeus  or  the 
Philebus  as  the  later  work.  As  to  the  date  of  the  imagined  con- 
versation I  think  it  is  possible  to  be  more  precise.  We  have  to 
consider  (a)  the  internal  evidence  of  the  Timaeus  itself,  (b)  the 
evidence  supplied  by  the  Republic,  (a)  The  interlocutors  in  the 
dialogue  are  Socrates,  Timaeus,  Critias,  and  Hermocrates.  Of 
Timaeus  nothing  is  known  except  what  we  learn  from  Plato,  that 
he  is  a  Locrian  from  South  Italy,  with  a  career  of  eminence  in  both 
science  and  politics  behind  him  (200).  From  the  fact  that  the 
doctrine  he  is  made  to  expound  is  recognizably  a  version  of  Pytha- 
goreanism  in  which  the  biology  and  medicine  of  Empedocles  is 
grafted  on  the  original  Pythagorean  mathematics,  we  can  really 
have  no  doubt  that  he  is  meant  to  be  a  Pythagorean  of  the  same 
type  as  the  more  famous  Philolaus.  This  suggests  that  he  is  at 
least  as  old  a  man  as  Socrates,  and  that  we  may  perhaps  connect 
what  we  are  told  of  the  magistracies  he  has  filled  with  the  facts 
about  Pythagorean  political  ascendancy  in  Magna  Graecia  in  the 
first  half  of  the  fifth  century.1  Hermocrates  is  plainly  the  famous 

1 1  cannot  agree  with  those  who  dispute  Plato's  intention  to  represent 
Timaeus  as  a  Pythagorean.  Everything  in  his  doctrine  can  be  traced  back 


TIMAEUS  AND   CRITIAS  437 

Syracusan  best  known  by  the  prominent  part  he  played  in  the 
defence  of  Syracuse  against  the  Athenian  Armada  of  415.  Socrates 
implies  (200)  that  Hermocrates  is  still  a  man  with  his  career  before 
him,  and  bases  his  estimate  of  him  on  the  general  report.  This 
shows  that  Hermocrates  is  a  stranger  at  Athens  and  indicates  that 
the  conversation  is  presumably  to  be  dated  not  too  long  after  the 
"  pan-Sicilian  Congress  "  at  Gela  in  425,  where  Hermocrates  seems 
to  have  first  made  his  reputation  (Thuc.  iv.  58). l  Critias  is  certainly 
not,  as  all  writers  before  Professor  Burnet  have  assumed,  Critias 
the  so-called  "  oligarch  "  who  figured  in  the  usurping  government 
of  404-3.  He  has  already  distinguished  himself  in  science  and 
politics  (200),  and  he  refers  pointedly  to  his  own  extreme  old  age 
and  the  way  in  which  he  remembers  the  distant  events  of  his  child- 
hood, though  he  can  hardly  recollect  what  he  has  been  told  yester- 
day (266).  He  also  says  that  his  great-grandfather  was  a  friend 
and  connexion  of  Solon  (20^),  and  that  he  himself,  as  a  boy  of 
ten  years  old,  used  to  sing  the  verses  of  Solon,  which  were  then  a 
"  novelty  "  (2i5).  All  this  shows  that  the  Critias  meant  is  the 
grandfather  of  the  "  oligarch/'  Plato's  own  great-grandfather.  Even 
so  we  have  to  suppose  him,  at  the  date  of  the  dialogue,  to  be  ex- 
tremely old.  (b)  The  Timaeus  unmistakably  announces  itself  as  in 
a  way  a  continuation  of  the  Republic.  Socrates  opens  the  dialogue 
by  recalling  the  main  heads  of  what  he  had  said  "  yesterday  "  to 
the  present  company  (17^-19^),  and  the  recapitulation  coincides 
exactly  with  the  contents  of  Republic  i.-v.  Thus  we  seem  directed 
to  date  the  discourse  of  Timaeus  two  days  after  the  conversa- 
tion in  the  house  of  Polemarchus.2  If  we  were  right  in  our  view 
of  the  dramatic  date  of  the  Republic,  this  brings  us  to  the  time 
of  the  peace  of  Nicias  or  very  shortly  before  it,  the  year  422  or  421. 
Such  a  date  fits  all  the  indications  of  the  Timaeus  itself.  It  enables 

to  Pythagorean  sources  except  the  use  of  the  four  Empedoclean  "  roots  "  and 
the  equally  Empedoclean  sense-physiology  and  medicine,  a  point  which  I  have 
tried  to  establish  in  detail  elsewhere.  For  the  evidence  that  Philolaus  simi- 
larly combined  Pythagorean  mathematics  with  Empedoclean  biology,  see 
Burnet,  E.G. Ph.*  278-279,  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I.,  88-89.  I  have  tried  to 
add  something  to  the  evidence  elsewhere.  The  name  is  not  given  as  that  of  a 
Locrian  by  lamblichus  in  his  catalogue,  but  he  mentions  a  Timaeus  among  the 
Crotoniates,  and  again  (unless  it  is  the  same  man)  among  the  Parians,  who 
precede  the  Locrians  immediately  in  his  list.  This  looks  as  though  the  name 
had  been  displaced  by  a  copyist.  Plato's  avoidance  of  the  name  of  Pythag- 
oras is  a  standing  habit  ;  it,  no  doubt,  has  to  do  with  the  disrepute  into 
which  the  word  was  brought  by  the  more  superstitious  members  of  the  order. 
1  It  is  impossible  to  imagine  the  meeting  as  taking  place  after  the  dispatch  of 
the  Athenian  fleet  to  Syracuse.  As  we  know  from  Xenophon  and  Diodorus, 
Hermocrates  was  serving  against  Athens  in  the  East  from  413  until  his 
descent  on  Sicily  in  409  or  408.  We  cannot  suppose  that  he  would  be  likely 
to  choose  Athens  as  a  place  to  visit  in  this  interval,  or  that  he  could  meet 
Socrates  there  on  friendly  terms,  still  less  that  Socrates  would  contrast  him, 
at  that  date,  as  a  man  with  a  career  to  make,  with  Timaeus  and  Critias  as 
men  whose  distinction  has  been  already  achieved. 

*  It  is,  however,  suggested  that  the  present  discourse  is  held  during  the 
Panathenaea,  which  do  not  fall  even  within  two  months  of  the  day  mentioned 
in  the  Republic  (the  feast  of  Bendis).  This  secures  us  against  connecting 
the  two  dialogues  too  closely. 

15 


438          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

us  to  understand  that  the  boyhood  of  old  Critias  would  fall  immedi- 
ately after  the  expulsion  of  the  Pisistratidae  from  Athens,  and  we 
can  guess  why  the  poems  of  Solon  would  be  likeVy  to  be  popular 
and  "  novel  "  at  that  date.  (Pisistratus  and  his  sons  are  not  likely 
to  have  encouraged  the  singing  of  them.)  It  also  gives  us  a  reason 
for  the  presence  of  a  distinguished  public  man  from  Locri  and  another 
from  Syracuse.  Only  a  year  or  two  before  the  peace  the  Athenians 
had  sent  envoys  on  a  tour  of  the  South  Italian  cities,  including 
Locri,  for  the  express  purpose  of  forming  a  league  to  keep  the  power 
of  Syracuse  in  check.  A  general  pacification  would,  of  course, 
leave  a  good  deal  to  be  "  redd  up  "  in  the  western  Mediterranean. 
We  may  be  sure  that  Timaeus  did  not  come  to  Athens  expressly 
to  talk  to  Socrates  about  the  creation  of  the  world.  We  see  also 
why  Hermocrates  is  known  to  Socrates  only  by  reports  of  his 
abilities  and  education.  And  it  is  significant  that,  if  we  are  right, 
the  date  at  which  Socrates  is  represented  as  listening  with  keen 
interest  to  a  cosmological  lecture  is  only  a  year  or  two  after  the 
burlesque  of  him  in  the  Clouds.  This  is  a  much  more  appropriate 
dramatic  date  than  one  later  in  his  life.  Hence  I  feel  little  doubt 
that  it  is  right. 

The  dialogue  falls  into  three  distinct  parts:  (a)  introductory 
recapitulation  of  the  contents  of  Republic  i.-v.  by  Socrates  (170- 
196),  with  expression  of  a  strong  desire  to  see  the  doctrine  there 
laid  down  embodied  in  a  dramatic  story  of  concrete  achievements 
(196-200)  ;  (b)  relation  by  Critias  of  the  alleged  heroic  exploit  of 
Athens  in  resisting  and  defeating  the  kings  of  Atlantis  (200-26^)  ; 
(c)  the  cosmological  discourse  of  Timaeus,  which  extends  unbroken, 
but  for  an  occasional  word  of  assent  from  Socrates,  to  the  end  of 
the  dialogue  (270-920).  We  may  consider  these  divisions  in  their 
order. 

(a)  Introduction  (170-200). — There  is  not  much  on  which  we 
need  make  any  comment.  It  is  useless  to  speculate  on  the  identity 
of  the  unnamed  person  who  has  been  kept  away  from  the  conversa- 
tion by  indisposition  and  whom  Timaeus  agrees  to  replace  as  speaker. 
As  Timaeus  takes  his  place,  we  are  no  doubt  to  understand  that  he 
belongs  to  the  same  group  of  "  Italian  "  philosophers.  Philolaus, 
as  Burnet  suggests,  would  suit  the  part,  or  we  might  perhaps  even 
think  of  Empedocles.  Plato  is  merely  intending  a  graceful  ex- 
pression of  the  debt  of  his  dialogue  to  fifth-century  "  Italians." 
The  most  striking  feature  of  the  recapitulation  of  the  Republic 
is  that  it  covers  only  the  ground  of  Books  I.-V.  Nothing  is  said 
of  the  philosopher-kings  and  their  education  in  mathematics  and 
dialectic,  of  the  Form  of  Good,  or  of  the  contents  of  Republic  viii.-x. 
I  suggest  that  the  most  likely  explanation  of  this  silence  is  that  which 
is  also  the  simplest.  Just  so  much  of  the  Republic,  and  no  more,  is 
recalled  as  will  be  an  appropriate  basis  for  the  story  of  the  Athenian 
victory  over  Atlantis.  Plato  is  quite  alive  to  the  fact  that  the 
philosopher-king  is  an  "ideal"  which  has  never  been  realized,  and 
therefore  abstains  from  an  attempt  to  exhibit  a  society  of  philo- 


TIMAEVS  AND  CRITIAS  439 

sopher-kings  in  action.  It  is  more  credible  that  there  should  be  an 
actual  society  at  the  level  of  that  described  in  Republic  i.-v.,  and 
he  feels  himself  equal  to  the  vivid  imaginative  delineation  of  its 
performances. 

The  remarks  with  which  Socrates  closes  his  recapitulation  are 
interesting  as  showing  that  Plato  fully  understood  that  his  own  hero 
had  his  definite  limitations.  Socrates,  as  he  says,  can  give  us  a 
picture  of  the  really  healthy  society,  but  he  cannot  "  make  the 
figures  move/1  He  cannot  tell  an  actual  story  of  the  behaviour  of 
such  a  society  in  a  life-like  way,  and  the  reason  is  that  he  has  not 
enough  personal  experience  of  the  work  of  the  active  statesman. 
He  remains,  after  all,  something  of  the  theorist  and  doctrinaire 
(igb-e).  This  was,  in  fact,  true  of  Socrates,  and  it  helps  to  explain 
the  fact  that  his  influence  on  many  of  his  associates  was  not  wholly 
beneficial.  Association  with  him  in  early  life  was  not  an  unmixed 
good  for  the  average  lad  ;  so  far,  there  was  just  a  slight  basis  of 
foundation  for  the  distrust  with  which  practical  workers  of  the 
democratic  constitution,  like  Anytus,  regarded  him. 

(b)  The  Story  of  Atlantis  (200-25^). — The  story  told  by  Critias 
is  to  the  effect  that  nine  thousand  years  before  the  time  of  Solon 
Athens  had  enjoyed  just  such  institutions  as  those  described  in 
Republic  i.-v.  Her  soil  was  then  wonderfully  rich  and  fertile,  as 
it  had  not  suffered  from  the  denudation  which  has  since  reduced 
the  district  of  Attica  to  a  rocky  skeleton.  The  prehistoric  Athen- 
ians, strong  only  in  public  spirit  and  sound  moral,  encountered  and 
defeated  the  federated  kings  of  Atlantis,  an  island  lying  in  the 
Atlantic  outside  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  who  had  already  success- 
fully overrun  all  Europe  as  far  as  Italy,  and  all  Africa  as  far  as 
the  Egyptian  border.  Afterwards  both  the  prehistoric  Athenian 
victors  and  the  island  Atlantis  were  overwhelmed  in  a  single  day 
and  night  of  earthquake  and  inundation.  The  story  only  survived 
in  the  records  of  Egypt,  where  Solon  heard  it  when  on  his  travels. 

It  should  be  clear  that  this  whole  tale  is  Plato's  own  invention. 
He  could  not  tell  us  so  much  more  plainly  than  he  does  in  the 
Critias  (ii3&),  when  he  makes  Critias  appeal  to  the  testimony  of 
"  family  papers  "  as  his  sole  evidence  for  the  narrative.  Not  only 
the  existence  of  the  island-kingdom,  but  the  statement  that  Solon 
had  ever  contemplated  a  poem  on  the  subject  is  represented  as  a 
"  family  tradition  "  ;  in  other  words,  nothing  was  ever  really 
known  of  any  such  intention.  It  is*  not  hard  to  see  what  the 
materials  for  the  tale  are.  The  alleged  shallowness  of  the  sea 
just  outside  the  "  pillars  of  Heracles/'  and  perhaps  tales  of  Cartha- 
ginian sailors  about  islands  in  the  Atlantic,  are  the  foundation  for 
the  story  of  the  lost  island  ;  the  account  of  its  destruction  is  mani- 
festly based  on  the  facts  of  the  great  earthquake  and  tidal  wave 
of  the  year  373  which  ravaged  the  Achaean  coast.  The  main 
conception  of  the  successful  conflict  of  a  small  and  patriotic  nation 
in  arms  against  an  invader  with  vast  material  resources  and  im- 
mense superiority  in  the  art  of  military  engineering — a  point  on 


440          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

which  the  Critias  lays  great  stress — is  clearly  suggested  by  the 
actual  facts  of  the  Athenian  resistance  to  Darius  and  Xerxes. 
Plato  has  projected  the  events  of  the  Persian  wars  backwards, 
magnified  their  scale,  and  thus  made  the  moral,  that  numbers, 
wealth,  and  engineering  skill  are  no  match  for  the  national  spirit 
of  a  free  people,  the  more  obvious  to  the  dull.  Strictly  speaking, 
the  whole  narrative  has  no  logical  connexion  with  the  special  theme 
of  the  Timaeus.  Its  real  function  is  to  serve  as  a  prelude  to  the 
Critias,  where  the  narrative  now  briefly  summarized  was  to  be  told 
with  full  detail.  As  Critias  puts  it,  at  the  end  of  his  story  (2ja-b), 
the  division  of  labour  between  speakers  is  to  be  that  Timaeus 
shall  now  describe  the  formation  of  the  world  and  of  man,  as  its 
closing  "  work/'  Socrates  is  then  to  be  understood  to  have  ex- 
plained how  man  is  educated,  and  it  is  left  for  Critias  to  describe 
the  heroic  achievements  of  the  men  whose  production  has  been 
dealt  with  by  Timaeus  and  their  education  discussed  by  Socrates. 
Thus  the  logical  order  of  the  three  dialogues  would  have  been 
Timaeus,  Republic,  Critias.  The  express  allusion  in  this  passage 
to  the  contribution  of  Socrates  seems  to  show  that  this  definitely 
means  the  Republic,  the  only  Platonic  work  where  Socrates  ex- 
pressly discusses  the  question  of  educational  method.  From  the 
absence  of  any  reference  to  a  discourse  of  Hermocrates,  and  the 
difficulty  of  seeing  what  has  been  left  for  him  to  discourse  upon, 
I  should  infer  that  it  was  never  Plato's  intention  to  carry  the  scheme 
beyond  the  Critias.  Hermocrates,  the  youngest  member  of  the 
group,  was  probably  to  be  a  listener,  not  a  speaker. 

(c)  The  Discourse  of  Timaeus  (270-920).—  The  lecture  which 
Timaeus  now  delivers  covers  the  whole  ground  of  natural  knowledge 
from  astronomy  to  pathology  and  psychophysics.  It  will  be 
impossible  to  deal  with  more  than  its  most  outstanding  features. 
It  starts  with  two  fundamental  positions  :  (a)  that  the  sensible 
world,  being  sensible,  "  becomes,"  or,  as  we  might  say,  is  a  world 
of  "  happenings  "  or  "  events  "  ;  (b)  that  whatever  "  becomes  "  has 
a  cause,  by  which  Timaeus  means  that  it  is  the  product  of  an  agent 
(280-c).  The  "  artisan  "  or  "  craftsman  "  (%xtovpyo's)  who  makes  the 
world  thus  comes  into  the  story,  and  it  is  assumed  that  this  maker 
is  God.  Now  a  craftsman  always  works  with  a  model  or  archetype 
before  him,  and  so  we  must  ask  whether  the  model  on  which  the 
world  has  been  made  is  itself  something  that  has  "  become  "  or  some- 
thing eternal.  Since  the  maker  is  the  best  of  all  causes  and  the 
thing  he  makes  the  best  of  all  effects,  clearly  the  model  of  which 
the  sensible  world  is  a  "  copy  "  or  "  likeness  "  (CIKWV)  is  eternal  (290). 
(In  more  modern  language,  it  is  meant  that  the  natural  world  is  not 
constituted  by  "  events  "  only,  but  by  events  and  the  objects  (in 
Professor  Whitehead's  sense)  situated  in  the  events,  and  this  is 
why  it  is  intelligible  and  can  be  known.)  This  leads  us  to  lay  down 
an  important  canon  of  the  degree  of  truth  to  be  expected  in  natural 
science.  Discourse  about  the  fixed  and  unchanging  archetype, 
or  model,  can  be  exact  and  final ;  it  has  the  definitiveness  of  Us 


TIMAEUS  AND  CRITIAS  441 

object  :  discourse  about  its  sensible  copy,  which  is  continually 
varying  and  changing,  can  only  be  approximate.  Hence  in  natural 
science,  we  have  no  right  to  demand  more  than  "  likely  stories/'  i.e. 
in  metaphysics  and  mathematics  there  can  be  finality  ;  in  the 
natural  sciences  we  have  to  be  content  with  approximate  and 
tentative  results,  though  our  business  is  to  make  our  approxima- 
tions as  accurate  as  we  can  (2gb-d).  In  other  words,  physical 
science  is  progressive  in  a  sense  in  which  metaphysics  and  mathe- 
matics are  not.  (Newton's  gravitation  formula  may  be  a  "first 
approximation "  on  which  later  physicists  can  improve  ;  such 
a  formula  as  cos0  =  £(^l+£-*1)  is  no  "first  approximation  "  and 
there  is  no  improving  on  it.)  This  principle,  that  a  proposition 
of  physics  is  always  "  approximate/'  and  that  none  is  therefore 
beyond  the  possibility  of  correction,  is  one  so  important  that  Timaeus 
is  careful  to  call  repeated  attention  to  it  in  connexion  with  the 
special  scientific  hypotheses  he  propounds  to  explain  special  groups 
of  facts.  A  simple  modern  illustration  would  be  the  consideration 
that  all  actual  measurements  of  physical  magnitudes  are  approxi- 
mate, and  that  no  determination  of  such  a  magnitude  by  experi- 
mental methods  can  be  trusted,  unless  it  is  accompanied  by  a 
statement  of  the  "  probable  error."  When  we  are  told  that  all 
our  natural  knowledge  is  only  a  "  likely  story,"  it  is  not  meant  that 
we  may  substitute  fairy  tales  for  science  ;  what  is  meant  is  that  while 
we  must  make  our  results  as  precise  as  we  can,  we  must  remember 
that  they  are  all  liable  to  improvement.  Our  best  measurements 
may  be  superseded  ;  our  most  satisfactory  explanatory  hypotheses 
may  always  have  to  be  modified  in  the  light  of  overlooked  or  freshly 
discovered  facts.  What  Timaeus  is  really  trying  to  formulate  is 
no  fairy  tale,  but,  as  we  shall  see,  a  geometrical  science  of  nature. 

Next  we  may  ask  ourselves  why  the  Maker  produced  a  world  at 
all.  He  was  perfectly  good,  and  for  that  very  reason  did  not  want 
to  keep  his  goodness  to  himself,  but  to  make  something  like  himself. 
So  he  took  over  the  whole  of  the  "  visible/'  which  was  in  a  condi- 
tion of  chaotic  disorder,  and  made  it  into  an  ordered  system,  since 
order  is  better  than  chaos.  For  the  same  reason,  he  put  mind 
(vovs)  into  it,  and,  as  mind  can  only  exist  in  a  soul  (1/0^77),  he  gave 
it  a  soul,  and  thus  the  sensible  world  became  "  by  the  providence 
of  God,  a  living  being  with  soul  and  mind  "  (306).  The  model  in 
the  likeness  of  which  he  made  it  was,  of  course,  a  vor^rov  or  "  in- 
telligible," something  complete  and  whole  (rcAcov),  and  something 
living.  The  sensible  world,  then,  is  the  sensible  embodiment  of  a 
living  creature  or  organism  (£o>ov)  of  which  all  other  living  creatures 
are  parts.  And  there  is  only  one  "  world  "  of  sense  (as  against 
the  Milesian  tradition  of  the  "  innumerable  "  worlds).  For  the 
model  is  one,  and  a  perfect  copy  of  it  will  reproduce  its  uniqueness 
(300-316).  < 

Thus,  in  the  scheme  of  Timaeus,  we  see  that  the  "efficient 
cause  "  of  the  world  is  thought  of  definitely  as  a  "  personal  "  God, 
and  this  "  creator  "  or  "  maker  "  is,  strictly  speaking,  the  only  God, 


442          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

in  our  sense  of  the  word,  the  dialogue  recognizes.  Later  on  we  shall 
find  the  name  Qtos  given  both  to  the  world  itself  as  a  whole  and  to 
certain  parts  or  denizens  of  it,  but  this  must  not  mislead  us.  These 
Scot  are  all  "  created  "  ;  their  raison  d'etre  is  the  will  of  the  Sry/xtovpyo? 
(2ge,  416),  who  is  thus  distinguished  from  them  as  God  is  from 
"  creatures  "  in  Christian  theology.  The  formal  cause  of  the  world, 
however,  is  not  God  but  the  "  intelligible  living  creature,"  the 
auro  o  co-rt  £<poi/,  which  God  contemplates  as  the  model  for  his  work. 
The  language  used  about  this  model  shows  that  we  are  to  think  of 
it  as  a  form,  the  "  form  "  of  an  organism  of  which  all  other 
organisms  are  parts.  It  thus  has  the  peculiarity  that  there  is  only 
one  unique  "  sensible  "  which  "  partakes  *'  of  it. 

It  may  naturally  be  asked  how  much  of  this  can  be  conceived 
to  be  serious  Platonic  teaching  and  how  much  is  mere  imaginative 
symbolism  ?  No  one,  of  course,  could  answer  the  question  pre- 
cisely ;  possibly  Plato  himself  could  not  have  made  a  hard-and-fast 
distinction  between  philosophical  content  and  mythical  form.  But 
one  or  two  points  are  important.  It  would  stultify  the  whole  story 
to  follow  the  example  of  some  interpreters,  who  wish  to  find  some- 
thing like  the  philosophy  of  Spinoza  in  Plato,  by  making  the 
"  artisan  "  a  mythical  symbol  of  his  "  model/'  the  vorjrov  fu>ov. 
This  may  or  may  not  be  good  philosophy  and  theology,  but  it  is 
not  the  thought  of  Plato,  as  we  shall  see  more  clearly  when  we  come 
to  deal  with  the  doctrine  of  God  in  the  Laws.  God  and  the  forms 
have  to  be  kept  distinct  in  Plato  for  the  reason  that  the  activity  of 
God  as  producing  a  world  "  like  "  the  forms  is  the  one  explanation 
Plato  ever  offers  of  the  way  in  which  the  "  participation  "  of  things 
in  forms  is  effected.  If  "  God  "  simply  meant  the  same  thing  as 
the  forms,  or  as  a  supreme  form,  it  would  remain  a  mystery  why 
there  should  be  anything  but  the  forms,  why  there  should  be  any 
"  becoming  "  at  all.  How  far  the  explanation  that  God  "  makes  " 
a  world  on  the  model  of  the  forms  was  taken  by  Plato  to  be  a  literal 
statement  of  truth  is  a  question  that  may  be  left  to  anyone  who  is 
bold  enough  to  pronounce  exactly  how  literally  Leibniz  intended  his 
similar  language  about  God's  "  choice  of  the  best  "  as  the  reason 
why  the  actual  world  is  actual.  The  one  thing  which  is  clear  from 
the  Laws  is  that  God,  in  Plato,  is  a  "  soul/1  not  a  form. 

A  more  legitimate  question  is  whether  God  in  the  Timaeus  is 
quite  all  we  mean  by  a  "  creator."  Are  we  to  take  seriously  the 
representation,  which  runs  through  the  dialogue,  of  God's  action 
as  the  imposing  of  order  on  a  pre-existing  chaos  ?  Does  Plato 
mean  that  the  world  was  formed  out  of  pre-existing  materials  ? 
On  this  point  we  find  a  discrepancy  of  interpretation  springing  up  in 
the  first  generation  of  the  Academy  itself.  Aristotle,  as  is  well 
known,  insists  on  finding  in  the  Timaeus  the  doctrine  that  the  world 
is  ytvi/r/ros  (''had  a  beginning"),  and  is  severely  critical  of  this 
error,  as  he  regards  it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Platonists  for  the 
most  part — the  Neoplatonists  unanimously  —  adopt  the  view, 
originally  propounded  by  Xenocrates,  that  the  representation  of 


TIMAEUS  AND  CRITIAS  443 

the  world  as  having  a  beginning  is  adopted  simply  "  for  convenience 
of  exposition  "  (StSao-KaXtas  XO-PW),  as  a  geometer  talks  of  "  drawing  " 
a  line,  when  all  that  he  does  is  to  point  out  that  the  existence 
of  the  line  is  already  implied  by  our  initial  postulates.1  Thus, 
on  their  view,  the  account  of  the  world,  or  rather  its  constit- 
uents, as  they  were  before  God  began  his  work,  is  merely  a  picture  of 
the  sort  of  thing  you  would  have  left  on  your  hands  if  you  tried 
to  do  what  you  never  can  do  successfully,  to  think  away  all  traces 
of  the  order  and  structure  in  which  God's  authorship  of  things  reveals 
itself.  The  only  two  Platonists  who  are  known  to  have  taken 
Aristotle's  view  on  this  question  are  Plutarch  and  Atticus,  a  writer 
of  the  Antonine  age.  It  is  significant  that  their  attempt  to  take 
the  words  of  Timaeus  literally  gets  them  into  very  grave  difficulties. 
Since  the  undoubted  Platonic  doctrine,  expounded  most  fully  in  the 
Laws,  is  that  "  soul  "  is  the  cause  of  all  movements,  Plutarch  finds 
himself  bound  to  discover  in  the  Laws  the  doctrine  that  there  is  an 
"  evil  "  world-soul,  which  he  supposes  to  have  animated  the  original 
chaos.  Though  this  discovery  has  been  followed  in  modern  times 
by  such  scholars  as  Zeller,  it  is  certainly  a  mere  "mare's  nest.1' 
The  words  of  the  Laws  say  no  more  than  that,  since  there  is  disorder 
in  the  world  as  well  as  order,  there  must  be  some  soul  or  souls  other 
than  God  to  cause  the  disorder.2  And  we  may  be  sure  that  Aristotle 
would  never  have  been  silent  about  a  doctrine  which  would  be,  to 
him,  sheer  blasphemy,  if  he  had  known  of  it  as  a  Platonic  theory. 

If  we  look  at  the  text  of  the  Timaeus,  we  shall  see  that  at  any 
rate  Plato  does  not  mean  to  say  that  there  ever  was  a  time  before 
God  constructed  the  world,  since  he  tells  us,  as  Aristotle  allows,3 
that  time  and  the  world  "began"  together,  God,  in  fact,  making 
both  of  them.  Thus  the  language  which  seems  to  imply  a  primi- 
tive state  of  pure  chaos  cannot  be  meant  seriously,  and  so  far 
Xenocrates  seems  to  be  right  in  his  interpretation.  (This  would 
leave  it  a  logical  possibility  that  the  series  of  events  had  a  first 
member,  and  that  the  interval  between  the  first  member  and  the 
event  which  is  my  writing  of  these  words,  is  a  finite  number  of 
years,  but  I  do  not  think  any  scholar  acquainted  with  Greek  thought 
is  likely  to  suppose  Plato  to  be  contemplating  this  alternative.) 
Again,  as  will  be  clearer  from  what  we  shall  have  to  say  later  on 
about  the  use  of  the  notion  of  "necessity/1  it  seems  plain  that  the 

*For  Aristotle's  interpretation,  see  Physics,  2516  17,  de  Caelo,  280030, 
Metaph.  10720  i.  Since  he  comments  on  the  fact  that  the  dialogue  makes 
time  and  the  world  begin  together,  he  is  presumably  alive  to  the  point  that 
limaeus  does  not  ascribe  a  beginning  to  nature  in  the  usual  sense  of  that 
phrase.  For  the  explanation  of  Xenocrates,  see  Plutarch,  de  Animae  Pro- 
creatione  in  Timaeo,  10130-6,  where  it  is  admitted  that  on  this  point  the 
Academy  in  general  followed  Xenocrates. 

1  Laws,  x.  Sg6e,  where  all  that  is  said  is  that,  since  there  is  disorder  and 
"  dysteleology  "  in  the  world,  the  perfectly  good  soul  cannot  be  the  only  soul 
there  is  ;  there  must  be  one  or  more  faulty  souls.  Neither  Plutarch  nor  Zeller 
had  any  right  to  manufacture  an  "  evil  world-soul "  out  of  this  straightforward 
rejection  of  Pantheism. 

*  Physics,  2516  17,  Metaph.  10720  l. 


444          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Timaeus  knows  of  no  external  limitation  imposed  on  God's  will  by 
conditions  independent  of  God  himself.  The  "  maker's  "  goodness 
is  the  whole  and  complete  explanation  of  the  very  existence  of 
the  natural  world.  This  should  justify  us  in  saying  that  the 
"  Demiurge  "  really  is  thought  of  as  a  Creator  in  the  full  sense  of  the 
word.  Probably  Xenocrates  may  also  have  been  right  in  taking 
the  dialogue  to  imply  the  "  eternity  of  the  world  "  in  the  sense  in 
which  that  phrase  is  commonly,  but  inaccurately,  used,  that  the  order 
of  events  never  had  a  first  member.  It  still  remains  true  that,  in 
Plato's  own  more  accurate  terminology,  the  world  is  a  yeyoi/o's, 
"something  that  has  become/'  not  dtStov,  eternal.  Even  if  there 
never  was  a  first  event,  everything  sensible  has  "  emerged  "  as  the 
result  of  a  process ;  in  the  Platonic  conception  the  world  is  always 
"  in  evolution,"  even  if  the  evolution  never  began  and  will  never 
come  to  an  end.  This  is  why  the  world,  unlike  God,  has  a  history. 
It  is  always  getting  itself  made  ;  there  is  never  a  point  at  which  it  is 
full-made. 

The  story  of  the  making  we  cannot  here  follow  far  into  its 
details.  Since  natural  things  can  be  seen  and  grasped,  fire  (light) 
and  earth  must  be  among  their  constituents.  To  combine  two 
such  terms  in  a  stable  way,  there  must  be  a  "  mean  "  between  them. 
But  fire  and  earth  are  volumes  and  have  three  dimensions.  Hence 
you  cannot  insert  a  single  mean  proportional  between  them,  but 
need  two.1  This  need  is  met  by  air  and  water.  Fire  is  to  air 
what  air  is  to  water  and  water  to  earth.  This  playful  application 
of  the  doctrine  of  the  geometrical  mean  effects  a  transition  from 
Pythagorean  mathematics  to  the  four  "  roots  "  of  Empedocles. 
We  shall  see  shortly  that  for  Timaeus  they  are  not  "  elements  " 
(316-32^).  God  used  up  the  whole  of  these  materials  in  making 
the  world.  It  excretes  nothing  and  assimilates  nothing,  and  this 
secures  it  against  age  or  disease.  Its  form  was  appropriately  made 
spherical,  since  the  sphere  has  the  greatest  volume  of  all  bodies  with 
the  same  perimeter,  and  is  therefore  the  right  figure  for  that  which 
is  to  contain  everything.  It  was  given  no  sense-organs,  since  there 
is  nothing  outside  itself  to  be  apprehended,  no  digestive  organs, 
as  there  is  nothing  it  can  take  in  as  food,  and  no  organs  of  loco- 
motion, for  it  has  nowhere  to  travel.  It  needed  no  hands,  for 
there  is  nothing  for  it  to  grasp  or  repel.  Being  alive,  however, 
it  moves  with  the  most  uniform  of  all  motions,  uniform  rotation 
on  its  own  axis.  Finally,  we  must  add  that  it  was  animated  all 
through  with  a  \l/\)\r),  and  this  was  the  generation  of  a  "  blessed 
god  "  (320-346). 

We  have  begun,  however,  at  the  wrong  end.  We  should  have 
described  first  the  fashioning  of  the  world's  soul,  since  soul  takes 
precedence  of  body  in  order  of  "  production  "  as  well  as  of  worth 

1  The  allusion  is  to  the  famous  problem  of  the  "  duplication  of  the  cube," 
connected  by  later  anecdote  with  Plato's  own  name.  The  meaning  of  Timaeus 
is  clearly  that  no  one  rational  "  mean  "  can  be  inserted  between  two  integers, 
when  each  is  the  product  of  three  prime  factors  and  no  more. 


TIMAEUS  AND   CRITIAS  445 

(since,  on  Plato's  view,  soul  initiates  all  movements).  The  world's 
soul  has  three  constituents  :  (a)  a  Being  which  is  intermediate 
between  that  which  is  always  "  self-same  "  and  that  which  "  be- 
comes and  is  divisible  "  in  bodies  ;  (b)  a  similarly  "  intermediate  " 
kind  of  Sameness,  and  (c)  of  Otherness.  God  thus  makes  the  soul 
as  a  tertium  quid  between  the  eternal  and  the  temporal.1  Next 
he  "  divided  "  the  result  in  accord  with  the  intervals  of  a  musical 
scale  which  Timaeus  describes.2  (Apparently  we  are  to  imagine 
a  long  ribbon  with  intervals  marked  on  it  at  distances  corre- 
sponding to  the  numbers  indicated  by  the  directions  for  making 
the  notes  of  the  scale.)  Next,  the  ribbon  was  split  longitudinally 
into  two  halves,  which  were  laid  cross-wise,  thus  +  .  Then  each 
ribbon  was  bent  into  a  circle  so  as  to  give  two  circles,  in  planes 
at  right  angles  to  one  another,  with  double  contact,  like  the  equator 
and  a  meridian  on  a  sphere.  The  outermost  of  these  circles  was 
called  that  of  the  Same,  the  innermost  that  of  the  Other.  The 
circle  of  the  Same  was  made  to  revolve  "  to  the  right,"  that  of  the 
"  Other  "  was  subdivided  into  seven  concentric  circles  at  unequal 
distances  from  one  another,  which  were  made  to  revolve  with  un- 
equal velocities  "  to  the  left  "  (340-36^).  We  learn  a  little  later 
that  the  inclination  of  the  two  circles  was  made  oblique  (390), 
so  that  they  turn  out  in  the  end  to  stand  for  the  sidereal  equator 
and  the  ecliptic,  their  revolutions  being  the  (apparent)  diurnal 
revolution  of  the  "  starry  heavens  "  and  the  orbits  of  the  sun  and 
the  planets  in  the  Zodiac  respectively.  It  must  be  carefully  noted 
that  nothing  is  said  of  "  spheres/'  and,  again,  that  as  usual  in  the 
classical  period,  the  orbit  of  a  heavenly  body  is  thought  of  as  itself 
revolving,  like  a  cart-wheel,  and  carrying  round  the  body  which  is 
set  in  it.  We  have  heard  now  of  the  orbits  of  the  whole  and  of  the 
seven  planets,  but  so  far  nothing  has  been  said  about  any  bodies 
which,  as  we  should  say,  "  revolve  in  "  these  orbits.  We  are  now 
at  last  (36^)  told  that  the  creator  finally  constructed  the  body  of 
the  world  "  within  "  its  soul  and  adapted  the  two  ;  this  begins 
the  "  unceasing  and  reasonable  life  "  of  the  KOO-/AOS  as  an  organism. 
The  circle  of  the  Same  and  the  Other,  being  circles  primarily  "in 
the  soul  "  of  the  world,  have  an  epistemological  as  well  as  an 
astronomical  significance.  Their  absolutely  uniform  revolutions 
symbolize — perhaps  Timaeus  means  that  they  actually  embody — 

1  I  have  adopted  the  exegesis  given  by  Mr.  Cornford  in  Plato's  Cosmology 
as  convincing,  and  modified  these  sentences  accordingly. 

*  For  the  construction  of  this  scale — its  compass  is  four  octaves  and  a  sixth 
— see  Tim.  356-366.  Modern  editors  and  translators  in  general  have,  in  my 
opinion  all  been  led  into  errors  by  exaggerated  deference  to  Boeckh,  who,  in 
his  turn,  has  been  misled  by  an  erroneous  statement  in  Timaeus  Locrus  about 
the  sum  of  the  terms  of  the  progression.  That  Boeckh  and  his  followers, 
at  least,  must  be  wrong  seems  to  be  shown  by  their  twice  introducing 
into  their  scale  the  interval  called  the  dTroro/ziJ  or  major  semitone.  As 
Proclus  says,  the  silence  of  Timaeus  shows  that  he  does  not  intend  to  admit 
this  interval,  but  only  the  minor  semitone,  or  Xer/^ia,  which  he  is  careful  to 
describe. 


446          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

in  the  one  case,  science  of  the  eternal  and  unchanging,  in  the  other 
true  conviction  (8o£a)  about  the  temporal  (37#-c).  (We  must 
remember  that  the  cosmic  animal  is  a  rational  animal.) 

The  creator  next  proposed  to  make  his  work  even  more  like 
the  model  on  which  he  had  designed  it.     He  could  not  make  it, 
like  its  model,  eternal  (<u8tos)  (since  nothing  sensible  can  be  so), 
but  he  made  it  as  nearly  eternal  as  he  could.     He  devised  a  "  moving 
image  of  eternity,"  which  he  called  time.    Time  is  to  eternity  as 
number  is  to  unity  ;    its  absolutely  uniform  flow  is  an  imperfect 
mirroring  of  the  self-sameness  of  eternity,  and  time  is  the  character- 
istic form  of  the  sensible.     We  try  to  speak  of  the  eternal  as  that 
which  "  was  and  is  and  is  to  be."     But  strictly,  what  is  eternal 
simply  "  is  "  ;  we  must  not  say  that  it  "  was  "  or  "  will  be/'  for  such 
language  can  only  be  used  properly  of  what  "  happens/1     So  again 
we  say  that  the  past  is  past,  the  future  is  to  come,  the  non-existent 
is   non-existent.     But    all    such   language,    which    ascribes    being 
to  what  is  mere  "  becoming  "  and  even  to  "  what  is  not/'  is  un- 
scientific l  (37^-386).     The  true  state  of  the  case  is  that  the  model 
eternally  is,  its  sensible  embodiment  has  been  going  on  and  will  be 
going  on  all  through  time  (380).     If  there  is  to  be  time,  there  must 
be  perceptible  bodies  with  uniform  movements  to  serve  as  measures 
of  it,  and  so  God  devised  the  sun  and  the  other  "  planets  "  and  put 
them  into  the  orbits  provided  for  them  by  the  splitting  of  the  circle 
of  the  Other.    Their  order,  reckoning  outwards  from  the  earth, 
is  Moon,  Sun,  Hesperus,  the  "  star  of  Hermes,"  then  the  three 
"  outer"  planets,  for  which  no  names  are  given  here.     The  sun, 
Hesperus,  and  the  "star  of  Hermes"  have  the  same  "  period," 
but  the  two  latter  are  in  an  unexplained  way  opposed  to  the  sun, 
so  that  they  are  always  catching  him  up  and  being  caught  up  by 
him.    The  details  about  the  apparent  behaviour  of  the  others  would 
require  more  time  than  we  can  spare  for  their  description.    The 
important  points  to  remember  are  that  their  velocities  are  different, 
that  each  of  them  has  two  motions,  one  communicated  to  it  by  the 
outermost  circle,  that  of  the  Same  (which  revolves  from  E.  to  W. 
with  a  period  of  twenty-four  hours),  another,  oblique  to  this,  and 
with  a  longer  period  (the  planet's  "  year  "),  from  W.  to  E.     The 
result  is  that  the  actual  visible  movements  are  complicated  "  cork- 
screws "   (IXtKcs).     Men  ought   to    understand,   as   they  do  not, 
that  the  components  of  the   movements  of  all  are  perpetually 
uniform  and  regular,  and  are  "  time  "  just  as  much  as  a  lunar 
month,  or  a  solar  year.    There  is  a  great  period,  the  longest  of  all, 
at  the  completion  of  which  all  the  planets  are  once  more,  relatively 
to  the  sidereal  heavens  and  to  one  another,  in  the  same  positions. 
"  To  enable  them  to  see  their  way  "  round  these  circuits,  a  great 

1  Timaeus,  we  see,  is  not  allowed  to  show  any  consciousness  of  the  important 
logical  results  Plato  had  reached  in  the  Sophistes.  This  is  presumably  because 
his  discourse  must  be  kept  within  limits  imposed  by  the  assumption  that  he  is  a 
fifth-century  Pythagorean.  All  through  the  dialogue  we  need  to  remember 
that  the  speaker  is  not  Plato,  and  that  Plato  need  not  be  supposed  to  regard 
his  utterances  as  a  complete  exposition  of  his  qwn 


TIMAEUS  AND  CRITIAS  447 

light  (the  sun)  was  kindled  in  the  circle  next  but  one  to  the  earth 


God  had  now  to  make  the  various  lesser  animals  which  were  to 
inhabit  the  different  regions  of  the  universe.  This  was  done  by 
reproducing  the  various  forms  of  organism  mind  discovers  in  the 
form  of  "  living  being."  Of  these  there  are  four,  each  inhabiting 
its  own  region  :  gods  who  live  in  the  sky,  winged  creatures  who 
inhabit  the  air,  aquatic  creatures,  and  land-animals.  The  "  gods  " 
were  made  approximately  of  pure  fire,  given  spherical  form,  distri- 
buted over  the  heaven  which  revolves  with  the  circle  of  the  Same, 
and  given  a  double  movement—  motion  with  the  circle  of  the  Same 
(i.e.  a  diurnal  revolution),  and  an  axial  revolution  of  their  own. 
(Thus  the  "  gods  "  of  Timaeus  are  simply  the  stars.  We  gather  that 
they  are  self-luminous,  since  they  are  made  of  fire,  and  from  com- 
parison of  the  mention  of  their  axial  rotations,  with  the  absence  of 
any  corresponding  statement  about  the  planets,  we  may  (perhaps  ?) 
infer  that  the  planets  are  not  supposed  to  have  any  such  rotations.) 
As  for  the  earth,  our  mother,  God  made  it  for  "  a  guardian  and 
artificer  of  night  and  day,  swinging  (tAXo/Ac'v^i/)  on  the  path  about 

the   axis  of   the   universe  "    (TT/V  Trepi  rov  Sta  Travros  TroXov  TtTOLfjLcvov, 

406).     To  describe  the  system  further  would  be  impossible  without 
an  actual  visible  model,  and  is  irrelevant  (39^-40^). 

Full  discussion  of  this  astronomical  passage  is  impossible  here, 
but  the  following  points  should  be  noted,  (a)  There  is  no  reference 
to  the  famous  theory  devised  by  Eudoxus  within  the  Academy 
itself,  which  analyses  the  apparent  movements  of  the  heavenly 
bodies  into  combinations  of  axial  rotations  of  imaginary  "  spheres," 
with  a  common  centre  at  the  centre  of  the  earth.  Timaeus  never 
speaks  of  "  spheres,"  but,  in  the  language  originated  by  Anaxi- 
mander,  of  "  circles,"  conceived  to  turn  round  like  a  wheel  spun 
about  its  centre.  And  though  one  of  the  motions  of  each  true 
"  star  "  is  said  to  be  "  controlled  by  "  the  circle  of  the  Same  (406), 
this  motion  is  expressly  ascribed  to  the  star  itself,  not  to  an  outer- 
most "  sphere."  Presumably  the  mere  fact  that  Timaeus  is  a 
fifth-century  astronomer,  speaking  many  years  before  the  origina- 
tion of  Eudoxus'  hypothesis,  sufficiently  explains  this,  (b)  The 
stars  are  not  thought  of,  after  Aristotle's  fashion,  as  made  of  a 
superior  and  "  celestial  "  stuff.  They  are  made  of  "  fire,"  the 
finest  quality  of  fire,  but  still  the  same  fire  to  be  found  in  ourselves 
and  bodies  round  us.  We  cannot  too  carefully  remember  that  the 
fateful  distinction  between  "  celestial  matter  "  and  "  elementary 
matter  "  was  unknown  to  Greek  science  until  Aristotle  introduced 
it  as  a  direct  consequence  of  his  hypostatization  of  the  purely 
mathematical  spheres  of  Eudoxus  into  physical  globes,  (c)  It 
is  worth  while  also  to  observe  the  complete  freedom  of  the  whole 
theory  from  any  traces  of  the  planetary  astrology  which  was,  later 
on.  to  infest  the  minds  of  the  Hellenistic  age.  The  position  of 

1  Le.t  all  the  planets  shine  by  reflected  solar  light,  as  Empedoctes  had 
taught  for  the  case  of  the  moon, 


448          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

the  planets  in  the  theory  is  a  very  humble  one.  They  are  not  called 
"  gods,"  as  the  stars  are,  and  the  natural  interpretation  of  Timaeus' 
language  is  that  they  are  not  supposed  to  have  any  "  souls  "  of 
their  own,  but  merely  to  be  directed  by  the  soul  of  the  KOO-/XOS. 
They  serve  as  timepieces,  and  that,  so  far,  is  all.  The  remark  of 
Timaeus  (40^)  that  though  their  movements  are  all  calculable, 
their  occultations,  reappearances,  and  conjunctions  frighten  "  those 
who  cannot  do  a  sum,"  and  are  supposed  to  be  portents,  is  probably 
meant  to  deride  the  astrological  superstitions  of  the  East,  and  it  is 
amusing  to  note  that  the  negative  in  the  phrase  "  who  cannot  do  a 
sum,"  preserved  in  A,  and  guaranteed  by  the  version  of  Cicero, 
has  been  dropped  in  our  other  best  MSS.  and  marked  for  deletion 
by  the  diorthotes  of  A.  In  the  age  of  our  copyists,  it  was  assumed 
that  it  is  just  the  astronomer,  who  can  do  the  sum,  who  is  frightened 
by  the  appearances  he  foresees  !  (d)  As  to  the  astronomical  theory 
itself,  it  agrees  with  that  of  Eudoxus  in  being  one  of  a  "  double  " 
planetary  motion.  Each  planet  is  assumed  to  have  a  "  proper 
motion  "  through  the  zodiac  from  W.  to  E.,  and,  over  and  above 
this,  to  be  affected  by  the  diurnal  revolution  from  E.  to  W.,  with 
the  result  that  it  is  brought  daily  back  almost,  but  not  quite,  to  the 
position  it  had  twenty-four  hours  earlier.  Thus,  in  this  view,  the 
moon,  which  most  successfully  resists  the  "  diurnal  revolution," 
is  the  swiftest  of  the  planets,  Saturn  the  slowest,  since  the  moon 
succeeds  in  getting  round  the  zodiac  in  a  month,  Saturn  takes  about 
thirty  years.  Both  theories  thus  contradict  the  older  view,  traceable 
back  to  Anaximander,  that  all  revolutions  are  in  the  same  sense. 
If  this  were  so,  we  should  have  to  say  that  the  moon  is  left  farthest 
behind,  Saturn  lags  least  behind  the  diurnal  revolution.1  Since  the 
double  revolution  theory  is  expressly  employed  in  the  myth  of  Er 
(Rep.  6170),  it  is  pretty  clearly  of  Pythagorean  origin,  and  may  be 
as  old  as  Pythagoras  himself,  though  this  is  uncertain. 

(e)  A  much  more  important  question  is  suggested  by  the  remarks 
about  the  earth.  Does  Timaeus  mean  to  ascribe  a  motion  to  the 
earth,  or  does  he  not  ?  In  the  middle  of  the  last  century  there  was 
a  sharp  controversy  on  the  point  between  Grote,  who  found  the 
motion  of  the  earth  in  the  dialogue,  and  Boeckh,  who  denied  it. 
On  one  point  Boeckh  was  clearly  right.  Timaeus  cannot  mean, 
as  Grote  thought,  to  give  the  earth  an  axial  rotation  with  a  period 
of  twenty-four  hours,  since  this  would  conflict  with  his  own  express 
attribution  of  this  period  to  the  "  circle  of  the  Same  "  at  390. 
If  the  stars  were  revolving  round  us  once  in  twenty-four  hours  and 
the  earth  rotating  in  the  opposite  sense  with  the  same  period,  mani- 
festly the  interval  between  two  successive  transits  of  the  same  star 
over  the  meridian  would  not  be  twenty-four  hours  but  twelve,  and 
we  cannot  suppose,  as  Grote  suggested,  that  Plato  may  have  forgotten 
so  obvious  a  point.  On  the  other  hand,  though  nearly  all  later 
.editors  have  followed  Boeckh,  it  is  equally  plain  that  he  must  be 
wrong  in  making  the  earth  of  Timaeus  motionless.  His  inter- 
1  On  all  this  see  Burnet,  E.G. Ph.9  iio-tu. 


TIMAEUS  AND  CRITIAS  449 

pretation  is  overthrown  at  once  by  restoration  of  the  correct  text  of 
the  passage  (rrjv  negl  r6v  dia  navio-,  «rA).  The  rrjv  here  can  only 
mean  rty  6d6v  or  rfjv  neolodov,  and  is  an  accusative  of  the  path 
traversed.  Also  the  verb  used,  MfofUvrp,  is  notoriously  a  verb  of 
motion,  and  we  have  to  add  that  Aristotle  twice  over,  commenting 
on  the  passage,  expressly  interprets  it  as  asserting  a  movement  of 
some  kind.  He  does  not  even  produce  any  argument  to  show  that 
this  is  what  is  meant,  but  assumes  that  no  one  will  dispute  the 
point.  Hence  I  think  we  may  feel  fairly  sure  that  it  was  the 
accepted  exegesis  of  the  first  generation  of  the  Academy.1  It 
follows  that  Timaeus  regards  the  centre  of  the  universe  as  empty 
and  ascribes  to  the  earth  a  "  to-and-fro  "  movement  about  it. 
This  oscillatory  motion  we  must  pretty  certainly  take  to  be  recti- 
linear, not  circular  or  cycloidal  like  the  movement  of  a  pendulum- 
bob.  This  will  explain  why  Aristotle,  discussing  the  motion  of  the 
earth  in  de  Caelo,  B  13,  distinguishes  the  view  of  Pythagoreans  and 
certain  unnamed  other  persons,  that  the  earth  revolves  "  round  the 
centre/'  from  that  of  the  Timaeus,  that  it  moves  "  at  the  centre.1' 

The  interpretation  just  given  follows  Professor  Burnet,  who  is 
at  least  certainly  right  in  insisting  that  the  word  used  by  Timaeus 
of  the  earth  (IMoiilvrjv)  must  stand,  as  Aristotle  said,  for  a  notion 
of  some  sort.  Mr.  Cornford  has  since  developed  a  very  different, 
and  attractive  explanation,  according  to  which  the  meaning  is  that 
the  earth,  situated  at  the  centre  of  the  universe,  has  a  diurnal 
rotation  in  the  opposite  sense  to  that  of  the  "  circle  of  the  same  " 
and  thus  exactly  compensating  it  (op.  cit.,  pp.  120-124).  Attrac- 
tive as  this  view  is,  I  still  doubt  whether  it  could  have  been  ex- 
pected to  be  divined  by  a  reader  with  nothing  before  him  but  the 
bare  statement  that  the  earth  ?AAerai,  "  winds  "  or  "  curls,"  and 
have  therefore  hesitated  to  adapt  my  text  to  it,  though  I  am  not 
confident  that  it  may  not  be  right  after  all.  But  it  is  conceivable 
that  Timaeus  may  be  supposed  to  hold  that  some  sort  of  "  slide  " 
of  the  earth  would  explain  one  or  both  of  two  "  appearances," 
(a)  the  inequality  of  the  "  seasons  "  into  which  the  year  is  divided 
by  the  equinoxes  and  solstices,  (b)  the  notorious  fact  that  though 
the  sun  and  moon  are  "in  conjunction"  every  lunar  month,  a 
solar  eclipse  is  not  regularly  observed  at  each  conjunction.  But 
I  give  this  avowedly  as  a  guess.2 

1  For  Aristotle's  interpretation,  see  de  Caelo,  B  2936  30  ff.,  and  cf.  ibid.  2960 
26.  The  important  point  is  that  the  grammar  of  the  passage  in  the  Timaeus 
demands  a  verb  of  motion,  and  that  Aristotle  expressly  explains  the  word  by 
adding  /rai  KivewOat*  That  he  should  be  mistaken,  or  speaking  with  mala 
fides,  on  such  a  point  seems  incredible.  Cf.  Burnet,  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I., 
348  and  notes.  The  summary  to  D.L.  (iii.,  75)  also  ascribes  a  motion  to  the 

(Kivela 


earth,  though  wrong  about  its  nature  (KivelaOai  irepl  rt> 

a  On  the  anomaly  of  the  seasons,  see  Theo  Smyrnaeus,  p.  153  (Hiller), 
and  on  the  Metonic  cycle  the  passages  quoted  in  Diels,  Fragmente  det  Vorsok- 
ratiker*,  i.  29,  9  (s.v.  Oinopides).  For  the  problem  raised  by  the  comparative 
rarity  of  visible  eclipses  of  the  sun,  see  Placita,  ii.  29  (the  explanation  ascribed 
to  the  Pythagoreans  and  to  Anaxagoras).  I  suspect  that  Timaeus  may 
intend  his  sliding  motion  to  explain  why  we  do  not  see  an  eclipse  of  the  sun 


450         PLATO:   THE   MAN  AND  HIS   WORK 

It  is,  in  any  case,  improbable  that  the  vague  expression  put 
into  the  mouth  of  Timaeus  is  meant  to  disclose  Plato's  full  doctrine. 
Theophrastus,  as  Plutarch  has  told  us,  related  that  "  in  his  old 
age  "  Plato  repented  of  having  placed  the  earth  at  the  "  centre," 
which  should  have  been  reserved  for  a  "  worthier  body." l  In  the 
chapter  of  the  de  Caelo  already  referred  to,  Aristotle,  after  mention- 
ing that  some  of  the  Pythagoreans  held  that  the  earth  is  a  planet 
revolving  round  a  central  luminary,  adds  that  "  many  others  too 
might  accept  the  view  that  the  centre  should  not  be  assigned  to  the 
earth,  for  they  think  (oiowai)  that  the  most  honourable  region 
should  belong  to  the  most  honourable  body,  and  that  fire  is  more 
honourable  than  earth,  and  the  boundary  than  the  intermediate. 
Now  circumference  and  centre  are  boundaries  ;  so  on  the  strength 
of  these  considerations  they  think  that  not  the  earth,  but  rather  fire, 
is  situated  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere  "  (op.  cit.  2930, 27-35).  Aristotle 
does  not  say  who  these  persons  are,  except  that  they  are  not  the 
Pythagoreans  of  whom  he  had  begun  by  speaking.  Yet  he  must 
be  speaking  of  actual  persons,  since  he  twice  uses  the  phrase  "  they 
think."  From  what  Plutarch  has  told  us  on  the  authority  of 
Theophrastus,  it  seems  to  me  certain  that  the  unnamed  "  some  " 
mean  here,  as  so  often  in  Aristotle,  Plato  and  his  followers.  In 
that  case,  we  have  the  evidence  not  only  of  Theophrastus,  though 
that  would  be  sufficient,  but  of  Aristotle,  that  Plato  "  in  his  old 
age  "  regarded  the  earth  as  a  planet  revolving  along  with  the  rest 
round  a  central  luminary,  a  view  quite  unlike  that  expounded  by 
Timaeus.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  evidence  of  an  important 
passage  in  the  Laws  (821^-8220)  where  the  Athenian  speaker  speaks 
of  it  as  a  truth  which  he  has  only  recently  learned  that  every  planet 
has  one  and  only  one  path  (ov  TroXXas  aXXa  /uu'av  act).  This  can 
have  only  one  meaning,  that  the  speaker  intends  to  deny  the 
doctrine  of  the  double  or  composite  motion  on  which  Timaeus 
insists.  He  must  mean  that  the  diurnal  revolution  is  not  communi- 
cated to  the  planets,  and  so  is  not  a  component  of  their  motions  ; 
each  planet  has  only  its  "  proper  "  movement  through  the  Zodiac. 
Since  the  appearances  which  prompted  the  double  motion  theory 
still  have  to  be  accounted  for,  we  are  driven  to  suppose  that  the 
"  diurnal  revolution  "  must  be  intended  to  be  regarded  as  only 
apparent,  being  really  due  to  a  motion  of  the  earth.  The  implica- 
tion is  that  the  earth  is  a  planet  revolving  round  an  invisible  central 
luminary  in  a  period  of  twenty-four  hours,  as  the  moon  is  supposed 
to  revolve  round  the  same  body  in  a  lunar  month,  or  the  sun  in  a 
year.  A  little  more  light  is  thrown  on  the  matter  by  a  sentence  of 
the  Epinomis,  a  dialogue  which  is  generally  "  athetized "  on 
extremely  inadequate  grounds,  but  admitted  to  have  been  at  any 

at  every  new  moon,  nor  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  at  every  full  moon,  by  sug- 
gesting that  on  most  of  these  occasions  the  earth  happens  to  be  a  little  "  out 
of  the  centre." 

1  Plutarch,  Quaesl.  Platon.  1006$,  Vit.  Numae,  c.  11.     See  on  this  evidence 
Burnet,  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  347. 


TIMAEUS  AND  CRITIAS  451 

rate  composed  immediately  after  Plato's  death  by  a  disciple  for 
circulation  along  with  the  Laws,  and  is  therefore,  in  any  case,  likely 
to  be  faithful  to  the  master's  teaching.  We  are  there  told  (Epin. 
9876)  that  the  various  planets  revolve  in  one  sense  and  with  different 
periods  ;  the  outermost  circle  revolves  —  we  are  not  told  with  what 
period  —  in  the  opposite  sense,  "  carrying  the  others  with  it,  as  it 
might  seem  to  men  who  know  little  of  such  things."  1  This  is; 
of  course,  only  an  urbane  way  of  saying  that  it  does  not  "  carry 
the  others  "  with  it,  another  denial  of  the  double  motion  theory  of 
Timaeus.  Presumably  the  reason  why  the  period  of  this  re  volu- 
tion is  not  stated  is  that,  now  that  the  twenty-four  hours'  period  has 
been  given  to  the  earth,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  we  know 
what  the  period  of  revolution  of  the  "  outermost  circle  "  is.  It 
must  have  a  movement,  because  the  world  has  a  ^xn  ,"  that  Plato 
supposes  its  revolution  to  explain  any  particular  appearance  is 
very  unlikely.  We  can  only  say  that,  since  the  periods  of  the 
planets  become  steadily  longer  as  we  advance  farther  from  the 
"  centre,"  the  period  of  the  outermost  circle  is  presumably  a  very 
long  one.8 

Plato's  own  doctrine  would  seem,  thus,  to  be  neither  that  of  the 
motionless  earth,  nor  that  of  Timaeus,  nor  the  full-blown  Coper- 
nicanism  which  some  modern  admirers  have  read  into  him.  He 
appears  to  attribute  one  motion  only  to  the  earth,  a  motion  of 
revolution  round  an  invisible  centre  (not  round  the  sun),  with  a 
period  of  twenty-four  hours.  The  important  point  is  not  that  he 
has  a  well-worked-out  hypothesis,  but  that  his  scientific  instinct 
has  seized  the  fundamental  point  that  a  true  mechanic  of  the 
heavens  must  start  with  a  revolving  earth  ;  this,  no  doubt,  is  his 
reason  for  dissatisfaction  with  the  scheme  of  Eudoxus,  beautiful 
as  it  is.  Another  inference  of  first-rate  importance  is  this.  We 
clearly  have  no  right  to  assume  that  the  view  ascribed  to  Plato 
by  Theophrastus  and  apparently  presupposed  in  the  Laws  was 
arrived  at  after  the  completion  of  the  Timaeus.  We  have  seen  that 
the  Timaeus  and  the  Laws  must  have  been  in  progress  simultane- 
ously. And  it  is  hardly  credible  that  if  Plato  had  suddenly  made  so 


1  Epin.,  I.e.,  &yuv  roi>s  AXXovs,  #s  7^  AvOpd-rrois  tpatvotr  &v  6\Lya  TOVTUV  eldo<nv. 
If  it  only  "  appears  so  "  to  the  "  beginner,"  of  course  it  is  not  so.  Burnet's 
insertion  of  OUK  before  Aytov  only  makes  the  meaning  needlessly  plain 
at  the  expense  of  Plato's  little  jest  at  the  blunder  of  disciples  like  Aristotle, 
who  had  committed  themselves  to  the  Eudoxian  view.  There  seems  to  be  a 
deliberate  rejoinder  in  Aristot.  Met.  10736  8,  5™  ntv  otiv  TrXetous  rCiv  (pepoptvwv 
cti  <f>opa.l  (f>avep6v  rols  ical  jjifTplus  Tj/x/i^ois*  irXe/ous  y&p  ^Kaarof  faptrou  /uas  r&v 
TrXavwjjLtvwv  farpuv  —  just  what  the  Laws  denies. 

*  This  interpretation  of  the  testimony  of  Theophrastus  is  that  of  Schia- 
parelh,  C.  Ritter,  and  Burnet.  However  we  understand  his  evidence,  it  is 
far  too  weighty  to  be  simply  set  aside,  nor  do  I  think  Mr.  Cornford's  ingenious 
attempt  to  minimize  its  significance  (Plato's  Cosmology,  p.  128)  happy.  I 
think  it  more  likely  that  Plato  has  deliberately  chosen  for  his  fifth-century 
astronomer  phraseology  which,  except  that  it  ascribes  movement  of  some 
kind  to  the  earth,  is  left  studiously  vague. 


452          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

startling  a  change  in  his  doctrine  during  the  time  when  Aristotle 
was  a  member  of  the  Academy,  Aristotle  should  have  told  us  nothing 
about  the  fact.  It  would  have  been  "  grist  to  his  mill  "  if  he  could 
have  urged  against  the  doctrine  of  a  moving  earth  that  Plato  had 
been  forced  to  hold  two  inconsistent  theories  about  its  motion 
in  the  course  of  a  few  years.  Presumably,  then,  Plato  held  astro- 
nomical views  more  developed  than  those  which  he  has  ascribed 
to  Timaeus  at  the  very  time  he  was  writing  the  dialogue.  This 
should  help  us  to  appreciate  Plato's  real  regard  for  historical 
verisimilitude  and  make  us  on  our  guard  against  over-readiness  to 
suppose  that  all  the  theories  of  his  Pythagorean  are  such  as  he 
would  find  himself  satisfied  with. 

Timaeus  next  adds  that  the  Creator  further  made  a  number  of 
created  gods  who,  unlike  the  stars,  only  show  themselves  when 
they  choose,  Oceanus,  Tethys,  Phorcys,  Cronus,  Rhea,  and  their 
offspring.  We  have  no  evidence  for  the  existence  of  these  beings 
except  that  of  persons  who  claim  to  be  their  descendants,  but  we 
may  fairly  suppose  these  persons  to  know  their  own  pedigrees 
(^od-e).  This  is,  of  course,  satire,  not,  as  has  been  sometimes  sup- 
posed, a  concession  for  safety's  sake  to  the  religion  of  the  State. 
Most  of  the  figures  named  belong  to  the  cosmogonies  of  poets  like 
Orpheus  and  Hesiod,  not  to  the  Attic  cultus,  and  the  ironical 
remark  that  a  man  must  always  be  believed  about  his  own  family- 
tree  is  aimed  at  poets  like  Orpheus  and  Musaeus.  Timaeus,  as  a 
scientific  Pythagorean,  has  his  own  reasons  for  not  wishing  to  be 
confounded  with  the  Orphics.  The  Creator  now  addresses  the 
created  gods,  explaining  that  whatever  is  his  own  immediate  work 
is  imperishable.  Hence  for  the  making  of  creatures  which  are  to 
be  perishable,  he  will  employ  these  created  gods  as  his  intermediaries 
(4ia-d).  He  then  himself  makes  immortal  souls,  in  the  same 
number  as  the  stars,  of  the  "  seconds  "  and  "  thirds  "  of  the  mixture 
from  which  he  has  made  the  souls  of  the  world  and  the  stars.  Each 
soul  is  conducted  to  its  star  and  made  to  take  a  perspective  view 
of  the  universe  and  its  structure.  It  is  then  explained  to  the  souls 
that  in  due  process  of  time  they  are  all  to  be  born  as  men  in  the 
various  "  instruments  of  time  "  (i.e.  the  planets).1  If  they  live 
well  in  the  body,  they  will  return  to  their  native  stars  ;  if  less  well, 
they  will  have  to  be  reincarnated  in  the  bodies  of  women  ;  if  that 
lesson  is  insufficient,  they  will  be  reborn  as  various  brutes,  and 
will  never  return  to  their  "  star  "  until  they  have  first  climbed  up 
the  scale  from  brute  to  man  again.2  The  souls  are  then  sown,  like 
seeds,  in  the  various  planets,  while  the  created  gods  fashion  bodies 

1  The  souls  sown  in  the  planets  are  not,  of  course,  to  be  future  inhabitants 
of  the  earth.  They  are  to  inhabit  the  planets  where  they  are  "  sown." 
Timaeus  is  alluding  to  the  Pythagorean  belief  that  there  are  men  and  animals 
in  the  planets  as  well  as  on  earth. 

a  The  connexion  of  a  soul  with  its  "  star  "  has  nothing  to  do  with  either 
planetary  or  zodiacal  astrology.  The  thought  is  simply  that  there  is  a  corre- 
spondence one-to-one  between  the  "  gods  "  and  the  human  denizens  of  the 
universe. 


TIMAEUS  AND  CRITIAS  458 

for  them  and  any  additions  to  their  souls  which  may  be  required  for 
their  life  in  the  body  (410-42^). 

We  are  next  told  something  of  the  way  in  which  this  work  was 
done,  but  the  story  is  only  given  in  outline,  with  the  necessary 
warning  that,  since  it  has  to  do  with  the  mutable,  L  can  only  be 
tentative  (420-470).  In  making  the  human  body,  the  gods  first 
constructed  the  head  as  a  suitable  dwelling-place  for  the  immortal 
soul,  which,  of  course,  like  the  soul  of  the  KOCT/XO?,  contains  the 
two  circles  of  the  Same  and  the  Other.  (This  means  that  Timaeus 
rightly  accepts  the  discovery  of  Alcmaeon  of  Crotona  that  the  brain 
is  the  central  organ  in  the  sensory-motor  system.)  The  skull  was 
therefore  made  spherical,  as  the  body  of  the  /cooyxos  is  spherical. 
The  trunk  and  the  limbs  were  added  for  the  safety  and  convenience 
of  the  head  (440-456).  The  organ  of  sight  was  then  constructed.  It 
is  literally  a  ray  of  sunlight  dwelling  within  the  body  and  issuing 
out  through  the  pupil.  We  thus  see  by  an  actual  long-distance 
contact  of  this  ray,  which  is  a  real,  though  temporary,  member 
of  the  body,  with  the  visible  object — the  theory  explained  by 
Empedocles  in  verses  cited  by  Aristotle.  To  this  account  of  vision 
Timaeus  appends  an  explanation  of  sleep  as  produced  by  an  equable 
diffusion  of  this  internal  "  fire  "  when  darkness  prevents  its  issuing 
out  to  join  its  kindred  fire  outside  us,  and  a  brief  account  of  mirror- 
vision  (456-460).  His  main  points  at  present  are,  however,  of  a 
different  kind.  He  dwells  on  the  thought  that  the  effect  of  the 
conjunction  of  the  soul  with  a  body  which  is  always  "  flowing," 
giving  off  waste  material  and  taking  in  fresh,  is  to  throw  the  move- 
ments of  the  "  circles  "  in  the  soul  into  complete  disorder.  The 
movement  of  the  circle  of  the  Same  is  temporarily  arrested,  and 
that  of  the  circle  of  the  Other  rendered  irregular.  Hence  the 
thoughtlessness  and  confused  perception  and  fancy  of  our  infancy 
and  childhood.  It  is  only  when  the  "  flow  "  of  the  body  becomes 
less  turbid,  as  waste  and  repair  come  to  balance  one  another  in 
adult  life,  that  the  movements  of  the  "  circles  "  recover  from  the 
init  al  disturbance  of  birth,  and  men  come  to  discretion  and  intelli- 
gence, and  then  only  with  the  aid  of  "  right  education  "  (43^440). 
Also,  we  must  be  careful  to  remember  the  distinction  between 
true  causes  and  mere  subsidiary  causes  (rwaCria).  Any  account 
we  give  of  the  mechanism  of  vision,  or  any  other  function,  is  a  mere 
statement  about  the  subsidiary  or  instrumental  cause.  The  true 
cause,  in  every  case,  is  to  be  sought  in  the  good  or  end  a  function 
subserves.  Thus  the  real  end  for  which  we  have  been  given  eyes, 
is  that  the  spectacle  of  .the  heavenly  motions  may  lead  us  to  note 
the  uniformity  and  regularity  of  days,  nights,  months,  and  years, 
and  that  reflection  on  this  uniformity  may  lead  us  to  science  and 
philosophy,  and  so  make  the  revolutions  of  the  "  circles  in  the 
head  "  themselves  regular  and  uniform.  And  the  same  thing  is 
true  of  hearing  ;  its  real  purpose  is  not  that  we  may  learn  to  tune 
the  strings  of  a  lyre,  but  that  we  may  learn  to  make  our  own  think- 
ing and  living  a  spiritual  melody  (460-470). 


454         PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

We  next  come  to  one  of  the  most  important  and  character- 
istic sections  of  the  discourse — an  outline  of  the  principles  of  a 
geometrical  science  of  nature.  So  far  we  have  been  talking  about 
the  work  done  by  Intelligence  in  the  construction  of  the  sensible 
world.  But  this  world  is  a  "  mixed  "  product,  born  of  Intelligence 
(1/01)5)  and  Necessity  (avdyKrj),  and  we  must  now  describe  the  con- 
tribution of  Necessity  to  the  whole.  The  relation  between  In- 
telligence and  Necessity,  which  is  also  called  the  "  errant  "  or 
"  irregular  "  cause  (TrXavw/xcVr;  ama),  is  that  "  for  the  most  part  " 
Intelligence  is  superior  (apxw,  480),  Necessity  is  servant,  or  slave, 
but  a  willing  slave  ;  Intelligence  "  persuades  "  (TTCI^CI)  Necessity. 
The  special  reason  given  for  now  studying  the  working  of  Necessity 
is  that,  unless  we  do  so,  we  can  give  no  account  of  the  origin  of  the 
"  four  roots  "  of  Empedocles,  the  "  stuff  "  we  have  so  far  been 
assuming  as  there  for  God  to  form  a  world  of.  Hitherto  no  one  has 
explained  the  structure  of  these  bodies  ;  they  have  been  treated  as 
the  ABC  (crroixcta,  elementa,  486)  of  things,  though,  as  we  shall  see, 
they  do  not  even  deserve  to  be  called  syllables.  We  are  now  to 
analyse  them  back  into  something  very  much  more  primitive,  and 
we  are  carefully  reminded  again  that,  from  the  nature  of  the  case, 
our  analysis  can  at  best  be  tentative  and  "  likely." 

The  sections  which  are  now  to  follow  are  marked  by  Timaeus 
as  the  most  original  and  important  part  of  his  whole  cosmology. 
We  shall  see  that  they  serve  to  connect  the  two  main  currents  of 
scientific  thought,  the  biological  and  the  mathematical,  by  providing 
a  geometrical  construction  for  the  "  corpuscles "  of  the  four 
"  elements  "  which  the  biologist  Empedocles  had  treated  as  the 
"  simples  "  of  his  system.  The  four  types  of  body  thus  con- 
structed are  then,  in  the  Empedoclean  fashion,  treated  as  the 
immediate  units  from  which  the  various  tissues  and  secretions  of 
the  living  body  are  formed  by  chemical  composition.  The  result 
is  thus  that  Timaeus,  in  the  spirit  of  Descartes,  offers  us  an  anatomy 
and  physiology  in  which  the  organism  appears  as  an  elaborate 
kinematical  system  ;  natural  science  is  thus  reduced  in  principle, 
as  Descartes  and  Spinoza  held  it  ought  to  be,  to  geometry.  Plato  is 
not,  of  course,  very  strictly  committed  by  the  details  of  speculations 
which  he  repeatedly  says  are  provisional,  but  it  is  clear  that  he  is  in 
sympathy  with  the  general  attitude  known  to-day  in  biology  as 
mechanistic.  The  human  organism,  as  he  conceives  it,  is  a  machine 
directed  and  controlled  by  mind  or  intelligence,  but  the  machine 
itself  is  made  of  the  same  ultimate  constituents  as  other  machines 
and  the  workings  of  it  follow  the  same  laws  as  those  of  the  rest. 

It  is  important,  if  we  are  to  approach  the  exposition  in  the 
right  spirit,  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  the  initial  distinction 
between  the  part  of  Intelligence  and  that  of  Necessity  in  the  cosmic 
system.  We  must  be  careful  not  to  confuse  the  "  necessity  "  of 
which  Plato  is  speaking  with  the  principle  of  order  and  law.  Law 
and  order  are  precisely  the  features  of  the  world  which  he  assigns 
to  intelligence  as  their  source  ;  we  are  carefully  told  that  necessity 


TIMAEUS  AND  CRITIAS  455 


is  something  disorderly  and  irregular,  the  irXay^v^  atria,  a 
name  probably  derived,  as  Burnet  has  suggested,1  from  the  use 
of  the  disrespectful  name  TrXa^reu,  "  tramps/'  "  vagabonds/'  for 
the  heavenly  bodies  which  seem  at  first  sight  to  roam  about  the 
sky  with  no  settled  abode.  Thus  the  Necessity  of  the  Timaeus  is 
something  quite  different  from  the  Necessity  of  the  myth  of  Er, 
or  of  the  Stoics,  which  are  personifications  of  the  principle  of  rational 
law  and  order.  On  the  other  hand,  Necessity  is  plainly  not  meant 
to  be  an  independent,  evil  principle,  for  it  is  plastic  to  intelligence  ; 
mind  "  for  the  most  part  "  is  said  to  "  persuade  it  "  ;  its  function 
is  to  be  instrumental  to  the  purposes  of  i/oGs.2  The  reason  for 
introducing  it  into  the  story  seems  to  be  simply  that  it  is  impossible 
in  science  to  resolve  physical  reality  into  a  complex  of  rational  laws 
without  remainder.  In  the  real  world  there  is  always,  over  and 
above  "  law/'  a  factor  of  the  "  simply  given  "  or  "  brute  fact,"  not 
accounted  for  and  to  be  accepted  simply  as  given.  It  is  the  business 
of  science  never  to  acquiesce  in  the  merely  given,  to  seek  to  "  ex- 
plain "  it  as  the  consequence,  in  virtue  of  rational  law,  of  some 
simpler  initial  "  given."  But,  however  far  science  may  carry  this 
procedure,  it  is  always  forced  to  retain  some  element  of  brute  fact, 
the  merely  given,  in  its  account  of  things.  It  is  the  presence  in 
nature  of  this  element  of  the  given,  this  surd  or  irrational  as  it 
has  sometimes  been  called,  which  Timaeus  appears  to  be  personi- 
fying in  his  language  about  Necessity.  That  "  mind  persuades 
necessity  "  is  just  an  imaginative  way  of  saying  that  by  the  analysis 
of  the  given  datum  we  always  can  rationalize  it  further  ;  we  never 
come  to  a  point  at  which  the  possibility  of  "  explanation  "  actually 
ceases.  But  the  "  irrational  "  is  always  there,  in  the  sense  that 
explanation  always  leaves  behind  it  a  remainder  which  is  the  "  not 
yet  explained."  When  we  have  followed  the  exposition  a  little 
further,  we  shall  discover  that  in  the  last  resort  this  element  of  the 
irreducible  and  given  turns  out  to  be  exactly  what  Professor  Alex- 
ander has  called  the  "  restlessness  of  space-time/'  But,  unlike 
Professor  Alexander,  Plato  does  not  believe  that  the  restlessness  of 
space-time  is  enough  to  account  for  its  elaboration  into  more  and 
more  rationally  articulated  systems  ;  left  to  itself,  it  would  be 

1  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I.,  341-346.  The  "  necessity  "  of  the  Timaeus 
is  not  "  uniform  sequence."  So  far  as  sequences  are  "  uniform/'  the  uni- 
formity is  due  to  the  "  persuasion  "  of  necessity  by  voOf  ;  that  is,  the  uni- 
formity is  an  effect  and  sign  of  the  presence  of  rational  purpose.  It  is  the 
exceptional  departures,  the  "  sports  "  in  nature,  which  we  are  to  account  for 
by  the  presence  of  a  TrXavw/x^ry  alrta.  More  generally,  "  necessity  "  explains 
why  the  course  of  actual  fact  only  conforms  approximately  to  the  formulae  of 
kinematics.  The  "  necessity  "  of  the  dialogue  is  thus  precisely  what  Aristotle 
has  taught  us  to  call  "  contingency." 

*  This  excludes  the  superficial  identification  of  "  necessity  "  with  an  evil 
"  material  principle."  The  doctrine  that  "  matter  "  is  the  source  of  evil  is 
wholly  un-Platonic.  Historically,  of  course,  the  AvdyKTj  of  Timaeus  connects 
directly  with  the  facipov  of  early  Pythagoreanism.  It  is  the  element  of 
indetermination  in  events,  the  element  which  a  Spinozistic  conception  of  the 
universe  persists  in  ignoring. 


456          PLATO  :   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

merely  restless ;   order  and  structure  are  the  work  of  the  mind  of 
God,  in  whose  hands  necessity  is  plastic. 

We  find,  then,  that  we  need  to  revise  our  first  account  of  the 
sensible  world.     We  had  already  spoken  of  two  things  which  need 
to  be  carefully  discriminated,  the  intelligible  archetype  and  its 
visible  copy.    We  have  now  to  take  into  account  a  third  concept 
which  we  shall  find  obscure  enough,  that  of  the  "  receptacle  " 
(vTroSo^)  or  "matrix"  (eV^aycioi/)  in  which  "becoming"  goes  on. 
This  receptacle   or  matrix  of  process   cannot   be  fire   or  water 
or  any  of  the  things  which  the  earliest  philosophers  had  selected 
as  the  primary  "boundless."     Experience  shows   that  these   are 
constantly  passing  into  one  another  ;  there  is  now  fire  where  there 
was  water,  or  water  where  there  was  fire.    The  various  bodies  are 
mutable  and  impermanent ;    what  remains  permanent  under  all 
the  variations  is  the  region  or  room  or  place  where  they  arise  and 
vanish.     This  is  there  and  self-same  under  all  the  processes  of 
change,  and  has  no  form  or  structure  of  its  own,  precisely  because 
it  is  its  indifference  to  all  which  makes  the  appearance  of  all  within 
it  possible.     We  find  it  hard  to  apprehend,  because  it  cannot  be 
discerned  by  sense  ;  it  must  be  thought  of,  but  can  only  be  thought 
of  by  a  sort  of  "  bastard  reflection  "  (Xoytor^w  TU/I  vd0u>,  526),  i.e. 
by  systematic  negation,  the  denying  of  one  definite  determination 
after  another.     It  is,  in  fact,  "  place  "  (x<*>Pa)-     We  may,  incident- 
ally, remind  ourselves  that  each  of  our  three  principles  is  appre- 
hended in  a  special  way.     We  can  satisfy  ourselves  of  the  reality 
of  the  forms  by  considering  that  if  there  were  only  sensible  objects, 
science  and  true  belief  would  be  the  same  ;  whereas  it  is  clear  they 
are  not.     Science  can  only  be  acquired  by  learning   (didayrf)   a 
true  belief  may  be  produced  by   "  persuasion/'   appeal  to  our 
emotions ;   what  we  know  can  always  be  justified  to  the  intellect 
(r6  ph  &et  per'  dAr?0oi7£  Ao'yov),  a  true  belief  not  always  ;  we  cannot 
be  argued  out  of  the  one,  we  can  be  persuaded  out  of  the  other. 
Since  science  and  true  belief  thus  differ,  their  objects  must  be 
different.1     (Thus  Timaeus  has  nothing  to  say  in  the  one  passage 
in  which  he  discusses  the  forms  which  differs  from  the  presentation 
of  them  in  the  Phaedo.)     Sensible  things  we  apprehend,  of  course, 
by  sight  and  the  rest  of  our  senses  ;  "  place,"  as  we  have  just  said, 
by  a  curious  kind  of  thinking  (480-520). 

If  we  try  to  picture  the  condition  of  things  "  before  "  the  intro- 
duction of  ordered  structure,  we  have  to  think  of  the  "  receptacle  " 

1  There  is  an  almost  absolute  equivalence  of  Timaeus'  analysis  with  that 
of  Whitehead  in  his  Principles  of  Natural  Knowledge,  and  Concept  of  Nature. 
Whitehead's  "  objects  "  have  exactly  the  formal  character  of  the  !5foi;  his 
account  of  the  "  ingredience  of  objects  into  events  "  corresponds  almost  ver- 
bally with  that  given  by  Timaeus  of  the  determination  of  the  various  regions 
of  the  "  receptacle  "  by  the  "  ingress  "  and  "  egress  "  of  the  impresses  of  the 
forms.  The  "  receptacle  "  itself  only  differs  from  "  passage  "  in  being  called 
"  space  "  and  not  "  space-time."  If  we  try  to  picture  "  passage  "  as  it  would 
be  if  there  were  only  "  events  "  and  no  "  objects  "  ingredient  in  them,  we  get 
precisely  the  sort  of  account  Timaeus  gives  of  the  condition  of  the  ' '  receptacle '  * 
before  God  introduced  order  and  structure  into  it. 


TIMAEUS  AND   CRITIAS  457 

or  matrix,  just  described  as  place  as  agitated  everywhere  by  irre- 
gular disturbances,  random  vibratory  movements,  and  exhibiting 
in  various  regions  mere  rude  incipient   "  traces "   (hvri)    of    the 
definite  structure  we  know  as  characteristic  of  the  various  forms  of 
body.     (Thus;  its  general  character  is  exactly  that  of  the  "  bound- 
less "  of  Anaximander,  agitated  by  the  "eternal  motion,1'  before 
the  "  opposites  "  have  been  "sifted  out"  and  a   xfo/toi;   formed. 
This    is,    in    fact,    pretty    clearly    the    historical    starting-point 
from  which  Pythagorean  cosmology  had  taken  its  departure).1 
The  first  step  God  takes  towards  introducing  determination  and 
order  into  this  indeterminate  "  happening  "  is  the  construction 
of   bodies  of  definite  geometrical  structure.     This  brings  us  to 
the  doctrine  of  the  geometrical  structure  of  the  "  corpuscles " 
of  the  "  four  roots  "  which  Empedoclean  biology  wrongly  treats 
as  simple  ultimates.     The  construction  is  effected  by  making  a 
correspondence    between    the    "four   roots"    and   the   originally 
Pythagorean  doctrine  of  the  regular  solids  which  can  be  inscribed 
in  the  sphere  (530-560).    There  are  five  and  only  five  distinct  types 
of  regular  solid,  and  four  of  them  can  be  built  up  geometrically 
by  starting  with  two  ultimate  simple  types  of  triangle,  which  are 
the  most   beautiful,  and   therefore   the  most   appropriate,  of  all. 
These  two  triangles  are  the  ultimate  "  elements  "  of  the  Timaeus. 
One  of  them  is  the  isosceles  right-angled  triangle,  called  by  the 
Pythagoreans  the  "  half-square  "  ;   the  other  is  the  triangle  which 
can  be  obtained  by  dividing  the  equilateral  triangle  into  six  smaller 
triangles  by  drawing  the  perpendiculars  from  the  angular  points 
on  the  opposite  sides,  or  less  symmetrically,  by  dividing  the  equi- 
lateral triangle  into  two  by  a  single  such  perpendicular.     (Hence 
the  Pythagorean  name  for  it,  the  "  half-triangle/')     Timaeus  does 
not  explain  what  the  peculiar  beauty  of  these  triangles  is,  but  we 
know  independently  that  it  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  ratios  of  the  angles 
of  the  two  triangles  are  the  simplest  possible.    Those  of  the  "  half- 
square  "  have  the  ratios  i  :  i  :  2,  those  of  the  "  half-triangle  "  the 
ratios  1:2:3.    From  the  former,  by  a  symmetrical  arrangement 
of  four  such  triangles  about  a  centre  of  position  we  get  the  square, 
and  from  a  proper  arrangement  of  six  square  faces,  the  cube.    A 
similar  symmetrical  arrangement  of  six  triangles  of  the  second  type 
gives  us  the  equilateral  triangle,  and  there  are  three  regular  solids 
which  can  be  made  with  equilateral  triangles  as  their  faces — the 
tetrahedron,  the  octahedron,  the  icosahedron.    For  physical  reasons, 
we  take  the  cube  as  the  form  appropriate  to  a  corpuscle  of  earth, 
the  tetrahedron  as  that  of  a  particle  of  fire,  the  other  two  as  the 
forms  of  the  particles  of  air  and  water  respectively.    There  is  still  a 
fifth  regular  solid,  the  dodecahedron,  which  has  twelve  pentagons 
as  its  faces ;  but  this  can  be  constructed  from  neither  of  the  ele- 
mentary triangles,  and  has  a  different  part  to  play.     God  employed 
it  (556)  "for  the  whole,  adorning  it  with  constellations. "     (This 

1  For  the  historical  connexion  of  Pythagorean  cosmology  with  the  scheme 
of  Anaximander  see  E.G.Ph.*  108  ff.,  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I.,  <x  2. 


458         PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

out  the  celestial  sphere  for  purposes  of  astronomical  description  by 
dividing  it  into  twelve  pentagonal  regions,  exactly  as  a  leather  ball 
is  made  by  stitching  together  twelve  pentagonal  pieces  of  leather.1) 
It  follows  from  the  theory  that  a  corpuscle  of  one  of  the  "  roots  " 
can  only  be  broken  up  along  the  edges  of  the  triangles  from  which 
it  has  been  built  up.  Hence,  since  earth  is  formed  from  a  special 
type  of  triangle,  it  cannot  be  "  transmutable  "  with  any  of  the  other 
three,  but  they  are  all  transmutable  with  one  another.  Timaeus 
then  proceeds  to  give  a  number  of  equations  which  determine  the 
equivalences  between  the  corpuscles  of  these  "roots."  Into  the 
physical  difficulties  created  by  this  table  of  equivalences  we  cannot 
enter  here.  It  must  be  enough  to  have  seen  that  the  general  pro- 
gramme contemplated  is  precisely  that  reduction  of  all  physics  to 
applied  geometry  and  nothing  else  which  is  equally  characteristic 
of  Descartes. 

We  next  have  an  attempt  to  specify  the  most  important 
"  varieties  "  of  each  of  the  four  types  of  body  and  the  "  chemical 
compounds  "  they  form  with  one  another,  and  to  account  for  the 
sensible  qualities  of  all  these  bodies  by  reference  to  their  geo- 
metrical structure,  which  must  be  passed  over  here  (580-68^).  Its 
most  interesting  feature  is  a  long  psycho-physical  account  of  the 
conditions  of  pleasure-pain  (64^-^656),  in  terms  of  the  depletion- 
repletion  formula.  The  "  unmixed  "  pleasures  of  sense  are  brought 
under  the  formula  by  the  hypothesis  that  they  are  sudden  and 
appreciable  "  repletions  "  of  a  "  depletion  "  which  has  been  too 
gentle  and  gradual  to  be  propagated  to  the  "  seat  of  consciousness." 

With  the  next  section  of  the  dialogue  we  pass  definitely  from 
physics  to  anatomy,  physiology,  and  medicine  (690-876).  Again, 
it  must  be  sufficient  in  this  volume  to  pass  over  the  details  lightly. 
The  main  point  is  that  the  organism  has  been  constructed  through- 
out to  minister  to  the  soul.  To  fit  the  soul  for  its  embodied  life  it 
had  to  receive  two  temporary  and  inferior  additions,  the  "  spirited  " 
and  "  concupiscent  "  "  parts  "  or  "  forms  "  already  familiar  to  us 
from  the  Republic.  Each  of  these  has  a  central  "  organ  "  or  "  seat," 
just  as  the  "  rational  "  part  has  its  seat  in  the  brain  ;  "  spirit  "  is 
lodged  in  the  thorax,  "  appetite  "  in  the  lower  region  of  the  trunk, 
beneath  the  diaphragm  (690-700).  In  connexion  with  this  least 
orderly  and  disciplined  element  in  the  soul,  the  liver  has  a  specially 
important  part  to  play.  It  is  the  source  of  visions  and  bad  dreams 

1  The  whole  of  this  construction  is  Pythagorean  in  origin,  as  we  see  by 
comparison  with  the  valuable  fragment  preserved  at  the  end  of  the  Theolo- 
gumena  Arithmetica  from  the  work  of  Speusippus  on  Pythagorean  Numbers 
(Speusippus,  Fr.  4;  Diels,  Fragmented.  Vorsokr.*i.  p.  303  ff.],  where  the  relations 
silently  presupposed  by  Timaeus  between  the  angles  01  the  "  half-square  " 
and  "  half- triangle  "  are  explained  in  full.  The  one  point  where  Timaeus  may 
be  going  beyond  results  reached  by  the  Pythagoreans  is  in  his  tacit  assumption 
that  all  his  five  solids  and  no  others  can  be  inscribed  in  the  sphere.  Note 
that  he  makes  a  point  of  it  that  Socrates  and  the  others  are  mathematicians, 
and  so  will  follow  him  easily  ($y  i). 


TIMAEUS  AND  CRITIAS  459 

of  all  kinds,  an&  the  utterances  of  the  "  possessed/1  "  seers/'  and 
the  like  are  really  due  to  a  disordered  liver.  They  can  be  inter- 
preted by  spokesmen  (irpo^rai),  who  are  themselves  not  in  the 
state  of  "  possession/1  and  thus  given  a  salutary  moral  influence 
(710-726).  The  details  of  the  anatomy  and  physiology  have  more 
interest  for  the  historian  of  these  sciences  than  for  the  student  of 
philosophy,  especially  since  they  are  all  given  as  tentative  and  liable 
to  revision.  The  most  prominent  feature  of  the  section  is  the 
elaborate  attempt  (776-790,  Sod-8ie)  to  account  (of  course  in  a 
fanciful  way)  for  respiration,  the  systole  and  diastole  of  the  heart, 
digestion,  all  together  as  one  vast  rhythmical  mechanical  process 
with  the  double  purpose  of  maintaining  the  vital  heat  of  the 
organism  and  distributing  nourishment  through  the  blood  to  the 
various  tissues. 

The  physiology  is  followed  up  by  a  section  on  pathology  which 
makes  a  curious  attempt  at  a  classification  of  the  various  known 
diseases  (82#-86a).  The  theory  could  only  be  properly  discussed 
in  connexion  with  what  we  know  of  other  fifth-  and  fourth-century 
speculations  on  the  same  subject  from  the  Hippocratean  corpus 
and  other  sources.  Its  most  outstanding  feature  is  that  it  departs 
wholly  from  the  lines  of  the  Hippocratean  "  humoral  pathology  " 
by  treating  "  phlegm "  and  "  bile  "  not  as  ingredients  of  the 
organism  in  its  normal  state  but  as  unwholesome  morbid  secretions. 
I  have  tried  elsewhere  to  show  reasons  for  supposing  that  Plato  is 
deriving  the  doctrine  from  Philistion  of  Locri,  with  whom,  as  we 
see  from  the  Epistles,  he  had  made  acquaintance  at  Syracuse,  and 
that  in  its  main  outlines  it  is  in  general  accord  with  what  we  know 
to  have  been  the  medical  theory  of  Philolaus,  though  there  are 
points  of  difference.  If  this  is  so,  we  can  understand  why  this 
particular  medical  theory  should  be  expounded  by  the  Locrian 
Timaeus.  In  any  case,  we  must  not  suppose  that  Plato  has  in- 
vented an  amateur  pathology  of  his  own  and  is  teaching  it  dog- 
matically. He  will  simply  be  following  what  he  regards  as  respect- 
able specialist  authority. 

The  pathology  of  the  body  leads  up  to  the  pathology  of  the  soul 
(866-876),  and  this  to  some  regulations  of  physical  and  mental 
hygiene  (870-90^).  Undesirable  moral  propensities  are  due  very 
largely  to  physical  constitutional  defects  ;  e.g.  undue  propensity 
to  sexual  irregularities  is  largely  of  physiological  origin.  The 
other  chief  cause  of  "  badness  "  is  education  in  bad  social  traditions. 
Hence  Timaeus  infers — not  quite  consistently  with  his  own  earlier 
insistence  on  personal  responsibility — that  those  who  begot  and 
educated  the  transgressor  are  really  more  to  blame  than  the  trans- 
gressor himself.  We  must  remember  that  he  is,  among  other  things, 
a  medical  man,  and  that  "  the  profession  "  are  prone  to  views  of 
this  kind.  Plato  may  well  be  treating  his  speaker  with  a  certain 
touch  of  irony  when  he  makes  the  moral  theory  of  Timaeus  a  little 
inconsistent  with  his  mental  pathology. 

In  laying  down  rules  of  hygiene,  the  supreme  object  we  should 


460          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

aim  at  is  the  correction  of  any  disproportion  between  the  body  and 
the  soul  which  animates  it.  This  disproportion  is  dangerous  to 
both  body  and  soul.  The  soul  which  is  too  big  for  its  "  pigmy 
body  "  actually  wears  the  body  out,  as  we  see  in  the  case  of  so 
many  keen  political  and  scientific  controversialists  ;  when  the  body 
is  too  robust  for  its  soul,  a  man  too  often  makes  the  soul  dull  and 
slow  by  ministering  to  the  body's  clamant  appetites.  The  rule 
should  be  that  neither  body  nor  soul  should  be  exercised  exclusively. 
The  student  must  take  care  to  attend  to  his  physical  condition,  or 
he  will  suffer  for  it  in  soul  as  well  as  body.  The  best  kind  of 
"  motion  "  by  which  to  exercise  the  body  is  active  muscular 
exertion,  and  the  next  best  easy  rhythmical  passive  motion,  like 
swinging,  riding  in  a  carriage,  being  rowed  on  the  water.  The 
worst  kind,  which  may  only  be  resorted  to  in  case  of  absolute 
necessity,  is  the  violent  production  of  intestinal  motions  by  drugs 
and  purges  (Syc-Sgd). 

A  still  more  important  topic  is  the  hygiene  of  the  mind  which  is 
to  rule  and  direct  the  movements  of  the  body.  Timaeus  cannot 
relevantly  enter  on  a  systematic  discussion  of  the  principles  of 
education,  but  he  lays  down  the  general  principle  that  our  intelli- 
gence is  the  divine  thing  in  us,  and  the  real  "  guardian  spirit  " 
(8at/xo)v)  of  each  of  us.  It  has  been  truly  said  that  man,  whose 
divine  part  resides  in  the  head,  is  like  a  tree  with  its  root  not  in  the 
earth,  but  in  the  sky  (900).  The  rule  of  healthy  living  for  the  soul 
is  that  this  divine  thing  in  us  should  "  think  thoughts  immortal 
and  divine,"  and  that  the  merely  human  "  parts  "  of  the  soul  should 
"  worship  "  and  "  tend  "  it.  The  true  "  tendance  "  of  any  creature 
consists  in  providing  it  with  its  appropriate  food  and  "  exercise  " 
(iun?<r€i9,  QOC),  and  the  "  exercise  "  appropriate  to  the  rational 
soul  is  thus  "  the  thoughts  and  revolutions  of  the  whole."  The 
end  of  life  is  to  correct  the  "  revolutions  in  the  head  "  and  bring 
them  once  more  into  correspondence  with  the  "  tunes  and  revolu- 
tions "  of  the  world-soul,  in  whose  image  they  were  made  at  first 
(cpa-d). 

The  story  closes  with  a  development  which  should  not  be  taken 
as  seriously  as  has  been  done  by  some  interpreters.  Timaeus,  we 
remember,  had  incorporated  in  his  narrative  the  old  fancy  that  the 
first  men  were  directly  sprung  from  the  soil.  Hence  his  physiology 
has  taken  no  account  of  the  reproductive  system.  This,  we  are 
now  told,  was  only  wanted  in  the  second  generation,  when  the 
second-best  of  the  original  "  men  "  came  to  be  reborn  as  women. 
He  gives  an  unmistakably  playful  account  of  the  modifications 
which  had  to  be  introduced  into  the  physiological  scheme  to  suit 
the  new  situation  (goe-gid),  and  then  adds  more  briefly  that  the 
lower  animals  in  general  were  also  derived  by  degeneration  from 
the  original  human  pattern,  the  deformation  being  greater  or  less 
as  the  souls  which  were  to  tenant  the  various  bodies  had  fallen 
more  or  less  short  of  virtue  and  wisdom  in  their  first  life  (91^-926). 
Nothing  is  said  here  of  the  hell  and  purgatory  of  the  eschatological 


TIMAEUS  AND  CRITIAS  461 

myths  of  the  Gorgias,  Phaedo,  Republic.  Presumably  the  scientific 
Pythagoreans  of  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century  regarded  them  as 
no  more  than  edifying  mythology,  exactly  as  the  author  of  the 
so-called  Timaeus  Locrus  regards  Timaeus'  own  statements  about 
metamorphosis.  We  should  pretty  certainly  be  wrong  if  we  took 
this  part  of  the  discourse  as  a  serious  speculation  on  the  part  of 
Plato  about  a  possible  evolution  d  rebours.  Timaeus  himself  is 
probably  meant  to  be  less  than  half  in  earnest  ;  as  in  the  tale  of 
Aristophanes  in  the  Symposium,  we  are  really  dealing  with  a  playful 
imitation  of  the  speculation  of  Empedocles  about  the  "  whole- 
natured  "  and  double-sexed  forms  with  which  evolution  in  the 
"  period  of  strife  "  began.  What  Plato  himself  thinks  of  all  this 
is  sufficiently  indicated  when  we  are  told  in  the  Politicus  that  the 
"  earth-born  "  men  and  the  "  age  of  Cronus  "  do  not  belong  to  our 
"  half  of  the  cycle,"  i.e.  they  belong  to  fairy-tale,  not  to  history. 

Here  our  story  comes  at  last  to  an  end.  We  have  now  told 
the  whole  tale  of  the  birth  of  this  sensible  world,  "  a  visible  living 
creature,  modelled  on  that  which  is  intelligible,  a  god  displayed  to 
sense  "  (920).  x 

The  Critias  calls  for  no  special  consideration.  Its  declared 
purpose  is  to  relate  in  detail  the  story  of  the  defeat  of  the  Atlantid 
kings,  of  which  Critias  had  given  the  bare  outline  in  the  Timaeus. 
It  remains,  however,  a  bare  fragment.  Critias  describes  the  topog- 
raphy of  Attica  and  Athens  as  they  were  before  the  process  of 
denudation  which  has  reduced  the  country  to  a  mere  rocky  skeleton 
(1096-111^),  and  the  happy  condition  of  the  inhabitants  (ine-ii2c). 
He  then  gives  a  much  longer  account  of  the  island  of  Atlantis  and 
its  kings,  the  descendants  of  the  god  Posidon,  their  institutions, 
and  their  wonderful  engineering  works  (1180-120^),  and  is  about 
to  relate  how  their  hearts  were  lifted  up  with  pride  in  their  wealth 
and  power,  and  how  Zeus  resolved  to  bring  them  into  judgment, 
when  the  fragment  breaks  off,  just  as  Zeus  is  about  to  declare  his 
purpose  to  the  assembled  gods.  The  chief  things  which  call  for 
notice  are  the  clear-headed  way  in  which  Plato  has  grasped  the 
effects  of  gradual  geological  denudation  on  Attica,2  and  the  special 
stress  he  lays  on  the  marvellous  skill  of  the  Atlantids  in  naval 
engineering.  The  description  may  have  been  inspired  by  a  re- 
collection of  what  had  actually  been  effected  at  Syracuse,3  but  the 


1  clK&v  roG  VOTJTOU,  0e6s  alffQrjrfo.     In  this  sentence  J/OT/TOU  must  not  be  taken, 
against  all  the  rules  of  grammar,  as  masculine  agreeing  with  an  "  understood  " 
0cov,  since  the  word  0e6s  has  not  yet  occurred  in  the  sentence.     VOTJTOV  is 
neuter,  and  we  must  either  understand  ftioi/  from  the  preceding  $ovt  or  pos- 
sibly take  rb  vorjr6v  substantially.     The  v.l.  TTOITJTOV  found  in  A  is  inferior  to 
the  vulgate,  which  is  also  the  better  supported  reading,  as  it  occurs  in  both 
F  and  Y. 

2  But  it  is  said  (Rivaud,  Timte,  p.  239)  that  much  of  the  denudation  of 
Attica  ascribed  by  Plato  to  the  natural  cataclysm  mentioned  at  Timaeus  2$d 
and  Critias  H2a  is  actually  the  work  of  man. 

8  Plato  is  thinking  also,  perhaps,  of  the  conversion  of  the  Piraeus  into  a 
great  naval  harbour,  but  the  immediate  source  of  the  description  is  probably 
what  he  had  seen  himself  at  Syracuse. 


462  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

works  ascribed  to  the  mythical  kings  more  than  sustain  comparison 
with  the  greatest  achievements  of  Roman  architects  and  engineers. 
The  whole  account  illustrates  Plato's  exceptional  knowledge  of  the 
technical  arts  and  his  high  estimate  of  their  possibilities.  We  may 
be  sure  that,  if  the  story  had  been  completed,  one  of  its  main  points 
would  have  been  the  triumph  of  patriotism  and  sound  moral  over 
technical  skill. 

The  conception  of  the  "  purpose  of  Zeus  "  seems  to  be  an  echo 
from  epic  poetry.  It  is  hardly  a  mere  accident  that  the  last  com- 
plete sentence  of  the  fragment  recalls  the  version  of  the  Trojan  story 
given  in  the  Cypna,  where  the  origin  of  the  great  war  is  traced  to 
the  plan  of  Zeus  for  the  prevention  of  over-population.  There  may 
be  some  significance  in  the  fact  that  Zeus  is  said  to  summon  the 
divine  council  to  his  "  most  honourable  abode  "  in  the  centre  of  the 
universe.1  Since  one  of  the  names  given  by  those  Pythagoreans 
who  believed  in  a  "  central  fire  "  to  this  luminary  was  Atos  <£uA.a*r;, 
this  looks  as  though  Critias  meant  to  hint  at  that  astronomical 
doctrine.  Timaeus,  as  we  have  seen,  makes  the  "  centre  "  empty. 


See  further  : 

BURNKT. — Greek  Philosophy,  Part  J.,  335-349  ;   Platonism  (1928), 

c.7. 
RITTKK,  C. — Platon,  ii.,  258-287  al.  ;    Platans  Dialog?,  98-158  ; 

Neue   Untersuchungen  uber  Platon,    174—182. 
LEVI,  A. — //  Concetto  del  Tempo  nella  Filosofia  di  Platone.      (Turin, 

N.D.) 
STEWART,  J.  A. — Plato's  Doctrine  of  Ideas,   101-105  ;    Myths  of 

Plato,   259-297   (The  Timaeus),  457-469. 
DIES,  A. — Autour  de  Platon,  ii.,   522-603. 
TAYLOR,  A.  E. — A   Commentary  on  Plato's  Timaeus.     (Oxford, 

1928)  ;    Plato,   Timaeus  and  Critias  (translated)    (1929). 
RIVAUD,  A. — Platon,  Time'e,  Critias.     (Paris,   1925.) 
FRIEDLANDER,    P. — Platon;    Eidos,    Paideia,   Dialogos    (1928). 

Excursus  II.   (on  the  city  of  Atlantis). 

RAEDER,  H. — Platons  philosophische  Entivichelung,  374-394. 
NATORP,   P. — Platons  Ideenlehre,  338-358. 
BAEUMKER,   C. — Das   Problem  der  Materie   in   dev  griechischen 

Philosophic,   115-188. 

MARTIN,  T.  H. — Etudes  suv  le  Time'e  de  Platon.     (Paris,   1841.) 
ROBIN,  L. — Etudes  sur  la  signification  et  la  place  de  la  physique 

dans  la  philosophic  de  Platon.     (Paris,   1919.) 
ROBIN,  L. — Platon,  c.  v. 
CORNFORD,  F.  M. — Plato's  Cosmology  (Timaeus  translated  with 

commentary,  Cambridge,   1937). 


1  Critias  i2ic  2-4.     The  sentence  adds  to  the  case  for  my  view  that  the 
astronomy  of  Timaeus  is  not  Plato's,  own. 


CHAPTER    XVIII 
THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS 

THE  Laws  is  not  only  the  longest  of  all  Plato's  writings  ; 
it  also  contains  his  latest  and  ripest  thought  on  the  subjects 
which  he  had  all  through  his  life  most  at  heart— ethics,  educa- 
tion, and  jurisprudence.  Plato's  services  to  the  theory  of  educa- 
tion, in  particular,  have  usually  been  grossly  underrated,  from  an 
inexcusable  neglect  of  the  very  thorough  treatment  given  to  it  in 
what  he  probably  himself  regarded  as  his  most  important  work. 
His  theology,  again,  has  often  been  misconceived  in  modern  times, 
because  the  tenth  book  of  the  Laws  is  the  only  place  in  his  works 
where  it  is  systematically  expounded.  This  neglect  of  so  noble  a 
work  is  perhaps  to  be  explained  by  two  considerations.  In  one 
respect  the  Laws  makes  a  greater  demand  on  the  reader  than  any 
other  Platonic  writing.  The  dramatic  element  is  reduced  to  a 
minimum  ;  if  one  does  not  care  for  the  subject-matter  of  the  book, 
there  is  little  in  its  manner  to  attract.  To  all  intents  and  purposes, 
the  work  is  a  monologue,  interrupted  only  by  formulae  of  assent 
or  requests  for  further  explanation.  Further,  the  purpose  of  the 
whole  is  severely  practical,  and  will  not  appeal  to  a  reader  who  cares 
more  for  metaphysics  and  science  than  for  morals  and  politics. 
More  than  any  other  work  of  Plato,  the  Laws  stands  in  direct  rela- 
tion to  the  political  life  of  the  age  in  which  it  was  composed  and  is 
meant  to  satisfy  a  pressing  felt  need. 

In  the  last  twenty  years  of  Plato's  life  it  was  becoming  more  and 
more  obvious  that  the  old  city-states  which  had  been  the  centres  of 
Hellenic  spiritual  life  had  had  their  day.  Athens  herself  had  be- 
come a  second-rate  power  ever  since  the  collapse  of  the  great  Syra- 
cusan  expedition,  as  Plato  knew  only  too  well.  Sparta,  to  whom 
the  hegemony  had  passed  at  the  end  of  the  Decelean  war,  had  proved 
wholly  unfitted  for  such  a  post,  and  had  been  crushed,  in  a  way 
from  which  she  never  recovered,  by  the  brilliant  successes  of 
Epaminondas,  which  made  Thebes  for  a  few  years  a  power  of  the 
first  order.  Meanwhile  the  very  existence  of  Hellenic  civilization 
was  endangered  by  the  encroachments  of  Persia  in  the  East  and 
Carthage  in  the  West.  It  was  clear  that  if  civilization  of  the  Hellenic 
type  was  to  hold  its  own,  none  of  the  older  city-states  was  in  a  condi- 
tion to  become  its  centre.  We  know  now  that  the  historical  solu- 
tion of  the  problem  was  to  be  provided  by  the  rise  of  the  Mace- 
donian monarchy  and  the  achievements  of  Philip  and  Alexander, 

463 


464          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

But  the  work  of  Philip  was  only  in  the  beginning  in  Plato's  last 
years  ;  his  appearance  south  of  Thermopylae  as  the  ally  of  Thebes 
against  Phocis,  the  first  manifest  sign  that  a  new  power  had 
succeeded  to  the  hegemony  of  the  Hellenic  states,  did  not  take  place 
until  the  year  after  Plato's  death.  In  the  meantime,  the  most 
striking  feature  of  the  situation  was  the  founding  of  new  cities 
or  the  revival  of  old  ones.  Epaminondas'  foundation  of  Megalo- 
polis as  a  centre  for  Arcadia  is  a  good  example  of  the  one  process, 
his  restoration  of  Messene  an  equally  good  example  of  the  other ; 
and  it  is  pertinent  to  remember  that,  according  to  Greek  ideas,  the 
first  thing  to  be  done  in  such  a  situation  was  to  provide  the  new  or 
revived  community  with  a  complete  constitution  and  fundamental 
law.  It  was  naturally  the  practice  to  call  in  the  aid  of  experts  in 
"  politics  "  as  advisers  in  the  task.  In  the  fifth  century,  Pericles 
had  employed  Protagoras  in  this  way,  to  give  advice  on  the  laws 
to  be  made  for  Thurii ;  in  the  fourth,  the  Academy  was  constantly 
being  asked,  as  a  recognized  society  of  experts  in  jurisprudence,  to 
do  the  same  sort  of  work.  Plato  himself  is  said  to  have  been  re- 
quested to  legislate  for  Megalopolis,  and,  though  he  declined,  work 
of  the  same  kind  was  done  by  his  associates  for  many  foundations.1 
Hence  it  was  eminently  desirable  that  men  contemplating  the 
probability  of  being  called  on  to  "legislate,"  should  be  provided 
with  an  example  of  the  way  in  which  the  work  should  be  gone  about, 
and  the  Laws  is  meant  to  furnish  just  such  an  example.  The 
assumed  situation  is  that  a  new  city  is  to  be  founded,  and  that  an 
Athenian  is  invited  to  lend  his  assistance  in  the  work.  The  partic- 
ular situation  assumed,  of  a  city  to  be  founded  in  Crete  on  the  site 
of  a  prehistoric  town,  is  presumably  fictitious,  especially  if,  as 
Wilamowitz  has  asserted,  the  topographical  details  show  that  Plato 
was  not  really  acquainted  with  actual  Cretan  conditions ;  a 
fictitious  situation  will  serve  as  well  as  a  real  one  to  illustrate  the 
principles  which  have  to  be  enforced. 

The  date  of  composition  of  the  work  cannot  be  very  precisely 
fixed.  But  we  may  readily  fix  a  terminus  a  quo.  One  of  the  chief 
principles  on  which  Plato  insists  is  that  the  legislator  has  not  really 
done  his  work  when  he  has  merely  enunciated  an  enactment  and 
provided  it  with  a  "  sanction  "  in  the  form  of  a  penalty  for  non- 
observance.  This  is  like  the  method  of  an  empiric  "  slave  "  doctor, 
treating  other  slaves  ;  he  merely  orders  a  prescription  to  be  followed 
under  the  threat  of  consequences  if  it  is  neglected.  A  great  physician 
treating  an  intelligent  freeman  tries  to  enlist  his  patient  in  the 
work  of  the  cure  by  explaining  to  him  the  principles  on  which  the 
treatment  rests.  In  the  same  way,  a  legislator  should  try  to  enlist 

1  See  the  list  of  active  "  law-givers  "  among  Plato's  pupils  in  Plutarch 
(Adv.  Colotem,  n?6c-d).  "  Plato  sent  Aristonymus  to  the  Arcadians,  Phormio 
to  Elis,  Menedemus  to  Pyrrha.  Eudoxus  and  Aristotle  wrote  laws  for  Cnidus 
and  Stagirus.  Alexander  asked  Xenocrates  for  advice  about  kingship ;  the 
man  who  was  sent  to  Alexander  by  the  Greek  inhabitants  of  Asia  and  did  most 
to  incite  him  to  undertake  his  war  on  the  barbarians  was  Delius  of  Ephesus, 
an  associate  of  Plato."  Cf.  D.L.  iii.,  23,  for  the  request  from  Megalopolis. 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  465 

the  sympathies  of  decent  men  on  the  side  of  the  law  by  prefixing 
to  his  whole  legislation  and  to  the  several  main  divisions  of  it 
"  proems  "  or  "  preambles'*  explaining  the  aims  of  the  legislation 
and  the  reasons  why  its  enactments  are  what  they  are,  and  why  the 
penalties  for  transgression  are  what  they  are  (Laws  719^-722^).  Now 
in  Epistle  iii.  316^,  Plato  refers  to  himself  as  having  been  occupied 
with  Dionysius  at  Syracuse  upon  "  preludes  "  or  "  preambles  "  to 
the  laws  to  be  given  to  the  cities  they  were  proposing  to  form  into  a 
constitutional  monarchy.  Thus  we  may  reasonably  infer  that  the 
conception  of  legislation  characteristic  of  the  Laws  was  suggested 
by  Plato's  personal  experience  of  the  Syracusan  situation.  The 
occasion  to  which  Epistle  iii.  refers  is  probably  that  of  Plato's  last 
visit  to  Syracuse  in  361/60,  though  it  may  conceivably  be  that  of 
the  visit  of  367/6.  In  either  case,  it  is  unlikely  that  Plato  would 
have  the  leisure  to  plan  a  work  of  the  scope  of  our  Laws  before  360, 
when  his  direct  connexion  with  the  affairs  of  Syracuse  was  over. 
Such  a  work  would  necessarily  involve  a  great  deal  of  thought  and 
time  and  may  well  have  occupied  Plato  more  or  less  continuously 
for  the  remaining  years  of  his  life,  though  the  one  actual  allusion  to 
a  dateable  event  seems  to  be  the  mention  (638^)  of  a  victory  of 
Dionysius  II  over  the  Locrians,  probably  to  be  assigned  to  the 
year  356. 

The  personnel  of  the  dialogue,  if  we  can  call  it  one,  is  exceedingly 
simple.  There  are  three  characters — an  Athenian,  left  anonymous, 
who  is  the  main  speaker,  and  two  minor  characters,  Megillus,  u 
Spartan,  and  Clinias,  a  Cretan.  All  of  them  are  old  men  ;  of  the 
Athenian  we  learn  that  he  has  astronomical  and  mathematical 
knowledge,  is  regarded  by  the  others  as  a  highly  suitable  person 
to  give  advice  on  matters  of  jurisprudence  and  political  science,  and 
that  he  has  had  personal  experience  of  association  with  a  "  tyrant  " 
(71  ia).  Thus  his  intellectual  qualifications  are  those  of  a  member 
of  the  Academy,  and  his  personal  experiences  are  modelled  on 
Plato's  own,  and  to  that  extent  we  may  fairly  take  him  as  standing 
for  Plato,  though  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  he  is  drawn 
with  any  deliberate  intention  of  self -portraiture.  All  we  learn  of 
the  others  is  that  the  Spartan  belongs  to  a  family  in  which  the  office 
of  proxenus  of  Athens  is  hereditary,  and  that  the  Cretan  is  connected 
by  blood  with  the  famous  medicine-man  Epimenides  (6426,  d). 
This  is  meant  to  account  for  the  unusual  readiness  of  both  to  learn 
from  an  Athenian.  When  the  work  opens  we  find  the  three  old 
men  engaged  in  a  general  conversation  about  the  merits  and  purpose 
of  the  institutions  of  the  traditional  legislators  of  Sparta  and 
Cnossus,  Lycurgus  and  Minos.  They  propose  to  continue  their 
conversation  as  they  walk  to  the  cave  of  Dicte,  the  legendary  birth- 
place of  Zeus.  The  full  situation  is  only  disclosed  at  the  end  of  the 
third  book  (jQ2b-d).  It  then  appears  that  the  Cretans  have  re' 
solved  to  resettle  the  site  of  a  decayed  city  ;  the  making  of  the 
necessary  arrangements  has  been  left  to  the  citizens  of  Cnossus, 
who  have  devolved  it  upon  a  commission  of  ten.  Clinias,  the  head 


466          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

of  this  commission,  proposes  to  take  the  Athenian  and  Spartan  into 
consultation  as  advisers  about  the  legislation  and  the  constitution 
generally.  We  have  already  incidentally  heard  that  the  time  of 
the  year  is  midsummer,  so  that  the  long  day  will  suffice  for  a  full 
discussion. 

The  argument  of  the  first  three  books  may  be  regarded  as 
introductory.  Plato  winds  his  way  very  gradually  into  his  subject, 
advancing  almost  imperceptibly  from  a  problem  of  ethics,  through 
educational  theory,  to  the  consideration  of  strictly  political  and 
juristic  matter,  and  does  not  reveal  his  full  purpose  until  the  pre- 
paratory positions  have  been  thoroughly  secured.  This  method  is 
very  characteristic,  and  it  is  unfortunate  that  some  modern  readers 
should  have  appreciated  it  so  little  as  to  speculate  about  the  possi- 
bility that  the  whole  arrangement  is  due  to  the  piecing  together  of 
disconnected  papers  by  an  editor.  I  trust  that  the  brief  analysis 
which  follows  will  reveal  the  real  march  of  the  argument  as  far  too 
carefully  studied  to  be  the  result  of  a  well-meant  blunder. 

(Book  I.)  What  is  the  central  purpose  of  the  institutions  of 
Lycurgus  and  Minos  ?  The  Spartan  and  Cretan  agree  that  their 
law-givers  have  discovered  the  fundamental  truth  that,  under  all 
disguises,  the  brute  hard  fact  about  the  life  of  a  city  is  that  it  is  a 
"  war  to  the  knife  "  with  all  rivals  ;  almost  in  Hobbes's  phrase, 
independent  cities  are  in  a  state  of  nature  towards  one  another,  and 
the  state  of  nature  is  a  state  of  real  but  undeclared  war  (jro/U/iog 
aKYjpvKTos).  Hence  the  supreme  good  for  a  city  is  victory  in  this 
unremitting  warfare,  and  the  business  of  a  citizen  is  to  be,  before 
everything,  a  combatant.  All  the  institutions  of  Sparta  and  Crete 
are  therefore  rightly  directed  towards  producing  the  one  great 
virtue,  efficiency  in  warfare,  di/Speta,  valour.  The  Athenian  dissents 
entirely  from  this  ethic  of  warfare.  The  supreme  victory  for  any 
community  or  any  man  is  not  victory  over  the  foe  without,  but 
victory  over  self,  that  is,  the  conquest  of  the  worser  elements  in 
the  community  or  the  individual  soul  by  the  better.  And  this 
victory  is  not  complete  when  the  better  elements  coerce  or  expel 
the  worse  ;  it  is  only  complete  when  subjugation  is  followed  by 
reconciliation  and  harmony.  Peace,  not  war,  between  the  com- 
ponents of  community  or  individual  soul  is  the  best  state;  it  is 
with  a  view  to  peace  that  a  good  legislator  must  make  his  enact- 
ments. From  this  point  of  view,  wisdom,  sophrosyne,  justice,  are 
the  supreme  virtues  ;  mere  martial  valour  will  rank  only  fourth 
(6310).  Now  when  we  consider  the  Spartan  system  of  training  we 
see  that  all  its  peculiarities — the  common  meals  of  coarse  fare,  the 
bodily  exercises  and  hunting,  and  the  rough  discipline  in  general 
— aim  only  at  fostering  the  one  virtue  we  have  just  ranked  lowest 
among  the  four  of  the  familiar  quadrilateral.  And,  what  is  more, 
they  aim  at  teaching  only  the  easier  and  less  valuable  half  of  the 
one  virtue. 

True  "manliness"  or  valour  does  not  consist  simply  in  the 
power  to  face  danger,  pain,  and  weariness ;  it  means  also  being  able 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  467 

to  face  the  seductions  of  pleasure  without  giving  in  to  them,  and 
this  is  the  finer  half  of  the  virtue  and  the  harder  to  learn.  But 
Megillus  himself  cannot  point  to  any  training  provided  by  the 
Spartan  system  in  this  part  of  valour  (6346).  The  explanation  is 
that  the  only  way  to  learn  to  get  the  better  of  temptation  is  to  be 
made  to  face  it  and  overcome  it.  The  Spartans  act  on  this  prin- 
ciple when  they  teach  the  young  to  face  peril  and  pain  bravely  by 
exposing  them  to  them.  They  avoid  making  them  learn  to  face 
and  overcome  the  seductions  of  pleasure.  Indeed,  the  perverse 
sexual  practices  which  are  fostered  by  the  "  barrack-room  "  life 
of  Sparta  have  given  her  a  universal  bad  name  (6366)  no  less  than 
the  relaxed  manners  of  her  women  (6370). 

A  chance  remark  of  Megillus  in  reply  to  these  criticisms  provides 
the  material  for  the  rest  of  the  discussion  of  Book  I.  He  regards  it 
as  highly  creditable  to  Sparta  that  its  pleasures  are  so  few  ;  a  wine- 
party,  for  example,  is  an  unheard-of  thing  (6370).  This  leads  the 
Athenian  into  a  long  discussion  of  the  practice  of  /xe'tf??,  the  convivial 
use  of  wine.  (As  a  mere  drink  with  meals  wine  was  used  sparingly 
at  Sparta,  as  everywhere  else  in  Greece,  for  the  simple  reason  that 
the  water  is  bad.)  Some  communities  wholly  prohibit  the  practice, 
others  allow  anyone  who  pleases  to  indulge  in  it  as  much  as  he 
pleases  and  whenever  he  likes.  Both,  the  Athenian  thinks,  are 
mistaken.  A  Spartan  may  urge  that  the  Spartans  beat  the  "  wet  " 
forces  in  the  field  whenever  they  meet  them,  but  we  cannot  generalize 
by  enumeration  from  a  few  instances.  The  issue  of  numberless 
engagements  goes  unrecorded,  and  we  can  point  to  examples  on 
the  other  side,  such  as  the  victory  of  the  toping  Syracusans  over 
the  abstemious  Locrians.  If  we  are  to  judge  of  wine-drinking  or 
any  other  practice  we  must  see  what  can  be  made  of  it  under  proper 
regulation.  Now  under  two  important  conditions — (a)  that  the 
party  is  presided  over  by  a  sober  man  who  is  not  himself  giving  way 
to  the  merriment,  and  (b)  that  this  president  is  a  man  of  more  years 
and  experience  than  the  rest  of  the  party — such  a  gathering  might 
have  valuable  social  uses.  In  vino  veritas  is  true  in  the  sense  that 
when  a  man  is  warmed  with  wine,  he  shows  himself  for  what  he  is 
.  without  disguise.  He  blurts  out  thoughts  which  he  would  normally 
keep  to  himself,  and  exhibits  tempers  he  would  normally  hide.  If 
there  were  a  drug  which  would  gradually  produce  groundless  fear 
and  apprehension,  as  there  is  not,  it  would  enable  us  to  make  a  very 
safe  and  easy  test  of  a  man's  courage.  We  could  make  him  take 
deeper  and  deeper  draughts  of  it,  and  watch  his  success  in  mastering 
his  pathological  alarms.  We  should  thus  be  able  to  do  without 
risk  what,  in  fact,  we  can  only  do  by  exposing  a  man  to  actual  risk, 
distinguish  the  more  from  the  less  valiant.  Wine  does  give  us 
such  a  test  of  a  man's  sophrosyne.  We  can  see  who  forgets  himself 
least  and  keeps  his  modesty  best  under  the  artificial  removal  of 
restraints  produced  by  the  wine-cup,  and,  if  the  party  is  rightly 
conducted,  there  is  no  danger  that  the  application  of  the  test  will 
have  serious  consequences  ;  the  subject  will  be  a  little  noisy  and 


468          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

silly  for  the  time,  and  that  is  all.  It  is  much  better  to  learn  a  man's 
weakness  from  such  a  slight  exposure  than  to  have  to  discover  it 
from  his  exposure  to  a  grave  temptation  to  unlawful  love  or  the  like. 
The  practice  might  thus  be  of  great  value  to  the  magistrate  who 
wants  to  know  what  citizens  he  can  safely  trust  to  come  well  out 
of  positions  where  there  is  opportunity  for  gratifying  the  desire  for 
unrighteous  pleasures.  And  to  the  members  of  the  party,  of  course,  . 
learning  to  "  drink  their  wine  like  gentlemen  "  does  afford  a  very 
real  drill  in  learning  to  say  "  no  "  at  the  right  time.  On  these 
grounds  the  Athenian  advocates  the  strictly  regulated  permission 
to  drink  wine  convivially.  If  there  is  to  be  no  regulation  of  such 
parties,  he  would  like  to  see  wine  absolutely  prohibited  to  the  young 
of  both  sexes,  soldiers  in  the  field,  servants,  magistrates  during 
their  tenure  of  office,  sea-captains,  jurymen  and  counsellors  when 
acting  in  that  capacity,  and  "  any  person  immediately  contemplating 
the  procreation  of  children  "  (6740-6).  No  doubt  the  main  reason 
for  the  discussion  is  that  it  serves  to  illustrate  the  great  principles 
that  the  better  half  of  valour  is  mastery  over  one's  desires,  and  that 
the  true  way  to  master  temptation  is  to  stand  up  to  it,  not  to  make 
its  occurrence  artificially  impossible. 

(Book  II.)  The  sentence  just  quoted  does  not  occur  until  the 
end  of  the  second  book,  but  before  we  reach  it,  Plato  has  ingeniously 
made  the  problem  of  the  right  use  of  wine  lead  up  to  that  of  the  use 
of  music  and  poetry  as  a  vehicle  of  early  moral  education.  There 
is  still  a  further  valuable  social  service  which  may  be  derived  from 
a  proper  use  of  wine,  but  before  we  can  say  what  this  service  is, 
we  must  ask  the  question  what  right  education  is.  To  answer  this, 
we  reflect  that  a  child's  first  experience  in  life  is  acquaintance  with 
pleasure  and  pain  (6530),  and  that  an  education  in  character  begins 
with  learning  to  feel  pleasure  and  pain  about  the  right  things 
(ibid.  b).  To  understand  how  this  education  is  to  be  got,  we  consider 
that  a  young  creature  cannot  keep  still ;  it  is  always  jumping  and 
shouting  (ibid.  d).  In  man,  by  the  gift  of  God,  these  boundings  and 
shoutings  can  be  transformed  into  tuneful  and  rhythmical  singing 
and  dancing,  and  it  is  with  this  transformation  that  education 
begins  (6540).  Thus,  by  a  liberal  interpretation,  the  whole  of  the 
early  moral  training  of  the  young,  which  is  to  begin  as  soon  as  they 
are  sensible  to  melody  and  rhythm,  can  be  brought  under  the  rubric 
of  education  in  the  "  choric  "  art,  the  art  of  song  accompanied  by 
the  lyre  and  by  the  movements  of  an  appropriate  ballet  faction. 
The  connexion  of  the  discussion  with  the  previous  problem  of  the 
right  use  of  wine  is  effected  by  a  playful  artifice  very  characteristic 
of  Plato.  It  is  at  first  assumed  that,  since  the  community  as  a 
whole  must  take  its  part  in  the  worship  of  the  Muses,  there  will  be 
three  choirs  at  our  musical  festivals — one  of  the  boys  and  girls,  a 
second  of  the  younger,  and  a  third  of  the  older,  men.  But  old  men 
who  ale  "stiff  in  the  joints"  and  past  the  feelings  of  frolic  will 
naturally  not  find  it  easy  to  recapture  the  youthful  spirit  of  gaiety 
which  will  make  it  natural  for  them  to  sing  and  dance  before  a 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  469 

public  audience.  If  they  do  not  enter  thoroughly  into  the  spirit 
of  the  thing,  there  will  be  an  awkwardness  and  constraint  about 
their  contribution  which  is  specially  out  of  place  in  a  festival  of 
the  deities  of  graceful  achievement.  The  concession  to  them  of  a 
proper  use  of  wine  would  provide  just  the  requisite  means  of  recover- 
ing for  the  time  the  abandon  of  youth,  and  would  be  appropriate, 
when  we  remember  that  Dionysus,  one  of  the  gods  who  are  patrons 
of  song  and  dance,  is  also  the  giver  of  wine.  As  the  argument 
develops,  we  discover  that  we  are  not  to  take  the  description  of  the 
functions  of  this  "  choir  of  Dionysus  "  quite  literally.  What  they 
are  really  to  do  is  to  select  the  words  and  music  for  the  songs  of 
younger  persons.  They  are,  in  fact,  to  be  compilers  of  the  official 
anthology,  and  the  use  of  wine  is  to  assist  them  in  this  task.  The 
besetting  fault  of  compilers  of  anthologies  for  the  young  is  that 
they  make  their  selections  much  too  "  grown-up."  The  middle- 
aged  compiler's  taste  is  not  a  safe  guide.  Plato  thinks  that  if  he 
came  to  his  work  warmed  with  a  few  glasses  of  a  generous  wine,  he 
would  be  more  likely  to  escape  this  commonly  recognized  danger 
and  to  make  a  wiser  selection. 

The  details  of  the  book  cannot  be  discussed  here,  but  it  should 
be  noted  that  while  the  treatment  proceeds  on  the  same  main 
principles  as  those  laid  down  for  the  employment  of  music  in  the 
schoolroom  in  Republic  iii.,  the  whole  discussion  is  much  richer  in 
psychological  insight  ;  no  account  of  Plato's  views  about  the  moral 
influence  of  music  on  character  can  possibly  afford  to  neglect 
Laws  ii.,  though  many  professed  accounts  commit  the  fault.  For 
the  general  theory  of  moral  education,  the  most  significant  utter- 
ances are  the  declaration,  emphatically  commended  by  Aristotle, 
that  the  whole  problem  is  to  teach  the  young  to  "  feel  pleasure  and 
pain  "  rightly  (6536)  and  that  "  rightly  "  means  "  in  accord  with 
the  rightly  uttered  discourse  of  the  law"  (659^,  Trpos  TOV  LTTO  TOV 
VO/AOV  \6yov  opOov  ctpT/fuVov),1  a  sentence  which  seems  to  be  the 
source  from  which  the  expression  6p0os  Aoyos  has  got  into  the 
Ethics  of  Aristotle.  We  may  also  note  the  vigour  of  the  protest 
against  the  view  that  "  the  tastes  of  the  audience  "  are  the  standard 
of  excellence  in  art  (6580-6590),  and  the  allusion  to  the  example  of 
Egypt  as  proof  that  it  is  possible  to  establish  permanent  canons  of 
aesthetic  taste  (656^,  e)* 

With  Book  III.,  we  enter  on  the  main  problem  of  political  science, 
what  a  "  city  "  is,  and  how  it  arises.  To  illustrate  the  way  in 

1  The  whole  sentence  should  be  familiar  to  every  one  who  wants  to  appreci- 
ate Plato's  educational  theory ;  "  education  (waiSela)  is  the  drawing  and 
guiding  (O\K^  re  ical  dywyfy  of  children  towards  the  discourse  rightly  uttered 
by  the  law  and  assented  to  as  truly  right  by  the  best  and  oldest  men,  on  the 
strength  of  their  experience."  The  immediate  point  is  that  sound  musical 
education  must  accustom  the  young  from  the  first  to  enjoy  what  is  really 
good,  so  that  "  young  and  old  alike  "  have  the  same  tastes  in  music. 

s  Note  that  Plato  does  not,  as  is  often  said,  express  any  approval  of  the 
actual  "  stereotyped  "  Egyptian  art.     He  merely  appeals  to  the  fact  that 
Egyptian  art  has  remained  stationary  as  a  proof  that  permanent  standard? 
are  possible. 
16 


470          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

which  historical  development  of  institutions  is  conditioned,  we 
imagine  what  would  happen  if  a  natural  cataclysm  destroyed  the 
whole  of  a  community  with  the  exception  of  a  few  shepherds  and 
goat-herds  who  escaped  by  the  very  fact  that  they  occupied  a  re- 
mote and  inaccessible  position.  They  would  be  the  rudest  members 
of  their  society,  and  thus  all  the  arts  of  civilization  would  be 
temporarily  lost.  It  would  be  only  very  gradually  that  the  chief 
industrial  arts  and  the  arts  of  letters  would  be  recovered  The 
survivors  would  at  first  live  in  isolated  family  groups  in  out-of-the- 
way  places,  with  little  or  no  means  of  intercommunication,  and 
hardly  any  implements  of  industry.  In  the  main,  when  they  began 
to  recover  communication  with  one  another,  they  would  live,  after 
the  fashion  of  nomads,  on  the  produce  of  their  herds,  without 
accumulating  "  portable  property,"  and  hence  without  strife  and 
greed  (6790-0).  Their  rule  of  life  would  be  "  patriarchal,"  each 
head  of  a  house  making  regulations  for  his  own  household,  as 
Homer  has  correctly  assumed  in  his  account  of  the  pastoral  Cyclopes 
(6806). 

In  course  of  time,  men  would  pass  from  this  "  nomad  life  "  to 
agriculture,  and  the  inhabiting  of  some  sort  of  "  city/'  These 
settlements  would  naturally  be  made  first  of  all  in  the  uplands,  and 
agriculture  would  bring  along  with  it  the  first  rude  attempts  at 
"  enclosures  "  (68i#).  For  defence  against  dangers,  families  would 
coalesce  in  large  "  houses  "  (like  the  "  long  houses  "  of  the  North 
American  Indians).  This  would,  in  time,  lead  to  an  Ausgleich 
of  rules  of  life.  The  "  large  house  "  would  develop  a  rule  of  life 
out  of  the  various  rules  each  family  group  brought  with  it  into  the 
settlement,  and  we  might  call  this  the  first  rude  beginning  of  legisla- 
tion (ibid.  b-c).  So  we  should  find  the  first  beginnings  of  sovereignty 
at  the  same  stage  in  the  appearance  of  a  sort  of  "  aristocracy  "  of 
headmen,  who  see  that  the  rule  of  life  is  duly  observed  (6Sid). 
When  the  memory  of  the  cataclysm  had  sufficiently  died  out,  a 
further  step  would  be  taken.  Men  would  venture  to  come  down 
into  the  plains  and  build  cities  on  a  larger  scale,  like  Homer's 
Ilios  (6820).  With  this  development  we  find  ourselves  in  an  age  of 
rich  and  powerful  monarchs  who  can  engage  in  serious  hostilities. 
(It  will  be  noted  with  how  sure  an  eye  Plato  discerns  the  general 
character  of  the  Greek  "  Middle  Ages,"  as  they  are  depicted  for  us 
in  the  Iliad,  which  he  rightly  regards  as  historical  in  its  representa- 
tion of  the  old  days  of  "  chivalry.") 

The  traditional  story  of  the  disasters  of  the  return  from  Troy 
and  of  the  Dorian  conquest  of  the  Peloponnese  also  has  a  lesson 
for  us.  The  narrative  of  the  conflicts  between  the  returning  warriors 
and  the  new  generation,  and  of  the  Dorian  invasion,  throw  light 
on  the  way  in  which  a  "  world- war  "  changes  the  face  of  history 
(682^  ff.).  The  main  point,  made  at  considerable  length,  is  that 
the  Dorian  invaders,  if  they  had  only  been  wise  in  their  genera- 
tion, had  the  opportunity  of  establishing  a  State  which  could  have 
held  its  own  against  all  the  Oriental  monarchies,  since  they  found 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  471 

themselves  in  occupation  of  a  new  territory,  had  no  ancient  tradi- 
tions or  vested  interests  to  hamper  them,  and  so  had  a  free  hand  for 
legislation.  They  must  have  misused  their  opportunity,  for,  though 
tradition  says  that  they  set  up  a  federation  of  three  States — Sparta, 
Argos,  Messene — pledged  to  mutual  support,  two  of  the  three  were  in 
course  of  time  reduced  to  subjection  or  impotence  by  the  third, 
and  it  is  only  in  part,  and  in  the  one  city  of  Sparta,  that  the  old 
rule  of  life,  which  dates  from  the  conquest  and  was,  in  fact,  dictated 
by  the  position  of  the  Dorians  as  invaders  in  the  midst  of  an  alien 
and  hostile  population,  has  lasted  on.  The  great  mistake  made  at 
the  conquest  was  that,  though  the  three  kingdoms  tried  to  ensure 
the  permanency  of  their  institutions  by  a  compact  that  if  any  attempt 
at  innovation  was  made  in  any  one  of  the  three  States,  the  other 
two  would  help  to  suppress  it,  they  did  not  understand  the  all- 
important  principle  that  (6gic-d)  the  permanent  well-being  of  any 
State  demands  the  division  of  the  sovereign  power  between  several 
parties.  Concentration  of  the  plenitude  of  sovereignty  in  the 
same  hands  is  fatal.  If  Sparta  has  retained  much  of  the  old  in- 
stitutions it  is  because  the  "  division  of  power  "  has  preserved  her. 
Providence  gave  an  opening  for  this,  when  circumstances  led  to 
the  division  of  the  kingship  between  two  houses  ;  the  wisdom  of 
an  ancient  statesman — this  certainly  means  Lycurgus — carried  the 
principle  further,  by  dividing  sovereignty  between  the  kings  and 
the  yepnva-ta  \  the  process  was  afterwards  completed  by  the  in- 
stitution of  the  ephors.  Hence  the  Spartan  constitution  is,  as 
Plato  holds  that  a  stable  constitution  always  ought  to  be,  a  mixed 
one  (69 1  £-6920). 

We  learn  the  same  lesson  from  the  history  of  Persia  and  that  of 
Athens.  The  principle  is  that,  in  the  last  resort,  there  are  two 
"  matrices  "  of  constitutions — personal  rule  (monarchy),  and 
democracy  (popular  rule,  693^).  In  a  sound  constitution  both 
need  to  be  blended.  This  was  the  case  with  the  Persians  under 
Cyrus,  as  well  as  with  the  Athenians  of  the  same  time.  But  in 
Persia,  the  element  of  popular  control  has  disappeared,  and  govern- 
ment has  become  capricious  autocracy,  with  the  result  that  Persia 
is  now  only  formidable  on  "  paper,"  since  there  is  no  real  loyalty 
in  the  subject.  At  Athens,  respect  for  personal  character  and 
authority  has  been  lost  in  a  complete  reign  of  the  mob.  The  cause, 
in  both  cases,  has  been  the  same,  ignorance  of  the  true  principles 
of  education.  Since  the  great  Darius,  every  Persian  prince  has 
been  "  born  in  the  purple  "  and  brought  up  by  women  and  eunuchs, 
who  ruin  him  by  gratifying  all  his  caprices.  At  Athens,  the  mis- 
chief began  when  the  uneducated  learned  to  think  their  own  opinion 
about  music  and  drama  as  good  as  that  of  the  educated,  and  the 
same  delusion  soon  spread  to  political  matters;  the  Athens  of  to- 
day is  not  really  a  "  democracy  "  but  a  "  theatrocracy  "  of  ignorant 
sensation-lovers  (6940-701^).  In  Persia,  no  one  is  taught  how  to 
command,  and  in  Athens  no  one  learns  how  to  obey.  The  lesson 
of  history  for  the  intending  legislator  is  thus  that  every  wholesome 


472          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

government  must  rest  on  a  "  division  of  sovereignty  "  ;  it  must 
combine  the  "  popular  "  element  with  "  something  of  personal 
authority,11  or,  as  Plato  puts  it,  must  unite  "  monarchy  "  and  "  free- 
dom." There  must  be  somewhere  a  scat  of  authority,  but  authority 
must  not  degenerate  into  regimentation ;  there  must  be  €\cvO€p£a, 
the  freedom  of  the  individual,  but  not  a  freedom  which  is  anarchical. 

It  is  a  good  corrective  to  some  popular  misconceptions  of  Plato, 
to  note  the  judicious  way  in  which  he  employs  poetry  and  tradition 
as  the  basis  for  his  tentative  reconstruction  of  pre-history,  and  the 
moderation  and  sobriety  of  the  lessons  he  draws  from  history.  In 
the  main,  his  conception  of  the  stages  by  which  men  pass  through 
the  nomad  to  the  agricultural  state,  and  from  the  life  of  the 
family  group  to  that  of  the  "city/1  agrees  with  Aristotle's, 
and  I  might  suggest  that  the  well-known  account  of  the  "  house- 
hold "  and  "  village  "  as  the  precursors  of  the  "  city  "  in  the  Politics 
is  consciously  inspired  by  the  more  detailed  picture  of  Laws  iii. 
In  one  respect,  Plato  is  more  "  modern  "  than  Aristotle  or  any 
other  ancient ;  he,  like  ourselves,  has  a  vivid  sense  of  the  enormous 
lapses  of  time  and  the  numerous  changes  which  must  have  gone  to 
the  making  of  society  before  our  records  begin.  Alone  among  the 
Greeks,  he  has  a  genuine  sense  of  the  recency  of  the  "historical" 
period  of  human  life,  and  the  importance  of  pre-history.  For  the 
theory  of  politics,  the  great  feature  of  the  book  is  the  clear  and 
definite  enunciation  of  the  principle  of  the  "  division  of  sovereign 
power."  Lord  Acton  once  wrote,  improving  on  Dr.  Johnson,  that 
the  first  Whig  was  not  the  devil,  but  St.  Thomas.  It  might  be 
even  truer  to  say,  neither  St.  Thomas  nor  the  devil,  but  Plato. 

The  third  book  of  the  Laws  ends  with  the  statement  that  Clinias 
and  his  friend  are  actually  engaged  in  a  visit  to  the  site  of  the 
proposed  new  city,  and  an  invitation  to  the  Athenian  to  assist  them 
by  continuing  his  discourse  on  legislation  as  they  walk.  In  Book  IV. 
Plato  proceeds  at  once  to  give  us  a  lesson  in  practical  constitution- 
making.  The  very  first  requisite  is  to  be  well  informed  about  the 
topography,  climate,  economic  resources  of  the  State  for  which  we 
are  to  legislate, and  the  character  of  its  inhabitants.  The  constitution 
and  legislation  must,  of  course,  be  adapted  to  all  these  conditions  ; 
Plato  is  no  builder  of  Utopias,  but  an  extremely  practical  thinker. 
In  the  present  case,  he  assumes  that  the  territory  of  the  imagined 
city  is  varied  :  it  contains  arable,  pasture,  woodland,  and  the  like, 
in  reasonable  quantity,  but  it  is  not  extremely  fertile.  In  situation, 
the  city  is  some  miles  from  the  sea,  though  there  is  a  spot  in  its 
territory  which  would  make  a  good  harbour.  It  has  no  very  near 
neighbours.  These  conditions  are  assumed,  because  without  them 
some  of  the  features  Plato  regards  as  most  desirable  in  national  life 
could  not  be  secured.  He  wants  his  territory  to  be  varied  in  order 
that  it  may  be  as  nearly  as  possible  self-supporting  and  independent 
of  imports  ;  he  wants  it  not  to  be  over-fertile,  mainly  in  order  to 
exclude  the  rise  of  production  for  the  foreign  market,  and  for  much 
the  same  reasons  he  is  glad  that  it  should  not  have  easy  access  to 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  478 

the  sea,  the  great  highway  of  commerce.  His  objection  is  to  the 
influx  of  large  bodies  of  aliens  engaged  in  trade,  whose  presence 
would  be  a  menace  to  the  stability  of  national  traditions  of  life. 
(There  is  to  be  no  Peiraeeus.)  And  he  wants  to  exclude  a  big  export 
trade  also,  because  he  does  not  wish  the  spirit  of  the  community  to 
be  commercialized.  A  further  danger  is  that,  as  in  the  case  of 
Athens  herself,  the  development  of  a  sea-borne  commerce  will  lead 
to  the  growth  of  a  navy,  and  with  it  to  the  growth  of  aggressive 
"  imperialism."  This  explains  the  motive  for  the  long  passage  in 
which  it  is  argued  that,  contrary  to  the  general  opinion,  the  rise 
of  Athens  as  a  sea-power  has  been  her  chief  misfortune  (705^707^). 
This  was  also  the  opinion  of  Isocrates,  and  seems  to  be  true,  in  spite 
of  the  customary  glorification  of  Themistocles  and  Pericles,  It  was 
the  spirit  of  commercialistic  imperialism  which  led  directly  to  the 
attempt  of  Alcibiades  and  his  admirers  to  create  an  Athenian 
empire  in  the  western  Mediterranean,  and  it  was  this  adventure 
which  irretrievably  ruined  the  Periclean  democracy.1  The  history 
of  Athens  explains  why  Plato  wishes  a  morally  healthy  society  to 
be  agrarian  rather  than  industrial,  just  as  Ruskin,  Carlyle,  and 
Morris  all  wished  the  same  thing  for  England.  The  composition 
of  the  prospective  inhabitants  by  invitation  of  settlers  from  all 
over  Crete  and  from  the  Peloponnese  is  intended  to  provide  another 
advantage.  As  the  citizens  come  from  different  quarters,  they 
will  have  different  original  traditions,  and  this  will  mean  that  a 
legislator  will  not  have  the  same  dead  weight  of  unintelligent 
conservatism  to  contend  against  (708^). 

Now  what  would  be  the  most  favourable  opportunity  for  the 
creation  of  a  thoroughly  sound  system  of  laws  and  institutions  ? 
Though  the  remark  seems  paradoxical,  the  best  chance  would  be 
offered  by  the  co-operation  of  a  thoroughly  wise  statesman  with  a 
"  tyrant/'  but  the  tyrant  would  have  to  be  young,  intelligent,  and 
endowed  with  unusual  moral  nobility  (709^).  The  thought  is  that 
in  this  case  the  statesman  would  have  the  freest  hand.  He  would 
need  only  to  convert  the  autocrat  to  his  plans,  and  the  rest  of 
society  would  follow  suit,  partly  from  loyalty,  partly  because  the 
autocrat  has  the  requisite  force  to  constrain  the  malcontent.  He 
must  be  young  as  well  as  intelligent,  of  course,  if  he  is  to  be  won  to 
such  an  undertaking  :  an  older  man  would  be  less  easily  impressed. 
He  must  have  moral  nobility,  because  he  will  be  called  on  to  sacri- 
fice his  own  position  as  autocrat,  if  the  combination  of  authority 
with  "  freedom  "  is  to  be  effected.  It  is  improbable  that  there 
should  ever  be  such  a  conjuncture  as  the  association  in  one  age  and 
place  of  a  supreme  statesman  with  a  young  autocrat  of  such  unusual 
qualifications,  but  we  cannot  say  that  the  thing  is  impossible  (7iicf). 
So  we  may  imagine  that  the  condition  has  been  realized  and  proceed 

1  Of  course  it  was  not  the  fault  of  the  Athenians  that  they  were  a  naval 
power.  They  had  to  be  one,  just  because,  like  ourselves,  they  needed  to  import 
their  wheat.  But  the  necessity  of  possessing  a  powerful  fleet  inevitably  led 
to  the  temptation  to  use  it  for  purposes  of  selfish  aggrandizement. 


474          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

to  consider  what  institutions  the  statesman  with  such  a  force  at 
his  disposal  would  be  likely  to  recommend.1 

If  a  man  with  a  genius  for  statesmanship  ever  got  this  favourable 
opportunity  of  carrying  his  conceptions  out  in  practice,  he  would, 
in  accord  with  the  principles  already  laid  down,  take  care  not  to 
establish  an  "  unmixed  "  constitution  of  any  of  the  three  types 
familiar  in  the  Greek  world.  That  would  be  to  create  a  sovereignty 
of  a  favoured  person  or  class  over  a  subject  class  or  classes.  In  a 
true  "  constitution  "  the  sovereign  is  not  class-interest,  but  God, 
and  the  voice  by  which  God  makes  His  commands  known  is  the 
law.  Hence  the  fundamental  principle  of  good  government  is 
that  the  sovereign  shall  be  not  a  person  or  a  class,  but  impersonal 
law  (7130).  In  such  a  society  the  posts  of  authority  will  be  awarded 
for  superiority  not  in  birth,  or  wealth,  or  strength,  but  in  whole- 
hearted service  to  law.  Its  point  of  honour  will  be  loyalty  to  the 
laws.  The  Athenian  accordingly  imagines  himself  to  be  in  the 
position  of  a  legislator  speaking  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  body 
of  intending  citizens,  and  proceeds  to  begin  an  address  to  them  on 
the  majesty  of  law  (7150-7180)  ;  the  opening  words  of  this  speech 
are,  perhaps,  the  one  "  text  "  quoted  more  frequently  than  any 
other  by  the  Platonists  of  later  antiquity.  God  eternally  pursues 
the  "  even  tenour  of  his  way,"  and  Justice  attends  Him  ;  he  who 
would  be  happy  must  follow  in  their  train  with  a  "  humbled  and 
disciplined "  spirit  (raTrcivo?  /cat  jce/cofr/x^/Acvo?).  To  follow  God 
means  to  be  like  God,  who  is  the  true  "  measure  of  all  things  "  (7i6c). 
We"  are  like  God  so  far  as  we  follow  the  life  of  right  measure. 

In  the  life  of  measure  reverence  (nprj)  must  be  meted  out  to  its 
various  recipients  in  the  right  order,  first  to  the  gods  of  the  upper 
world  and  our  city,  next  to  those  of  the  underworld,  then  to  "  spirits 
and  heroes,"  then  to  ancestors  and  dead  parents,  and  last  to  our 
living  parents  ;  in  honouring  these  last,  we  must  remember  that  to 
support  them  with  our  substance  is  the  least  office,  to  minister  to 
them  with  our  bodies  something  more,  to  give  them  the  affection 
and  devotion  of  the  soul  the  great  thing.  We  cannot  do  too  much 
for  them  while  we  have  them  with  us  ;  when  they  die,  the  most 
modest  funeral  is  the  most  decent  and  honourable.  At  this  point 
the  discourse  on  the  duties  of  life  breaks  off,  to  be  resumed  again 
in  the  following  book.  The  reason  for  the  interruption  is  that  the 
speaker  recollects  that  there  are  two  possible  types  of  law,  a  brief 
one  and  a  longer.  The  brief  type  of  law  is  that  in  common  vogue. 
It  consists  of  a  command  or  prohibition  accompanied  by  a 
"  sanction  "  in  the  form  of  a  penalty  threatened  for  non-compliance. 

1  Why  dot#s  not  Plato  suggest  that  the  supremely  wise  statesman  should 
himself  be  born  heir  to  the  throne  ?  Presumably  because  wisdom  in  states- 
manship only  comes  with  years  and  experience.  But  an  experienced  monarch 
oi  advanced  years  would  have  neither  the  enthusiasm  nor  the  entire  freedom 
from  self-interest  demanded  of  the  autocrat  who  is  to  employ  his  position  to 
suppress  himself.  Hence  the  wisdom  must  be  that  of  a  man  who  has  not  to 
struggle  with  the  insidious  temptations  of  self -interest,  the  enthusiasm  that  ol 
a  man  who  has  not  lost  the  first  flush  of  youth. 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  475 

The  wise  legislator  will  not,  however,  wish  to  overawe  the  subject 
into  obedience  by  mere  threats.  He  would  prefer  to  enlist  the 
feelings  of  the  subjects  in  favour  of  his  regulations  as  far  as  he  can, 
leaving  only  the  worst  kind  of  citizen  to  be  merely  coerced.  If  we 
look  at  the  practice  of  physicians  of  the  body,  we  shall  see  that 
there  are  two  types  among  them.  There  are  the  mere  empirics, 
usually  themselves  slaves  with  slaves  for  their  patients,  who  give  a 
prescription  magisterially  with  a  threat  that  things  will  go  ill  with 
the  patient  if  he  disregards  it.  There  are  the  eminent  physicians, 
educated  men  with  educated  men  for  their  patients  ;  they  explain 
to  the  patient  the  nature  of  their  treatment  and  the  purpose  of 
their  regulations  and  do  all  they  can  to  get  him  to  help  in  effecting 
the  cure.  It  is  their  method  the  legislator  should  adopt.  He 
should  therefore  prefix  to  his  whole  legislation  and  to  the  principal 
sections  of  it  "  preambles  "  explaining  the  purpose  of  his  regulations 
and  the  reasons  why  such-and-such  penalties  are  proper  for  neglect 
of  them,  and  so  win  the  sympathies  of  the  society  for  whom  he 
legislates  (jigc-j2oe).  Thus,  in  enacting  that  a  man  shall  marry 
before  he  reaches  a  given  age  or  be  subject  to  fine  or  loss  of  civil 
rights  (aTLfjiia),  he  would  dwell  on  the  reason  for  the  law,  namely, 
that  it  aims  at  securing  such  immortality  as  is  possible  for  the  race,1 
and  the  reason  for  selecting  just  this  "  sanction,"  namely,  that  the 
man  who  shirks  the  duty  to  save  himself  expense  shall  be  visited 
in  his  pocket,  and  that  the  man  who  has  done  nothing  to  leave  a 
younger  generation  behind  him  shall  not  share  in  the  honours  we 
expect  to  be  shown  by  the  younger  generation  to  their  parents 
(j2ia-d).  We  may  therefore  regard  the  interrupted  discourse  on 
the  beings  entitled  to  reverence  and  the  respective  degrees  in  which 
they  are  entitled  to  it,  as  the  opening  of  a  general  preamble  to  our 
whole  legislation. 

Book  V.  in  its  opening  pages  contains  the  continuation  of  the 
great  preamble  (726-734^).  From  reverence  to  parents,  we  proceed 
to  the  reverence  or  respect  due  to  ourselves  and  our  fellows.  The 
rule  of  self-reverence  is  that  the  soul  is  more  than  the  body  and  the 
body  than  possessions.  A  man  must  prize  his  soul  more  than  his 
body  and  his  body  more  than  his  "  goods."  We  dishonour  our 
own  soul  when  we  put  bodily  vigour  and  health  or  power  or  riches 
before  wisdom  and  virtue,  or  when  we  gratify  unworthy  caprice 
or  passion.  We  dishonour  the  body  when  we  prefer  wealth  to 
health.  Plato's  view  is  that  extraordinary  beauty  or  robustness 
or  wealth  are  bad  for  the  soul,  generally  speaking,  no  less  than 
extraordinary  ugliness,  deformity,  ill-health,  penury.  The  first 
breeds  vanity,  the  second  gross  lusts,  the  third  idleness  and 
luxury.  In  respect  of  advantages  both  of  body  and  of  fortune, 

1  This  thought,  which  had  already  appeared  in  the  Symposium,  has  no 
bearing  on  the  doctrine  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  It  is  the  man — the 
complex  of  soul  and  body— of  whom  Plato  says  that  survival  in  his  descend- 
ants is  the  nearest  approximation  he  can  make  to  deathlessness.  The 
divorced  from  the  body  is  not  Mpwiros  but  just  ^vxt,  a  "  spirit." 


476          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

the  middle  condition  is  preferable  to  an  extreme.  The  main  rules 
for  right  relations  with  others  are  that  (i)  in  our  relations  with 
friends  and  fellow-citizens,  we  should  rate  the  benefits  we  receive 
from  them  at  a  higher  rate  than  they  themselves  do,  the  services 
we  render  them  at  a  lower  ;  (2)  in  relations  to  the  alien,  especially 
to  the  suppliant,  we  ought  to  be  specially  careful  to  be  on  our 
best  behaviour,  for  nothing  is  so  odious  to  man  and  God  as  taking 
advantage  of  those  who  are  defenceless  (726-7300). 

Next  follows  an  exhortation  as  to  the  spirit  in  which  a  man 
should  conduct  himself  in  matters  where  the  law  can  lay  down 
no  specific  commands  or  prohibitions.  The  supreme  demand  on  a 
man  is  for  uArytfeia  ("  genuineness  ")  in  all  the  relations  of  life — in 
fact,  for  "  loyalty/1  A  man  who  is  not  "  true  and  loyal  "  is  wholly 
untrustworthy  ;  want  of  loyalty  makes  friendship  and  all  the 
happiness  of  life  impossible.  We  must  lay  it  down  that  in  this, 
and  in  all  points  of  virtue,  it  is  good  to  practise  them  yourself, 
better  to  go  further  and  to  bring  the  misdeeds  of  others  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  authorities,  best  of  all,  actually  to  assist  them  in 
chastising  the  misdoer.  We  must  add  that  rivalry  in  goodness  of 
all  kinds  is  the  one  form  of  emulation  we  should  encourage  in  all 
our  citizens,  as  it  is  the  one  kind  of  rivalry  which  aims  not  at  en- 
grossing a  good  to  one's  self,  but  at  communicating  it  as  widely  as 
possible.  To  the  faults  of  others  a  good  man  should  be  merciful, 
whenever  they  are  remediable,  since  he  knows  that  "  no  one  is  bad 
on  purpose  "  ;  he  will  only  let  his  anger  have  its  course  with  the 
incorrigible.  A  man  must  beware,  too,  of  the  deadly  fault  of  im- 
proper partiality  to  one's  self.  And  he  must  repress  all  tendency 
to  unrestrained  emotionalism  (7266-732^). 

We  must  not  forget  that  it  is  men,  not  gods,  whom  we  are  trying 
to  enlist  on  the  side  of  virtue.  We  must  therefore  make  allowance 
for  the  universal  human  desire  for  a  pleasant  existence.  We  cannot 
expect  men  regularly  to  choose  the  noble  life  unless  they  are  per- 
suaded that  it  is  also  the  pleasant.  Its  nobility  has  already  been 
argued ;  Plato  now  proceeds  to  contend  that,  even  by  the  rules  of  a 
Hedonic  calculus,  if  you  only  state  the  rules  correctly  and  work 
the  sum  right,  the  morally  best  life  will  be  found  to  be  also  the 
pleasant est.  The  rules  are  that  we  wish  to  have  pleasure,  and 
not  to  have  pain ;  we  do  not  wish  for  a  neutral  condition,  but  we 
prefer  it  to  pain.  We  choose  a  pain  attended  by  an  overbalance  of 
pleasure,  and  refuse  a  pleasure  attended  by  an  overbalance  of  pain ; 
to  an  exact  balance  of  pleasure  and  pain  we  are  indifferent.  We 
have  to  take  into  account  as  "  dimensions  "  of  pleasure  and  pain 
"  number  "  and  "  size  " — i.e.  frequency  and  duration  and  intensity. 
We  wish  to  have  a  life  in  which,  when  attention  has  been  given  to  all 
these  "  dimensions/'  the  balance  works  out  on  the  side  of  pleasure ; 
not  to  have  one  in  which  the  balance  is  on  the  side  of  pain.  The 
life  in  which  the  balance  is  zero  is  preferable  to  that  in  which  there 
is  a  balance  of  pain.  If  we  consider  four  pairs  of  lives,  correspond- 
ing to  the  four  currently  recognized  virtues  and  their  contrary 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  477 

vices — the  life  of  the  temperate  and  that  of  the  profligate,  the  life 
of  the  wise  man  and  that  of  the  fool,  the  life  of  the  brave  man  and 
that  of  the  coward,  the  morally  "  healthy "  and  the  morally 
"  morbid  "  life — we  find  that  in  the  first  member  of  each  pair  there 
is  less  excitement  than  in  the  second  ;  the  pleasures  and  pains  are 
both  less  intense,  but  at  the  same  time  these  pleasures  are  more 
frequent  and  more  lasting  than  the  pains,  whereas,  in  the  second 
members  of  the  pairs,  the  pains  are  more  numerous  and  lasting 
than  the  pleasures.  Thus,  in  each  case,  the  balance  is  on  the  side 
of  pleasure  in  the  first  member  of  the  pair,  on  the  side  of  pain  in  the 
second.  This  is  Plato's  proof  that,  if  the  calculation  is  fairly 
worked,  the  better  life  proves  to  be  also  the  pleasanter.  Its  moral 
superiority,  we  must  remember,  is  not  identified  with  nor  inferred 
from  its  greater  pleasantness,  but  is  taken  to  have  been  already 
established  independently  (7320-734.0).  This  brings  us  to  the  end 
of  our  general  prelude  to  the  legislation. 

There  is  still  one  more  matter  to  be  dealt  with  before  proceeding 
to  the  legislation  in  detail — the  creation  of  the  necessary  magis- 
tracies. The  magistrates  are,  so  to  say,  the  warp,  the  rest  of  the 
citizens  the  woof,  of  the  fabric  we  have  to  weave.  The  warp  must 
have  the  stronger  and  tougher  constitution,  must  be  made  of 
those  elements  of  the  population  who  have  most  strength  of  char- 
acter and  are  least  pliable.  We  begin  by  laying  it  down  (737c) 
that  the  size  of  the  community,  the  number  of  households,  must  be 
kept  permanent.  (We  want  to  exclude  the  social  revolutions  which 
would  be  produced  by  either  marked  decline  or  marked  increase 
in  population.)  We  require  to  have  just  such  a  population  as 
our  territory  will  support  in  industry  and  sobriety,  neither  more 
nor  fewer.  If  the  population  grows  beyond  this  limit,  it  will  begin 
to  expand  at  the  cost  of  wrong  to  its  neighbours ;  if  it  falls 
below  it,  it  will  not  be  adequate  to  its  own  defence.  The  actual 
number  of  households  will  depend  on  the  size  of  the  territory,  but, 
for  purposes  of  illustration  (7370),  we  may  imagine  it  fixed  at  5040, 
a  number  which  recommends  itself  by  the  fact  that  it  is  divisible 
by  all  the  integers  up  to  10.  This  is  convenient,  since  there  may 
be  practical  reasons  for  wishing  to  divide  the  inhabitants  into 
administrative  groups  for  various  purposes.1 

We  may  say  at  once  that  the  very  best  and  happiest  of  all 
societies  would  be  one  where  there  was  no  "  private  "  interest, 
where  even  wives  and  children  were  "common/'  and  the  word 
"  my  own  "  never  heard  (7390).  What  we  are  describing  now  is  a 

1  5040=  7  !  (the  continued  product  of  the  integers  from  i  to  7).  Plato  has 
chosen  it  because,  since  7  is  the  highest  prime  number  less  than  10,  and  the 
numbers  8,  9,  10  are  each  products  of  a  pair  of  factors  of  which  each  is  less 
than  7,  7  1  will  obviously  be  divisible  by  every  integer  up  to  10.  It  will  also 
be  divisible  by  12  (2  x  6) ;  and  this  is  a  great  convenience,  since  12  is  the  number 
of  months  in  the  year.  Ritter's  note  on  the  passage  rightly  points  out  that 
the  reason  for  choosing  such  a  number  is  strictly  practical  ;  it  prevents  any 
difficulty  in  determining  the  precise  quota  a  particular  subdivision  of  the 
population  ought  to  contribute  to  the  revenue  or  the  defences. 


478          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

society  which  is  to  come  nearest  to  this  ideal,  an  ideal  only  possible 
perhaps  to  beings  who  are  more  than  men  (Otol  17  -n-aiSes  0cu>v, 
739^). *  For  this  "  second  city  "  we  must  lay  it  down  that  the  land 
is  not  to  be  cultivated  in  common  ;  there  are  to  be  private  estates 
and  houses,  as  a  concession  to  human  weakness,  but  the  owner  of  a 
patrimony  must  always  regard  it  as  belonging  to  the  "  city  "  as 
much  as  to  himself.  It  will  be  an  obligation  of  religion  that  the 
number  of  "  hearths  "  is  always  to  be  the  same.  A  patrimony  is 
always  to  descend  undivided  to  one  son,  chosen  by  his  father,  who 
will  keep  up  the  household  worship.  Daughters  are  to  be  provided 
for  by  marriage,  and,  to  ensure  their  marriage,  there  will  be  a  law 
against  giving  or  receiving  dowries  (7420).  A  man's  remaining 
sons  will  be  provided  for  by  encouraging  adoption  on  the  part  of  the 
childless  or  those  who  have  been  bereaved  of  their  sons.  Plato  is 
thus  aware  that  his  scheme  demands  that  the  normal  family  shall 
be  one  of  two  children.  Tendency  to  over-population  will  be 
counteracted  by  "  moral  suasion  "  (740^),  or,  in  the  last  resort, 
by  sending  out  colonies.  (Apparently  no  "  artificial  "  methods  of 
birth-control  are  contemplated.)  Unavoidable  depopulation  by 
epidemics  and  the  like  can  be  met,  though  reluctantly,  by  inviting 
new  settlors. 

It  will,  unfortunately,  be  impossible  to  prevent  economic 
inequalities  altogether,  but  they  may  be  kept  within  bounds,  and 
both  penury  and  irresponsible  wealth  excluded  by  the  following 
regulations.  The  patrimonies  should  be,  as  nearly  as  possible,  of 
equal  value  (7370) ;  to  secure  that  they  remain  inalienable  in  the 
same  family,  a  careful  survey  of  the  whole  territory  will  be  made 
and  preserved  in  the  public  archives  (741^).  To  keep  out  the 
taint  of  commercialism,  the  State  will  have  its  own  currency,  value- 
less outside  its  own  territory,  and  it  will  be  a  crime  in  a  citizen  to 
own  the  coined  money  of  a  foreign  city  (7420)  .2  There  shall  be  no 
lending  of  money  on  interest,  and  no  credit  (742^).  The  reason  for 
this  is  simply  that  we  do  not  wish  to  encourage  a  man  to  live  on 
the  automatic  return  of  investments  ;  we  want  him  to  be  a  farmer 
living  by  the  labour  of  his  own  hands.  Accumulation  will  be 
checked  by  the  establishment  of  four  economic  classes,  the  poorest 
possessing  nothing  beyond  their  patrimony,  the  richest  being 
allowed  to  possess  no  more  than  four  times  the  yield  of  the  patri- 
mony. Any  further  increase  of  wealth  will  be  escheated  to  the 
State  (744^-7450).  Thus  wealth  will  have  some  weight,  as  well  as 
character  and  birth,  in  the  distribution  of  offices.  This  is  re- 
grettable, but  it  is  a  condition  we  cannot  wholly  exclude  (7446). 

1  Plato  still  adheres  to  the  moral  ideal  of  the  Republic,  though  he  seems 
definitely  to  be  saying  that  it  cannot  be  actually  embodied  in  flesh  and  blood. 
It  may  be  doubted  whether  he  had  ever  thought  otherwise.  At  any  rate,  he 
now  regards  a  system  of  peasant-proprietorship  with  inalienable  patrimonies 
as  the  society  in  which  ordinary  men  and  women  will  be  likely  to  show  most 
of  the  spirit  of  devotion  to  the  "  common  "  good. 

9  A  regulation  based  on  the  Spartan  practice,  which  is  proposed  also  by 
Fichte  in  his  Geschlossener  Handelsstaat. 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  479 

The  community  will  be  divided  into  twelve  "  tribes," l  care 
being  taken  that  the  total  property  of  the  tribes  is  approximately 
equal  and  that  their  holdings  are  equalized.  Each  patrimony 
will  be  divided  into  a  half  situated  nearer  to  and  one  situated  farther 
from  the  town,  which  must  have  a  central  position,  and  we  should 
be  careful  to  see  that  this  division  is  fairly  made,  so  that,  e.g., 
a  man  who  has  the  advantage  of  having  half  his  estate  close  to  the 
town  shall  have  the  other  half  on  the  outskirts  of  the  State  (7456-0). 
In  connexion  with  the  topic  of  subdivisions  and  measurements, 
Plato  shows  his  practical  interest  in  small  matters  by  expressly 
insisting  on  the  importance  of  a  rigid  standardization  of  the  currency 
and  of  all  weights  and  measures  (7460) ,2  the  object  being,  of  course, 
to  suppress  the  possibility  of  small  dishonest  gains.  It  is  an  un- 
philosophical  prejudice  to  suppose  that  the  eye  of  the  law  should 
be  blind  to  such  things.  Arithmetic  is  of  the  highest  value,  pro- 
vided it  is  pursued  in  a  spirit  untainted  by  the  commercialism  of 
Phoenicians  and  Egyptians  (747^-^). 

Book  VI.  brings  us  at  last  to  the  appointment  of  the  various 
magistrates  and  administrative  boards.  We  must  be  content  here 
to  describe  the  most  important  of  these  and  the  method  by  which 
they  are  constituted,  as  illustrative  of  Plato's  insight  into  the 
practical  business  of  "  representation/'  The  most  important 
ordinary  magistracy  is  that  of  the  vo//.o<£u'AaKes  or  guardians  of 
the  constitution,  a  body  of  thirty-seven  men  of  approved  character 
and  intelligence,  who  must  be  at  least  50  years  old  at  appoint- 
ment, and  must  retire  at  the  age  of  70.  Their  functions  are  to 
watch  over  the  interests  of  the  laws  in  general  and,  in  particular, 
to  take  charge  of  the  register  of  properties,  and  penalize  and  "  black- 
list "  any  citizen  guilty  of  fraudulent  concealment  of  income.  They 
figure  also  as  the  presiding  magistrates  in  connexion  with  the 
trial  of  grave  offences  of  various  kinds.  They  are  to  be  elected  by 
votes  given  in  writing  and  signed  with  the  voter's  name  (as  a  pre- 
caution against  an  irresponsible  vote),  and  the  election  has  several 
stages,  by  which  the  three  hundred  names  first  selected  are  finally 
reduced  to  thirty-seven  (three  for  each  "  tribe  "  with  an  odd  man  to 
prevent  an  equal  division  of  opinions). 

The  ordinary  great  council,  the  "  representative  chamber  "  of 
the  society,  is  elected  on  a  plan  ingeniously  contrived  to  eliminate 
extreme  "  class-consciousness  "  and  to  make  wire-pulling  and  cabal 
impossible.  It  is  ultimately  to  consist  of  360  members,  ninety  from 
each  of  the  four  property-classes,  but  the  selection  has  several 
stages  and  is  spread  over  a  week.  In  the  first  instance  360  repre- 
sentatives of  each  class  are  chosen,  the  voting  covering  four  days. 

1  The  number  is  selected  for  the  practical  convenience  that  it  makes  it 
easy  for  an  office  or  duty  to  rotate  through  all  the  tribes  in  the  course  of  a  year. 
The  official  year  is  to  have  365,  not  360,  days — a  reform  never  adopted  by  any 
actual  Greek  "  city  "  until  a  later  date  (8286). 

2  Ritter,  ad  loc.,  rightly  calls  attention  to  the  point  that  Plato  is  here,  for 
the  first  time,  pointing  out  the  necessity  of  regulations  of  this  kind,  which 
were  unknown  in  Hellenic  practice. 


480  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

Citizens  of  the  two  richest  classes  are  obliged  under  a  penalty  to 
vote  for  the  representatives  of  all  four  classes.  The  citizens  of  the 
third  and  fourth  classes  are  compelled  only  to  vote  on  the  first  two 
days,  and  may  or  may  not  vote  on  the  second  two,  as  they  please. 
(The  thought  is  that  they  would  mostly  abstain,  since  they  have 
already  lost  two  days  from  their  working  week,  and  will  not  wish 
to  lose  two  more.  Thus,  as  the  poorer  citizens  will  be  the  most 
numerous,  the  representatives  of  the  two  richer  classes  will  be 
elected  by  a  vote  in  which  the  poorer  classes  will  have  most  influ- 
ence ;  those  of  the  poorer  classes  will  mainly  be  chosen  by  the  votes 
of  the  richer.  This  means  that  the  names  selected  will  be  those  of 
moderate  men  from  all  classes  ;  neither  a  Coriolanus  nor  a  Cade  will 
stand  much  chance  of  election.  This  secures  that  the  whole  body 
shall  be  public-spirited,  fair-minded,  and  likely  to  co-operate 
harmoniously.)  In  the  second  stage  of  the  process,  the  number  of 
names  is  reduced  to  one-half  by  a  vote  which  must  be  compulsorily 
exercised  by  all  citizens.  (An  extremist  who  might  slip  through  the 
first  election  would  thus  very  probably  be  eliminated  at  this  stage, 
and,  as  the  voting  is  compulsory  for  every  one,  the  danger  that  the 
richer  classes  might  make  the  representation  of  the  poorer  a  farce 
by  inducing  their  poorer  fellow-citizens  to  abstain  from  voting  for 
the  members  of  their  own  class  is  also  reduced  to  a  minimum.) 
Finally,  the  numbers  are  again  reduced  to  one-half  by  the  use  of  the 
lot.  (This  would  be  a  final  precaution  against  electioneering 
jobbery.)  The  council  thus  appointed  holds  office  for  the  year, 
one-twelfth  of  it  forming  a  committee  which  exercises  the  main 
functions  of  sovereignty  for  each  month. 

The  chief  criticism  a  modern  thinker  would  be  likely  to  pass  on 
the  scheme  would  probably  be  that  it  runs  the  risk  of  making  the 
extremist  all  the  more  dangerous  by  leaving  him  no  chance  of 
airing  his  grievances  in  the  "  council  of  the  nation/'  But  it  might 
be  said  that  we  are  learning  by  experience  how  hard  it  is  for  the 
same  body  to  combine  the  functions  of  a  "  safety-valve  "  and  a 
really  effective  national  council. 

The  most  important  office  in  a  Platonic  community  is,  as  we 
should  expect,  that  of  the  Minister  of  Education.  The  well-being 
of  the  community  depends  directly  on  the  character  of  the  educa- 
tion given  to  successive  generations,  and  the  overseer  of  education 
should  therefore  be  the  best  and  most  illustrious  man  in  the  com- 
munity, as  holding  its  most  responsible  post.  He  must  be  a  man  of 
over  fifty,  with  children  of  his  own,  and  should  be  elected  for  a 
period  of  five  years  out  of  the  body  of  the  vopo&XaKts  by  the 
votes  of  the  other  magistrates  (765^-7666).  The  "  President  of  the 
Board  of  Education  "  is  thus  the  "  premier  "  in  Plato's  common- 
wealth. 

If  the  life  of  the  society  is  to  be  thoroughly  sound  from  a  moral 
point  of  view,  we  must  first  ensure  that  the  tone  of  family  life 
itself  is  sound.  Marriage  must  be  regarded  as  a  solemn  duty  to 
society ;  selfish  neglect  to  discharge  that  duty,  as  we  have  already 


THE  LAWS  AND  EP1NOM1S  481 

learned,  will  be  penalized.  Extravagant  expenditure  on  wedding 
festivities  must  be  discountenanced.  The  peace  of  the  household  also 
demands  that  we  lay  down  a  right  rule  for  the  treatment  of  servants. 
A  master  must,  for  his  own  sake  as  well  as  for  his  servant's,  make  it  a 
rule  to  be  even  more  scrupulously  fair  in  his  treatment  of  his  slaves 
than  he  is  in  his  behaviour  to  his  equals  (777^).  But  he  should  be 
strictly  just,  without  compromising  his  position  as  master  by  im- 
proper familiarities.  His  word  must  be  law  to  his  slave,  and  he 
must  punish  all  disobedience.  When  our  young  people  have  been 
married,  we  must  see  to  it  that  they  begin  their  married  life  on  the 
right  lines.  We  must  not  let  them  think  they  can  spend  these  early 
days,  before  children  have  yet  come,  just  as  they  please,  as  a  sort 
of  honeymoon.  The  young  husband  must,  for  example,  take  his 
place  at  the  public  table  with  his  fellow-citizens,  exactly  as  he  has 
been  used  to  do  (7806).  And,  though  this  is  a  thing  which  has  not 
been  attempted  even  at  Sparta,  women,  no  less  than  men,  must  be 
taught  to  live  under  the  eye  of  the  society  to  which  they  belong. 
They  are  frailer  than  men,  and  need  even  more  to  be  safeguarded  by 
the  knowledge  that  their  conduct  is  open  to  public  censure.  They, 
too,  must  have  their  common  table,  and  we  should  not  listen  to  the 
complaints  always  raised  against  the  moral  reformer  who  claims 
the  right  to  regulate  "  private  affairs  "  (780^-78 id).  The  three 
keenest  of  human  appetites  are  those  of  hunger,  thirst,  sex,  and  the 
rudiments  of  civilized  existence  are  only  made  possible  by  the 
proper  regulation  of  all  three  (782^-7836).  When  man  and  woman 
have  been  married,  they  must  think  it  their  bounden  duty  to 
present  the  city  with  worthy  offspring.  There  should  be  a  board 
of  ladies,  appointed  by  the  authorities,  to  supervise  the  behaviour 
of  married  couples  in  this  respect  and  advise  them.  This  com- 
mittee will  have  a  general  control  over  married  people  for  ten  years 
after  marriage,  and  it  will  treat  its  duties  from  both  a  eugenic  and 
a  moral  point  of  view.  If  a  marriage  remains  childless,  they  will 
arrange  for  its  dissolution  on  equitable  terms  after  the  ten  years. 
They  and  the  vo/xo^vXaKcs  will  act  as  conciliators  in  conjugal 
disputes,  and  there  will  be  penalties  for  parties  who  are  intractable 
to  their  remonstrances.  They  will  also  see  that  violations  of 
conjugal  fidelity  are  chastised,  where  they  are  too  grave  to  be  winked 
at.  It  need  not  be  said  that  a  careful  register  of  births  and  deaths 
must  be  kept ;  without  it  we  could  not  secure  observance  of  the 
regulations  about  the  proper  age  qualifications  for  marriage,  public 
office,  or  military  service.  Men  must  marry  between  30  and  35, 
girls  between  16  and  20. l  A  man  may  not  be  appointed  to  an 
office  under  30,  nor  a  woman  under  40.  The  period  of  liability  for 
military  service  will  be  for  a  man  from  20  to  60  (the  Athenian  rule) ; 
if  women  are  given  any  "  war  work/'  it  should  be  after  they  have 
borne  their  children  and  before  they  have  reached  50  (783^-785^) 

1  Later  on  (833^  the  minimum  age  of  the  girls  at  marriage  is  reckoned 
at  18 ;  we  must  remember  that  the  Laws  has  not  received  its  final  revision 
by  the  author. 


482          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

The  seventh  book  of  the  Laws  contains  Plato's  most  important 
and  detailed  scheme  for  a  universal  education.    The  principles  are 
at  bottom  those  already  familiar  to  us  from  the  Republic,  but  the 
treatment  is  much  more  detailed,  and  in  some  respects  the  level 
of  the  demands  has  risen.     There  must  be  systematic  organization 
from  the  first,  since  if  we  leave  anything  to  the  caprice  of  the  in- 
dividual householder,  we  shall  not  secure  the  community  of  spirit 
and  character  we  need  in  the  State.     And  we  cannot  take  the 
matter  in  hand  too  early.     It  is  just  when  the  child's  body  and 
mind  are  most  plastic  that  most  enduring  harm  can  be  done  by 
wrong  treatment.     We  ought,   therefore,  to  begin  the  task  even 
before   a   child's   birth,     An   expectant   mother   must   take   such 
exercise  as  is  required  in  the  interests  of  her  unborn  child  (789^). 
When  the  child  is  born,  we  must  see  that,  even  before  it  can  walk, 
its  nurse  gives  it  the  exercise  and  air  which  is  good  for  it,  and  parti- 
cularly, that  it  is  not  allowed  to  injure  itself  by  walking  too  early 
(7890).     A  baby  should  live,  as  nearly  as  possible,  as  though  it  were 
always  at  sea  ;    it  should  be  dandled  and  danced  about  and  sung 
to  (jgoc-e)  to  keep  it  from  being  frightened.     This  is  a  first  pre- 
paration for  the  development  of  a  brave  and  steadfast  character. 
And  care  must  be  taken  to  keep  the  baby  in  a  placid  mood  ;  it  is  a 
bad  moral  beginning  for  it  to  be  allowed  to  become  fretful  or 
passionate   (791^-793^).     When  the  child  is   3  or   older,  we  can 
begin  to  correct  it  judiciously,  and  it  will  take  to  playing  games. 
It  is  best  to  leave  children  to  invent  their  own  games,  but  from  the 
age  of  3  to  6  they  should  be  brought  together  daily  in  the  various 
temples  to  play  under  the  supervision  of  ladies  appointed  by  the 
authorities,  who  will  thus  have  the  opportunity  of  seeing  that  the 
nurses  really  bring  up  their  charges  in  the  way  the  State  expects 
of  them  (793^-794^.     At  the  age  of  6,  lessons  will  begin  in  earnest, 
and  with  them  the  segregation  of  the  girls  from  the  boys.     The 
boys  should  be  taught  to  ride  and  use  bow,  sling,  and  dart,  and  it 
would  be  well  for  the  girls  to  learn  the  same  things,  or  at  any  rate, 
the  use  of  these  weapons  (jq^c-d).    Care  should  be  taken  to  train 
the  children  to  be  ambidextrous.    That  this  is  possible  we  see  from 
the  indifference  with  which  the  Scythians  use  either  hand  to  hold 
the  bow,  and  it  is  of  great  practical  importance  to  have  two  "  right 
hands"  (794^-795^).     Taking  "gymnastic1'  and  "music"  as  the 
names  for  the  training  of  body  and  mind  respectively,  we  may 
divide  the  former  into  two  branches,  dancing  and  wrestling.     For 
educational    purposes,    "  trick "    wrestling    is    useless ;     only    the 
stand-up  sort  which  is  also  good  training  for  warfare   is  to  be 
practised  (7960-6) 1 ;   the  dancing  to  be  specially  commended  is 
similarly  the  dance  in  armour,  which  affords  a  good  preliminary 
training  against  the  years  of  military  education  (7966-^). 

"  Music  "  requires  a  fuller  treatment.     We  must  remind  our- 

1  Plato  has  no  use  for  fancy  wrestling  and  boxing,  and  would  clearly  have 
thought  ju-jitsu  unseemly.  He  condemns  in  so  many  words  the  art  oi 
Antaeus,  who  was  fabled  to  vanquish  an  opponent  by  sinking  to  the  ground. 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  483 

selves  once  more  of  the  great  practical  importance  of  the  subject. 
It  is  important  that  there  should  be  no  needless  innovations  in  the 
"  play  "  of  a  society,  for  innovations  in  play  lead  on  to  innovations 
in  what  is  supposed  to  be  earnest,  and  all  departure  from  an  estab- 
lished "  regimen  "  is  attended  with  risk  to  the  health  of  a  society, 
just  as  it  is  dangerous  for  an  organism  (797^-798^).  Music, 
as  we  have  so  often  said,  "  imitates  "  or  "  reproduces  "  types  of 
moods  and  characters,  and,  since  we  wish  the  national  ideal  of 
character  to  be  kept  constant,  we  shall  need  to  keep  the  standards 
of  this  imitation  constant  too.  The  Egyptians  set  us  an  example 
in  this  ;  each  type  of  permitted  musical  form  is  consecrated  by  them 
to  the  cultus  of  a  god,  and  innovation  thus  becomes  sacrilege,  and 
we  ought  to  require  that  the  example  shall  be  followed  in  our  city, 
singular  as  it  seems  to  a  Greek.  To  see  that  it  is  observed  should 
be  one  of  the  functions  of  our  board  of  i/oyuo^vAa/cc?  (7990-800 b). 
They  will  not  allow  the  festivals  of  the  gods  to  be  polluted  by 
choruses  declaiming  blasphemies  and  wailing  in  a  way  only  seemly 
for  the  performer  of  a  dirge  (Sooc-e).  (This  is  meant  to  exclude 
tragic  "  choruses  "  and  tragedy  itself  along  with  them.)  Our 
poets  must  feel  that  their  work  is  prayer,  and  that  the  first  rule  for 
it  is  that  of  eu^/xta,  reverent  reticency ;  the  second  that  they  do 
not  know  themselves  how  to  "  ask  aright  "  and  must  learn  from  the 
law  what  are  the  true  blessings  for  which  men  should  pray  (Soia-c). 
The  poets,  then,  must  submit  to  a  censure  and  circulate  no  com- 
position which  has  not  the  imprimatur  of  the  i/o/xo<£v/W€5  (Sold). 
It  will  be  the  business  of  the  State  to  compile  a  suitable  anthology 
of  verse  which  meets  our  requirements  ;  the  compilers,  besides 
being  men  of  sound  taste,  must  have  reached  the  mature  age  of  50. 
In  this  way  we  may  hope  to  imbue  our  young  people  from  the  first 
with  the  right  taste  for  high  austere  art  (8o2a-d).  There  should, 
of  course,  be  a  distinction  between  the  songs  learned  by  boys  and 
by  girls  ;  the  tone  of  the  former  must  be  lofty  and  manly,  of  the 
latter,  sedate  and  pure  (8020). 

We  proceed  with  the  details  of  the  education  to  be  reared  on  this 
basis  of  a  sound  taste  which  is  at  once  aesthetic  and  moral.  We 
have,  so  to  say,  laid  the  keel  of  the  vessel  and  have  now  to  design 
the  ribs.  We  may  feel,  perhaps,  that  the  voyage  of  life  is  not  so 
serious  an  affair  as  it  seems.  Perhaps  we  are  only  playthings  for 
God,  but  even  if  that  is  so,  we  must  "  play  the  game  "  well,  not 
in  the  inverted  fashion  of  mankind  at  large,  who  fancy  that  war  is 
the  business  of  life,  peace  only  the  play.  The  truth  is  that  it  is 
peace  which  is  "  real  "  and  "  earnest,"  for  it  is  only  in  peace  that 
we  can  pursue  education,  the  most  serious  affair  of  life  (8o3#-8o4c). 

To  return  to  our  subject.  We  shall  need  schools  for  the  teach- 
ing of  the  things  we  have  spoken  of,  with  proper  buildings  and 
grounds.  And  the  teachers  in  these  schools  will  have  to  receive 
salaries,  and  therefore  must  be  foreigners.  All  the  children  must 
attend  school  (<£oirav)  daily  ;  this  must  not  be  left  to  parental 
caprice.  This  applies  to  girls  as  well  as  to  boys  ;  they  must  even 


484          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

learn  to  ride  and  shoot,  or  the  State  will  be  deprived  of  the  ser- 
vices it  has  a  right  to  expect  at  need  from  the  one-half  of  its  citizens 
(8040-8056). 

It  is  important  to  note  the  magnitude  of  the  proposal  made 
here.  As  Professor  Burnet  points  out,  what  is  being  conceived 
for  the  first  time  is  the  "  secondary  school/ '  a  permanent  establish- 
ment for  the  higher  education  of  boys  and  girls  by  specially  com- 
petent teachers  duly  organized  and  paid.  (The  impossibility  of 
maintaining  such  an  institution  without  salaries  is  the  reason  why, 
in  accord  with  Hellenic  sentiment,  it  is  assumed  that  they  must 
all  be  non-citizens.)  The  "  grammar  school  "  meets  us  as  an  actual 
institution  in  the  Macedonian  age  ;  it  is  presumable  that  it  owes 
its  existence  to  the  influence  exerted  in  that  age  by  members  of 
the  Academy  as  the  recognized  experts  in  education  and  juris- 
prudence. The  old  practice  of  the  Periclean  age  had  been  that 
"  higher  education  "  of  all  kinds  was  got  from  attending  the  lectures 
of  sophists,  each  with  his  speciality.  Plato's  new  idea  is  the 
systematization  of  secondary  education  by  co-ordinating  the 
specialists  in  single  institutions. 

We  need  not  be  afraid  of  the  criticism  that  our  views  on  the 
education  of  women  are  paradoxical.  We  see  that  women  can 
share  the  labours  of  men  by  the  example  of  Thrace  and  other 
districts  where  they  do  agricultural  work,  though  at  Athens  they 
are  expected  to  do  nothing  but  sit  indoors,  mind  the  store-closet, 
and  spin  and  weave.  At  Sparta  a  middle  course  is  followed  ;  the 
girls  learn  to  wrestle,  and  they  do  no  house-work,  but  they  are  not 
expected  to  be  capable  of  doing  anything  for  the  national  defence. 
With  all  courtesy  to  a  Spartan  hearer,  we  must  confess  that  we  cannot 
be  satisfied  with  such  a  compromise  ;  the  women  should  at  least  be 
able,  in  case  of  need,  to  scare  away  raiders  from  the  city  (8o6b).1 

The  scheme  we  have  adopted  for  our  community  makes  it 
certain  that  our  citizens  will  not  have  to  labour  long  hours  for  the 
means  of  existence  ;  they  will  have  abundant  leisure,  and  they 
must  not  waste  it  in  fattening  themselves  like  cattle,  but  use  it  in 
setting  themselves  to  live  the  most  strenuous  of  all  lives,  that  which 
aims  at  goodness  of  mind  and  body.  They  will  have  to  be  up 
betimes,  before  all  the  servants,  and  to  prevent  waste  of  the  precious 
hours  in  sleep,  it  will  be  enjoined  that  public  as  well  as  household 
business  shall  be  transacted  in  the  early  morning.  Sleeping  long 
and  late  is  as  bad  for  the  body  as  for  the  mind  (8o6d-8o8c).  It 
follows  that  the  boys  must  be  taken  to  school  at  daybreak,  and  both 
the  servants  who  conduct  them  there  and  the  schoolmasters  must 
pay  the  closest  attention  to  their  moral,  for  a  boy,  just  because  he 
has  a  "  spring  of  intelligence  "  in  him,  which  does  not  as  yet  run 
clear,  is  the  most  unruly  of  all  animals.  As  to  the  subjects  of 

1  There  is  a  clear  allusion  to  the  fact  dwelt  on  by  Aristotle  (Pol.  B  12696  37), 
that  the  panicky  behaviour  of  the  Spartan  women  when  Epaminondas  was 
threatening  an  assault  on  the  city  proved  that  the  famous  training  in  rough 
exercises  had  no  efiect  in  making  them  braver  than  women  anywhere  else. 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOM1S  485 

education  at  school,  we  have  already  spoken  of  the  principles  on 
which  songs  and  poems  should  be  selected,  but  it  will  be  more 
difficult   to  select  suitable  prose.     Of  course  enough  arithmetic 
must  be  learned  for  the  purposes  of  daily  life,  enough  elementary 
astronomy  to  understand  the  Calendar  (Sogc-d),  and  enough  of 
music  to  know  how  to  tune  one's  lyre.    This  will  suffice  until  a 
boy  is  16  years  old,  if  we  allow  three  years  (from  10  to  13)  for  reading 
and  writing  and  three  more  for  the  study  of  the  lyre,  taking  care 
that  the  sharp  boys  are  not  permitted  to  push  on  too  fast  nor  the 
dull  to  lag  behind  (Sioa).     The  one  serious  problem  at  this  stage  is 
the  selection  of  prose  reading.     We  may  certainly  let  the  boys  read 
sound  works  on  morals  and  law  (Suc-e),  but  there  is  a  difficulty 
about  other  kinds  of  prose,  and  too  wide  reading  would  not  be  good 
for  boys  (Sn^).1    The  supervision  of  the  whole  system  will  be  in  the 
hands  of  the  Minister  of  Education,  assisted  by  the  advice  of  experts 
chosen  by  himself  (8130).     It  must  be  understood  that  there  will  be 
paid  expert  teachers  of  all  the  exercises  we  have  prescribed  for  the 
training  of  the  body  ;   there  will  be  women  as  well  as  men  among 
these  teachers,  and  girls  as  well  as  boys  will  receive  the  training,  so 
that  they  may  be  capable  of  defending  themselves  in  necessity  (8140). 
There  are  still    three    "  branches    of  knowledge "    (/xa^/xara) 
which  any  free  man  should  possess — arithmetic,  geometry,  astron- 
omy (8170).     Only  a  few  young  people  are  capable  of  high  pro- 
ficiency in  them,  but  all  must  study  them  "  so  far  as  is  truly  neces- 
sary "   (8186).     But  how   far  is    that  ?     At  least  as  far  as  the 
Egyptians  succeed  in  carrying  large  classes  of  young  people.    They 
have  a  method  of  teaching  them  to  deal  with  fractions  and  to  find 
the  divisors  of  numbers  by  means  of  games  in  which  garlands  and 
other  objects  have  to  be  divided  among  a  given  number  of  persons,2 
or  boxers  to  be  paired.    The  study  of  this  sort  of  problem  can 
readily  be  made  to  lead  up  to  the  recognition  that  there  are  "  in- 
commensurable "  lengths,  areas,  and  volumes,  a  subject  on  which 
Greeks,  even  Greeks  who  dabble  in  mathematics,  are  disgracefully 
ignorant  (8206),  but  we  must  not  let  our  young  people  share  such 
ignorance.     Similarly  our  secondary  education  in  astronomy  must 
correct  the  really  "  impious  "  mistake  of  current  Greek  astronomy, 
which  ascribes  irregular  movements  to  the  heavenly  bodies,  and 
leads  to  calling  the  swiftest  of  them  the  slowest.     We  must  make 
it  clear  that  every  so-called  "  planet  "  has  a  strictly  regular  motion 
and  only  one  such  motion  (8220)  .8 

1  The  point  of  this  is  that  what  prose  literature  there  was  in  Plato's  time 
consisted  for  the  most  part  of  the  works  of  the  Ionian  men  of  science  and  of 
technical  works  on  medicine  and  rhetoric.  For  reasons  which  will  become 
apparent  when  we  speak  of  Plato's  theology,  he  regards  books  on  science  as 
dangerous  reading  for  the  boys  and  girls. 

2  Two  problems  seem  to  be  contemplated,  the  discovery  of  the  factors  of 
composite  numbers  and  the  handling  of  fractions.     On  the  Egyptian  problems 
in  question  see  Burnet,  E.G. Ph.9  18-19. 

3  ri]v  avrr)v  'yd/)  ai/rcDf   65bv   ^KOLGTOV  ical  ou  TroXX&j  f.tlav  del  KUK\(£  die^px^rai. 
This  clearly  means  not  only  that  the  real  motion  of  a  planet  is  regular,  but  that  it 


486         PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

It  might  seem  in  place  here  to  add  something  about  the  value  oi 
hunting  as  a  pursuit  for  the  young.  But  we  must  lay  it  down 
once  for  all  that  we  cannot  be  expected  to  deal  with  the  whole  of 
such  problems  in  a  law.  The  details  must  be  left  to  the  really 
competent  Minister  of  Education  to  regulate  by  his  personal  judg- 
ment (822^-823^).  For  us  it  is  enough  to  say  that  we  mean  only 
to  encourage  the  sort  of  hunting  which  contributes  to  make  good 
men.  We  do  not  wish  our  citizens  to  take  to  the  sea,  so  we  shall 
discourage  sea-fishing  ;  for  stronger  reasons,  we  object  to  raiding 
and  capturing  men,  and  to  any  kind  of  chase  which  depends  on 
mere  cunning.  Hence  we  should  discourage  the  mere  netting  and 
snaring  of  any  kind  of  creature,  retaining  only  "  the  hunting  of 
quadrupeds  with  horses  and  dogs  and  one's  own  body/'  as  a 
training  in  endurance  and  courage  (824^). 

The  contents  of  Books  VIII.  and  IX.  must  be  dealt  with  very 
summarily.  Provision  is  made,  as  would  be  the  case  in  any  actual 
Greek  "  legislation,"  first  of  all  for  the  cultus  of  the  State,  every 
month  of  the  year  and  every  day  of  the  month  being  provided  with 
its  appropriate  worship  ;  the  object  is  simply  to  place  the  whole 
daily  life  of  the  whole  community  under  the  "  religious  sanction  " 
(828).  Since  there  will  be  "  gymnastic  "  and  musical  "  contests  " 
as  part  of  this  regular  worship,  Plato  then  goes  on  to  lay  down 
regulations  for  the  regular  monthly  exercises  of  the  citizen  militia, 
as  well  as  for  the  "  contests  "  which  will  mark  special  festivals. 
The  latter  are  meant  to  correspond  to  the  pan-Hellenic  games  of 
actual  life,  but  the  programme  of  "  events  "  is  revised.  Competition 
is  to  be  in  exercises  of  strength  and  endurance  which  have  a  real 
military  value,  particularly  in  rapid  evolutions  in  complete  accoutre- 
ment, and  the  mimic  warfare  is  to  reproduce  its  model  as  closely  as 
possible  ;  there  must  be  a  spice  of  real  danger  about  it.  The  girls 
and  women  must  share  in  all  this,  so  far  as  their  physique  permits, 
but  we  cannot  make  detailed  regulations  on  this  point  in  advance 

(829-835^)- 

This  raises  an  important  ethical  question.  Is  there  not  a  real 
danger  that  the  very  free  association  of  young  people  of  both  sexes 
in  pursuits  of  this  kind,  and  their  abundant  leisure  from  "work," 
may  lead  to  a  relaxed  sexual  morality  ?  Plato  thinks  not,  if  we 
can  only  establish  the  right  social  tradition  in  such  matters,  which 
is  that  "  homo-sexual  "  relations  of  all  kinds  must  be  reprobated 
as  unnatural  and  that  the  normal  sexual  appetite  is  to  find  no 
gratification  outside  the  bounds  of  lawful  matrimony.  This 
demand  may  strike  most  persons  as  Utopian,  and  as  an  attempt  to 
suppress  "  love."  But  we  must  not  be  misled  by  equivocal  terms. 
"  Love  of  good-will  "  is  one  thing,  love  of  carnal  appetite  quite 
another  ;  the  suppression  of  the  second  in  no  way  militates  against 

is  not  composite.  The  object  is  thus  to  deny  all  theories,  like  that  of  Eudoxus, 
which  ascribe  to  a  planet  a  double  motion  in  opposite  senses.  I  still  think 
that  this  must  be  meant,  in  spite  of  the  dissent  of  Professor  Storey  and  Pro- 
lessor  Cornford. 


THE  LAWS  AND  EP1NOM1S  487 

the  cultivation  of  the  first.1  That  the  standard  of  continence 
proposed  can  be  attained  is  proved  by  the  lifelong  abstinence  of 
well-known  athletes,  and  surely  our  citizens  can  do  to  obtain  a 
spiritual  crown  what  boxers  will  do  for  an  Olympic  garland.2  That 
carnal  appetite  can  be  effectually  restrained  by  moral  and  religious 
sanctions  we  see  from  the  complete  suppression  of  incestuous  desire 
in  the  lives  of  civilized  societies,  which  is  effected  simply  by  the 
tradition  that  incest  is  shameful.  So  our  standard  will  be  found 
practicable  when  once  it  has  been  consecrated  by  the  sanctions  of  a 
social  tradition  (835^-842^).  If  we  should  find  it  beyond  our  power 
to  secure  absolute  conformity  to  this  rule,  we  shall  at  least  demand 
that  "  unnatural  "  passion  shall  be  wholly  suppressed  and  that 
more  normal  irregularities  shall  be  visited  by  disgrace  if  detected. 

The  speaker  now  turns  to  a  consideration  of  regulations  necessary 
for  the  pursuit  of  agriculture,  the  economic  foundation  of  his 
contemplated  society.  Under  this  caption  we  have  proposals  for 
dealing  with  such  matters  as  encroachments  on  boundaries,  diversion 
of  watercourses,  ownership  of  stray  animals,  regulation  of  the 
market,8  and  the  like.  In  matters  like  these,  there  are  many 
already  existing  good  rules  which  we  shall  do  well  to  follow  (8430), 
a  significant  hint  that  many  of  the  regulations  proposed  are  simply 
based  on  the  actual  code  of  Attica.  The  student  of  Plato's  political 
philosophy  need  not  delay  over  such  details,  though  they  have  a 
double  interest  for  the  historian  of  law  and  custom.  They  throw 
a  great  deal  of  light  on  questions  of  Attic  law,  and  they  provide  the 
starting-point  for  the  casuistry  by  which  Roman  lawyers  and,  in 
modern  times,  publicists  like  Grotius  and  Pufendorf  have  laboured 
to  arrive  at  the  principles  of  a  satisfactory  law  of  property.  It  is 
not  surprising  that  Plato's  actual  examples  recur,  for  example,  in 
the  Institutes  of  Justinian  and  the  de  Jure  Belli  et  Pads.  The 
discussion  of  the  regulation  of  the  market  leads  naturally  to 
consideration  of  the  conditions  on  which  aliens  may  be  allowed 
to  enter  the  society  and  practise  industry  (S^ob-d).  They  are 
to  be  subjected  to  no  poll-tax,  but  they  must  have  an  industry 
by  which  to  support  themselves,  must  conform  to  the  rules  of  the 

1  Loc.  cit.  8376-^.     This  is  a  criticism  of  the  current  theory  of  many  Greek 
societies — not  of  Athens — according  to  which  "  unnatural "  attachments  are 
of  great  value  for  military  purposes  because  of  the  mutual  devotion  they 
inspire,  the  theory  presupposed  by  the  institution,  e.g.,  of  the  Theban  Upbs  \6\os. 
The  Phaedyus  had  already  denied  the  fact  of  the  "  devotion  "  ;    the  Laws 
exposes  the  verbal  equivocation  by  which  the  practice  is  defended.     (For  such 
a  defence,  cf.  the  speech  of  Phaedrus  in  the  Symposium,  1780.) 

2  Loc.  cit.  839^-840^.     The  reasoning  is  familiar  to  us  from  the  Pauline 
parallel,  i  Cor.  ix.  23-27.     The  standard  here  set  up  is  no  novelty  of  Plato's 
last  years  ;  the  demands  made  on  the  guardians  of  the  Republic  would  be  even 
more  rigorous. 

8  The  important  points  in  connexion  with  the  market  are  that  (i)  all 
transactions  must  be  on  the  basis  of  immediate  payment,  (2)  there  is  to  be  no 
"  higgling  "  about  prices.  The  seller  must  have  a  fixed  price  and  must  take 
neither  more  nor  less.  Like  Ruskin,  Plato  is  not  so  anxious  to  prevent  a  seller 
from  asking  too  much  as  to  keep  him  from  palming  off  bad  wares  at  a 
pretended  "  sacrifice  "  (loc.  cit.  8490-8 500). 


488          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

State,  and  should  normally  be  expected  to  depart  again  after 
twenty  years'  residence  (i.e.  they  are  not  to  acquire  a  "  right  of 
settlement  "). 

We  come  now  to  criminal  jurisprudence,  with  an  apology  for  the 
necessity  of  admitting  that  there  will  be  any  crime  to  be  legislated 
against  in  a  rightly  constituted  society.  The  crimes  first  con- 
sidered are,  in  the  order  of  their  gravity,  sacrilege,  treason,  par- 
ricide. These  are  "  capital "  crimes,  and  it  is  best  for  a  citizen  who 
commits  them  that  he  should  be  allowed  to  live  no  longer,  but  we 
must  lay  it  down  once  for  all  that  the  capital  sentence  must  not 
include  the  penalizing  of  his  innocent  family  by  the  confiscation  of 
property,  and  that  they  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  tainted  in  their 
honour  by  his  offence.  Similar  crimes  in  an  alien  or  a  slave  will  be 
more  mildly  visited  by  whipping  and  expulsion  from  the  country. 
In  general,  Plato  allows  himself  a  freer  use  of  corporeal  chastise- 
ments than  modern  legislators,  since  he  does  not  accept  the 
"  humanitarian  "  estimate  of  physical  pain  nor  the  view  that  its 
infliction  is  peculiarly  degrading.  These  capital  crimes  are  to  be 
tried  before  a  court  composed  of  the  vo/xo<£vA.aKcs  and  a  number  of 
the  magistrates  of  the  preceding  year,1  and  the  proceedings  must 
be  spread  over  three  days. 

We  must  insist,  however,  that  in  our  State  criminal  jurisprudence 
takes  a  scientific  account  of  the  psychology  of  the  offender  (8$jc-d). 
Current  opinion  on  this  matter,  as  shown  by  the  practice  of  existing 
societies,  is  in  a  state  of  confusion.  Justice  is  held  to  be  a  "  fine  " 
thing  (*aAoV),  but  the  just  chastisement  inflicted  on  a  criminal  is 
regarded  as  a  disgrace  to  him  (859^-8606).  Yet  to  be  consistent, 
we  ought  to  hold  that  if  it  is  "  fine  "  to  do  what  is  just,  it  is  also 
"  fine  "  to  get  what  is  just  done  to  you.2  The  secret  of  the  current 
confusion  is  that  actual  jurisprudence  assumes  that  men  are  bad 
and  do  wrong  "  voluntarily,"  hence  the  one  great  distinction  re- 
cognized by  actual  law  is  the  distinction  between  voluntary  and 
involuntary  transgression.  But  we  must  adhere  to  the  philosophi- 
cal principle  so  familiar  to  us  from  earlier  dialogues  that  "  all  wrong- 
doing is  involuntary  "  (S6od),  and  therefore  we  cannot  make  the 
distinction  between  voluntary  and  involuntary  the  basis  of  our 
penal  code  (86id).  The  distinction  we  really  need  is  a  different 
one,  that  of  pkafiri,  the  causing  of  hurt  or  loss,  from  dSwaa,  the 
violation  of  a  right.  In  inflicting  penalties,  the  proper  question  is 
not  whether  the  act  committed  was  voluntary  or  not,  but  whether 
the  person  on  whom  it  was  inflicted  received  mere  loss  or  hurt,  or 
was  further  injured  in  his  rights.  The  proper  thing  to  say  about 
a  man  who  has  caused  an  unintended  loss  or  hurt  to  another  is  not, 

1  8556  ff .  The  constitution  of  the  court  is  thus  suggested  by  that  of  the 
Attic  Areopagus.  Plato  is  careful  to  avoid  the  miscarriage  of  justice  attending 
on  the  Athenian  practice  of  allowing  a  capital  case  to  come  before  an  irrespon- 
sible body  of  ordinary  citizens  chosen  by  lot,  from  whom  there  was  no  appeal. 

1  The  thought  is  the  old  one  of  the  Gorgias.  It  is  good  for  the  offender's 
soul  to  receive  the  penalty,  and  since  the  suffering  is  good  for  him  it  cannot  be 
The  "  disgrace  "  lies  not  in  the  punishment  but  in  the  crime. 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  489 

as  current  jurisprudence  says,  that  he  has  done  an  "  involuntary 
wrong/'  but  that  he  has  not  committed  a  wrong  at  all,  but 
only  caused  a  loss  or  hurt  (8610-862^).  It  is  this  distinction 
between  causing  loss  and  infringing  a  right  which  we  really  need 
to  make  fundamental  in  assessing  penalties.  Thus  the  important 
distinction  between  the  causing  of  detriment  and  the  infraction 
of  a  right,  with  the  consequent  distinction  between  an  action 
for  damages  and  a  criminal  prosecution,  is  introduced  into  legal 
theory  for  the  first  time  in  Laws  ix.  The  courts  can  make  mere 
damage  good  by  the  award  of  compensation  for  it,  but  contraven- 
tion of  a  right  must  further  be  met  by  the  imposition  of  a  penalty 
intended  to  make  the  offender's  soul  better  (S62c-e).  If  we  doubt 
whether  wrongdoing  is  really  involuntary,  we  need  only  remember 
what  its  causes  are — temper,  (flip's),  lust  for  pleasure,  ignorance 
(8630-8646). 

Plato  now  applies  these  principles  to  the  construction  of  a 
penal  code.  We  have  to  distinguish  violation  of  rights  from  the 
mere  causation  of  damage,  and  in  the  case  of  the  former,  we  must 
distinguish  between  violence  and  craft.  Regulations  are  then  laid 
down  for  the  cases  of  homicide,  suicide,  maiming,  wounding  with 
intent  to  kill,  minor  assaults,  the  object  being  to  give  a  specimen  of 
a  logically  constructed  criminal  code.  The  penalties  will  depend 
not  only  on  the  main  distinction  already  laid  down,  but  on  the 
status  of  the  parties,  whether  citizens,  aliens,  or  slaves.  The 
details  must  be  passed  over  here.  What  inevitably  impresses  a 
modern  reader  most  unfavourably  is  the  special  severity  with  which 
injuries  committed  by  a  slave  on  free  persons  are  treated.  This  is, 
however,  a  direct  consequence  of  the  recognition  of  the  servile 
status,  which  gives  these  crimes  something  of  the  character  of 
mutiny. 

Book  X.  introduces  us  to  one  of  the  most  important  develop- 
ments of  Platonism,  its  theology.  Plato  appears  as  at  once  the 
creator  of  natural  theology  and  the  first  thinker  to  propose  that 
false  theological  belief — as  distinguished  from  insults  to  an  estab- 
lished worship — should  be  treated  as  a  crime  against  the  State  and 
repressed  by  the  civil  magistrate.  He  is  convinced  that  there  are 
certain  truths  about  God  which  can  be  strictly  demonstrated,  and 
that  the  denial  of  these  leads  directly  to  practical  bad  living. 
Hence  the  denial  of  these  truths  is  a  grave  offence  against  the 
social  order  and  must  be  punished  as  such,  the  principle  upon  which 
the  Roman  Church  still  maintains  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  magis- 
trate to  suppress  heretical  pravity.  Historically  we  have  here  the 
foundation  of  natural  or  philosophical  theology,  The  name  we 
owe  to  the  famous  Roman  antiquarian,  M.  Terentius  Varro,  who 
distinguished  three  kinds  of  theology,  or  "  discourses  about  gods/' — 
the  poetical,  consisting  simply  of  the  myths  related  by  the  poets ; 
the  civil,  which  means  knowledge  of  the  Calendar  of  the  State's 
cultus  and  is  the  creation  of  the  "  legislator  "  ;  and  the  natural  or 
philosophic,  the  doctrine  about  things  divine  taught  by  philosophers 


490          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

as  an  integral  part  of  their  account  of  <£vVts,  natura,  reality.  The 
first,  according  to  a  view  as  old  as  Herodotus,  is  the  mere  inven- 
tion of  poets  who  aim  only  at  interesting  and  amusing ;  the 
second  has  been  manufactured  by  the  authorities  with  a  view  to 
social  utility;  the  third,  and  only  the  third,  claims  to  be  part 
of  the  truth  about  things,1  We  must,  of  course,  be  careful  to 
remember  that  the  epithet  "  natural/'  as  originally  applied  to 
this  kind  of  theology,  conveys  no  contrast  with  a  "  revealed  " 
or  "  historical  "  theology  ;  it  means  neither  more  nor  less  than 
"  scientific." 

The  three  heresies  Plato  regards  as  morally  pernicious  are,  in 
the  order  of  their  moral  turpitude  :  (a)  atheism,  the  belief  that  there 
are  no  gods  at  all,  the  least  offensive  of  the  three  ;  (b)  Epicureanism, 
as  we  may  call  it  by  a  convenient  anachronism,  the  doctrine  that 
God,  or  the  gods,  are  indifferent  to  human  conduct ;  (c)  worst  of 
all,  the  doctrine  that  an  impenitent  offender  can  escape  God's 
judgment  by  gifts  and  offerings.  It  is  morally  less  harmful  to 
believe  that  there  is  no  God  than  to  believe  in  a  careless  God,  and 
it  is  better  to  believe  in  a  careless  God  than  in  a  venal  one.  Against 
these  three  heresies  Plato  holds  that  he  can  prove  the  existence  of  a 
God  or  gods,  the  reality  of  providential  and  moral  government  of 
the  world  and  man,  and  the  impossibility  of  bribing  the  divine 
justice. 

(a)  Atheism. — Atheism  is  treated  by  Plato  as  identical  with  the 
doctrine  that  the  world  and  its  contents,  souls  included,  are  the 
product  of  unintelligent  motions  of  corporeal  elements.  Against 
this  theory,  he  undertakes  to  demonstrate  that  all  corporeal  move- 
ments are,  in, the  last  resort,  causally  dependent  on  "  motions  "  of 
soul,  wishes,  plans,  purposes,  and  that  the  world  is  therefore  the 
work  of  a  soul  or  souls,  and  further  that  these  souls  are  good,  and 
that  there  is  one  dpion?  \frvxn,  "  perfectly  good  soul/'  at  their  head. 
Thus  the  demonstration  of  the  being  of  God  serves  also,  in  principle, 
as  a  proof  of  the  indestructibility  of  the  soul,  a  doctrine  which 
has  to  be  introduced  in  refuting  the  two  graver  heresies.  He 
indicates  that  atheism  as  an  opinion  has  two  chief  sources — the 
corporealism  of  the  early  Ionian  men  of  science,  who  account  for 
the  order  of  nature  on  purely  "  mechanical  "  principles  without 
ascribing  anything  to  conscious  plan  or  design  (8890-^),  and  the 
sophistic  theory  of  the  purely  conventional  and  relative  character 
of  moral  distinctions  (8890-8900).  If  these  two  doctrines  are 
combined,  atheism  is  the  result.  It  has  to  be  shown,  as  against 
this  atheism,  that  the  motions  of  body  are  actually  all  caused  by 
prior  "  movements  "  of  soul,  so  that  rtxyrj,  conscious  design,  pur- 
pose, is  the  parent  of  r\>xn,  not  TU^T?  of  r^vrj,  as  the  proverb  says 
(8926).  Or,  more  briefly,  mind,  not  bodies,  is  "what  is  there  to 
begin  with  "  (8g2c).2 

1  See  for  Varro's  doctrine  on  this  point  Augustine,  de  Civitate  Dei,  vi.  5. 

*  8Q2C,  ytvCffUr  T7)V  TTCpl  T&  TTpUTa^TTJV  T&V  TTpUTWV    yCvt<TI.V=zTb  TtDl/    TTpUTW  -y&Of 

=  r6  TP&TOV.     That  yfrcrtt  here  is  equivalent  to  yfros  is  clear  from  the  context, 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  491 

The  proof  turns  on  an  analysis  of  the  notion  of  /aVr/o-is,  motion  or 
process  (Sg^b-Sg^e) .  Ten  senses  of  the  word  are  enumerated.  The 
first  five  are  different  forms  of  actual  physical  motion  :  (i)  revolu- 
tion in  a  circular  orbit,  (2)  rectilinear  motion,  (3)  rolling,  (4)  aggre- 
gation, (5)  disgregation.  Then  follow  three  "  ideal  "  motions : 
(6)  the  "  fluxion  "  of  a  point  which  "  generates  "  a  line,  (7)  the 
fluxion  of  the  line  which  generates  a  surface,  (8)  the  fluxion  of  a 
surface  which  generates  a  solid.  These  distinctions  are  merely 
preliminary  to  that  which  is  essential  for  the  purposes  of  our  proof. 
All  motions  belong  to  one  of  two  classes  :  (9)  communicated  motion, 
"  the  movement  which  can  only  move  other  things,"  or  (10)  spon- 
taneous motion,  the  "  movement  which  can  move  itself  "  (8946). 
And  it  is  argued  that  causally  communicated  motion  always  pre- 
supposes spontaneous  motion  as  its  source  (8940-8956).  Now  when 
we  see  anything  which  exhibits  spontaneous,  or  internally  initiated, 
motion,  we  call  it  *alive,  l^vxov  ;  we  say  that  there  is  ^v\j]  in  the 
thing,  t/fvxv,  m  fact,  is  the  name  which  language  gives  to  "  the 
motion  which  can  move  itself."  Thus,  "  soul  "  is  the  name,  or 
definiendum,  of  which  the  "  discourse  "  (Aoyos),  "  movement  which 
can  move  itself/'  is  the  definition.  The  name  and  the  discourse 
are  therefore  equivalent,  and  it  follows  that  the  movements  of 
soul,  "  tempers  and  wishes  and  calculations,  true  beliefs,  interests 
(cVt/xcXciat) ,  and  memories/'  are  actually  the  source  and  cause  of 
all  physical  movement,  since  no  physical  movement  is  spontaneous 
(896^).  This  constitutes  the  proof  that  soul  or  mind  is  the  cause 
of  cosmic  movement.  So  far  the  argument  is  an  elaboration  of 
that  which  has  been  given  more  briefly  in  the  Phaedrus  for  the 
immortality  of  the  soul. 

Next,  there  must  be  more  than  one  soul  which  is  the  cause  of 
cosmic  movements  (i.e.  Plato's  theology  is  theistic,  not  pantheistic). 
There  must  be  at  least  two  such  souls  and  there  may  be  more.  For 
there  is  disorder  and  irregularity  in  nature  as  well  as  order  and 
regularity,  hence  the  "  best  soul  "  clearly  cannot  be  the  only  source 
of  motion  in  the  universe  ;  since  order  has  the  upper  hand,  God, 
the  "  best  soul,"  is  clearly  the  supreme  cause,  but  there  must  be 
other  souls  which  are  not  wholly  good  (8960-898^).  (It  must  be 
carefully  noted  that  there  is  no  trace  in  the  language  of  the  doctrine 
of  a  "  bad  world-soul  "  read  into  the  Laws  in  ancient  times  by 
Plutarch  and  Atticus,  and  in  modern  times  by  Zeller  and  others. 
The  point  is  not  that  there  are  two  souls  responsible  for  the  universe, 
but  that  there  are  at  least  two  ;  the  "  best  soul  "  is  not  the  only 
soul  there  is,  but  we  are  at  liberty  to  suppose  as  many  inferior  souls 
as  the  appearances  seem  to  require.) 

If  we  are  not  to  misunderstand  Plato's  whole  conception  we 
must  note  the  following  points  carefully,  (i)  Evil,  no  less  than 

since  the  criticism  made  on  the  old  physicists  is  that  they  regard  such  things 
as  "  fire  "  and  "  air,"  i.e.  their  primary  bodies,  as  the  yfrciris  ire  pi  ret  irp&ra. 
For  this  use  of  ytvew  see  Ast,  Lexicon  Platonicum,  s.v.,  who,  however, 
wrongly  places  the  passage  under  a  different  heading. 


492          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

good,  is  expressly  said  to  be  due  to  "  soul/'  being  identified  with 
disorderly  motion.    Hence  the  doctrine  of  "  matter  "  as  intrinsically 
evil,  and  the  source  of  evil,  which  figures  in  the  popular  Platonism 
of  later  times,  is  wholly  un-Platonic.     (2)  God  (or  the  gods)  is  quite 
definitely  declared  to  be  a  il/vxn,  and  we  are  told  that  this  means 
that  the  universe  is  a  result  of  T^y,  design,     Plato  thus  definitely 
believes  in  a  divine  purposive  activity — in  other  words,  in  what  is 
really  meant  by  the  "  personality  "  of  God.     "  Pantheism/1  which 
repudiates  the  notion  of  conscious  creative  design,  would  be  only 
another  form  of  the  very  doctrine  Plato  identifies  with  atheism. 
(3)  God  is  a  soul,  not  a  form.     The  movement  which  can  move 
itself  is  the  highest  type  of  agent  known  to  Plato,  and  the  funda- 
mental difference  in  theology  between  Plato  and  Aristotle  is  just 
that  Aristotle  insists  on  getting  behind  it  to  a  still  more  divine  source 
of  movement,  an  "  unmoved  "  mover.     We  have  to  think  of  Plato's 
God  as  contemplating  the  forms  and   reproducing    them  in  the 
order  of  the  sensible  world.     Plato's  last  word  on  the  old  question 
of  the  Phaedo,  "  what  is  the  cause  of  the  presence  of  a  form  to  a 
sensible  thing  ?  "  is  that  God  is  the  cause.     Being  perfectly  wise  and 
good,  God  makes  the  sensible  order  after  the  pattern  of  the  forms 
he    contemplates.      (4)  The    argument    disregards    the    question, 
never  felt  by  a  Greek  to  be  very  important,  whether  there  is  only 
one  God  or  many.     But  the  very  phrase  "  best  soul  "  shows  that 
there  is  one  such  soul  which  is  supreme.    This,  no  doubt,  is  the  soul 
responsible  for  the  one  movement  which,  from  the  point  of  view  of 
Plato's  astronomy,  presents  no  irregularity  or  anomaly  at  all,  the 
movement  of  the  "  outermost  heaven."    This  soul  would  be  God 
in  a  special  sense.     How  it  is  related  to  that  which  it  moves  Plato 
does  not  tell  us,  though  he    suggests  alternative  views   (8990). 
(5)  What  are  the  irregularities  which,  to  his  mind,  prove  that  not 
all  cosmic  motions  are  due  to  a  single  divine  soul  ?     We  may 
reasonably  conjecture  that  they  are,  in  the  first  place,  the  various 
apparent  anomalies  in  the  motions  of  the  planets.    These  anomalies 
are  not  ultimate,  but  they  at  least  require  us  to  analyse  the  appear- 
ances into  combinations  of  several  movements,  and  this  would 
suggest,  as  it  does  to  Aristotle,  the  plurality  of  "  movers."     But  I 
think  something  further  is  meant.    The  course  of  nature  on  the 
whole,   by  its  regular  periodicities,  favours  the  development  of 
intellectual  and  moral  civilization.     Yet  there  are  natural  "  catas- 
trophes "  which  are  adverse    to  this  development,  inundations, 
successions  of  barren  or  pestilential  seasons,  volcanic  eruptions, 
and  the  like,  and  these  exceptions  to  the  rule  have  to  be  referred  to 
the  agency  of  souls  of  some  kind  ;  clearly  these  souls  must  be  thought 
of  as  at  least  partly  irrational  and  evil.     Whatever  we  may  think 
of  a  Theism  of  this  kind,  it  seems  to  me  plain  that  we  can  find  no 
other  doctrine  in  Plato  without  doing  violence  to  his  language,  and 
we  should  take  note  that,  though  religious  faith  in  God  was,  of 
course,  no  novelty,  Theism  as  a  doctrine  professing  to  be  capable 
of  scientific  demonstration  is  introduced  into  philosophy  for  the 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  493 

first  time  in  this  section  of  the  Laws.  Plato  is  the  creator  of  "  philo- 
sophical Theism." 

The  refutation  of  the  two  other  heresies  now  becomes  a  simple 
matter. 

(b)  Epicureanism  (Sggd-go^d). — The  belief  that  though  there 
are  gods  they  are  indifferent  to  our  conduct  is  suggested  by 
the  spectacle  of  successful  lifelong  iniquity,  but  it  is  really  no 
more  than  a  nightmare  or  bad  dream  (9006).  If  the  gods  pay  no 
attention  to  our  conduct,  the  reason  must  be  either  that  they  are 
unable  to  regulate  everything  or  that  they  regard  man  and  man's 
doings  as  trifles,  and  neglect  the  control  of  these  small  matters 
either  because  they  think  them  insignificant  or  because  they  are 
"  too  fine  "  to  attend  to  them.  We  may  dismiss  the  suggestion 
of  lack  of  power  at  once  ;  it  is  easier  in  action  to  handle  small 
affairs  than  to  handle  great,  though  it  is  the  minute  things  which  it 
is  hardest  to  perceive  accurately.  As  to  the  other  suggestions, 
all  competent  practitioners  of  medicine,  engineering,  and  the  other 
arts,  especially  that  of  the  statesman,  know  that  no  one  ever 
succeeds  in  the  main  of  any  enterprise  if  he  neglects  what  appear 
to  be  "  small  details,"  and  we  cannot  suppose  that  the  "  best  " 
soul  is  more  ignorant  than  a  human  practitioner,  even  if  it  were 
certain,  as  it  is  not,  that  human  conduct  is  a  "  trifle  "  from  God's 
point  of  view.  To  suppose  that  God  neglects  us  because  He  is  too 
indolent  or  fastidious  to  attend  to  us,  would  amount  to  saying 
that  the  "  best  soul  "  is  cowardly  or  "  work-shy,"  and  this  is 
no  better  than  blasphemy.  Nor  is  it  true  that  the  regulation 
of  human  destiny  in  accord  with  moral  law  would  involve 
eniless  "interference"  with  the  machinery  of  things.  The 
result  is  secured  from  the  first  by  a  law  of  singular  simplicity, 
the  law  that  "  like  finds  its  like,"  souls,  like  liquids,  "  find 
their  level."  A  man  "  gravitates  "  towards  the  society  of  his 
mental  and  moral  likes,  and  thus,  through  the  endless  succes- 
sion of  lives,  he  always  "  does  and  has  done  to  him  "  what  it 
is  fitting  that  such  a  man  should  do  or  have  done  to  him  (90 40). 
That  is  the  "  justice  of  God  "  from  which  no  man  can  escape 
in  life  or  death. 

We  may  dispose  of  (c)  the  doctrine  that  God  can  be  bribed  to 
wink  at  sin  even  more  summarily  (905^-907^).  For  our  argu- 
ment has  justified  the  old  belief  that  we  are  the  "  chattels  "  or 
"  flock "  (KTrjfjLdTa)  of  the  gods.  If  they  wink  at  the  conduct 
of  human  "  beasts  of  prey,"  they  are  behaving  like  shepherds 
or  watch-dogs  who  allow  the  wolf  to  rend  the  flock  on  condi- 
tion of  sharing  in  the  plunder.  A  blasphemy  like  this  is  more 
fittingly  met  by  honest  indignation  than  by  argument  or  gentle 
remonstrance. 

We  now  come  to  the  penalties  for  the  publication  of  these  various 
heresies.  The  overt  maintenance  of  any  of  them  ought  to  be  brought 
at  once  to  the  notice  of  the  magistrates,  who  are  to  bring  the  case 
before  the  proper  court.  If  a  magistrate  neglects  to  act,  he  must 


494          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

himself  become  liable  to  prosecution  for  "  impiety."  In  the  case 
of  each  class  of  offenders  we  must  distinguish  between  two  degrees 
of  guilt — that  of  the  heretic  who  is  otherwise  morally  blameless, 
and  that  of  the  worse  offender  who  adds  practical  evil-living  to  his 
heresy.  For  the  morally  inoffensive  heretic  the  penalty,  on  con- 
viction, will  in  every  case  include  at  least  five  years  of  imprison- 
ment in  the  "  House  of  Correction/'  where  he  will  see  no  one  but 
members  of  the  "  nocturnal  council/'  who  are  to  visit  him  from 
time  to  time  and  to  reason  with  him  on  the  error  of  his  ways  (9090). 
A  second  conviction  is  to  be  followed  by  death.1  The  worst 
offenders  are  those  who  add  to  the  speculative  belief  that  the 
gods  are  indifferent  or  venal  the  still  graver  crime  of  trading  on 
the  superstition  of  their  neighbours  for  their  own  profit  or 
aggrandisement,  by  founding  immoral  cults.  They  are  to  be 
imprisoned  for  life  in  "  penal  servitude  "  in  the  most  desolate  region 
of  the  country,  visited  by  no  citizen  whatever,  and  cast  out  un- 
buried  at  death,  in  fact,  treated  as  "  dead  in  law "  from  the 
moment  of  conviction.  But  their  innocent  families  must  not  suffer 
for  their  offence,  and  should  be  treated  as  wards  of  the  State  2 
(9090). 

Plato  is  so  much  in  earnest  with  this  horror  of  immoral  super- 
stition that  he  ends  by  proposing  to  suppress  all  shrines  and 
sacrifices  except  those  belonging  to  the  public  worship  of  the  city. 
No  one  may  be  permitted  to  have  a  private  "  chapel  "  or  "  oratory  " 
or  to  sacrifice  except  at  the  public  altars  and  with  the  established 
ritual.  His  motive  is  not  so  much  the  economic  one  of  preventing 
the  locking-up  of  wealth  in  the  "  dead  hand,"  as  the  moral  one  of 
protecting  society  against  the  insidious  lowering  of  the  ethical  and 
religious  standard. 

The  discourse  now  proceeds  to  deal  with  legislation  for  the 
security  of  private  property  and  trade,  particularly  with  the  regula- 
tions necessary  to  prevent  dishonesty  in  buying  and  selling,  and  in 
executing  or  paying  for  "  piece-work."  Then  follow  regulations 
about  wills,  the  guardianship  of  orphans,  the  conditions  on  which 
a  son  may  be  disinherited,  and  the  enforcement  of  the  claims  of 
parents  on  their  children.  Penalties  are  enjoined  for  vendors  of 
philtres  and  sorcerers,  with  the  remark  that  the  last-named  offence 

1  We  may  suppose  that  the  term  of  imprisonment  would  be  longer  for  the 
two  graver  heresies.     The  length  of  the  term  and  the  rule  of  seclusion  are 
meant,  of  course,  to  give  full  opportunity  for  a  genuine  conversion  and  to 
prevent  the  contamination  of  the  rest  of  the  community.     Death  is  the 
penalty  for  a  second  conviction,  because  the  offender  is  presumed  to  have 
shown  himself  "  incurable,"  and  death  is  better  for  such  a  man.     On  the 
composition  of  the  "  nocturnal  council  "  see  below. 

2  The  simple  atheist  apparently  runs  no  risk  of  this  severer  penalty,  since 
his  heresy  is  not  one  on  which  an  hypocritical  "  priestcraft  "  can  be  grafted. 
It  may  be  remarked  here  that  by  demanding  a  grading  of  prisons  into  (i)  a 
house  of  detention  for  persons  awaiting  trial,  (2)  a  house  of  correction  for  the 
reclaimable,  (3)  a  house  of  punishment  for  the  irreclaimable,  Plato  has  antici- 
pated an  important  reform  never  fully  carried  out  in  our  own  administration 
until  quite  recent  times. 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  495 

might  be  ignored  in  a  society  of  perfectly  rational  persons,  but  must 
be  treated  as  serious  in  a  community  where  the  current  belief  in 
the  sorcerer's  powers  makes  him  mischievous  (9336).  We  then 
have  a  paragraph  dealing  with  larceny  and  robbery  and  another 
on  the  necessity  of  enforcing  proper  supervision  of  the  insane  and 
mentally  deficient.  Begging  must  be  strictly  suppressed,  but  it 
will  be  the  duty  of  the  State  to  see  that  no  one,  not  even  a  slave, 
who  is  unemployed  through  no  fault  of  his  own  is  allowed  to  starve 
(936£>).  Rules  are  laid  down  about  the  admission  of  evidence  in 
courts  of  law  and  the  penalties  of  perjury.  Litigiousness,  a  common 
Athenian  failing,  should  be  checked  by  penalizing  the  vexatious 
prosecutor  ;  if  his  motive  was  gain,  the  penalty  should  be  death.1 
The  abuse  of  the  profession  of  Xoyoypa^o?  is  to  be  met  by  making 
the  crtV&Kos  in  a  vexatious  suit  liable  to  the  same  penalties  as  his 
principal  (938^-0). 

These  matters  of  private  law  must  not  detain  us  here,  though 
Plato's  treatment  of  them  has  the  double  interest  of  being  founded 
largely  on  Attic  practice,  which  he  is  trying  to  amend  where  it  seems 
defective,  and  of  having  exercised  a  considerable  indirect  influence 
on  the  development  of  Roman  law.2  With  Book  XII.  we  return 
to  the  sphere  of  public  law  and  the  law  of  the  constitution.  Pecula- 
tion or  embezzlement  of  the  public  funds,  an  offence  regularly 
charged  on  every  Attic  politician  by  his  enemies,  is  unpardonable 
and  in  a  citizen  must  always  be  visited  with  death,  irrespective  of 
the  magnitude  of  his  defalcation  (9420).  In  military  matters  every- 
thing depends  on  discipline  and  strict  fidelity  to  orders  ;  this  must 
therefore  be  enforced  in  all  the  exercises  which  have  been  enjoined 
as  the  standing  military  training.  Cowardice  in  the  face  of  the 
enemy  is  to  be  punished  by  loss  of  all  citizen-rights  as  well  as  by  a 
heavy  fine  (944^-945^). 

To  ensure  that  the  magistrates  do  their  duty,  Plato  adopts 
the  Attic  practice  of  requiring  every  magistrate  at  the  end  of  his 
term  of  office  to  submit  to  a  tvOwa  or  audit,  and  gives  special  care 
to  the  appointment  of  the  board  of  corregidors  (tvOwoi)  charged 
with  the  holding  of  the  audit.  The  members  of  the  board  must 
be  over  50  years  old,  and  are  to  be  chosen  by  the  following 
method.  There  is  a  vote  by  universal  suffrage,  each  citizen  voting 
for  only  one  candidate.  This  process  is  to  be  repeated  until  the 
number  of  names  not  eliminated  is  reduced  to  three.  Twelve  such 
officials  are  to  be  appointed  in  the  first  instance.  As  soon  as 
the  three  oldest  members  of  the  board  reach  the  age  of  75  they 
retire,  and  in  future  there  will  be  an  annual  election  of  three  new 

1  The  severe  penalty  is  due  to  the  heinousness  of  the  attempt  to  make  the 
court  of  justice  itself  accessory  to  the  infliction  of  a  wrong.     The  abuses 
Plato  has  in  view  are  specifically  Athenian,  and  would  not  be  likely  to  be 
common  in  the  sort  of  society  for  which  he  is  ostensibly  legislating. 

2  See  Burnet,  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  I.,  p.  304.     The  Academy  was  the 
first  permanent  and  organized  school  of  law  as  well  as  of  mathematics.     The 
two  studies  are  really  connected  by  the  importance  for  both  of  "  clear  and 
distinct  ideas." 


496  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

members  (9460). 1  Arrangements  are  made,  however,  for  an  appeal 
against  the  findings  of  the  board,  and  any  member  whose  action 
is  quashed  is  to  lose  his  post  (9480).  This  board  of  corregidors  is 
the  highest  ordinary  court  of  justice,  and  it  is  interesting  to  see 
that  Plato  provides  for  appeals  from  its  verdicts. 

It  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  whole  spirit  of  the  legislation 
to  permit  citizens  to  withdraw  themselves  from  the  life  of  the  State 
at  their  choice.  Travel  abroad  must  therefore  always  receive 
the  sanction  of  the  authorities,  and  this  sanction  will  only  be  given 
in  the  case  of  persons  over  40  (950^).  It  is  desirable  that  older 
men  of  sound  character  should  visit  other  States  with  a  view  to 
learning  how  the  customs  of  our  own  society  may  be  improved  by 
judicious  imitation  of  those  of  others.  The  traveller  should,  on  his 
return,  make  a  report  on  his  observations  to  the  "  nocturnal 
council,"  a  sort  of  extraordinary  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  which 
is  to  be  in  perpetual  session  and  is  charged  with  a  general  super- 
vision over  the  public  welfare.  We  have  heard  of  this  body  before 
in  connexion  with  the  proceedings  against  heresy,  and  are  now  told 
how  it  is  constituted.  Its  members  are  the  evOwoi*  the  ten 
senior  vo/mo^vAaKcs,  the  minister  and  ex-ministers  of  Education, 
and  ten  co-opted  younger  men  between  the  ages  of  30  and  40. 
It  gets  its  name  from  the  regulation  that  its  daily  sessions  are  to  be 
held  before  daybreak.  One  of  its  chief  functions  is  to  foster  sound 
scientific  research  (952^).  There  will  be  a  similar  careful  control 
of  the  temporary  admission  of  foreign  visitors  to  our  own  community. 
Special  encouragement  will  be  given  to  responsible  persons  from 
abroad  whose  object  is  to  impart  or  acquire  lessons  in  true  states- 
manship. They  will  be  honoured  "  guests  of  the  nation  "  (953^). 

It  is  not  enough  to  have  made  a  good  constitution  and  code  for 
our  society ;  there  is  need  for  constant  vigilance  to  preserve  our 
institutions  from  degeneration  (960^).  This  vigilance  will  be 
exercised  by  the  "  nocturnal  council,"  which  may  fairly  be  called 
the  "  brain  "  of  our  whole  system  (961^).  To  discharge  its  functions 
it  will  need  to  have  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  end  to  which 
social  life  is  directed,  the  development  of  "  goodness  "  in  all  its 
four  great  forms.  This  means  that  its  members  will  require  very 
much  more  in  the  way  of  education  than  anything  we  have  yet 
provided  (9656).  If  they  are  really  to  understand  what  goodness  is, 
they  must  be  able  to  "  see  the  one  in  the  many  "  (9650),  to  appreciate 
and  realize  the  great  truth  of  the  unity  of  all  virtues  (ibid.  d-e).  In 
fact,  they  must  have  a  genuine  knowledge  of  God  and  the  ways  of 

1  It  is  clear  that  the  details  of  the  plan  would  need  more  adjustment  before 
it  would  work  in  practice.  Perhaps  it  is  tacitly  assumed  that  most  of  the 
original  twelve  cMvvoi  would  be  nearer  75  than  50,  and  that  the  three  oldest 
retire  in  each  subsequent  year. 

8  The  actual  words  are  (95 id)  r&v  icptuv  ruv  rd  dpioreta  cl\i)<}>6Tuv  ;  that  this 
means  the  etfdwoi  is  shown  by  comparison  with  94  ja.  In  the  recapitulation  at 
96ia— b  the  composition  of  the  council  is  apparently  slightly  different.  The 
two  passages  would,  no  doubt,  have  been  better  adjusted  on  a  final  revision 
ot  the  text. 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOM1S  497 

God  (g66c)  ;  they  must  not  be  content,  as  the  average  citizen  may 
be,  with  a  mere  faith  based  on  the  tradition  of  the  society  (ib.). 
(In  other  words,  they  must  thoioughly  understand  the  natural 
theology  already  laid  down  in  Book  X.).  We  have  seen  that 
scientific  astronomy,  with  its  doctrine  of  the  regularity  and  order 
of  the  celestial  motions,  is  a  chief  foundation  of  the  whole  Platonic 
apologia  for  an  ethical  Theism.  Hence  a  thorough  knowledge  of 
astronomy  will  be  indispensable  for  the  men  who  are  the  intel- 
lect of  the  State.  It  is  a  common,  but  wholly  mistaken,  opinion 
that  such  science  makes  men  "  infidels."  When  astronomical 
knowledge  is  combined  with  insight  into  the  true  nature  of  the  soul 
as  the  one  source  of  movement,  it  leads  direct  to  piety.  Hence 
no  one  will  be  qualified  to  serve  on  the  nocturnal  council  unless 
he  is  a  trained  mathematician  and  astronomer  and  has  also 
rightly  grasped  the  principle  of  the  causal  priority  of  soul  in 
the  scheme  of  things.  There  remains  the  task  of  determining 
what  other  studies  are  implicitly  demanded  by  our  programme 
(966^969^). 

It  is  sometimes  said  that  in  the  Laws  astronomy  has  taken  the 
place  formerly  given  to  dialectic  as  the  supreme  science,  and  that 
this  indicates  a  growing  uncertainty  in  Plato's  own  mind  about  the 
possibility  of  metaphysics.  This  is  a  complete  misinterpretation 
of  the  concluding  section  of  the  Laws.  The  intellectual  quality 
demanded  in  the  members  of  the  supreme  council,  that  they  should 
be  able  to  see  the  "  one  in  the  many  "  is  precisely  the  character 
always  ascribed  in  the  dialogues  to  the  dialectician.  And  we  note 
that  astronomical  science  is  only  one-half  of  the  qualification  laid 
down.  It  must  be  accompanied  by  a  right  understanding  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  place  of  i/^x*?  m  the  universe,  the  doctrine  which, 
more  than  any  other,  lies  at  the  root  of  Platonic  metaphysics. 
Though  the  name  "  dialectic  "  is  not  used,  the  demand  for  the  thing 
remains  unabated.1 

THE  EPINOMIS. — There  is  no  real  division  between  the  Epinomis 
and  the  Laws,  and  the  former  is  sometimes  actually  quoted  by 
later  writers  as  the  "  thirteenth  "  book  of  the  Laws,  though  the 
Epinomis  was  already  reckoned  as  a  distinct  work  by  Aristophanes 
of  Byzantium.2  There  is  no  real  ancient  evidence  against  the 
authenticity  of  the  dialogue.  Diogenes  Laertius  (iii.  I,  37)  says 
that  "  some  "  ascribed  it  to  the  Academic  Philippus  of  Opus,  but, 
as  he  has  just  told  the  story  that  Philippus  "  transcribed  "  the  Laws 
"from  the  wax,"  he  presumably  only  means  that  he  was  said  to 
have  done  the  same  for  the  Epinomis.  Proclus,  who  disliked  the 
work,  wished  to  reject  it,  but,  as  he  merely  offers  two  very  bad 
arguments  for  his  view,  he  presumably  knew  of  no  Academic  tradition 

1  The  name  is  avoided,  presumably,  as  specially  characteristic  of  Socrates, 
who  is  absent  from  the  dialogue.  The  word  is  carefully  avoided  also  in  the 
Timaeus  for  the  same  reason. 

1  He  made  the  (spurious)  Minos,  the  Laws,  and  the  Epinomis  one  of  his 
"  trilogies  "  (Diog.  Laert.  iii.  i,  62). 


498          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

in  its  favour.1  I  can  detect  no  linguistic  difference  whatever 
between  the  style  of  Epinomis  and  Laws,  and  the  very  fact  that  the 
Laws  have  manifestly  not  received  even  the  trifling  editorial  revision 
which  would  have  removed  small  verbal  inaccuracies  and  contra- 
dictions makes  it  incredible  to  me  that  Plato's  immediate  disciples 
should  have  issued  as  his  the  work  of  one  of  themselves.  Hence  I 
am  confident  that  the  current  suspicion  of  the  dialogue  is  no  more 
than  a  prejudice  really  due  to  the  now  exploded  early  nineteenth- 
century  attacks  on  the  genuineness  of  the  Laws  themselves.2  In 
any  case,  we  have  to  recognize  that  the  work  was  known  to  Aristotle, 
who  has  a  curious  allusion  to  it  at  Metaphysics  1073?;  9.*  I  feel 
justified,  therefore,  in  regarding  the  Epinomis  as  Plato's,  and  hold- 
ing that  it  was  intended  as  an  integral  part  of  the  magnum  opus  of 
his  last  years. 

The  immediate  purpose  of  the  dialogue  is  to  discuss  the  question 
left  unanswered  in  Laws  xii.,  of  the  complete  scientific  curriculum 
necessary  for  the  members  of  the  "  nocturnal  council  " :  What 
studies  will  lead  to  o-o^i'a  (9736)  ?  We  must  recognize  that  o-o^ia, 
in  any  case,  is  only  attainable  by  a  select  few,  and  with  difficulty 
(9730  ff.),  and  that  most  of  the  so-called  eVto-T^uuu  do  not  help  us  to  it 
(974^).  Thus  we  may  exclude  all  the  arts  and  sciences  which  simply 
contribute  to  material  civilization  or  to  amusement  (9740-975^),  as 
well  as  those  of  war,  medicine,  navigation,  and  rhetoric,  and  still 
more  unhesitatingly  the  mere  art  of  acquiring  and  retaining 
multifarious  information,  which  many  confuse  with  o-o^ta  (975^- 
9760).  We  ought  to  give  the  name  o-o&a  only  to  studies  which 
make  a  man  a  wise  and  good  citizen,  capable  of  exercising  or  obeying 
righteous  rule.  Now  there  is  a  branch  of  science  which,  more  than 
any  others,  has  this  tendency  and  may  be  said  to  be  a  gift  of  a  god 
to  man,  being  in  fact  the  gift  of  Heaven  (ovpavo's)  itself.  This  gift 
is  the  knowledge  of  number,  which  brings  all  other  good  things 

1  His  arguments  are  given  in  the  Prolegomena  to  the  Philosophy  of  Plato 
apparently  by  Olympiodorus  (Platonis  Opera,  C.  F.  Hermann,  vi.  218).  They 
are  (i)  that  Plato  would  not  have  gone  on  to  write  another  dialogue,  leaving 
the  Laws  unrevised,  (2)  that  motion  from  W  to  E.  is  called  in  the  Epinomis  "  to 
the  right  "  (Epin.  9876),  whereas  in  the  dialogues  (Timaeus,  36c)  it  is  called 
^  to  the  left."  But  (i)  assumes  that  the  Epinomis  is  really  meant  to  be 
another  dialogue,"  and  (2)  overlooks  the  point  that  the  Laws  use  the  same 
language  as  the  Epinomis  (760^  2).  The  really  significant  thing  is  that  Proclus 
makes  no  appeal  to  testimony. 

*  See  the  good  defence  of  the  Epinomis  in  Raeder,  Platons  philosophische 
Entwickelung,  413  ff.  Stenzel  (Zahl  und  Gestalt,  103  n.  4)  rightly  declines  to 
commit  himself  to  rejection.  The  "  demonstration  "  of  the  spuriousness  of 
the  Epinomis  by  F.  Miiller  (Stilistische  Untersuchung  der  Epinomis  des  Phihppos 
von  Opus,  1927)  leaves  me  still  unconvinced. 

8  It  is  said  there  that  it  is  obvious  rots  Kai/ji€Tplw  rjwtvois,  that  the  motions 
of  the  planets  are  composite,  a  fairly  clear  retort  to  Epin.  9876  9,  where  the 
theory  that  the  "  diurnal  revolution  "  is  a  component  of  the  planetary  orbits 
is  said  to  be  "  what  might  seem  true  "  dvOpu-rrois  6\iya  TOVTUV  ei'&W.  Jaeger 
(Aristoteles,  146,  153  ff.)  has  called  attention  to  the  connexion  between  the 
Epinomis  and  Aristotle's  Trepl  </>iXo<ro^as,  but  regards  the  former  as  an 
Academic  rejoinder  to  the  latter. 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  499 

along  with  itself  (977&)-1  Without  knowledge  of  number  we  should 
be  unintelligent  and  unmoral  (qjjc-e).  How  divine  a  thing  it  is 
we  see  from  the  consideration  that  where  there  is  number  there  is 
order  ;  where  there  is  no  number,  there  is  nothing  but  confusion, 
formlessness,  disorder  (977^-9786).  To  be  able  to  count  is  the 
prerogative  which  marks  men  off  from  the  animals.  We  learn  to 
count  up  to  fifteen  by  simply  studying  the  daily  changes  in  the  face 
of  the  moon  as  she  rounds  to  the  full  ;  a  much  bigger  problem  is  set 
us  when  we  go  on  to  compare  the  period  of  the  moon  with  that  of  the' 
sun,  as  the  agriculturist  must.  In  our  own  recent  discussion  it  was 
easy  enough  to  see  that  a  man  ought  to  have  goodness  of  soul,  as 
well  as  of  body,  and  that  to  have  this  he  must  be  "  wise."  The 
difficult  question  was  what  kind  of  knowledge  this  all-important 
"  wisdom  "  is.  What  we  have  just  said  suggests  the  answer 


Perhaps  we  may  not  discover  a  single  "  wisdom  "  which  covers 
the  whole  ground.  In  that  case,  we  must  try  to  enumerate  the 
various  branches  of  wisdom  and  say  what  they  are  (9800).  We  may 
go  back  to  our  thought  that  the  best  way  a  man  can  spend  his  life 
is  to  spend  it  in  praising  and  honouring  God.  Let  us  then,  to  the 
praise  of  God,  construct  an  improved  "  theogony,"  holding  fast 
to  the  natural  theology  we  have  laid  down,  and  particularly  to  the 
principle  of  the  causal  priority  of  soul  over  body  (9806-981^).  An 
"  animal/'  we  know,  is  a  soul  conjoined  with  a  body.  There  are 
five  regular  solids,  and  we  may  recognize  five  corresponding  forms 
of  body  —earth,  water,  air,  fire,  and  aether  2  —  and  five  corresponding 
kinds  of  animal,  each  with  its  special  habitat.  The  body  of  each 
kind  of  animal  is  a  compound  in  which  the  "  element  "  that  forms 
its  habitat  is  predominant.  Hence  the  two  most  conspicuously 
visible  classes  of  living  beings  are  those  which  live  on  the  earth, 
of  whom  man  specially  interests  us,  and  those  which  have  bodies 
made  chiefly  of  fire  and  are  gods,  the  stars  and  planets.  Their 
bodies  are  more  beautiful  than  ours,  and  more  lasting,  being  either 
deathless  or  of  age-long  vitality.  A  comparison  of  the  restless  and 
disorderly  movements  of  man  with  the  majestically  orderly  move- 
ments of  the  heavenly  bodies  is  enough  to  show  that  their  souls 
equally  surpass  man's  in  intelligence.  If  they,  unlike  us,  never 
deviate  from  one  path,  it  is  because  their  motion  exhibits  the 
necessity  imposed  by  rational  pursuit  of  the  best  (9826).  Their 
real  bulk,  as  science  can  demonstrate,  is  enormous,  and  there  is 

'  *  Number  is  the  gift  of  "  Uranus,"  because,  as  Plato  holds,  the  science  of 
it  has  been  developed  in  the  interest  of  learning  to  number  and  compute 
days,  months,  and  years.  Cf.  Timaeus,  380,  30/;. 

2  The  corpuscular  theory  of  the  Timaeus  is  here  implied,  with  the  addition 
that,  to  get  something  to  correspond  with  the  dodecahedron,  the  alOr/p,  the 
clear  blue  of  the  upper  air,  is  recognized  as  a  fifth  "  body."  This  Tre/m-rdi/  cupa 
(whence  the  name  quinta  essentia]  is  identical  with  Aristotle's  irpurov  crcDjua,  or 
"  celestial  matter."  But,  unUke  Aristotle,  Plato  does  not  regard  it  as  the 
"  matter"  of  the  heavenly  bodies;  they  are  made  mainly  of  fire,  as  Timaeus 
had  taught. 


500          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

only  one  answer  to  the  question  how  such  masses  can  be  made  to 
revolve  endlessly  in  the  same  orbits  ;  it  is  that  the  masses  are  alive, 
and  that  it  is  God  who  has  conjoined  their  ^i/xat'  with  these  vast 
bodies  (983^-0) .  Either  they  are  themselves  gods,  or  they  are 
images  of  gods  wrought  by  the  gods  themselves  (9840),  and  therefore 
more  to  be  held  in  honour  than  any  images  of  man's  making.  We 
may  suppose  that  the  intervening  regions  of  aether,  air,  water,  are 
also  inhabited  by  appropriate  denizens.  A  man  may  give  what 
account  he  pleases  of  Zeus  and  Hera  and  the  rest  of  the  traditional 
pantheon,  but  we  must  insist  on  the  superior  dignity  of  the  visible 
gods,  the  heavenly  bodies.  Air  and  aether  will  have  denizens  with 
transparent  bodies  and  therefore  invisible  to  us ;  we  may  suppose 
that  they  are  a  hierarchy  of  "  spirits  "  (Sai/xoves),  who  act  as  unseen 
intermediaries  between  gods  and  men,  favouring  the  good  and 
warring  against  the  bad  (984^-9856).  There  may  be  similar 
semi-divine  denizens  of  the  water  of  whom  men  get  occasional 
glimpses.  The  current  worships  have  been  largely  prompted  by 
real  or  imagined  appearances  of  such  beings,  and  a  wise  law-giver 
will  not  wantonly  interfere  with  them.  Men  cannot  have  real 
knowledge  about  such  things  (985^).  But  the  neglect  of  Greeks 
to  pay  proper  honour  to  the  heavenly  bodies,  the  gods  whom  we 
all  do  see,  is  quite  inexcusable.  They  should  be  honoured  not 
merely  by  feasts  of  the  Calendar,  but  by  setting  ourselves  to  get  a 
scientific  knowledge  of  their  motions  and  periods  (9850). 1 

This  means  that  we  must  master  the  science  of  the  revolutions 
of  the  stars  and  planets.  At  present  we  have  not  so  much  as  names 
for  the  planets,  though  they  are  called  the  stars  of  several  gods,  a 
nomenclature  which  has  come  to  us  from  Syria  (9860-987^). 2  It  is 
the  general  rule  that  whatever  Greeks  borrow  from  barbarians 
they  improve  upon  (9870).  Every  man  who  is  a  Greek  should 
therefore  recognize  the  duty  of  prosecuting  astronomy  in  a  scientific 
spirit,  and  cast  off  the  superstitious  fear  of  prying  into  divine  matters. 
God  knows  our  ignorance  and  desires  to  teach  us  (987^-9880). 

The  study  we  need  to  lead  us  to  true  piety,  the  greatest  of  the 
virtues,  is  thus  astronomy,  knowledge  of  the  true  orbits  and  periods 
of  the  heavenly  bodies,  pursued  in  the  spirit  of  pure  science,  not  in 
that  of  Hcsiod's  farmer's  calendar  (990*2).  But  since  such  a  study 
is  concerned  with  the  difficult  task  of  the  computation  of  the  relative 
periods  of  sun,  moon,  and  planets  (and  thus  has  to  reckon  with 

1  The  irony  of  the  whole  passage  about  the  supposed  denizens  of  aether,  air, 
and  water  and  the  popular  cults  of  such  beings  must  not  be  overlooked.     We 
have  been  told  (g8oc)  that  the  whole  account  is  a  "  theogony,"  though,  as  is 
added  at  gSSc,  a  less  objectionable  one  than  those  of  the  old  poets,  and  that 
knowledge  on  such  matters  is  impossible.     All  that  is  really  serious  is  the 
insistence  on  the  necessity  of  giving  the  first  place  in  the  popular  cult  to  the 
heavenly  bodies  and  recognizing  the  study  of  astronomy  as  the  right  way  to 
worship  them.     The  rest  is  a  concession  to  the  maxim  that  harmless  popular 
rites  are  not  to  be  disturbed.    Timaeus  had  taken  the  same  line  (supra,  p.  452). 

2  The  names  "star  of  Aphrodite,"  "of  Ares,"  "of  Zeus,"  "of  Cronus," 
from  which  our  designations  are  derived,  appear  for  the  first  time  in  literature 
in  this  passage.     "  Star  of  Hermes  "  is  first  found  in  Timaeus,  $8d. 


THE  LAWS  AND  EPINOMIS  501 

highly  complicated  arithmetical  problems),  it  must  have  as  its 
foundation  a  thoroughly  scientific  theory  of  number.  This  includes 
not  only  a  scientific  doctrine  of  whole  numbers  ("  the  odd  and 
even,"  ggoc),  but  two  other  studies,  commonly  called  by  the  mis- 
leading names  geometry  and  stereometry.  Geometry  is  really 
arithmetic,  a  study  of  numbers  "  which  are  in  themselves  dissimilar, 
but  are  assimilated  by  reference  to  surfaces,"  and  stereometry  is 
similarly  the  study  of  another  class  of  numbers  which  become 
similar  when  raised  to  the  third  power.  Also  we  need  to  study  for 
its  physical  importance  the  theory  of  progressions.  The  geo- 
metrical series  i,  2,  4,  8  reveals  to  us  the  principle  on  which  the 
magnitude  of  length,  area,  and  volume  arc  interconnected  ;  in 
the  arithmetical  progression  6,  9,  12  and  the  harmonic  progression 
6,  8,  12  we  have  the  secret  of  music,  since  the  two  means  9  and  8 
correspond  to  the  two  great  intervals  within  the  octave,  the  fifth 
and  the  fourth.  Thus  we  might  say  that  consideration  of  the  ratio 
2  :  I,  its  powers,  and  the  means  between  its  terms,  discloses  the 
supreme  secret  of  nature  (9900-9916).  And  besides  we  must  add 
to  this  study  of  a  scientific  arithmetic  which  has  been  extended  to 
cover  geometry  plane  and  solid,  as  the  completion  of  the  whole 
curriculum,  insight  into  the  absolute  unity  of  principle  which  runs 
through  the  whole  of  exact  science  and  makes  it  one  (99 ic-e).1 
(Thus  once  more  dialectic,  the  synoptic  apprehension  of  the  prin- 
ciples which  pervade  all  science  and  the  whole  of  the  scibilc,  reappears 
as  the  foundation  of  statesmanship.) 

Without  this  scientific  knowledge,  a  city  will  never  be  governed 
with  true  statesmanship,  and  human  life  will  never  be  truly  happy. 
The  wisest  man  is  the  man  who  has  attained  all  this  knowledge  ;  we 
may  feel  confident  that  when  death  translates  him  from  the  sensible 
region,  he  will  finally  achieve  the  complete  unification  of  the  self, 
and  his  lot,  wherever  it  may  be  cast,  will  be  truly  blessed.  As  we 
said  before,  the  attainment  is  only  possible  for  the  few,  but  we 
must  insist  that  our  supreme  governors  at  least  shall  devote  them- 
selves to  it  (992*2-^).  Thus  the  Epinomis  ends  by  the  unqualified 
reassertion  of  the  old  demand  that  statesmanship  and  science  shall 
be  combined  in  the  same  persons. 

1  The  text  of  QQOC  5-9916  4,  the  most  important  mathematical  passage 
in  the  Platonic  corpus,  is  unfortunately  uncertain,  in  part  probably  corrupted, 
in  part  also  possibly  never  reduced  to  grammatical  form  by  the  writer,  but 
the  sense  is  clear.  The  point  of  chief  significance  is  the  revolutionary  demand 
that  quadratic  and  cubic  "  surds  "  shall  be  recognized  as  numbers  in  opposition 
to  the  traditional  view  that  there  are  "  irrational "  magnitudes  (lengths, 
areas,  volumes),  but  no  "irrational"  numbers.  The  meaning  of  the  rest  is 
that  the  succession  of  the  "  powers  "  21,  22,  23,  is  the  most  elementary  example 
of  the  principle  that  similar  areas  have  the  duplicate  and  similar  volumes 
the  triplicate  ratios  of  the  corresponding  "  sides,"  and  that  the  ratios  corre- 
sponding to  the  fourth  and  fifth  in  the  scale  respectively,  the  tirirpiros  and 
?7jLu6Xtos  X6705,  are  also  the  harmonic  and  arithmetic  means  between  i  and  2. 
(Plato  selects  6  and  12  as  surrogates  for  i  and  2  in  this  illustration  because 
he  wishes  the  two  "  means  "  to  be  whole  numbers.)  Stenzel  comes  near 
explaining  the  passage  correctly  (Zahl  u.  Gestalt,  98  ff.). 


502          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

See  further : 

BURNET. — Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  301-312  al. 

RITTER,  C. — Platon,  ii.  657-796  at.  ;    Platons  Gesetze,  Kommcntar 

zum    griechiscken    Text    (Leipzig,     1896)  ;     Platos    Gesetze, 

Darstellung  des  Inhalts  (Leipzig,   1896). 
A.    E.   TAYLOR. — The   Laws   of  Plato   translated   into   English. 

(London,   1934.) 

RAEDER,  H. — Platons  philosophische  Entwickelung,  395-419. 
NATORP,  P. — Platons  Ideenlehre,  358-365. 
BARKER,  E. — Greek  Political  Theory  :  Plato  and  his  Predecessors, 

292-380. 

JAEGER,  W. — Aristoteles,  125-170. 
MULLER,  F. — Statistische  Untersuchung  der  Epinomis  des  Philip- 

pos  von  Opus  (1927). 

HARWARD,  J. — The  Epinomis  of  Plato.     Translated  with  Intro- 
duction and  Notes.     (Oxford,   1928.) 
And  for  the  problems  presented  by  the  Epistles  : 

FRIEDLANDER,  P. — Platon  :    Eidos,  Paideia,   Dialogos  (1928). 
EGERMANN,     FR. — Die    platonischen     Briefe     VII    und     VIII, 

(Vienna,   1928.) 

SOUILHE,  J. — Platon,  Lettres.     (Paris,   1926.) 
NOVOTNY,  F.- — Platonis  Epistnlac.     (Brno,   1930.) 
HARWARD,  J. — The  Platonic  Epistles.     (Cambridge,   1932.) 


CHAPTER    XIX 
PLATO  IN  THE  ACADEMY— FORMS  AND  NUMBERS 

TO  us  Plato  is  first  and  foremost  a  great  writer,  but  from  his 
own  point  of  view,  books  and  the  study  of  them  are  a 
secondary  interest  with  the  "  philosopher  "  ;  what  counts 
as  supreme  is  a  life  spent  in  the  organized  prosecution  of  discovery 
(TO  o-vtfv).  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Plato  thought  his  work  as 
the  organizer  of  the  Academy  much  more  important  than  the  writing 
of  dialogues.  Since  Aristotle  commonly  refers  to  the  teaching  given 
in  the  Academy  as  Plato's  "  unwritten  doctrine  "  (aypa<j>a  Sdy/xara), 
we  may  be  reasonably  sure  that  Plato  did  not  even  prepare  a  MS. 
of  his  discourses.  This  explains  why  there  were  several  different 
versions  in  the  next  generation  of  the  famous  lecture  on  "  the 
Good,'1  which  seems  to  have  contained  Plato's  most  explicit  account 
of  his  own  philosophy.  We  are  told  that  several  of  the  hearers, 
including  Aristotle,  Xenocrates,  and  Heraclides  of  Pontus,  all 
published  their  notes  of  it,  and  the  obvious  implication  is  that  there 
was  no  "  author's  MS."  to  publish.  Consequently  we  have  to 
discover  Plato's  ultimate  metaphysical  positions  indirectly  from 
references  to  them  in  Aristotle,  supplemented  by  occasional  brief 
excerpts,  preserved  by  later  Aristotelian  commentators,  from  the 
statements  of  Academic  contemporaries  of  Aristotle,  like  Xeno- 
crates and  Hermodorus.  This  creates  a  serious  difficulty.  When 
it  is  a  mere  question  of  what  Plato  said,  the  testimony  of  Aristotle 
is  surely  unimpeachable ;  but  when  we  go  on  to  ask  what  Plato 
meant,  the  case  is  different.  Aristotle's  references  are  all  polemical, 
and  Aristotle  is  a  controversialist  who  is  not  unduly  anxious  to 
be  "  sympathetic."  Unfortunately,  too,  mathematics,  the  science 
specially  important  for  its  influence  on  Plato's  thought,  is  the  one 
science  where  Aristotle  shows  himself  least  at  home.  Thus  there  is 
always  the  possibility  that  his  criticisms  may  rest  on  misunder- 
standing. And  the  misunderstandings  may  not  even  originate 
with  him.  The  criticism  of  Plato  all  through  the  Metaphysics 
seems  to  be  subsidiary  to  Aristotle's  standing  polemic  against 
Xenocrates,  the  contemporary  head  of  the  Academy.  Hence  it  is 
possible  that  much  of  the  criticism  of  Metaphysics  M-N,  the  most 
sustained  anti-Academic  polemic  in  Aristotle,  may  be  directed 
rather  against  Academic  misinterpretation  of  Plato  than  against 
Plato  himself. 

In  a  necessarily  brief  statement  our  safest  couise  is  to  deal 

503 


504          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

only  with  views  expressly  attributed  by  Aristotle  to  Plato,  and 
with  them  only  so  far  as  their  meaning  seems  to  be  beyond  reason- 
able doubt.  This  is,  at  any  rate,  all  I  can  attempt  in  the  space  at 
my  disposal.  But  we  must  carefully  avoid  the  nineteenth-century 
mistake  of  treating  the  statements  described  by  Aristotle  under 
the  name  of  the  "  doctrine  "  (rrpayfjiaTcia)  of  Plato  as  a  sort  of 
senile  dotage.  Aristotle  definitely  identifies  Platonism  with  these 
doctrines  and  never  even  hints  that  he  knew  of  any  other  Platonism, 
though  he  does  occasionally  remark  that  the  dialogues  differ  from 
the  "  unwritten  "  discourses.  It  seems  to  follow  that  the  theories 
called  Plato's  by  Aristotle  must  have  been  formulated  as  early  as 
367  B.C.,  the  year  of  Aristotle's  entry  into  the  Academy,  and,  quite 
possibly,  even  earlier. 

When  we  turn  to  these  Aristotelian  statements  we  find  that, 
for  the  most  part,  they  amount  to  a  version  of  the  theory  of  forms 
with  a  very  individual  character,  and  of  a  much  more  developed 
type  than  anything  the  dialogues  have  ascribed  to  Socrates.  There 
are  also  one  or  two  other  notices  of  specific  peculiarities  of  Plato's 
doctrines,  all  concerned  with  points  of  mathematics,  and  it  is  with 
some  of  these  I  propose  to  begin,  as  they  may  help  us  to  understand 
the  point  of  view  from  which  the  doctrine  of  forms  as  known  to 
Aristotle  was  formulated. 

We  must  remember  that  though  mathematics  was  by  no  means 
the  only  science  cultivated  in  the  Academy,  it  was  that  which 
appealed  most  to  Plato  himself,  and  that  in  which  the  Academy 
exercised  the  most  thoroughgoing  influence  on  later  developments. 
All  the  chief  writers  of  geometrical  textbooks  known  to  us  between 
the  foundation  of  the  Academy  and  the  rise  of  the  scientific  schools 
of  Alexandria  belong  to  the  Academy.  In  Plato's  own  lifetime, 
Theaetetus  had  completed  the  edifice  of  elementary  solid  geometry, 
by  discovering  the  inscription  of  the  octahedron  and  icosahedron  in 
the  sphere.  He  and  Eudoxus  and  others  had  laid  the  foundations 
of  the  doctrine  of  quadratic  surds  as  worked  out  in  the  tenth  book 
of  Euclid's  Elements ;  Eudoxus  had  invented  the  method  of  approxi- 
mating to  the  lengths  and  areas  of  curves  by  exhaustion  (the  ancient 
equivalent  of  the  Integral  Calculus),  and  had  recast  the  whole 
doctrine  of  ratio  and  proportion  in  the  form  in  which  we  now  have 
it  in  Euclid's  fifth  book,  for  the  purpose  of  making  it  applicable 
to  "  incommensurables."  We  naturally  expect  to  find  traces  in 
Plato's  doctrine  of  this  special  preoccupation  with  the  philosophy 
of  mathematics  which  is  characteristic  of  the  work  of  the  school.1 

To  understand  the  motives  which  were  prompting  the  Academy 
to  a  reconstruction  of  the  philosophy  of  mathematics,  we  must  go 

1  For  an  account  of  the  Academic  work  in  mathematics  I  may  refer  the 
reader  to  any  of  the  standard  works  on  the  history  of  mathematics,  e.g.  Zeuthen, 
Histoire  des  mathematiques  dans  I'antiquite  et  le  moyen  dge  (Fr.  tr.,  Paris,  1902), 
or,  for  a  still  briefer  account,  Heiberg,  Mathematics  in  Classical  Antiquity 
(Eng.  tr.,  Oxford,  1922).  The  ancient  notices  are  chiefly  preserved  in  the 
second  prologue  to  Proclus'  Commentary  on  Euclid  i,  and  in  the  scholia  to 
Euclid. 


PLATO  IN  THE  ACADEMY  505 

back  to  the  age  of  Zeno.  In  the  Pythagorean  mathematics  of  the 
fifth  century  there  were  two  serious  logical  flaws.  One  was  that 
in  treating  geometry  as  an  application  of  arithmetic,  the  Pytha- 
goreans had  made  the  point  correspond  to  the  number  i,  as  is 
indicated  in  the  traditional  definition  of  the  point  often  mentioned 
by  Aristotle,  that  it  is  /xovas  exovcra  #e'<riv,  "  a  i  with  position/' 
The  identification  implies  the  view  that  a  point  is  a  minimum 
volume,  and  was  ruined  by  Zeno's  acute  argumentation  from  the 
possibility  of  unending  bisection  of  the  straight  line  and  the  im- 
possibility of  making  a  line  longer  or  a  volume  bigger  by  adding  a 
point  to  it.  There  are  just  two  ways  of  meeting  the  difficulty  : 
one  is  to  evade  it,  by  severing  geometry  from  its  dependence  on 
arithmetic,  as  Euclid  does ;  the  other  is  that  actually  hinted  at  by 
Zeno's  own  language  and  definitely  adopted  by  modern  philo- 
sophical mathematicians,  of  making  the  point  correspond  to  o 
and  regarding  o,  not  i,  as  the  first  of  the  integers.1  It  was  towards 
this  view  that  Plato  was  feeling  his  way,  as  we  shall  see  immediately. 
The  other  great  trouble  was  the  discovery  that  there  are  "  incom- 
mensurables  "  or  "  surds,"  e.g.  that  the  ratio  of  the  length  of  the 
side  of  a  square  to  its  diagonal  is  not  that  of  "  integer  to  integer." 
Here,  again,  two  ways  of  meeting  a  difficulty  fatal  to  the  old  philo- 
sophy of  mathematics  as  it  stood  are  possible.  One  is  again  to 
surrender  the  parallelism  between  geometry  and  arithmetic  by 
admitting  the  existence  of  surd  geometrical  magnitudes,  but  deny- 
ing that  there  are  "  surd  "  numbers.  This  is  the  position  taken  by 
Aristotle  in  express  words  and  tacitly  by  later  mathematicians  like 
Euclid,  who  always  represents  an  "  incommensurable  "  by  a  line 
or  an  area.  The  other  is  that  of  modern  rationalistic  mathematics, 
to  revise  the  conception  of  number  itself,  so  that  it  becomes 
possible  to  define  "  irrational  "  numbers  01  various  kinds  and  to 
formulate  laws  for  their  addition  and  multiplication  in  terms  of  the 
already  known  arithmetic  of  integers.  The  problem  has  only  been 
satisfactorily  solved  in  the  work  of  the  last  half -century,  but,  as  we 
saw  in  dealing  with  the  Epinomis,  this  was  the  line  which  already 
commended  itself  to  Plato.  Geometry  and  "  stereometry  "  are, 
according  to  him,  really  the  arithmetic  of  the  quadratic  and  cubic 
"  surds,"  as  plane  geometry  has  been  said  in  our  own  time  to 
be  simply  the  "  algebra  of  complex  numbers."  In  this  way  the 
parallelism  of  geometry  with  arithmetic  is  preserved  by  a  revised 
and  enlarged  conception  of  arithmetic  itself.2 

With  these  considerations  in  mind,  we  can  readily  understand 
certain  statements  which  Aristotle  makes  about  mathematical 
views  of  Plato.  There  are  three  such  statements  which  we  may 
at  once  elucidate,  (a)  Plato  stated  that  the  "  point "  was  a 

1  Cf.  the  definition  of  the  integer-series  in  Frege's  Grundgesetze  der  Arith- 
mctik  which  is,  put  into  words,  "  the  integers  are  the  successors  of  o." 

*  For  a  real  comprehension  of  Plato's  thought  it  is  indispensable  to  have  a 
grasp  of  the  modem  logic  of  arithmetic.  I  would  recommend  as  sufficient 
(but  also  necessary)  such  an  exposition  as  that  given  in  chap.  i.  (Real  Variables) 
of  Professor  G.  H.  Hardy's  Pure  Mathematics. 


506          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

"fiction  of  the  geometers,"  and  spoke,  instead,  of  the  "starting- 
point  of  the  line  "  (Met.  A  9920  20).  This  means,  of  course,  that 
Plato  rejected  the  conception  of  a  point  as  a  minimum  of  volume, 
or  "  unit. "<&  It  has  no  magnitude  of  its  own  but  is  "  the  beginning  " 
of  the  straight  line  which  has  such  a  magnitude  (its  length).  In 
other  words,  what  corresponds  in  arithmetic  to  the  point  is  not 
i  but  o,  if  only  Greek  arithmeticians  had  possessed  a  word  or 
symbol  for  o.  The  underlying  thought  is  that  which  reappears 
in  later  Greek  Platonists  when  they  speak  of  a  line  as  the  "  fluxion  " 
(/juo-is)  of  a  point,  in  the  very  terminology  Newton  was  later  to 
introduce  into  English.  We  are  on  the  track  of  the  ideas  and 
terminology  of  the  inventors  of  what  we  call  the  Differential 
Calculus.  It  is  true,  of  course,  that  this  notion  of  an  "  infinitesimal  " 
which  is  not  quite  nothing  nor  quite  something,  but  a  nothing  in 
the  act  of  turning  into  something,  involves  a  logical  paradox  and 
that  it  has  only  been  finally  disposed  of  by  the  purification  of 
mathematical  logic,  which  has  eliminated  "  infinitesimals  "  from 
the  so-called  Infinitesimal  Calculus.  But  the  Calculus  had  to  be 
there  first  before  its  purification  from  bad  logic  could  be  possible, 
and  it  is  hard  to  see  how  it  could  ever  have  been  originated  without 
this  defective  but  useful  conception,  (b)  (Met.  ibid.  22)  Plato  ' '  often 
used  to  assume  his  indivisible  lines  "  (jioAAdxtg  rrtOei  ia;  d-c6/*ov<; 
ypa^ds).  Aristotle,  who  apparently  distinguishes  this  point  from 
the  one  he  has  just  mentioned,  does  not  explain  its  meaning.  In 
the  textually  badly  corrupt  Peripatetic  tract  de  Lineis  insecabilibus, 
which  appears  to  be  a  polemic  of  an  Aristotelian  of  the  first  genera- 
tion against  Xenocrates,  the  "  indivisible  line  "  is  regarded  as  a 
minimum  length,  and  it  is  urged  that  there  are  insuperable  geo- 
metrical difficulties  about  such  a  conception,  as,  in  fact,  there  are. 
What  Plato  may  have  meant  by  the  expression  we  can  only  con- 
jecture. As  a  conjecture  I  offer  the  suggestion  that  his  intention 
is  precisely  to  deny  the  conception  attributed  to  some  Academic, 
apparently  Xenocrates,  by  the  Peripatetic  tract.  A  line,  however 
short,  is  "  indivisible  "  in  the  sense  that  you  cannot  divide  it  into 
elements  which  are  not  themselves  lines — in  other  words,  it  is  a 
"  continuum."  The  point  makes  a  straight  or  curved  line  not  by 
addition  or  summation,  but  by  "  flowing  "  ;  a  straight  or  other 
line  is  not  made  of  points  in  the  way  in  which  a  wall  is  made  of 
bricks  laid  end  to  end.1  (c)  Plato  said  that  "  there  is  a  first  2 
and  a  first  3,  and  the  numbers  are  not  addible  to  one  another  " 
(Met.  M  10830  32,  the  one  statement  about  numbers  which  is 
definitely  attributed  to  Plato  by  name  in  the  last  two  books  of  the 
Metaphysics).^  A  similar  point  is  made  about  the  Academy  gener- 
ally in  the  Ethics  (E.N.  10960,  17  ff.),  where  we  are  told  that  they 
held  that  there  is  no  form  (iSe'a)  of  number,  because  "  in  numbers 

1  Cf.  the  observations  of  Stenzel,  Zahl  u.  Gestalt,  89  ff.  The  technical 
expressions  bclv,  /Mem,  the  source  of  Newton's  language  about  "  fluents  " 
and  their  "  fluxions,"  come  from  the  accounts  of  the  doctrine  in  the  Aristo- 
telian commentators  and  were  presumably  coined  by  the  Academy. 


PLATO  IN  THE  ACADEMY  507 

there  is  a  before  and  an  after/'  i.e.  because  numbers  form  a  series. 
The  meaning  of  these  statements  seems  not  to  have  been  clear  to 
Aristotle,  but  is  manifest  to  anyone  who  has  learned  to  think  of 
number  en  malhematicien.  The  sense  is  that  the  series  of  numbers  is 
not  made  by  adding  "  units  "  together.  E.g.  we  say  that  3+1  =4, 
but  we  do  not  mean  that  3  is  three  "  units  "  or  that  4  is  3  and  I  ; 
4  is  not  four  i's,  or  a  3  and  a  i,  it  is  one  4.  What  we,  really  add 
together  is  not  numbers  but  aggregates  or  collections.  Thus  it  is 
true  that  if  you  have  a  group  of  n  things  and  another  group  of  m 
things,  and  form  the  two  into  one  group,  the  new  group  contains 
m+n  things,  but  it  is  not  true  that  the  number  m~\-n  contains  a 
number  m  and  a  number  n.  The  importance  of  this  view  is  that  it 
leads  to  revision  of  the  whole  conception  of  number.  The  fifth- 
century  theory,  still  represented  by  Euclid's  definition  of  apiOpos 
(Elements  vii.  def.  2)  is  that  a  "  number  "  is  TrXyOos  povaSw,  a 
"  collection  of  i's."  On  the  new  view,  the  only  really  sound  one, 
no  number  is  a  "  collection  "  ;  the  statement  that  3=2+1,  which 
is  the  definition  of  3,  does  not  mean  that  3  is  "  a  2  and  a  i,"  but  that 
3  is  the  term  of  the  integer-series  which  comes  "  next  after  "2. 

This  explains  why  there  is  no  form  of  number.  The  reason  is 
that  each  "  number  "  is  itself  a  form,  as  was  really  implied  in  the 
Phaedo  itself  when  Socrates  spoke  of  "  the  number  2  "  and  "  the 
number  3  "  as  instances  of  what  he  meant  by  a  form.  Hence  the 
ordered  series  of  integers  is  not  a  form,  it  is  a  series  of  forms. 
The  point  may  be  grasped  if  we  remember  that  in  our  own  philo- 
sophy of  mathematics  we  do  not  find  it  possible  to  define  "  number  " 
or  even  "  integer  "  ;  all  that  we  can  do  is  to  define  the  series  of 
integers  or  the  series,  e.g.,  of  "  real  "  numbers,  and  to  define  indi- 
vidual numbers.  I  can  define  "  the  integer  series  "  as  a  series  of 
a  certain  type  with  a  certain  first  term,  and  I  can  define  "  the 
integer  "  w+i  by  saying  that  it  is  the  number  of  that  series  which 
is  next  after  n,  but  I  cannot  really  define  "  integer."  Aristotle 
is  never  tired  of  arguing  against  Plato  that  there  is  no  number 
except  what  Aristotle  calls  '"  mathematical  "  number,  or  alter- 
natively "number  made  of  I's "  (/xoyaStKos  apiO^os) ;  but  the 
simple  truth  is  that  no  "  number  "  is  "  made  of  i's,"  and  that  it  is 
precisely  what  Aristotle  calls  "  mathematical  "  number  which  has 
no  existence  except  in  his  imagination.  Plato  may  well  have 
been  led  to  this  denial  that  numbers  are  "  addible  "  by  his  recog- 
nition that  "  surds  "  like  N/2,  \/2,  must  be  admitted  into  arithmetic 
as  numbers,  since  it  is  evident  that  no  process  of  "  adding  i  to  i  " 
could  ever  yield  such  numbers  as  these.1  Thus  this  doctrine,  also, 
may  well  be  connected  with  the  fact  that  the  "  real  "  numbers  form 
a  continuum.  But  it  is  important  to  be  clear  on  the  point  that  the 
principle  that  number  is  not  really  generated  by  addition  of  i's 

1  This  is  the  consideration  made  prominent  in  the  treatment  of  the  doctrine 
by  M.  Milhaucl  in  Les  Philosophes-gtonidtres  de  la  Gr&ce,  a  work  really  indis- 
pensable to  the  student  of  Plato.  But,  as  we  shall  see  immediately,  it  is  not 
the  whole,  nor  the  most  important  part,  of  Plato's  doctrine. 


508  PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

applies  equally  to  the  numbers  of  the  integer-series,  which  is  not  a 
continuum. 

This  brings  us  to  the  consideration  of  Aristotle's  account  of 
Plato's  theory  of  forms.  According  to  the  Metaphysics,1  Plato 
actually  called  the  forms  numbers,  and  maintained  that  each  form 
or  number  has  two  constituents,  the  One,  which  Aristotle  regards  as 
the  formal  constituent,  and  something  called  the  "  great-and-small  " 
or  "  the  indeterminate  duality  "  (aopio-ros  Suas),  which  Aristotle 
treats  as  a  material  constituent.  In  other  words,  a  number  is 
something  which  arises  from  the  determination  of  a  determinable, 
(the  grcat-and-small),  by  the  One.  Since  the  forms  are  the  causes 
of  all  other  things,  these  constituents  of  the  forms  are  the  ultimate 
constituents  of  everything,  and  this  is  what  is  meant  by  the  state- 
ment that  other  things  "  participate  "  in  the  forms.2  Aristotle 
remarks  on  the  theory  that  it  is  of  the  same  type  as  the  Pythagorean 
doctrine  that  "  things  are  numbers/'  or  are  "  imitations  of  numbers," 
but  differs  from  that  view  by  substituting  the  "  duality  "  of  the 
"  great-and-small  "  for  the  "  indefinite  "  (aTreipoy)  as  one  constituent 
of  numbers,  and  also  by  maintaining  that  "  mathematical  "  (TO, 
paOrjfjiaTLKa.)  are  intermediate  between  numbers  and  sensible 
things,  whereas  the  Pythagoreans  said  that  the  numbers  are  the 
things.8  He  seems  also  to  connect  this  theory  with  the  special 
point  in  respect  of  which  he  holds  Plato  and  the  Pythagoreans 
inferior  to  Socrates,  namely,  that  they  "  separated "  (f^/Hcrai/) 
the  "  universals  "  or  forms  from  "  things  "  as  Socrates  had  not 
done.4 

It  is  plain  from  the  explanations  attempted  by  the  later  com- 
mentators on  Aristotle  that  the  chief  source  from  which  the  doctrine 
alluded  to  in  the  Metaphysics  was  known  in  antiquity  was  the 
reports  of  the  auditors  of  Plato's  famous  lecture  on  "the  Good." 
As  we  do  not  possess  these  reports  and  cannot  be  sure  how  far  the 
statements  of  Peripatetic  commentators  on  Aristotle  about  them 
can  be  trusted,  we  need  to  be  cautious  in  our  interpretation.  But 
there  are  certain  points  on  which  we  can  be  reasonably  certain. 
It  is  quite  clear  from  the  whole  character  of  Aristotle's  polemic 
against  "  ideal  numbers,"  that  the  numbers  which  Plato  declared 

1  Met.  A  9876  18-25. 

2  The  simple  meaning  of  this  is  that,  as  we  have  been  told  by  Timacus, 
all  the  characters  of  "  things  "  depend  on  the  geometrical  structure  of  their 
particles,  and  thus,  in  the  end,  on  the  structure  of  the  "  triangles  "  into  which 
the  faces  of  these  particles  can  be  resolved.     And  a  triangle  is  determined  again 
by  three  "  numbers,"  those  which  give  the  lengths  of  its  sides. 

3  Met.  A  9876  25-28.     Oddly  enough,  he  does  not  mention  the  much  more 
important  point  that  the  One  is  made  by  Plato  the  formal  constituent  in  a 
number,  whereas  the  Pythagoreans  taught  that  "  the  unit  "  is  the  first  product 
of  the  combination  of  their  two  constituent  factors,  Trtpas  and  Aircipov,  though  he 
had  correctly  stated  this  doctrine  just  before,  Met.  A  9860,  19. 

4  Met.  M  10786  30.     Plato  is  not  named  in  this  passage,  but  a  comparison 
of  the  criticism  passed  immediately  below  (10786  34  ff.)  with  that  made  on 
Plato  at  A  9906  2  fi.t  shows  that  Aristotle  regards  the  charge  of  making  the 
"  separation  "  as  applicable  to  him. 


PLATO  IN  THE  ACADEMY  509 

to  be  forms  are  just  the  integers  and  nothing  else,  and  also  that 
the  doctrine  does  not  mean  that  it  is  denied  that  "  man,"  "  horse/' 
and  the  like  are  forms,  but  that  "  the  form  of  man  "  and  the  like 
are  now  held  to  be  themselves  in  some  sense  "  numbers."  Hence 
Aristotle  can  raise  the  difficulty  whether  the  "  units  "  which  make 
up  the  number  which  is  the  form  of  man  or  horse  are  the  same  as 
those  which  are  found  in  the  form  of  animal,  or  those  of  the  form 
of  man  the  same  as  those  of  the  form  of  horse  (Met.  10810  9, 
1082$  18,  10840  I3)-  ^  also  looks  as  though  Aristotle  meant  to 
ascribe  to  Plato,  as  well  as  to  the  Pythagoreans,  the  view  that  the 
integer-series  is  a  succession  of  repetitions  of  the  numbers  up  to  10, 
so  that  the  Form-numbers  would  be,  in  a  special  sense,  the  first 
ten  natural  numbers.  (E.g.  Met.  10840  I2>  though  the  allusion  there 
might  be  rather  to  a  theory  of  the  Pythagoreans  and  Speusippus 
than  to  a  personal  view  of  Plato.)  It  seems  clear,  at  any  rate,  that 
the  key  to  the  doctrine,  if  we  could  recover  it,  would  be  found 
in  a  theory  of  the  character  of  the  series  of  integers  up  to  10. 

To  some  extent,  at  least,  it  seems  possible  to  recover  this  key. 
We  have  to  begin  by  understanding  what  is  meant  by  speaking  of 
one  constituent  of  a  number  as  the  "  grcat-and-small  "  and  by 
calling  this  an  "  indeterminate  duality."  Even  without  the  help 
of  the  commentators  on  Aristotle,  the  Philebus  would  enable  us  to 
give  a  reasonable  answer  to  this  question.  We  saw  there  that 
"  that  which  admits  of  more  and  less  indefinitely  "  was  Plato's 
description  of  what  we  call  a  "  continuum,"  though  the  number- 
series  itself  does  not  figure  among  the  examples  of  coniinua  given 
in  the  dialogue.  This  enables  us  to  see  at  once  why  Plato  spoke 
of  what  the  Pythagoreans  had  called  the  "  unlimited  "  (airtipov)  as 
a  "  great-and-small  "  or  a  "  duality."  It  is  a  duality  because  it 
can  be  varied  indefinitely  in  either  of  two  directions.  Probably 
the  commentators  arc  right  in  connecting  this  with  the  more  specific 
view  that  you  can  equally  reach  plurality,  starting  from  unity, 
by  multiplication  or  by  division,  e.g.  when  you  divide  a  given  class 
regarded  as  a  whole  into  sub-classes,  you  have  two  or  more  more 
determinate  forms  within  the  original  ycVos*.  This  indicates  a  direct 
connexion  between  the  theory  of  number  ascribed  to  Plato  by 
Aristotle  and  the  preoccupation  with  the  problem  of  the  subdivision 
of  forms  in  the  later  dialogues  on  which  Stenzcl  has  done  well  to 
insist,  though  he  has  allowed  himself  to  negloct  too  much  the  speci- 
fically mathematical  problem.  We  can  also  see,  I  think,  why  the 
other  constituent  of  a  number  should  be  said  to  be  "  the  one," 
and  why  the  "  unit  "  is  no  longer  regarded,  in  Pythagorean  fashion, 
as  a  "  blend  "  of  "  limit  "  with  the  "  unlimited,"  but  as  itself 
the  "  limit."  Here,  again,  we  have  a  point  of  contact  with  the  theory 
of  logical  "  division."'  As  the  Philebus  had  taught  us,  we  may  arrive 
at  a  "  form  "  in  either  of  two  ways  ;  we  may  start  with  several 
different  eiS?/  as  many  and  seek  to  reduce  them  to  unity  by  showing 
that  they  are  all  special  determinations  of  a  more  general  "  form," 
or  again  we  may  start  with  the  more  general  "  form  "  and  discover 


510          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

more  specific  "  forms  "  within  it ;  whichever  route  we  follow,  we 
presuppose  as  already  familiar  the  notions  of  a  form  and  of  forms 
in  the  plural.  "  A  "  and  "  some  "  will  be  ultimate  indefinables.1 

In  the  case  of  numbers  it  is  easy  to  see  how  the  conception, 
already  implied  in  the  Epinomis,  of  a  "  continuum  "  of  "  real  " 
numbers  leads  to  the  Platonic  formulas.  If  we  wish  to  discover  a 
number  whose  product  by  itself  is  2,  it  is  easy  to  show  that  we  can 
make  steady  approximation  to  such  a  number  by  constructing  the 
endless  "  continued  fraction  "  : 

2+1 


2  +  1 


2  +  1 

2+   ... 

By  stopping  off  the  fraction  at  successive  stages,  we  get  a  number  of 
values  i,  i+i,  i+i      ,  etc.,  with  the  following  peculiarities.    The 
2         2+1 

2 

values  are  alternatively  less  and  greater  than  >/2,  and  each  value 
differs  from  N/2  less  than  the  preceding  value  ;  by  carrying  the 
fraction  far  enough,  we  can  get  a  fraction  a/b  such  that  a2/b2  differs 
from  2  by  less  than  any  magnitude  we  please  to  assign.  This  is 
what  we  mean  by  saying  that  \/2  is  the  limiting  value  to  which  the 
fraction  "  converges  "  when  it  is  continued  "  to  infinity."  Now 
in  forming  the  successive  approximate  values,  or  "  convergents," 
we  are  making  closer  and  closer  approximation  to  the  precise 
determination  of  an  "  infinite  great-and-small."  It  is  "  infinite  " 
because  however  many  steps  you  have  taken,  you  never  reach  a 
fraction  which,  when  multiplied  by  itself,  gives  exactly  2  as  the 
product,  though  you  are  getting  nearer  to  such  a  result  at  each 
step.  It  is  "  great-and-small,"  because  the  successive  approxi- 
mations are  alternatively  too  small  and  too  large.  \/2  is,  so  to  say, 
gradually  pegged  down  between  a  "  too  much  "  and  a  "  too  little," 
which  are  coming  closer  together  all  the  time.  I  choose  this  parti- 
cular example  because  this  method  of  finding  the  value  of  what  we 
call  \/2  was  pretty  certainly  known  to  Plato.2 

1  We  must,  of  course,  distinguish  carefully  between  the  notion  of  "  a  "  and 
that  of  "  the  integer  i."     The  latter  is  definable  exactly  as  any  other  integer 
is.     i  is  the  number  of  any  group  x  which  satisfies  the  conditions  that  (a)  there 
is  an  a  which  is  an  x"\  (b)  "b  is  an  x"  implies  "b  is  identical  with  a."     This 
distinction  is  not  yet  clearly  recognized  in  the  Platonic  formula. 

2  The  denominators  and  numerators  of  the  successive  "  convergents  "  are 
the  series  called  in  Greek  respectively  the  irXcvpiKol  and  the  Sia/uLerpiKol  dpiOjuioL. 
The  rule  for  finding  any  number  of  them  is  given  by  Thcon  of  Smyrna  (p.  43-44, 
Hiller).     The  geometrical  construction  by  which  the  rule  was  discovered  is 
given  by  Proclus   (Comm.  in  Eempubl.  ii.  24,  27-29,  Kroll).     The  source  of 
both  Theon  and  Proclus  appears  to  be  the  Peripatetic  Adrastus  in  his  com- 
mentary on  the  Timaeus  (Kroll,  op.  cit.  ii.  393  ff.).     Plato  himself  alludes  to 
the  irXeupt/cof  and  Sia^erpiKoJ  dpifl/xof  at  Rep.  546$  5. 


PLATO  IN  THE  ACADEMY  511 

The  same  point  might  be  similarly  illustrated  by  the  definitions 
given  by  modern  mathematicians  of  the  "  real  numbers."  The 
definitions  are  to  a  certain  point  arbitrary,  but  they  all  turn  on  the 
notion  of  a  "  section."  E.g.  we  cannot  find  a  rational  fraction  the 
"  square  "  of  which  is  exactly  2.  But  we  can  divide  all  rational 
fractions  into  two  classes,  those  of  which  the  "  squares  "  are  less 
than  2  and  those  of  which  the  "  squares  "  are  not  less  than  2.  We 
see  at  once  that  the  first  of  these  sets  has  no  highest  term,  the  second 
no  lowest,  and  that  no  fraction  can  belong  either  to  both  sets  or 
to  neither  set  ;  thus  our  "  section  "  is  unambiguous,  i.e.  every 
fraction  falls  into  one  and  only  one  of  the  two  sets  thus  constituted. 
We  may  then  define  the  "  square  root  of  2  "  either  as  this  "  section  " 
itself,  or,  if  we  prefer  it,  as  the  set  of  "  fractions  whose  squares  are 
less  (or,  if  we  like,  greater)  than  2."  Here  again,  the  notion  of  a 
"  section  "  of  the  rational  fractions  exhibits  the  Platonic  characters. 
It  involves  a  "  duality,"  or  "  great-and-small/'  the  two  sets,  one 
of  which  has  all  its  terms  less  than,  the  other  all  greater  than,  a 
specified  value,  and  the  duality  is  "  indefinite  "  because  one  of  the 
sets  has  no  highest  term,  the  other  no  lowest.  The  section  is  a 
determination  of  the  "  great-and-small  "  of  the  fractions  by  the 
"  one  "  precisely  because  it  makes  an  unambiguous  "  cut  "  just 
where  it  does.  Other  cuts  can  be  made  at  other  places  in  the 
series,  and  each  will  define  a  different  "  real  number."  l 

It  is  clear,  however,  that  we  have  not  yet  exhausted  the  meaning 
of  Plato's  doctrine.  From  Aristotle's  polemic  we  see  that  the 
Platonic  analysis  was  not  meant  to  apply  simply  to  the  case  of  the 
"  irrationals  "  which  Plato  was  the  first  to  recognize  as  numbers. 
The  theory  also  involves  a  doctrine  of  the  structure  of  the  integer- 
series  itself,  since  it  is  clear  that  the  numbers  with  which  the  forms 
are  identified  are,  as  Aristotle  always  assumes,  the  integers.  The 
integers  themselves,  then,  have  the  "  great-and-small  "  and  the 
"  one  "  as  their  constituents.  How  is  this  to  be  understood  ? 

1Cf.  G.  H.  Hardy,  Pure  Mathematics*,  p.  14.  The  "rational  fractions  " 
are,  to  be  sure,  not  a  continuum,  but  they  satisfy  the  only  condition  for  a 
continuum  known  in  Plato's  time,  that  between  any  two  a  third  can  always  be 
inserted.  Stcnzcl  rightly  dwells  on  the  connexion  of  the  "duality"  with 


being"  of  which  we  read  in  the  Sophistes  (Aristot.  Physics,  A  192^  6  ft.). 
The  meaning  of  what  is  said  about  geometry,  plane  and  solid,  in  the  Epinomis 
will  thus  be,  that  the  real  scientific  problem  is  to  obtain  a  series  of  "  approxima- 
tions," within  a  "  standard  "  which  we  can  make  as  narrow  as  we  please,  to 
the  various  quadratic  and  cubic  surds.  In  doing  so,  we  are  discovering  the 
ratios  of  the  "  sides  "  or  "  edges  "  of  the  various  regular  polygons  and  Solids 
to  one  another.  We  discover,  e.g.,  exactly  how  long — within  a  known  "  stan- 
dard " — a  line  must  be  if  the  area  of  the  square  or  volume  of  the  cube  on  it  is 
to  be  2,  3,  5  ...  times  a  given  area  and  volume ;  and  since  all  rectilinear  areas 
and  volumes  can  be  expressed  as  those  of  squares  and  cubes,  this  solves  the 
question  of  the  surveyor  and  the  "  stereometer."  It  is  precisely  with  such 
metrical  problems,  relating  to  the  "  regular  solids,"  that  Euclid's  Book  XIU. 
is  concerned,  a  safe  indication  of  its  Academic  provenance. 


512          PLATO :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

The  difficulty  is  that  the  integers  do  not  form  a  continuum,  even 
in  the  sense  in  which  continuity  means  no  more  than  infinite 
divisibility,  i.e.  the  possibility  of  inserting  a  third  term  between 
any  two  given  terms  of  the  series.  For  each  integer  is  "  next 
after  "  another. 

How,  then^  does  Plato  suppose  the  series  of  integers  to  be  con- 
structed ?  I  doubt  if  the  notices  preserved  to  us  enable  us  to  answer 
the  question  finally.  What  is  clear  is  that  Plato  rightly  rejects 
the  view  retained  by  Aristotle,  that  an  integer  is  a  collection  of 
"  j's,"  and  that  the  series  is  thus  constructed  by  additions  of  i 
to  itself.  2  is  not  "  i  and  i  "  but  "  the  number  next  after  i." 
(This  ought  to  be  plain  from  the  simple  consideration  of  the  way 
in  which  we  learn  to  count.  We  do  not  count,  "  one,  one,  one,  one, 
.  .  ."  but  "  one,  two,  three  .  .  .")  But  when  we  ask  in  what  way 
the  "  duality  "  comes  in  in  constructing  the  series  of  integers,  we 
are  puzzled  by  the  confusion  which  seems  to  run  through  Aristotle 
and  his  commentators  between  the  "  indeterminate  duality  "  or 
"  great-and-small  "  and  the  number  2.  If  it  were  only  in  the 
polemic  of  Aristotle  that  this  confusion  were  found,  we  might 
conceivably  dismiss  it  as  a  mere  misunderstanding,  but  it  appears 
to  have  occurred  also  in  the  Academic  reports  of  Plato's  doctrine. 
The  complete  study  of  the  problem  would  require  a  long  discussion 
of  the  mass  of  material  collected  and  examined  by  M.  Robin  in  his 
volume  La  Theorie  platonicienne.  Here  it  must  be  enough  to 
remark  that  the  following  points  seem  to  be  quite  certain,  (i)  The 
"  dyad  "  was  called  SVOTTOIO'S,  because  it  "  doubles  "  everything 
it  "  lays  hold  of."  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  "  dyad  "  meant  is 
the  "  great-and-small,'1  but  "  it  also  seems  clear  that  there  is  a 
confusion,  perhaps  from  the  very  first,  with  the  avrb  o  Iv-ri  Sua's, 
the  number  2,  and  that  the  function  of  the  "  dyad  "  within  the 
integer-series  is  thought  of  as  being  to  produce  the  series  of 
"powers0  of  2  by  repeated  multiplication,  1x2,  1x2x2, 
1x2x2x2,  and  so  forth  (cf.  Epinomis  9910  i~4).1  (2)  The  "  one," 
we  are  told,  puts  a  stop  to  the  "  indeterminateness  "  of  the  "  great- 
and-small  "  by  "  equalizing "  or  "  stabilizing "  it  (ro>  icm£ei»/).2 
This,  I  suggest,  as  my  conjectural  explanation  of  an  obscure 
expression,  means  that  each  odd  number  is  the  arithmetical  mean 
between  the  preceding  and  following  even  numbers,  and  so 
"halves  their  difference."  Each  odd  number  will  be  got  by 
halving  "  the  sum  of  two  even  "  numbers.  Thus  the  order  of  the 
"  decade "  will  be,  i,  2,  4,  8 ;  3  (which  equalizes  2  and  4) ; 
6  (double  of  3)  ;  5,  7  (which  "equalize"  4  and  6,  and  6  and  8) ; 
10  (double  of  5);  9  (which  equalizes  8  and  io).3  Cp.  Aristotle's 

JCf.  Aristot.  Met.  10840,  5,  10910  12,  10820  14,  9876  33. 

"Plutarch,  de  Anim.  procreat.  10120*,  reporting  the  explanation  of  Xeno- 
crates,  6c  5£  TOVTWV  ytvfoOat  rbv  apiO^bv  rov  &>6s  bpl$ovTos  rb  wXr/flos,  Aristot. 
Met.  M.  10836  23,  29,  where  the  "  unit  "  is  said  to  arise  from  the  "  equal- 
izing "  of  the  "  dyad  "  of  the  great-and-small. 

3  See  Robin,  La  Thforie  platonicienne ,  p.  449.  The  mathematical  reader 
will  see  at  once  a  certain  analogy  between  this  procedure  and  the  "  quadri- 
lateral construction  "  of  von  Staudt. 


PLATO  IN  THE  ACADEMY  513 


use  of  the  "arithmetical  mean"  as  an  "equalizer,"  E.N. 
I  ff.  If  this  was  the  construction,  it  must  be  pronounced  very 
faulty.  Not  only  does  it  involve  the  confusions  of  "  a  "  with  i 
and  of  "  plurality  "  with  2,  but  it  involves  obtaining  the  terms 
of  the  series  in  an  unnatural  order  and  using  more  than 
one  principle  of  construction  where  one  is  sufficient.  (The  one 
really  satisfactory  way  of  defining  the  integers  is  to  proceed  by 
"  mathematical  induction,"  i.e.  to  define  each  in  terms  of  its  im- 
mediate precursor.  This  is  readily  done  in  the  following  way. 
When  we  have  defined  the  integer  nt  we  can  go  on  to  define  n  +  1  by 
the  statement  that  n  +  1  is  the  number  of  members  of  a  group 
satisfying  the  conditions  (a)  that  it  contains  a  group  with  n  mem- 
bers, (b)  that  it  contains  a  member  a  which  is  not  a  member 
of  this  group  ;  (c)  that  it  does  not  contain  any  member  which 
is  neither  a  nor  a  member  of  the  group  of  n  members  already 
mentioned.)  . 

If,  as  seems  probable,  Plato's  conception  has  these  defects,  we 
must  not  be  surprised.  He  probably  started  with  the  right  con- 
viction that  what  we  should  call  the  notion  of  a  "  section  "  is 
necessary  for  the  definition  of  the  "  irrationals,"  and  went  on  to 
extend  the  conception  to  cover  the  case  of  the  integers.  What 
could  not  be  expected  of  the  first  thinker  who  had  formed  the 
notion  of  a  "  real  "  number  is  the  recognition  that  integers,  rational 
fractions,  real  numbers,  do  not  form  a  single  scries,  in  other  words 
that  the  "  integer,"  2,  the  "  rational  number  "  2/1,  and  the  "  real 
number  2  "  are  all  distinct.  In  the  logical  construction  of  the 
types  of  number,  we  need  three  distinct  steps  :  the  rules  for  defining 
the  successive  integers,  the  derivation  of  the  rational  numbers 
from  the  integers,  and  the  derivation  of  the  "  continuum  "  of  the  real 
numbers  from  the  series  of  rational  numbers.  These,  however,  are 
matters  on  which  mathematical  philosophers  have  only  reached 
clear  comprehension  in  very  recent  times.  The  important  point  is 
that  Flato  should  have  grasped  the  necessity  of  enlarging  the 
traditional  conception  of  number  and  of  strictly  defining  numbers  of 
all  kinds.1 

What  are  the  "  mathematical  "  which  Plato  distinguished  from 
his  numbers  or  forms  ?  Aristotle  tells  us  that  they  differ  from 
forms  in  the  fact  that  they  are  many,  whereas  the  form  is  one, 
and  from  sensible  things  by  being  eternal  (Met.  A  9876  15).  It  is 
to  be  noted  that  he  does  not  call  them  "  mathematical  numbers/' 

1  Stenzel,  Zahl  u.  Gestalt,  31,  gives  a  different  construction,  but  without 
justifying  it.  I  venture  to  think  he  has  been  misled  by  an  anxiety  to  discover 
Plato's  number  theory  directly  in  the  Philebus,  where  it  could  not  have  been 
introduced  without  the  dramatic  absurdity  of  putting  it  into  the  mouth  of 
Socrates.  In  the  main,  I  hope  I  am  in  accord  with  Burnet,  Greek  Philosophy, 
Part  I.,  320  ff.  But  I  should  say  that  I  can  make  nothing  of  n.  2  to  p.  320, 
which  manifestly  is  a  non-sens.  It  appears  to  be  a  partially  correct  explanation 
of  something  Aristotle  tells  us  about  the  Pythagoreans,  which  has  got  into  its 
present  place  by  some  inadvertence.  How  can  "  the  one  "  be  the  terms  of  the 
series  ^2,  *J6,  V7?2  .  .  .  ? 


514          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

but  ra  p,aOrjfjLaTiKat  and  that  he  never  appears  to  ascribe  to  Plato 
the  recognition  of  "  mathematical  number"  The  meaning  seems 
to  me  to  be  best  shown  by  two  passages  in  the  Aristotelian  corpus. 
At  Metaphysics  K  10596  2  ff.,  it  is  made  an  objection  to  the  theory 
of  forms  that  just  as  the  fia^cn-iKa  are  intermediate  between  the 
form  and  sensible  things,  so  there  ought  to  be — on  the  theory — 
something  intermediate  between  such  a  form  as  man  or  horse  and 
visible  men  and  horses  (though  we  see  that  there  is  not).  This 
implies  that  the  "  mathematicals  "  are  something  quite  familiar. 
I  would  couple  with  this  de  Anima  A  4046  19,  where  we  are  told  that 
in  ra  TTfpl  <£tAoo-oc/>ias  Aeyo/xci/a  Plato  said  that  the  form  of  animal 
is  composed  of  the  one  and  "  the  first  length,  breadth,  and  depth." 
The  form  of  animal  is,  according  to  the  Timaeus,  the  archetype 
on  which  the  sensible  world  is  constructed,  that  is,  it  is  the  res 
extensa,  the  subject-matter  of  geometry,  and  Aristotle's  meaning 
is  thus  that  this  res  extensa  is  constituted  by  the  three  dimensions 
of  length,  breadth,  and  depth.  These  correspond*,  as  the  context 
of  the  passage  in  the  de  Anima  makes  clear,  to  the  numbers  2,  3,  4 
(the  line  being  determined  by  two  points,  the  plane  by  three,  three- 
dimensional  space  by  four).  Thus  Plato's  construction  recalls  the 
Pythagorean  tetractys  of  the  numbers  I,  2,  3,  4.  But  he  spoke 
not  of  numbers,  but  of  the  first  "  length,  breadth,  depth/'  This 
seems  to  mean  that  though,  as  the  Epinomis  says,  plane  and  solid 
geometry  may  be  identified  with  the  study  of  certain  kinds  of 
number,  lengths,  areas,  volumes  are  not  identical  with  numbers. 
The  study  of  number  provides  the  key  to  all  these  relations,  and 
yet  they  are  not  themselves  numbers,  and  the  significance  of 
number  is  not  exhausted  by  its  geometrical  applications. 

So  we,  too,  are  familiar  with  analytical  geometry  in  which  we 
study  the  properties  of  curves  and  surfaces  by  means  of  numerical 
equations.  All  the  properties  of  the  curves  and  surfaces  can  be 
discovered  from  these  equations,  but  the  application  of  equations 
is  not  confined  to  geometry  or  geometrical  physics  ;  the  same 
methods,  for  example,  play  a  prominent  part  in  the  study  of 
economics,  as  when  we  plot  out  curves  to  show  the  effects  of  modi- 
fications of  duties  on  the  "  volume  "  of  foreign  trade.  In  a  word, 
I  take  it,  the  "  mathematicals  "  are  what  the  geometer  studies. 

We  may  now  perhaps  be  in  a  position  to  see  what  is  meant  by  the 
statement  that  the  constituents  of  the  forms  are  the  constituents  of 
everything.  The  things  of  the  sensible  world,  as  we  have  learned 
from  the  Philebus,  are  one  and  all  in  "  becoming  "  ;  they  are  events 
or  processes  tending  to  the  realization  of  a  definite  law,  and  this 
law,  Plato  thinks,  can  be  expressed  in  numerical  form.  Because 
these  things  are  always  "  in  the  making/'  they  do  not  exhibit 
permanent  and  absolute  conformity  to  law  of  structure  ;  if  once 
they  were  "  made  "  and  finished,  they  would  be  the  perfect  embodi- 
ment of  law  of  structure.  And  because  the  stuff  of  things  is 
extension  itself,  the  law  thus  realized  would  be  geometrical  and 
therefore,  as  we  should  say,  be  expressible  in  the  form  of  an  equation 


PLATO  IN  THE  ACADEMY  515 

or  equations.  This  is  what  Plato  means  at  bottom  in  his  own 
philosophy  by  the  "  participation  "  of  the  sensible  in  forms  and 
by  the  doctrine  that  the  trroix^n  of  number  are  the  crrotxcia  of 
everything.  (I  abstain  from  commenting  on  the  further  numerous 
passages  in  Aristotle  where  the  question  of  the  relation  of  the  dpx<u 
of  geometry  to  those  of  arithmetic  is  raised,  since  these  seem  to  form 
part  of  the  polemic  against  Speusippus  and  Xenocrates,  and  it  is 
not  clear  to  me  how  far  any  of  the  views  canvassed  are  meant  to  be 
directly  ascribed  to  Plato.) 

Aristotle  seems,  as  I  said,  to  connect  his  complaint  about  the 
Academic  "  separation  "  (x^pio-fj.6^)  between  forms  and  sensible 
things  specially  with  the  doctrine  we  have  just  been  discussing.  He 
is  commonly  taken  to  mean  no  more  than  that  the  Platonic  form 
is  a  sort  of  "  double  "  of  the  sensible  thing,  supposed  to  be  in  some 
"  intelligible  world,"  wholly  sundered  from  the  real  world  of  actual 
life.  It  is  hard  to  suppose  that  he  could  put  such  an  interpretation 
on  a  theory  which  according  to  himself  makes  the  a-Toi^a  of  number 
the  a-Toix^a  of  everything.  Hence  I  think  Stenzcl l  is  on  the  right 
track  in  looking  for  a  more  definite  meaning  in  the  Aristotelian 
criticism,  and  that  he  has  rightly  indicated  the  direction  in  which 
we  should  look.  As  he  points  out,  one  of  Aristotle's  chief  difficulties 
about  the  "  numbers  "  is  that  he  holds  that  if  "  animal  "  is  one 
number  and  "  man  "  is  another,  we  have  to  face  the  question 
whether  the  "  units  "  in  "  animal  "  are  part  of  the  "  units  "  which 
constitute  "  man  "  or  not ;  (e.g.  if  you  said  "  animal  "  is  2,  "  man  " 
is  4,  since  2  X2  =4,  "  man  "  would  seem  to  be  the  same  thing  as 
"  animal  "  taken  twice  over).  The  complaint,  as  Stenzel  says,  is 
not  that  an  c?8os  is  treated  as  something  distinct  from  a  sensible 
individual,  but  that  the  more  universal  cufy,  the  yiv-q  as  Aristotle 
calls  them,  are  thought  of  as  though  they  had  a  being  distinct  from 
that  of  the  dro/xov  €t<5o?  or  infima  species.  Aristotle's  point  is  that 
"  animal,"  for  example,  has  no  being  except  as  "  horse,"  "  man," 
"  dog,"  or  one  of  the  other  species  which  can  no  longer  be  divided  into 
sub-species.  This  would  be,  in  effect,  a  criticism  on  the  method 
of  division  as  practised  in  the  Sophistes,  where  it  is  made  a  rule 
that  in  summing  up  the  result  of  the  division  into  a  definition,  all 
the  intermediate  differentiae  which  have  been  employed  must  be 
recapitulated.  This  is  a  procedure  condemned  by  Aristotle's  own 
doctrine  that  a  definition  need  only  state  genus  and  specific  differ- 
ence ;  the  specific  difference  includes  in  itself  all  the  intermediate 
differences.  Hence,  according  to  Stenzel,  the  xMPl(TlJi°<:  °f  which 
Aristotle  complains  is  that  the  Platonic  account  of  "  division  "  as 

1  See  Stenzel,  Zahl  u.  Gestalt,  133  ff.,  with  the  Aristotelian  texts  discussed 
there.  The  all-important  passage  is  Met.  Z  10376  8-1038^  35.  Aristotle 
urges  that  if,  e.g.,  you  first  divide  animals  into  footed  animals  and  animals 
without  feet,  and  then  divide  the  former  into  bipeds  and  others,  the  Platonic 
rule  would  require  you  to  say  that  man  is  a  "  two-footed  footed  animal."  But 
the  determination  "  footed  "  only  exists  actually  as  contained  in  the  more 
specific  determinations  "  two-footed,"  "  four-footed."  The  same  problem 
recurs  in  Met.  H  6,  10450  7  ff» 


516          PLATO  :    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

the  instrument  of  definition  is  fatal  to  the  unity  of  the  definiendum,1 
and,  since  the  process  is  a  direct  outcome  of  the  doctrine  of  /xcfofis, 
the  defect  is  one  which  requires  the  doctrine  of  /xe'0e£is  itself  to 
be  revised.  (Thus  Aristotle's  rejection  of  the  Platonic  doctrine  of 
forms  would  at  bottom  be  based  on  rejection  of  the  logical  tenet 
that  the  relation  of  species  to  genus  is  identical  with  that  of  indi- 
vidual to  species.)  Whether  this  interesting  interpretation  is 
sound  is,  however,  a  question  for  the  student  of  Aristotelianism 
rather  than  for  an  expositor  of  Plato.* 

See  further  : 

BURNET. — Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /.,  312-324  ;    Platonism,  c.  5, 

2,  7- 

NATORP,   P. — Platans  Idcoilehre,  366-436. 

BAKUMKKR,  C.-—Das  Problem  der  Materie  in  der  griechischen  Philo- 
sophic, 196-209. 

STKNZEL,  ].—Zahl  and  Gestalt  bei  Platan  und  Aristoteles.     (1924.) 

ROBIN,  L. — La  Thiorie  platonicienne  dcs  ide'es  ct  des  nombres 
apr?s  Aristote.  (Paris,  1908.) 

MILHAUD,  G. — Lcs  Philosophes-gt?om*tres  de  la  Gr^ce,  Platon  et 
ses  predeccsseurs.  (Paris,  1900.) 

TAYLOR,  A.  E. — Philosophical  Studies,  pp.  91-150. 

THOMPSON,  D'AucY  \V. — "  Excess  and  Defect  "  in  MTND,  N.S., 
149. 

1  Zahl  u.  Gestalt,  126  ff. 

1  It  seems  clear  that  a  definitive  interpretation  of  Plato's  main  thought 
must  start  with  a  thorough  study  of  the  material  collected  in  M.  Robin's  great 
work  La  Thiorie  platonicienne.  It  is  time  that  we  should  make  an  end  of  the 
pretence  of  understanding  Plato  by  ignoring  the  evidence  or  by  arbitrarily 
reading  into  him  the  views  of  our  own  favourite  modern  metaphysicians.  In 
this  brief  chapter  I  have  only  been  able  to  hint  at  the  interpretation  the 
material  suggests  to  myself.  These  hints  I  have  tried  to  develop  briefly  in 
a  notice  of  Stenzcl's  book  in  Gnomon,  ii.  7  (July  1926),  and  more  fully  in  an 
essay  in  MIND,  "Forms  and  Numbers,"  with  reference  to  the  Aristotelian 
evidence.  (See  the  reference  given  above.) 


ADDENDA 

P.  21,  1.  1 8  ff.  It  seems  necessary,  in  view  of  some  criticisms,  to 
say  expressly  that  I  regard  the  date  387  B.C.  as  a  mere  convenient 
"  approximation,"  not  as  the  known  precise  date  of  the  founding  of  the 
Academy.  And,  of  course,  my  language  about  the  long  interruption 
in  Plato's  literary  activity  must  be  understood  with  the  qualifications 

(1)  that  I  expressly  decline  to  commit  myself  to  an  opinion  about  the 
relative  order  of  composition  of  Republic,   Phaedo,   Symposium,   and 

(2)  that  I  never  meant  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  a  minor  "  occasional  " 
violation  of  silence.     On  my  own  view  the  Mene.\enus  would  have  to 
be  dated  c.  380-379.     Understood  in  this  "common-sense"  way,  the 
view  that  "  roughly  speaking  "  the  dialogues  earlier  than  the  Parmenides 
and   Theaetetus  were  written  before  the  foundation  of  the  Academy 
still  seems  to  me  as  probable  as  it  did  to  Burnet. 

P.  207,  1.  26  ff .  The  reality  of  Plato's  own  personal  faith  in  immorta- 
lity is  surely  put  beyond  doubt  by  the  words  of  Kp.  vii.  335^,  "one  must 
put  genuine  faith  in  the  ancient  sacred  sayings  which  indicate  that  our 
soul  is  immortal,  has  to  face  a  judge,  and  pays  the  gravest  penalties 
when  one  has  left  the  body,"  etc.  (neiOeaOm  de  orrax;  del  yQt]  TO  it;  jr«Aa«o/"j 
re  Kdl  iegoit;  Ao'yotg,  ol  df]  firjvvovaiv  r;/i>  dOdvmov  yvyjiv  elvai  fiixacrrds  re 
laxeiv  xai  liveiv  rag  /leyfarag  TijucoQtaq  orav  n<;  dnaMa%Oij  lov  croj/mToc). 

P.  263,  par.  2.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  Gkuicon  of  the  Sympo- 
sium is  not  Plato's  brother,  who  figures  in  the  Republic,  since  (Symp. 
1730)  he,  like  Plato  himself,  was  a  mere  nmq  at  the  date  of  Agathon's 
party. 

P.  263,  par.  2.  Professor  Burnet,  in  the  posthumous  volume  of 
lectures  on  Platonism  delivered  at  the  University  of  California,  expresses 
the  opinion  that  the  Republic  and  consequently  the  Timaeus  are  to 
be  given  a  dramatic  date  anterior  to  the  Archidamian  War  (Platonism, 
PP-  25~26).  This  would,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  be  possible  but  for  one  con- 
sideration. It  would  compel  us  to  hold  that  Perictione,  since  she  was 
the  mother  of  two  sons  who  are  young  men  before  431,  was  at  the  very 
least  over  a  hundred  years  old  in  366,  when  Ep.  xiii  refers  to  her  as 
still  living.  This  is  just  possible,  but  hardly  likely,  and  since  I  am  as 
convinced  as  Burnet  himself  of  the  genuineness  of  Ep.  xiii.,  I  would 
rather  not  follow  him  on  this  point. 

P.  278,  n.  i .  Xenophon  also  (Symp.  ii.  9)  ascribes  to  Socrates  the  thesis 
that  "  woman's  nature  is  not  inferior  to  man's  "  (/}  yvvmxela  fvai<;  ovdev 
%eiQO)v  ir]s  rov  dvdpog  ofiaa  tvyxdvei),  though  she  is  not  his  equal  in 
physical  strength  and  intelligence  (yrco/^^c  re  xai  lo-/vo<;  deirai).  But 
he  may  be  dependent  on  Plato  or  Aeschines,  or  on  both. 

P.  309,  n.  i.  Aeschines  also  in  his  Alcibiades  ascribed  the  "  erotic  " 
temperament  to  Socrates,  with  special  reference  to  his  affection  for 
Alcibiades.  (eycu  <5£  did  TOV  egami  ov  ervy^avov  egcav  'Akxipiddov  ovdiv 

617 


518        PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

&id<poQov  row  Bax%a>v  inen6v6eiv.  Fr.  1 1 ,  Dittmar.  This  evidence  seems 
to  me  to  make  nonsense  of  all  the  inferences  about  the  personality  of 
Plato  which  have  been  drawn  from  the  Phaedrus  and  Symposium. 

P.  450.  In  Platonism  (1928),  p.  106,  Burnet  now  says  that  "  it 
can  be  proved"  that  Plato  "discovered  the  heliocentric  system"  in 
astronomy.  The  evidence  offered  is  simply  the  statement  of  Theo- 
phrastus  discussed  in  our  text.  I  do  not  understand  how  Burnet 
reconciles  this  view  with  his  own  defence  of  the  Epinomis,  in  which 
the  sun  is  still  expressly  treated  as  a  "  planet"  (9866-987^).  I  am 
wholly  in  accord  with  Burnet  about  the  genuineness  of  the  Epinomis 
and  therefore  am  compelled  to  dissent  from  his  attribution  of  "  Coperni- 
canism  "  to  Plato. 

P.  472, 1.  20.  But  it  should  be  remembered,  as  Mr.  Lorimer  reminds 
me,  that  Aristotle  does  once  observe  (Pol.  13296  25)  that  the  various 
arts  of  civilized  life  must  have  been  discovered  "  often,  or  rather  an 
indefinite  number  of  times  in  the  course  of  ages,"  and  "  Ocellus  Luca- 
nus  "  (c.  3)  that  "  Hellas  has  often  been  barbarian,  and  will  often  be 
so  again." 

P.  516,  1.  4.  That  is,  Aristotle's  great  difficulty  with  the  theory  of 
"  forms,"  as  it  seems  to  me,  is  not  so  much  that  there  should  be  a 
"  form  "  of  man,  "  besides  "  Socrates  and  Coriscus,  as  that  there  should 
be  a  "  form  "  of  animal,  "  besides  "  horse,  and  dog  and  man.  That  is 
what  he  is  specially  anxious  to  deny. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE 

B.C. 

428-7.  Plato  born  (Ol.  88,  i).  Fourth  year  of  Archidamian  War ; 
year  following  death  of  Pericles.  Revolt  and  subjuga- 
tion of  Mytilene.  Capture  of  Plataea  by  Peloponnesians. 
Hippolytus  of  Euripides. 

427.  Gorgias  at  Athens  as  envoy  from  Leontini.  Aristophanes' 
first  comedy  (AairaXrjq)  produced. 

425.  Tribute  of  Athenian  allies  raised.  Capture  of  Sphacteria. 
Pan-Sicilian  congress  at  Gela.  Acharnians  of  Aristophanes 
performed.  (?)  Hecuba  of  Euripides. 

424.  Athenian  defeat  at  Delium  (Pyrilampes  wounded.)  Brasidas 
in  the  north.  Loss  of  Amphipolis  and  banishment  of 
Thucydides.  Battle  outside  Megara.  Knights  of  Aristo- 
phanes. 

423.  Year's  truce  with  Sparta.  Revolt  of  Scione.  Clouds  of 
Aristophanes.  Connus  of  Amipsias. 

422.  Death  of  Brasidas  and  Cleon  before  Amphipolis.  (?)  Socrates 
serves  in  this  campaign.  Wasps  of  Aristophanes. 

421.  Peace  of  Nicias  ;  Scione  captured  and  inhabitants  massacred. 
Peace  of  Aristophanes. 

418.  Battle  of  Mantinea ;  Laches  killed,  dioixiaiids  of  Arca- 
dians by  Sparta. 

416.  Melos  captured  by  Athenians  and  inhabitants  massacred.  Tragic 
victory  of  Agathon. 

415.  Mutilation  of  Hermae  and  "profanation  of  mysteries."  Des- 
patch of  Syracusan  expedition  under  Alcibiades,  Nicias  and 
Lamachus  ;  recall  and  disgrace  of  Alcibiades.  Troades  of 
Euripides. 

414.         Birds  of  Aristophanes. 

413.  Final  ruin  of  Syracusan  expedition  ;  deaths  of  Nicias  and 
Demosthenes.  Decelea  occupied  by  Spartans.  (?)  Electra 
of  Euripides.  (?)  Iphigenia  in  Tanris. 

411.  Revolution  of  the  "  four  hundred."  Return  of  Polemarchus 
and  Lysias  from  Thurii.  Thesmophoriazusae  and  Lysistrata 
of  Aristophanes. 

410.         Battle  of  Cyzicus.     Philoctetes  of  Sophocles  (410-9). 

409.         Carthaginian  invasion  of  Sicily  ;  Selinus  and  Himera  destroyed. 

408.         Hermocrates  in  Sicily.     Orestes  of  Euripides. 

407.  Battle  of  Notium.  Return  of  Alcibiades  to  Athens.  Hermo- 
crates killed  in  street-fighting  at  Syracuse. 

406.  Battle  of  Arginusae.  Trial  and  condemnation  of  generals  ; 
protest  of  Socrates.  Deaths  of  Euripides  and  Sophocles. 

405.  Battle  of  Aegospotami.  Dionysius  I  becomes  "  tyrant  "  at 
Syracuse. 

519 


520         PLATO:    THE   MAN  AND   HIS   WORK 

404.         End  of  Peloponnesian  War  ;  Athens  surrenders  to  Lysander. 

Appointment  of  the  "  Thirty  "  ;     murder  of  Polemarchus. 

Affair  of  Leon  of  Salamis  (404-3). 

403.         Fall  of  "  Thirty  "  ;  deaths  of  Critias  and  Charmides.     Restora- 
tion of  democracy  at  Athens. 

401.         Expedition  of  Cyrus  and  battle  of  Cunaxa. 
399.         Trials  of  Andocides  and  Socrates  for  impiety  and  death  of 

Socrates  in  archonship  of  Laches. 
395-87.  Corinthian  War.     Rebuilding  of  Athenian  Long  Walls  (395- 

393).     Pamphlet  of  Polycrates  against  Socrates  (c.  392-390). 

Ecclesiazusae    of    Aristophanes.      Destruction    of   Spartan 

mora  by  Iphicrates  (?392  or  390). 

c.  388.    First  visit  of  Plato  to  Sicily  and  Italy  at  age  of  40.     Tradi- 
tional date  of  capture  of  Rome  by  Gauls. 
387.         Corinthian  War  ended  by  "  King's  Peace."     Approximate  date 

of  foundation  of  Academy. 
385.         Birth  of  Aristotle  at  Stagirus. 
382          Spartan  seizure  of  citadel  of  Thebes  and  political  murder  of 

Ismenias. 

380.         Panegyricus  of  Isocrates. 
379-8.     Spartan  garrison  expelled  at  Thebes   by   Pelopidas   and   his 

associates.     Raid  of  Spartan  Sphodrias  on  Piraeus. 
378.         Alliance  of  Athens   and   Thebes.     Second   Athenian   League 

founded. 

373.         Great  tidal  wave  and  earthquake  on  the  Achaean  coast. 
371.         "  Peace  of  Callias  "   between  Sparta  and  Athens.     Spartan 

power  broken  by  Epaminondas  at  Leuctra.     Liberation  of 

Messene  and  foundation  of  Megalopolis  follow  in  the  next 

year  or  two. 
369.         Spartan  lines  on  Ml.  Oneion  broken  by  Epaminondas.     (Theae- 

tctus  probably  wounded  in  this  campaign.) 
367.         Death  of  Dionysius  I.     Plato  summoned  to  Syracuse  by  Dion. 

Aristotle  enters  Academy.     Traditional  date  of  "  Licmian 

rogations  "  and  defeat  of  Gauls  by  Camillas  at  Alba. 
362.         Battle  of  Mantinea  ;    Epaminondas  killed. 
361-60.  Third  visit  of  Plato  to  Sicily.     Traditional  date  of  penetration 

of  Gauls  into  Campania. 
357.         Capture  of  Syracuse  by  Dion, 
c.  356.     Birth  of  Alexander  the  Great  at  Pella. 
354.         Murder  of  Dion  by  Callippus.     Plato's  VII  Epistle.     Earliest 

extant  speech  of  Demosthenes  (on  the  Symmories.) 
353-         Overthrow  of  Callippus.     Plato's  VIII  Epistle. 
351.        First  Philippic  of  Demosthenes. 
349-8.     Olynthiacs  of  Demosthenes.     Capture  of  Olynthus  by  Philip 

(348). 

347          Death  of  Plato. 
346.         Peace  of  Philocrates.     Philip  acts  as  general  in  the  "  Sacred 

War  "  against  the   Phocians,   becomes  a  member  of  the 

Amphictionic  Council  and  presides  at  the  Pythian  games. 

Temporary  restoration  of  Dionysius  II  at  Syracuse. 
344-3.     Dionysius  finally  overthrown  by  Timoleon.     Aristotle   (343-2) 

at  Pella  as  tutor  to  Alexander. 


APPENDIX 

THE   PLATONIC  APOCRYPHA 

In  using  the  name  Apocrypha  as  a  convenient  collective  designa- 
tion for  those  items  contained  in  our  Plato  MSS.  of  which  it  is 
reasonably  certain  that  they  have  no  real  claim  to  Platonic  author- 
ship, I  make  no  gratuitous  assumption  of  fraudulence  in  their 
writers  or  worthlessness  in  their  contents.  Apart  from  the  collec- 
tion of  Definitions,  which  has  its  own  special  character,  the  Apocrypha 
seem  to  be  undiguised  imitations  of  Platonic  "  discourses  of  Socrates/' 
and  most  of  them  to  be  the  work  of  the  early  Academy  ;  the  attri- 
bution to  Plato  has  arisen  naturally  and  by  accident.  The  works 
in  question  fall  into  three  classes  :  (A)  items  actually  included  in 
the  canon  of  Thrasylus  ;  (B)  the  collection  of  6001  or  definitions, 
which  falls  outside  the  division  into  "tetralogies";  (C)  voOevo/uevoi, 
dialogues  recognized  in  antiquity  as  spurious. 

A.  Dialogues  included  in  the  "  tetralogies,"  but  certainly,  or  all 
but  certainly,  spurious. 

Of  these  there  are  seven :  A Icibiades  /,  A Icibiades  II,  Hipparchus, 
Amatores  (the  whole  of  the  fourth  "  tetralogy  "),  Thcages  ("  tetra- 
logy "  V),  Clitophon  ("  tetralogy"  VIII),  Minos  ("  tetralogy  "  IX). 
All  were  clearly  regarded  as  genuine  by  Dercylides  and  Thrasylus. 
The  only  fact  known  about  their  earlier  history  is  that  Aristophanes 
of  Byzantium  had  included  the  Minos  in  one  of  his  "  trilogies  " 
along  with  the  Laws  and  Epinomis  (D.L.  iii.  62).  Since  we  never 
hear  of  Dercylides  or  Thrasylus  as  introducing  any  items  into  the 
Platonic  canon,  it  seems  reasonable  to  infer  that  the  whole  group 
were  already  accepted  by  the  Alexandrian  scholars  of  the  third 
century  B.C.  and  that  the  composition  of  all  must  therefore  be  dated 
earlier  still.  None  of  the  group  is  certainly  quoted  by  Aristotle, 
or  even  Cicero,1  but  this  proves  nothing  since  none  contains  any- 
thing which  makes  any  difference  to  the  interpretation  of  Plato's 
thought.  As  I  shall  try  to  show,  the  linguistic  evidence  is  also 
decidedly  against  a  late  date  in  almost  every  case  ;  the  Greek 
with  which  these  dialogues  present  us  is  recognizably  that  of  the 
fourth  century. 2  It  follows  that  we  should  assign  their  composition, 

1  The  allusion  of  Cicero,  Tusculans,  iii.  xxxiv.  77,  is  certainly,  that  of 
de  Oratore,  ii.  8  almost  certainly,  not  to  Alcibiades  i,  but  to  the  Alcibiades 
of  Acschines  of  Sphettus. 

3  The  statement  perhaps  needs  a  little  qualification  in  the  case  of  A  lei- 
biades  II,  as  will  be  pointed  out  later. 

521 


522         PLATO:    THE   MAN   AND  HIS   WORK 

speaking  roughly,  to  the  half-century  between  Plato's  death  and 
the  opening  of  the  third  century,  while  one  or  two  may  quite 
possibly  have  been  written  even  within  Plato's  lifetime.  I  shall 
also  try  to  show  that  the  thought  is  quite  Platonic,  though  the 
way  in  which  it  is  presented  is  not  altogether  that  of  the  Master. 
My  own  conclusion  is  that  the  whole  group  is  the  work  of  Platonists 
of  the  first  two  or  three  generations,  intending  to  expound  Aca- 
demic ideas  by  "  discourses  of  Socrates/1  This  thesis  cannot  be 
formally  demonstrated,  but  seems  more  probable  than  either  the 
extreme  view  of  Grote,  who  accepted  the  whole  group  as  Platonic, 
or  the  rival  extreme  view  which  would  bring  some  of  the  items  well 
within  the  Alexandrian  period. 

Alcibiades  I.  This  is  in  compass  and  worth  the  most  important 
member  of  the  group,  as  it  contains  an  excellent  general  sum- 
mary of  the  Socratic- PI  atonic  doctrines  of  the  scale  of  goods  and 
the  "  tendance  "  of  the  soul.  The  Platonic  authorship  has  been 
defended  by  Grote,  Stallbaum,  C.  F.  Hermann,  J.  Adam  and 
recently  M.  Croiset  and  P.  Friedlandcr  ;  Jowett  included  a  version 
in  his  English  translation  of  Plato.  For  my  own  part  I  feel  reluc- 
tantly forced  to  decide  for  rejection  on  the  following  grounds, 
(i)  Close  verbal  study  seems  to  show  that  in  language  the  manner 
is  that  of  the  later  Plato,1  whereas  the  thought  is  that  of  Plato's 
earliest  ethical  dialogues,  and  the  exposition,  at  points,  so  unskilled 
that  a  resolute  defender  is  almost  bound  to  regard  the  dialogue  as 
one  of  the  earliest  of  all.  (2)  It  seems  incredible  that  Plato,  who  has 
given  us  such  vivid  portraits  of  Alcibiades  in  the  Protagoras  and 
Symposium,  should  ever  have  treated  his  personality  in  the  colourless 
fashion  of  this  dialogue.  (3)  It  should  be  still  more  incredible 
that  Plato,  with  his  known  views  on  the  worth  'of  "  text-books/1 
should  have  composed  what  is,  to  all  intents,  a  kind  of  hand-book 
to  ethics.  The  work  has  the  qualities  of  an  excellent  manual, 
and  this  is  the  strongest  reason  for  denying  its  authenticity.  I 
agree,  then,  with  those  who  hold  that  Alcibiades  I  is  a  careful 
exposition  of  ethics  by  an  early  Academic,  written  well  before 
300  B.C.,  and  possibly,  though  perhaps  not  very  probably,  even 
before  the  death  of  Plato.  I  should  say  with  Stallbaum  that  it 
contains  nothing  actually  unworthy  of  Plato,  but  I  am  equally 
satisfied  that  it  contains  echoes  of  Plato  which  are  not  in  the  manner 

1  On  this  question  see  C.  Ritter,  Untersuchungen  iiber  Plato,  89-90  ; 
Raeder,  Platans  philosophische  Entwickelung,  24—25  ;  Lutoslawski,  Origin 
and  Growth  of  Plato's  Logic,  197-198.  I  would  add  that  comparison  with 
the  remains  of  the  Alcibiades  of  Aeschines  and  that  of  Antisthenes  shows 
that  our  dialogue  is  almost  certainly  dependent  on  the  former,  and  possibly 
also  on  the  latter.  Use  of  these  sources  in  this  way  is  barely  credible  in 
Plato.  Also,  Socrates  is  represented  (103^)  as  posing  as  the  tongue-tied 
"  lover  "  of  Alcibiades,  whereas  according  to  Plato  in  the  Symposium  it  was 
rather  Alcibiades  who  posed  as  the  "  beloved  "  of  Socrates.  For  further 
discussion,  and  for  evidence  that  Alcibiades  I  depends  also  on  Xenophon, 
*ee  H.  Dittmar,  Aeschines  von  Sphettos,  163-177. 


APPENDIX  523 

of  a  writer  who  is  echoing  himself.  In  particular,  the  closing  words 
(*35e)  l  can  hardly  be  anything  but  an  allusion  to  Plato's  description 
(Rep.  491  ff.)  of  the  corruption  of  the  young  man  of  genius  by  the 
blandishments  of  that  supreme  sophist,  the  "  public/1  a  passage 
itself  perhaps  inspired  by  the  tragic  career  of  Alcibiades.  There 
are  other  similar  disguised  quotations,  as  we  shall  see. 

The  writer's  purpose  is  to  expound  the  thoughts  that  the  one 
thing  needful  for  true  success  in  life  is  self-knowledge,  that  this 
means  knowledge  of  what  is  good  and  bad  for  our  souls,  and  that 
such  knowledge  is  different  in  kind  from  all  specialism.  Alcibiades 
is  drawn  as  a  young  man  of  boundless  ambition  just  about  to  enter 
on  public  life.  (The  date  assumed  is  the  end  of  his  "  ephebate," 
before  the  outbreak  of  the  Archidamian  War.  Pericles  is  at  the 
head  of  affairs,  1046.)  Socrates,  who  has  long  admired  the  wonderful 
boy  from  a  distance,  is  now  allowed  by  his  "  sign  "  to  express  his 
admiration  for  the  first  time.2  He  knows  that  A.  is  ambitious  to 
become  the  first  statesman  of  Europe  and  Asia,  and  can  help  him 
to  realize  the  dream  if  A.  will  only  answer  his  questions  (103^-1066).  3 
To  succeed  as  a  statesman,  A.  must  be  a  good  adviser  and  so  must 
have  knowledge  which  his  neighbours  have  not,  and  this  knowledge 
must  come  to  him  either  as  a  personal  discovery  or  by  learning 
from  others.  But  none  of  the  things  A.  has  "  learned  "  are  matters 
considered  by  sovereign  assemblies,  and  in  the  matters  which  such 
an  assembly  does  consider  there  are  experts  who  would  be  much 
better  counsellors  than  A.  His  boasted  "  advantages  "  of  person, 
rank,  wealth,  are  irrelevant.  On  what  topics,  then,  would  he  be 
a  competent  adviser  of  the  public  ?  He  says,  "  On  the  conduct 
of  their  own  affairs,  e.g.  the  making  of  war  and  peace."  Yet  it 
is  the  expert  we  need  to  advise  us  whether  it  is  better  to  make  war, 
on  whom,  and  for  how  long.  Our  standard  of  the  "  better  "  is 
supplied  by  the  expert's  rtxvrj.  Now,  what  rs^vr]  is  the  relevant 
one  in  these  questions  of  state  ?  When  we  declare  war,  we  always 
do  so  on  the  plea  that  our  rights  have  been  infringed.  Has  A.,  then, 
ever  learned  "  justice,"  the  knowledge  of  rights  and  wrongs  ?  He 
has  never  received  instruction  in  it,  nor  can  he  have  discovered  it 
for  himself.  To  do  that  he  would  need  first  to  look  for  it,  and  to 
look  for  it  he  must  be  first  awake  to  his  ignorance  of  it.  But  from 
his  childhood  he  has  always  been  wrangling  with  his  companions 


W,  otf  rt  r-j  ay  0tVet  d7ricrrwi>  dXXA    rty    rrjs  ir6\€b)S    opuv  /W/tij*',    /XT) 

t/JLOU  Te  KO.I  (TOV  KpCLTr)O"Q. 

*  1030.     The  representation  that  S.  has  not  spoken  a  word  to  the  lad  for 
years  seems  an  un-Platonic  exaggeration.     Contrart  the  representation  in 
the  Protagoras  which  depicts  a  scene  from  the  same  period  of  the  philosopher's 
lile. 

*  This  self-confidence,  again,  is  not  in  keeping  with  Plato's  conception 
of  Socrates  ;   it  looks  to  be  borrowed  from  the  Socrates  of  Xenophon.     It  is 
definitely  "un-Platonic"  that   Socrates  boasts    (124$)    of   having   God  for 
his  '^guardian,"  with  reference,  as  we  see  by  a  comparison  with  1030  5,  to 
the  "  divine  sign."     God  and  the  "  sign  "  are  never  confused  in  this  way 
in  any  certainly  genuine  work  of  Platp. 


524        PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS   WORK 

about  his  "  rights/'  as  if  he  already  knew  what  they  are  (io6c- 
nod).  And  he  certainly  cannot  have  ''picked  up"  knowledge 
of  right  and  wrong  from  the  "  many  "  at  large,  as  he  has  done  the 
use  of  his  mother-tongue.1  The  "  many "  all  agree  about  the 
meaning  of  vernacular  words,  and  this  is  why  one  can  learn  the 
language  from  them.  Where  their  views  are  at  hopeless  variance, 
they  cannot  be  our  teachers,  and  there  is  nothing  about  which 
they  are  more  at  variance  than  their  "rights"  and  "wrongs." 
A.  then  is  proposing  to  teach  others  what  it  is  not  possible  that  he 
knows  himself  (iioe-ii^a). 

But,  says  A.,  the  politician  need  not  know  what  is  right ;  he 
need  only  know  what  is  expedient.  Well,  if  A.  thinks  he  knows 
what  the  expedient  is,  let  him  answer  one  question  :  Is  the 
expedient  always  the  same  as  the  right  or  is  it  not  ?  A.  thinks 
not,  but  Socrates  is  confident  that  he  can  prove  the  contradictory 
(114^).  The  proof  turns  on  establishing  the  equations  *cdoV  = 
dyaBov,  ala^Qov  =  xaptiv  (114^-1166). 2  He  who  acts  "  finely " 
also  "  does  well,"  i.e.  is  in  possession  of  good*  and  the  good  for  us 
=  the  expedient  for  us.  He  then  who  advises  as  expedient  what  is 
wrong  is  a  bad  adviser.  If  A.  hesitates  whether  to  admit  or  to 
deny  this,  his  very  hesitation  is  a  sign  that  he  is  becoming  conscious 
of  his  ignorance  about  the  most  important  of  all  subjects  (1170). 
He  is  suffering  from  virulent  dfiaOla,  the  common  malady  of 
"  public  men  "  (n8b).  Pericles,  indeed,  is  said  to  have  "  learned  " 
wisdom  from  Anaxagoras  and  Damon.  But  since  he  never  imparted 
"  wisdom  "  to  anyone,  we  may  fairly  doubt  whether  he  had  it.4 
A.  might  reply  that  if  all  our  public  men  are  "  laymen,"  he  need 
not  be  more  than  a  layman  himself  to  compete  with  them.  But 
the  real  antagonists  for  whom  an  Athenian  statesman  needs  to  be 
more  than  a  match  are  foreign  powers,  the  Spartan  and  Persian 
kings.  Both  have  the  advantage  of  A.  alike  in  descent,  in  careful 
preparatory  training  for  their  office,6  in  wealth  and  resources.6 

1  An  echo  of  Protagoras,  3270  ? 

2  Cf.  Gorgias,  474 c. 

3  Cf.  Rep.,  353*  ff . 

4  Cf.  Protagoras,  3195,  Meno,  9$  (both  echoed  by  Ale.  7,  1180). 

5  The  starting-point  for  the  long  and  over-coloured  picture  of  the  educa- 
tion of  a  Persian  king  (which  must  be  meant  ironically)  seems  to  be  Aeschines, 
Fr.  8  (Dittmar),  where  Socrates  ironically  argues  that  Themistocles  must 
have  practised  "  tendance  of  himself  "  before  venturing  to  match  himself 
with  Xerxes.     The  development  of  this  hint  in  our  dialogue  seems  to  reflect 
Xenophon's  romance  of  the  Education  of  Cyrus  (itself  possibly  influenced  by 
the  Cyrus  of  Antisthenes).     Plato's  view  (Laws,  684)  is  that  no  Persian  prince 
ever  receives  any  "  education  "  at  all.     So  far  I  should  accept  the  conclusions 
of  H.   Dittmar,  but  I  am  wholly  sceptical  of  his  further  theory  that  the 
real  object  of  Ale.  I  is  to  discountenance  the  preference  of  Eastern  thcosophy, 
represented  by  Zoroaster,  to  Hellenic  philosophy. 

8  Note  that  the  statements  of  the  dialogue  about  the  wealth  of  Sparta 
would  only  be  true  for  the  period  between  the  surrender  of  Athens  to  Lysander 
and  the  battle  of  Leuctra.  They  are  not  true  for  the  supposed  date  of  the 
conversation. 


APPENDIX  525 

If  one  is  to  compete  with  such  rivals,  the  first  lesson  to  be  learned 
must  be  "  knowledge  of  self "  (the  lesson  of  not  underrating  your 
opponent.) 

How,  then,  must  we  set  to  work  on  the  "  care  "  (empeheia)  of 
ourselves  ?  We  wish  to  be  as  good  as  possible  at  the  goodness  of  a 
nates  xdyaQog,  that  is,  of  a  <j>o6ri/4os,  a  man  of  sound  judgement  in 
all  things.  About  what  things  do  the  KaAoi  xdyadoi,  the  "  virtuous  ", 
show  this  sound  judgment  ?  A.  says,  in  capacity  to  command 
"  men  who  associate  with  one  another  to  transact  the  business  of 
civic  life  "  (125^),  or  more  briefly,  "men  sharing  in  the  constitu- 
tional rights  and  functions  of  citizenship  "  (125^).  The  statesman's 
liyyv}  is  evfiovUa,  "excellence  in  counsel  respecting  the  conduct  and 
safety  of  the  State."  This  safety  depends  on  the  existence  of  <f>dia, 
or  more  precisely,  6p6voia,  "  oneness  of  mind  "between  the  citizens; 
not  the  "  oneness  of  mind  "  secured  by  the  arts  of  number,  weight 
and  measure,  but  the  kind  of  "  oneness  of  mind  "  which  makes  men 
agree  "  in  a  house  "  and  is  the  basis  of  family  affection.  Such 
agreement  implies  that  both  parties  to  it  have  a  "  mind  of  their 
own,"  and  so  differs  from  any  arrangement  by  which  one  party 
leaves  a  matter  of  which  he  is  himself  wholly  ignorant  to  the  sole 
discretion  of  the  other.  That  is  not  what  is  meant  when  justice 
is  said  to  be  "  minding  your  own  business  and  leaving  others  to 
mind  theirs  "  (127^).  (The  exposition  at  this  point  shows  traces 
of  a  confusion  one  would  not  expect  in  Plato.) 

Again  (the  transition  is  oddly  abrupt),  what  is  "care  for  a 
man's  self  "  ?  With  some  needless  elaboration,  we  reach  the  result 
that  to  care  for  a  thing  means  to  make  it  better,  and  that  we  cannot 
tell  what  will  make  a  thing  better  unless  we  know  what  the  thing 
is.  So  our  question  becomes  "What  is  the  self?"  (1280).  It  is 
argued  at  length  that  an  agent  is  never  identical  with  the  tools  he 
uses.  All  of  us  are  constantly  using  our  hands,  eyes,  members 
generally,  as  tools.  The  body  is  thus  an  instrument  used,  and 
therefore  cannot  be  the  agent  who  uses  the  instrument.  The  real 
self,  the  agent  which  "  uses  "  and  "  commands  "  the  body,  must 
be  the  VVM,  and  the  true  definition  of  man  is  that  he  is  a  "  soul 
using  a  body" 1  (1306.)  "  Know  thyself,"  then,  means  "  know  thy 
yv%rj  "  ;  sophrosyne,  the  true  self-knowledge,  must  be  different 
from  any  of  the  "  arts  "  which  "  tend  "  our  bodies  or  our  posses- 
sions. And  to  be  in  love  with  another's  body  is  not  to  be  in  love 
with  him.  (His  body  is  not  really  his  "  person.") 

The  great  business  of  life  is  "self-knowledge,"  the  "  care  "  of 
ourselves  (i32c).2  Now  the  eye  can  see  itself  only  by  looking  at 
its  reflection.  So  the  soul  can  "  see  itself  "  only  by  either  gazing 
at  another  man's  soul,  particularly  at  "  that  region  of  it  where  the 

1  In  refutation  of  the  allegation  that  this  definition,  always  insisted  on 
by  the  Neo-Platonists,  is  "  not  platonic,"  Raeder  properly  refers  to  Phaedo, 
n$c-d. 

*  Cf.  the  reference  to  ^irt/^Xeia  of  the  self  in  Aeschines,  Fr.  8. 


526        PLATO:    THE   MAN   AND  HIS   WORK 

goodness  of  a  soul  is  to  be  found/'  or  contemplating  God,  a  mirror 
of  perfection  brighter  than  any  human  soul.1  We  get  to  know 
ourselves  truly  by  knowing  God  (133^).  Until  we  know  ourselves, 
we  cannot  know  what  is  good  for  ourselves,  for  other  men,  for  the 
State.  Without  such  knowledge,  a  man's  career  will  be  disastrous 
to  himself  and  the  public  (134^).  Thus,  the  true  prosperity  of  a 
city  depends  not  on  its  navy,  but  on  its  virtue  (1346).  2  The  states- 
man must  impart  goodness  to  his  countrymen,  and  he  cannot 
impart  what  he  has  not.  It  must  be  his  first  concern  to  get  good- 
ness by  "looking  to  God,"  Freedom,  the  power  to  make  one's 
will  supreme,  is  a  bad  thing  for  the  ignorant  ;  it  leads  them  to 
disease,  shipwreck,  moral  ruin.  Until  one  has  acquired  goodness, 
servitude  to  a  better,  not  being  "  one's  own  master/'  is  the  condition 
which  befits  one. 

Alcibiades  II.  A  poor  production,  stamped  as  not  Plato's  by 
its  style,  by  manifest  imitations  of  Alcibiades  I,  and,  as  has  generally 
been  admitted  since  Boeckh,  by  a  definite  allusion  to  one  of  the 
Stoic  "  paradoxes/'  3 

The  subject  is  Prayer.  The  writer  seems  to  take  his  cue  either 
from  the  passage  of  the  Memorabilia  where  Xenophon,  who  may 
himself  be  thinking  of  the  closing  words  of  the  Phaedrus,  says  that 
Socrates  "  used  to  ask  the  gods  simply  to  give  him  good  things, 
since  they  know  best  what  things  are  good/'  and  thought  it  perverse 
to  pray  "  for  gold  or  silver,  or  a  tyranny,  and  things  of  that  kind,"  4 
or  possibly  from  Laws,  68gc-e,  where  the  speaker  expresses  the  same 
view.  A.  is  about  to  pray.  Now,  some  prayers  are  granted,  others 
are  not.  So  a  man  should  be  careful  not  to  ask  what  is  bad  for 
him  ;  his  god  might  happen  to  be  in  a  giving  mood  and  take  him 
at  his  word,  as  happened  to  Oedipus.  5  A.  says,  Oedipus  was 
notoriously  "  a  mere  lunatic."  This  raises  a  problem.  "  Lunatic  " 
is  the  contrary  of  "  sane."  But  mankind  may  be  divided  into  two 
classes  which  allow  of  no  tertiiwi  quid,  the  faonpoi,  men  of  sound 
judgement,  and  the  afaoves,  men  of  unsound  judgement.  On  the 


1  The  argument  presupposes  the  doctrine  of  the  Laws  which  identifies 
God  with  the  apiary  ^vxy- 

2  A  plain  allusion  to  the  language  of  Gorgias,  5190,  a  passage  which  seems 
to  be  in  the  writer's  mind  all  through  his  own  account  of  "  sophrosyne  and 
justice." 

3  On  these  points  see  Stallbaum's  Introduction  to  his  Commentary  on  the 
dialogue,  and  for  remarks  on  the  language,  C.  Ritter  (Untersuchungen,  88-89), 
who  accepts  Stallbaum's  objections  to  several  words  and  phrases,  but  owns 
that  the  dialogue  would  not  be  condemned  by  his  own  stylometric  tests  — 
a  significant  confession. 

4  Xenophon,  Mem.  i.  iii.  2,    i^xero  §£  irp6s  TOI)S  0eoi>s  airXws  rd^a^A  dtdovai, 
ws  rot)?  0foi>s  KdXXurra  e/56ras  biroid  &yaOd  tern.     This  perhaps  explains  why  the 
dialogue  was  attributed  by  some  persons  to  Xenophon  (Athenaeus,  5060), 
with  whose  manner  it  has  no  affinity. 

6  Who  prayed  that  his  sons  might  divide  their  inheritance  by  the  sword. 
The  writer  follows  the  version  of  the  story  which  accounts  for  the  imprecation 
as  due  to  mere  insanity.  Cf.  Frs.  2  and  3  of  the  Thebais,  often  regarded 
in  antiquity  as  "  Homeric." 


APPENDIX  527 

principle  that  "one  term  has  one,  and  only  one,  opposite/'  it  looks 
as  though  this  means  that  all  men,  except  the  few  fadvipot,  are 
lunatics.      But  this  thesis  can  hardly  be  sound  ;   if  all  men  were 
lunatics,  we  could  not  mix  with  them,  as  we  do,  with  safety  to  life 
and  limb.     (Thus  the  writer  knows,  and  goes  out  of  his  way  to 
attack,  the  Stoic  tenet  that  na$  cifiQwv  /-tmVercu,  every  one  but  the 
ideal  "  sage  "  is  out  of  his  wits.)     We  may  urge  that  there  are  many 
bodily  ailments,  many  trades  ;  but  no  invalid  has  all  the  diseases, 
no  tradesman  follows  all  the  trades,  at  once.     So  there  are  many 
degrees  of  "  want  of  sense/'  from  mere  dullness  to  stark  lunacy,  and 
so  lack  of  judgement  must  not  be  equated  with  lunacy  (138^-140^). 
The  ^QOVL^OI  are  those  who  know  "  what  is  proper  to  do  and 
say/'     The  ftfaoveg  do  not  know  this,  and  so  unintentionally  do 
and  say  what  they  should  not.     Oedipus  does  not  stand  alone 
in  this.     If  a  god  appeared  to  Alcibiades  himself  and  offered  to  make 
him  autocrat  of  Athens,  or  Hellas,  or  Europe,  A.  would  probably 
think  he  was  offered  a  great  boon.     Yet  the  power  and  splendour 
of  the  position  would  be  no  true  boon  to  one  who  had  not  the 
knowledge  how  to  use  it.     A  tyranny  may  prove  fatal  to  the  reci- 
pient, as  was  the  case  with  the  murderer  of  Archelaus  ;  he  was 
himself  murdered  after  a  reign  of  three  clays.1     Many  Athenian 
citizens  have  been  undone  by  attaining  high  office  ;   children  may 
prove  a  curse  to  those  who  have  prayed  for  them.     The  poet  who  asks 
Zeus  simply  to  give  him  what  is  good  and  withhold  what  is  bad, 
even  if  he  asks  it,  speaks  like  a  wise  man  (1400-1430).    What  ignorance 
is  thus  shown  to  be  so  bad  for  us  ?     Some  ignorance  may  be  better 
for  us  than  knowledge.     If  A.— the  example  is  un-Platonic  in  its 
bad  taste — formed  a  murderous  design  on  his  guardian  Pericles,  it 
would  be  better  that  he  should  lose  the  power  of  recognizing  Pericles 
when  he  meets  him.     Knowledge  of  other  things,  not  accompanied 
by  knowledge  of  good,  is  most  often  harmful.     It  is  better  not  to 
know  how  to  do  a  thing,  unless  you  also  know  whether  it  is  good 
to  do  that  thing.     Mere  professional  skill  does  not  make  men  ^QOVI^OI  ; 
the  national  life  of  a  society  of  "  professional  experts  "  destitute 
of  the  knowledge  of  good  would  not  be  admirable  (1436-1466). 
Most  men  have  not  the  knowledge  which  would  tell  them  whether 
what  they  do  "  skilfully  "  (nQoXeiQ^)  is   really  beneficial.     So  it 
is  better  that  the  "  many  "  should  neither  have  nor  fancy  them- 
selves to  have  a  professional  skill  which  they  would  be  sure  to 
misuse.     Hence  the  importance  of  knowledge  of  good  in  private 
and  public  life.     If  it  is  wanting,  the  fresher  the  breezes  of  fortune 
blow,  the  graver  the  peril.     Horner  hinted  at  this  when  he  said  of 
Margites  that  he  "  knew  a  lot  of  things,  but  knew  them  all  badly" 
(1436-147*).* 

1  This  is  a  bad  anachronism,  since  Archelaua   was  killed  in  399,  some 
years  after  the  death  of  Alcibiades,  who  is  a  mere  boy  in  the  dialogue. 

2  TTuXV  r)irlffTa.To  (pya,  Kaicd*   5*  rjirlffraTo  irdi'To..    The  forced  interpretation 
of  Kaffutt  as  "  to  his  own  hurt  "  looks  like  an  imitation  of  the  whimsicalities 
of  Socrates'  exposition  of  Simonides  in  the  Protagoras. 


528        PLATO:    THE  MAN   AND   HIS   WORK 

A.  now  thinks  that  he  would  not  jump  blindly  at  the  offer  of  a 
"  tyranny,"  and  approves  the  wisdom  of  the  unnamed  poet  whom 
Socrates  had  quoted.  The  Spartans,  Socrates  adds,  show  a  like 
wisdom.  Their  only  public  prayer  is  a  brief  petition  for  «aA<i  eV 
dyafloig,  the  honestum  et  bonum.  There  is  a  tale  that  the  Athenians 
once  asked  the  oracle  of  Ammon  why  Heaven  favours  the  Spartans 
who,  in  spite  of  their  wealth,  are  niggardly  with  sacrifices,  more 
than  the  liberal  Athenians.1  The  oracle  answered  that  the  Spartan 
ev(f>r)[i(a — by  which  it  presumably  meant  the  decency  of  the  prayer 
just  mentioned — is  more  pleasing  than  all  burnt-offerings.  In  the 
same  spirit  the  gods  rejected  the  costly  offerings  of  Priam.  They 
are  not  to  be  bribed,  and  they  look  at  our  souls,  not  our  gifts 
(148^-1506). 

A.  would  do  well,  then,  to  postpone  his  prayer  until  he  has 
learned  to  pray  aright.  But  who  will  teach  him  ?  "  Your  sincere 
well-wisher/'  says  Socrates,  "  but  there  is  a  mist  which  must  first 
be  removed  from  your  soul/'  A.  rewards  these  words  of  encourage- 
ment by  "  crowning  "  Socrates  with  the  garland  he  had  meant  to 
wear  while  praying,  and  Socrates  fatuously  accepts  the  compliment. 
(A  tasteless  reminiscence  of  the  Platonic  playful  "  crowning  "  of 
Socrates  by  the  drunken  Alcibiades,  Sympos.  2i^d-e.} 

The  very  poor  dialogue  is  dependent  on,  and  therefore  later 
than,  Alcibiades  I.  Besides  the  echoes  already  mentioned,  we 
note  that  the  juawo/tevov  avd^wnov  of  1380  6,  said  of  Oedipus,  is 
a  verbal  imitation  of  the  use  of  the  same  phrase,  "  a  mere  lunatic," 
with  reference  to  Alcibiades'  own  brother  at  Ale.  I,  uSe  4.  The 
ill-managed  fiction  of  the  god  who  offers  A.  the  "  tyranny  "  of 
Athens,  Hellas,  or  Europe,  is  founded  on  what  is  said  more  naturally 
of  A/s  own  day-dreams  at  Ale.  /,  io$b-c. 

It  is  still  more  significant  that  the  discussion  of  the  Stoic 
"  paradox  "  is  forcibly  dragged  into  the  argument  at  its  very  open- 
ing. Oedipus  is  mentioned  merely  to  give  an  opening  for  the 
remark  that  he  was  "  crazy,"  and  the  nominal  main  argument 
is  kept  standing  still  while  Socrates  goes  off  at  a  tangent  to  discuss 
the  irrelevant  question  whether  all  unwise  persons  are  "  crazy  "  too. 
The  writer  thus  betrays  the  fact  that  his  real  concern  is  to  attack 
the  Stoics.  This  shows  that  he  is  not  writing  before  some  date 
when  Stoicism  was  already  in  existence,  i.e.  not  before  the  early 
decades  of  the  third  century.  In  the  time  of  Arcesilaus,  president 
of  the  Academy  from  276  to  241  B.C.,  anti-Stoic  polemic  became  the 
main  business  of  the  school.  It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the 
polemic  may  not  have  begun  rather  earlier. 

Linguistic  considerations  do  not  take  us  far.  Stallbaum  pro- 
duces a  respectable  "  haul  "  of  alleged  non-Platonic  words  and 
phrases,  but  forgets  that  many  of  these  may  only  go  to  show  that 
the  writer  was  a  poor  stylist,  without  throwing  any  light  on  his 

1  The  reference  to  Spartan  wealth  is  another  anachronism,  taken  pretty 
obviously  from  Ale.  /. 


APPENDIX  529 

date,  while,  in  one  or  two  cases,  the  text  is  not  certainly  sound. 
No  great  weight  can  be  attached  to  his  point  that  the  use  of  the 
word  neyaMyvxo;  at  1400  for  a  "  megalomaniac  "  is  singular.  This 
might  well  be  a  polite  euphemism — it  is  given  as  one — in  any  age. 
It  is  urged  that  the  plural  ovdeves  is  found  twice  (1480,  0).  But 
the  same  form  occurs  also  in  Plato  (Euthydemus,  305^,  Timaeus, 
2ob,  Ep.  vii.  3440)  and  in  Isocrates,  and  I  take  its  double  appearance 
in  a  single  half-page  of  Ale.  II  to  be  due  to  conscious  imitation. 
The  forms  djioxQidfjvai  (1490),  oldapev  (141  £,  142^)  are  definitely  not 
clasvsical  Attic,1  but  the  majority  of  the  Academy  were  never  Athe- 
nians. Aristotle,  for  example,  was  an  Ionian  and  constantly 
betrays  the  fact  by  his  vocabulary.  Too  much  has  been  made  of 
the  employment  (1400,  1500)  of  rv%6v  in  the  adverbial  sense  of 
"  perhaps."  This  is  not  usual  in  good  classical  Attic,  but  there  is 
at  least  one  example  in  Isocrates.2  By  comparison  with  such  early 
specimens  of  the  xoivrj  as  the  extant  remains  of  Epicurus,  Ale.  II 
might  almost  be  called  Attic.  Hence  I  think  it  should  not  be 
confidently  dated  too  late  in  the  third  century.  It  may  belong  to 
any  time  soon  after  the  first  rise  of  Stoicism. 

Amatores  (or  Rivales.  The  title  is  'EgaaTai  in  the  famous  MSS. 
BT,  'AvTEQaaral  in  the  margin  of  B). 

The  scena  is  the  school  of  the  reading-master  Dionysius,  said 
by  Diogenes  and  others  (D.L.  iii.  5)  to  have  been  Plato's  own  first 
teacher.  Two  boys  are  disputing,  apparently  on  a  point  of  geo- 
metry. Socrates  is  told  by  the  "  lover  "  of  one  of  them  that  they 
are  "  chattering  philosophy  "  about  "things  on  high  "  (rd  jierecoQa). 
The  tone  of  the  remark  leads  him  to  ask  whether  philosophy  is  a 
thing  to  be  ashamed  of.  The  "  lover's  "  rival  is  surprised  that 
Socrates  should  act  so  much  out  of  character  as  to  put  this  question 
to  a  man  who  leads  the  life  of  a  voracious  and  sleepy  athlete.  This 
new  speaker  is  a  votary  of  "  music/'  as  the  other  is  of  "  gymnastic.1' 
His  opinion  is  that  philosophy  is  so  divine  a  thing  that  a  man  must 
be  less  than  human  if  he  disprizes  it.  But  what  is  this  "  philo- 
sophy "  ?  "  What  Solon  meant  when  he  spoke  of  '  learning  some- 
thing fresh  every  day  of  one's  life  '."  3  Yet,  is  it  so  clear  that 
philosophy  is  simply  identical  with  multifarious  learning  ? 4  We 
are  used  to  think  that  philosophy  is  for  the  soul  what  exercise  is 
for  the  body.  If  so,  "  polymathy  "  must  be  the  mental  counterpart 
of  noXvnovia,  excessive  exertion,  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether 
this  latter  is  a  good  thing.  The  cultivated  "  lover  "  feels  bound, 

1  The  first  may  be  a  vulgarism,  the  second  is  Ionic.  Yet  before  the  time 
of  the  New  Comedy  oI5as  is  found  once  in  Euripides,  once  (probably)  in 
Xenophon  ;  oldaficv  once  in  Antiphon  (the  orator),  once  (probably)  in 
Xenophon. 

8  Isocr.  iv.  171,  rvxbv  &v  ykp  Av  n  (rvvcirtpavav.  Cf.  Xenoph.,  Anab.  vi.  I, 
2O,  vofjil^wv  .  .  .  TVX&I'  t>€  Kal  dyaffov  rii/os  SLV  atnosry  arpari^yfv^affat. 

3  Solon,  Fr.  2,  yrjpdffKa)  d'  alti  TroXXd  didavKb^vos. 

*  TroXvfjLaOia  (133$).  The  allusion  is  to  Heraclitus,  Fr.  16  (By water),  TTO\* 
i  v6ot> 


680        PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

as  a  fair-minded  man,  to  allow  that  nolvnovta  may  be  good,  though 
the  admission  goes  against  his  personal  bias.  His  "  athletic " 
rival  takes  a  different  view.  As  all  experts  know,  it  is  "  moderate  " 
exertion  which  keeps  the  body  fit  ;  even  a  hog  has  the  sense  to 
understand  that.  In  that  case,  may  we  not  argue  by  analogy  that 
it  is  not  excessive  but  moderate  " studies"  (/^adij^ara)  that  are 
good  for  the  soul  ?  This  question  leads  straight  up  to  another : 
Who  is  the  expert  who  determines  what  is  the  right  measure  in  the 
matter  of  studies  ? 

Again,  tohat  studies  would  a  true  lover  of  wisdom  regard  as 
most  important  ?  The  "  musician  "  says,  "Those  which  will  win 
you  the  highest  reputation."  A  philosopher  should  be  at  home  in 
the  "  theorick  "  of  all  the  professions,  or  at  least,  of  those  which 
are  in  high  consideration,  though  he  should  not  stoop  to  meddle 
with  their  manual  part.  He  should  know  them  as  the  "  master- 
builder  "  *  knows  his  business  (1356-^).  But  can  a  man  be  really 
proficient  in  the  theory  of  two  professions  at  once  ?  Only  if  we 
concede  that  the  philosopher  need  not  have  the  "  finished  "  know- 
ledge of  a  great  specialist,  but  such  an  amateur's  knowledge  as  will 
enable  him  to  follow  the  discourse  of  the  specialist  intelligently 
and  form  a  sound  judgement  on  it.  That  means,  says  Socrates, 
the  philosopher  is  to  the  great  specialist  what  a  "  pentathlist  "  is 
to  a  first-rate  boxer  or  wrestler.  He  is  not  supreme  in  any  one 
speciality,  but  a  good  second-rate  man  in  several  (1360).  As  he  is 
not  subdued  to  any  speciality,  he  is  not  circumscribed  by  any.2 
But  what  is  the  good  of  his  philosophy  ?  We  do  not  want  to  trust 
a  second-rate  physician  when  we  are  ill,  nor  a  second-rate  navigator 
when  we  are  in  danger  on  the  sea.  If  the  philosopher  is  first-rate 
at  nothing,  life  has  no  place  for  him  ;  this  seems  fatal  to  the  con- 
ception of  him  as  an  all-round  "  intelligent  amateur  "  (1376). 

Let  us  make  a  fresh  start.  In  the  case  of  our  domestic  animals, 
there  are  two  sides  to  the  professions  which  "  tend  "  them.  The 
expert  knows  a  good  horse  or  dog  from  a  bad  one  better  than  other 
men;  he  also  "  disciplines,"  or  "corrects"  (*cadfei),  the  animals 
under  his  care.  What  "  art  "  similarly  "  corrects  "  human  beings  ? 
Justice,  the  "  art  "  of  the  dicast ;  hence  we  should  presume  that 
the  practitioners  of  this  art  also  know  a  good  man  from  a  bad  one. 
The  layman  in  the  art  is  ignorant  even  of  himself,  does  not  know 
the  true  state  of  his  own  soul.  This  is  why  we  say  that  he  has  not 
sophrosyne  ;  by  consequence,  to  have  sophrosyne  will  mean  to  be  a 
practitioner  of  the  art  we  have  just  called  justice,  the  art  of  true 
self-knowledge.  We  call  this  art  sophrosyne  because  it  teaches  us 
to  know  ourselves,  and  also  justice,  because  it  teaches  us  to  "  cor- 
rect "  what  we  discover  to  be  amiss  (138^).  Since  the  life  of  society 

1  A  tell-tale  allusion  to  Politicus,  2590  ft.  ? 

a  This  reminds  one  of  the  unnamed  person  described  at  the  end  of  the 
kuthydemus  as  being  on  the  border-line  between  politics  and  philosophy  (see 
supra,  p.  101).  I  suspect  the  writer  means  to  recall  that  passage. 


APPENDIX  581 

is  kept  sound  by  the  employment  of  this  "  correction/'  we  may  also 
call  this  same  self-knowledge  "  politics,"  the  art  of  the  statesman, 
or,  when  it  is  practised  by  one  man  for  the  whole  community,  the 
art  of  the  king,  or  even  of  the  autocrat  (ctiQawog).  It  is  the  same 
art  which  is  exercised  on  a  smaller  scale  in  regulating  a  household. 
So  we  may  say  that  the  "  master,"  the  householder,  the  statesman, 
the  king,  the  autocrat  are  all  specialists  in  an  "  art  "  whose  true 
name  is  indifferently  sophrosyne  or  justice.  The  expert  in  this  art 
is  the  person  whose  discourse  a  philosopher  must  be  able  to  follow, 
and  on  whose  results  he  must  be  able  to  pass  a  sound  judgement 
(138^).  What  is  more,  the  philosopher  ought  to  be  himself  a 
first-rate  practitioner  of  it  (ib.  e),  and  this  disposes  of  the  attempt 
to  identify  the  philosopher  with  the  all-round  connoisseur. 

The  purpose  of  the  little  work  is  clearly  to  set  the  Platonic  con- 
ception of  philosophy  as  the  knowledge  of  the  good,  with  its  corol- 
lary, the  identification  of  the  true  philosopher  and  the  true  king, 
in  sharp  contrast  with  the  shallower  conception  of  philosophy  as 
"  general  culture."  The  great  representative  of  this  view  of  philo- 
sophy in  Attic  literature  is  Isocrates,1  and  I  think  the  'EQcundi  may 
fairly  be  described  as  a  pleasing  essay  on  the  superiority  of  the 
philosophy  of  the  Academy  to  the  thing  called  by  the  same  name 
in  the  school  of  Isocrates.  This  may  have  some  bearing  on  the 
date  of  the  composition.  The  tension  between  Isocrates  and  the 
Academy  seems  to  have  reached  its  maximum  in  the  last  years  of 
Plato's  life,  when  Aristotle  was  coming  into  prominence  as  a  rival 
teacher  of  "  rhetoric."  It  is  natural  to  regard  our  dialogue  as  a 
contribution  to  the  Academic  side  of  the  controversy,  a  view  borne 
out  by  the  complete  absence  of  all  linguistic  traces  of  later  date. 
The  explicit  recognition  of  the  "  tyrant "  as  a  practitioner  of 
"  sophrosyne  and  justice  "  indicates  a  more  favourable  view  of 
"  personal  rule  "  than  anything  to  be  found  in  Plato.  Unless  it 
is  to  be  taken  as  mere  irony,  it  seems  to  imply  that  the  writer 
regards  an  autocracy  as  a  fait  accompli  of  which  he  definitely 
approves.  He  also  retains  the  demand  that  the  philosopher  ought 
to  be  himself  a  "  ruler,"  disregarding  the  modified  view  of  the  Laws, 
where  the  philosopher  acts  as  the  sovereign's  adviser  and  coadjutor. 
May  we  infer  that  he  is  unacquainted  with  the  Laws  and  therefore 
presumably  writing  before  their  circulation  ?  2  The  facts  would, 

1  Burnet,  Greek  Philosophy,  Part  /,  215. 

1  See  the  remarks  of  Jaeger,  Aristoteles,  53-60,  on  the  relation  between 
Aristotle's  Protrepticus  and  [Isocr.]  I.  The  Panathenaicus  of  Isocrates  is  a 
contribution  to  the  controversy  ;  the  "  sophists  "  of  whom  he  complains 
there  as  rivals  and  critics  are  unmistakably  the  Academy.  I  suggest  that 
the  'E/jaorraf  belongs  somehow  to  the  same  "  war  of  pamphlets."  There  ia 
a  remark  ascribed  (D.L.  ix.  37)  to  Thrasylus  that  etircp  oi'AvTepavTal  nXdrw^6s 
eiffi,  the  "  lover  "  to  whom  Socrates  makes  the  suggestion  that  the  philo- 
sopher is  a  kind  of  "  pentathlist,"  must  be  Democritus.  This,  as  it  stands, 
is  nonsense.  Perhaps  Thrasylus  really  said,  what  is  true,  that  Democritua 
was  the  kind  of  "  all- round  man  "  whom  Socrates  has  in  view  I  think  with 


532         PLATO:    THE   MAN   AND  HIS    WORK 

I  think,  fall  into  line  if  we  supposed  the  writer  to  be  connected 
with  the  Academic  group  formed,  at  the  end  of  Plato's  life,  at 
Assos  under  the  protection  of  the  converted  "  tyrant  "  Hermias  of 
Atarneus.  I  offer  this  suggestion  for  whatever  it  may  be  worth. 

Theages.  The  main  object  of  the  work  seems  to  be  to  relate  a 
number  of  anecdotes  about  Socrates'  "  sign."  Theages,  son  of 
Demodocus  (perhaps  the  general  of  the  year  425-4  mentioned  at 
Thuc.  iv.  75),  is  twice  named  in  Plato  (Apol.  33^,  Rep.  4966). 
From  these  references  we  learn  that  he  suffered  from  delicate 
health  and  was  dead  in  399.  According  to  the  Republic,  he 
might  have  been  lost  to  philosophy  but  for  the  invalidism  which 
kept  him  out  of  public  life.  In  the  Theages  he  is  a  mere  lad  whose 
future  destination  is  giving  his  father  some  anxiety.  There  is 
no  indication  of  dramatic  date  except  that  in  1270,  apparently 
verbally  echoed  from  Apol.  ige.  Prodicus,  Polus  and  Gorgias  are 
all  assumed  to  be  present  in  Athens.  The  piece  can  hardly  be 
said  to  have  an  argument.  Demodocus  thinks  that  nothing  would 
prepare  his  son  for  a  great  career  so  well  as  association  with  Socrates. 
But,  says  S.,  my  young  friends  do  not  always  benefit  by  my  society  ; 
everything  depends  on  the  "  divinity."  My  "  sign  "  sometimes 
interferes,  and  it  is  always  lost  labour  to  disregard  it.  Charmides 
neglected  my  advice  not  to  train  for  the  foot-race  at  Nemea  and 
had  reason  to  be  sorry  for  it.  Timarchus  insisted  on  leaving  a 
dinner-party  to  keep  an  engagement  in  defiance  of  the  "  sign." 
The  "engagement"  was,  in  fact,  to  assist  in  an  assassination, 
and  Timarchus  afterwards  confessed,  on  the  way  to  execution,  that 
he  had  done  wrong  to  disregard  my  warnings.  The  "  sign  "  also 
predicted  the  great  public  disaster  at  Syracuse.  Aristides,  grandson 
of  the  great  Aristides,  made  famous  progress  while  he  was  with 
me,  but,  in  a  short  absence,  forgot  all  he  had  learned,  though 
Thucyclides  (the  grandson  of  Pericles'  opponent)  was  associating 
with  me  to  his  great  advantage.  Aristides  explained  that  he  had 
never  directly  learned  anything  from  me,  but  found  his  own  intelli- 
gence mysteriously  aided  by  being  in  the  same  room  with  me. 

All  through  this  conversation  there  are  recognizable  borrowings 
from  the  Platonic  dialogues.  The  "  sign  "  is  described  (i28d)  in 
+he  actual  words  of  Apol.  $id  ;  the  statement  that  it  warned  S. 
that  some  lads  would  not  benefit  by  his  company  is  taken  from 
Theactet.  1510,  and  the  anecdote  about  the  boys  Aristides  and 
Thucydides  has  been  constructed  by  combining  that  passage  with 
the  Laches,  where  these  two  lads  are  introduced  to  S.  by  their 
fathers.  There  is  an  allusion  to  the  usurpation  of  Archelaus  (124^) 
which  verbally  reproduces  Gorg.  470^.  Theages,  like  the  young 

Grote  that  the  words  e?7re/>  KT\.  need  not  indicate  any  doubt  of  the  genuine- 
ness of  the  dialogue.  They  may  quite  well  mean,  "  Since,  as  every  one 
knows,  the  work  is  Plato's."  The  object  may  be  to  argue  that  Plato  has 
made  Socrates  allude  to  Democritus.  This  would  be  a  retort  to  the  charge 
that  Plato  ignores  Democritus  out  of  envy  (D.L.  iii.  25). 


APPENDIX  533 


Alcibiades  of  Ale.  I,  would  like  to  be  a  x^avroc,  "  and  so,  I  am  sure," 
he  says,  "  would  you,  or  any  one  else  "  (1250).  All  these  passages 
are  ultimately  borrowings  from  Gorg.  469^.  There  is  one  glaring 
anachronism,  a  reference  to  the  mission  of  Thrasylus  to  Ionia  in 
the  year  409.  x  Since  the  Republic  manifestly  speaks  of  Theages 
as  a  grown  man,  the  reference  to  the  Sicilian  disaster  is  probably 
a  second.  The  curious  theory  of  1295  ff.  that  the  "  sign  "  could 
infect  the  associates  of  S.  with  intelligence  is  unlike  anything  in 
Plato,  but  we  may  take  it  as  indicating  Academic  authorship  that, 
in  spite  of  its  wonderful  stories,  the  Theages  agrees  with  Plato  against 
Xenophon  that  the  "  sign  "  gave  no  positive  recommendations 
(128^). 

Stallbaum  2  had  a  theory  which  would  bring  the  Theages  down 
to  a  very  late  date.  He  argues  that  the  opening  for  its  composition 
was  provided  by  the  words  of  Theaetet.  150^,  where  Socrates  says 
that  those  of  his  young  friends  "  to  whom  God  permits  it  "  (oloneQ  av  6 
Oeos  naQetxrj)  make  great  progress.  Our  writer  wrongly  supposed 
that  "  God  "  here  means  the  "  sign,"  which  has  nothing  to  do  with 
the  matter.  This  shows  that  he  was  influenced  by  the  Stoic  faith 
in  prophecies,  divination  and  omens.  We  know  from  Cicero  3  that 
Antipater  of  Sidon,  a  Stoic  of  c.  150  B.C.,  related  curious  tales  about 
the  "  divination  "  of  Socrates,  and  may  infer  that  the  stories  of 
the  Theages  come  from  him.  Hence  the  work  is  not  earlier  than 
150  B.C.  Stallbaum  reinforces  this  argument  by  producing  a 
longish  list  of  suspicious  words  and  phrases. 

I  see  no  force  in  this  reasoning,  which  starts  with  a  bad  blunder. 
Stallbaum  has  forgotten  the  statement  of  the  Theaetetus  (1510) 
about  the  warnings  of  the  "  sign  "  which  is  our  author's  real  starting- 
point.  There  is  no  misunderstanding  of  the  Theaetetus  in  the 
Theages.  Also  it  is  antecedently  just  as  likely  that  the  Theages 
is  one  of  the  sources  from  which  Antipater  "  collected  "  his  tales 
as  that  it  is  drawing  on  him.  In  fact,  a  Stoic  would  not  be  likely 
to  be  satisfied  with  Plato's  account  of  the  merely  inhibitory 
character  of  the  "sign."  Xenophon's  version  of  the  matter, 
which  makes  the  "  sign  "  give  positive  guidance,  is  much  more 
in  keeping  with  Stoic  theories  about  "  the  divinity."  Hence  I 
hold  that  the  fidelity  of  the  Theages  to  Plato  on  this  point  is  definite 
evidence  against  the  presence  of  Stoic  influence.  The  linguistic 
arguments  are  also  nugatory.  Some  of  the  expressions  to  which 
Stallbaum  took  objection  are  actually  Platonic,  others  are  mere 
examples  of  a  slightly  turgid  diction.4  On  the  evidence  I  think  it 

1  For  this  mission  see  Xenoph.,  Uellenica,  i.  2,  I. 

*  See  his  Introduction  and  Commentary. 

8  Cicero,  de  Divinatione,  I.  liv.  123,  permulta  collecta  sunt  ab  Antipatro 
quae  mirabiliter  a  Socrate  divinata  sunt. 

*  He  objects  to  f3iu>vai,  though  Plato  has  tftlu<ya.vtpi$y  piyTj,  and  even  /3tu><ras  ; 
to  TCKfji.a{pe<r0at  dw6  rifos  eft  rt  (a  phrase  directly  imitated  from  Theaetet.  2066  7)  ; 
to  irotoDfjLai  deivfa  clvat,  an  odd  expression  but  paralleled,  perhaps,  Rep.   58  id 
10  (where  the  n  ol&ntOa,  of  editors  is  a  correction  of  the  MSS. 


534        PLATO:    THE  MAN   AND  HIS  WORK 

most  probable  that  the  dialogue  is  the  work  of  an  Academic  of  the 
last  third  of  the  fourth  century,  a  man  of  the  type  of  Xenocrates, 
(president  of  the  Academy  339-314  B.C.).  Xenocrates  was  notori- 
ously interested  in  "  daemons  "  and  seems  to  have  been  the  original 
authority,  or  one  of  them,  for  the  later  Platonist  lore  on  the  subject. 
The  Theages  is  the  very  sort  of  thing  we  might  expect  from  his 
circle.1  Its  chief  interest  for  us  lies  in  the  probability  that  some 
of  its  anecdotes  may  have  come  down  from  men  who  had  actually 
seen  Socrates,  and  thus  may  reflect  the  impression  his  oddities 
made  on  contemporaries.  Perhaps  it  is  un-Platonic  that  the 
Theages  represents  the  dcujuoviov  aiyuelov  as  leading  Socrates  to  check 
the  acts  of  other  persons.  There  is  no  parallel  for  this  in  any 
certainly  genuine  dialogue. 

Hipparchus.  By  general  admission  the  language  and  diction 
of  the  dialogue  are  excellent  fourth-century  Attic,  not  to  be  really 
discriminated  from  the  authentic  work  of  Plato.  This  should 
put  Stallbaum's  view  that  it  is  a  clever  late  imitation  out  of  court. 
That  might  have  been  possible  after  the  rise  of  "  Atticism,"  but  not 
earlier.  I  shall  discuss  Boeckh's  unlucky  speculation  on  the  author- 
ship later  on. 

Socrates  and  an  unnamed  friend  a  are  considering  the  question 
what  avarice  (or  greed,  TO  fafoxeQdes)  is  and  who  is  the  avaricious 
or  greedy  man  (the  </>dox£g<%).  The  first  and  obvious  answer  is 
"  A  greedy  man  is  one  who  is  not  above  making  a  profit  from  an 
unworthy  source  "  (nno  r&v  firjdfrog  d$lcov).  But  a  man  who  expects 
to  make  a  profit  from  what  he  knows  to  be  worthless  must  surely 
be  silly,  whereas  we  think  of  the  greedy  not  as  silly,  but  as  "  cunning 
knaves/'  "slaves  of  gain  "  who  know  the  baseness  of  the  source 
and  yet  are  not  ashamed  to  make  the  profit.  Here  there  is  a  diffi- 
culty. He  who  knows  when  and  where  it  is  "  worth  while  "  to 
plant  a  tree,  or  perform  any  other  operation,  is  always  some  kind 
of  expert.  And  an  expert  would  not  expect  to  make  a  profit  out 

(And  in  the  Theages  it  is  quite  possible  that  we  ought  to  read  irpo<r- 
irotoD/Luu.)  He  objects  to  the  use  of  Trpo<ra.yopev€i.v  in  the  sense  of  "to 
name,"  which  is  justified  by  parallels  at  Sophist.  25 la,  Polit.  2910,  Phileb. 
120,  54«,  and  the  phrase  a/yiara  Kvfiepvav,  a  mere  piece  of  "  Gorgianism  " 
with  a  close  parallel  in  Laws,  641  a  2.  The  only  really  suspicious  word  in  his 
list  is  ISioXoye'iffOai,  apparently  used  nowhere  else  before  Philo  Judaeus. 
But  as  the  noun  idioXoyia  occurs  in  Epicurus,  three  centuries  before  Philo, 
the  suspicion  does  not  amount  to  much.  Ritter  (Untersuchungen,  94)  finds 
the  mannerisms  in  agreement  with  Plato's  earlier  style,  though  inconceivable 
in  a  dialogue  later  than  the  Theaetetus,  on  which  the  Theages  is  dependent. 

1  See  also  H.  Briinnecke,  de  Alcibiade  II,  quifertur  Platonis  (Gottingen, 
1912),  113.  H.  Dittmar  (Aeschines  von  Sphettos,  64)  thinks  of  Heraclides 
of  Pontus  and  his  friends,  which  comes  to  much  the  same  thing. 

1  This  is  not  in  Plato's  manner.  Apart  from  the  purposely  anonymous 
chief  speakers  in  the  Sophistes-Politicus  and  Laws,  he  only  introduces  unnamed 
tralpoi  as  persons  to  whom  Socrates  reports  the  conversation  (e.g.  in  the 
Protagoras),  never  as  interlocutors  in  the  dialogue  proper.  It  is  also  not 
his  practice  to  name  a  dialogue  after  a  character  who  is  not  an  interlocutor, 
though  Aeschines  seems  to  have  done  this  in  his  Miltiades. 


APPENDIX  535 

of  worthless  material  or  by  using  worthless  instruments,  as  we 
may  readily  convince  ourselves  by  taking  simple  examples.  This 
disposes  of  the  suggestion  that  cleverness  is  part  of  the  definition 
of  the  <£tAox£e<%.  We  try  a  second  formula  :  the  greedy  are  those 
who  are  insatiably  eager  for  petty  profits.  (The  emphasis  now 
falls  on  the  paltriness  of  the  gain.)  Still,  they  cannot  be  supposed 
to  know  how  petty  the  profit  is.  Also,  ex  hyp.  they  are  eager  for 
the  gain.  Gain  is  the  "opposite  "  of  detriment,  detriment  is  always 
an  evil  and  therefore  men  are  made  worse  by  it,  therefore  it  is  always 
an  evil  (2270,  a  singular  argument  in  a  circle).  Gain,  then,  being 
the  "  opposite  "  of  something  which  is  always  an  evil,  must  always 
be  a  good.  A  man  who  loves  gain  is  one  who  loves  "  good,"  as  we 
all  do.  With  the  first  definition  it  would  seem  that  no  one  could 
be  greedy,  with  the  second  that  everyone  must  be  greedy.  If  we 
try  a  third  suggestion,  that  the  greedy  man  is  one  who  is  not  "  above  " 
making  gain  from  sources  to  which  the  respectable  (of  xQ^aroi,  22yd) 
will  not  stoop,  it  may  still  be  replied  that  if  it  is  true  (a)  that  to 
make  a  gain  is  to  be  benefited  (dxfreXeloOcu),  and  (b)  that  all  men 
desire  good,  it  must  follow  that  the  "  respectable  "  are  as  much 
"  fond  of  all  gain  "  as  others.  And  it  would  not  help  us  to  say 
that  they  do  not  desire  to  gain  by  that  which  will  do  them  harm, 
or  to  make  a  "  wicked  "  gain.  For  to  be  harmed  =  to  suffer  loss 
of  some  kind,  and  it  is  meaningless  to  talk  of  losing  by  a  gain  ; 
and  if  gain  is  always  good,  how  can  there  be  any  "  wicked  "  gain  ? 

Here  the  friend  complains  that  Socrates  is  "  gulling  "  him.  But 
that,  says  S.,  would  be  a  shocking  act  and  would  violate  the  precept 
of  that  good  and  wise  man  Hipparchus,  the  eldest  of  the  Pisistra- 
tids.  He  introduced  Homer's  poetry  to  Athens,  regulated  its 
recitation,  patronized  Anacreon  and  Simonidcs,  all  out  of  zeal  for 
improving  his  fellow-citizens.  For  the  country-folk  he  set  up 
Hermae  by  the  roads  engraved  with  maxims  intended  to  surpass 
the  wisdom  of  the  famous  Delphian  inscriptions.  One  of  these 
maxims  was  MH  &IAON  E3A HA  TA, ' '  never  gull  a  friend. ' '  After  the 
murder  of  this  great  and  good  man,  his  brother  Hippias  ruled  like 
a  tyrant,  but  so  long  as  he  lived,  Athens  enjoyed  a  golden  age. 
The  true  story  of  his  death  is  that  Harmodius  murdered  him  from 
jealousy  because  Aristogiton  preferred  the  wisdom  of  Hipparchus 
to  his  own.1 

To  return  :  we  cannot  give  up  any  of  our  theses,  but  perhaps  we 
might  qualify  one  of  them,  the  thesis  that  gain  is  always  good. 
Perhaps  some  gain  may  be  bad.  But  at  least,  gain  is  always  gain, 
as  a  man,  good  or  bad,  is  always  a  man.  In  a  definition  we  should 

1  The  story  makes  a  deliberate  point  of  contradicting  the  facts  in  every 
possible  detail.  It  is  thus  certainly  not  meant  to  be  taken  seriously,  but 
should  be  regarded  as  a  not  quite  successful  attempt  to  recapture  the  "  irony  " 
of  Plato's  Socrates.  Stallbaum's  denunciation  of  the  homuncio  who  could 
make  such  a  string  of  blunders  is  wasted.  So  is  the  labour  of  those  who  have 
gone  to  the  passage  for  light  on  the  "  Homeric  problem."  The  dialogue 
gets  its  name  from  this  intercalated  piece  of  awkward  pleasantry. 


536        PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

indicate  the  common  character  of  all  gain,  as  we  do  that  of  all 
"  meats/'  wholesome  or  not,  when  we  call  them  "  solid  nutriment  " 
(fyQd  TQofy).  We  might  try,  as  a  last  attempt,  the  definition  that 
gain  is  "  anything  acquired  at  no  outlay,  or  an  outlay  less  than 
what  accrues  from  it."  But  we  reflect  that  one  might  acquire 
an  illness,  not  only  at  no  expense,  but  by  being  feasted  at  another's 
expense,  and  yet  this  would  not  be  a  gain.  If  we  add  the  qualifica- 
tion that  the  thing  acquired  must  be  a  good,  we  shall  be  thrown  back 
on  a  difficulty  which  has  already  given  us  trouble.  And  the  words 
"  with  no  outlay,  etc."  also  have  their  difficulties.1  To  make  their 
meaning  clear,  we  need  to  introduce  the  notions  of  value  (d£fo  231^) 
and  a  standard  of  value.  The  profitable  =  the  valuable,  and  the 
valuable  =  that  of  which  the  possession,  or  ownership,  is  valuable. 
But  this  seems  to  mean  just  the  "  beneficial  "  or  "  good."  We 
have  ended  by  equating  "  gain  "  with  "  good  "  a  second  time  and 
are  thus  baffled  by  the  plain  fact  that  there  appear  to  be  "  wicked  " 
gains  which  good  men  do  not  desire,  and  by  the  notorious  common 
employment  of  (frdoxeQdrjs  as  a  term  of  reproach. 

The  thoughts  of  the  trifle  are,  all  through,  as  Platonic  as  itf 
language,  and,  apart  from  the  one  awkward  "  circle  "  in  the  reason- 
ing, the  main  argument  seems  to  me  worthy  of  Plato  in  his  more 
youthful  vein.  The  interest  shown  in  economic  facts  is  thoroughly 
intelligent.  The  real  evidence  of  non-Platonic  authorship  is,  to 
my  mind,  the  anonymity  of  the  interlocutor  and  the  inferiority  and 
irrelevant  length  of  what  is  meant  to  be  the  humorous  interlude 
about  Hipparchus.  The  dialogue  should  be  assigned  to  an  Academic 
of  the  earliest  period  with  an  excellent  style  and  an  intelligent 
interest  in  economics.2 

Clitophon.  The  work  is  no  more  than  a  brief  fragment,  but 
raises  interesting  questions.  Clitophon,  a  minor  character  in  the 
Republic*  is  conversing  with  Socrates,  who  has  been  told  that  he  is 
a  great  admirer  of  Thrasymachus,  but  inclined  to  be  critical  of 
Socrates  himself.  Clitophon  explains  his  real  position.  He  holds 
that  as  long  as  S.  confines  himself  to  preaching  the  need  for  "  learn- 
ing justice  "  his  discourse  is  most  awakening.  He  is  convincing, 

1  The  point  is  that  you  might,  e.g.,  exchange  gold  for  twice  or  four  times 
its  weight  in  silver  and  yet  lose  by  the  transaction,  though  you  acquire  a 
greater  weight  of  metal  (since  the  ratio  of  the  value  of  gold  to  that  of  silver 
is  12  :  i). 

•It  stands  "  stylometric "  tests  well.  C.  Ritter  (Untersuchungen,  91) 
thinks — or  thought — its  genuineness  an  open  question.  I  agree  with  hirn 
that  the  writer  has  "  learned  more  than  his  style  "  from  Plato,  and  am  content 
to  believe  that  his  work  may  actually  have  been  read  by  Plato. 

8  He  is  mentioned  there  at  3276  in  a  way  which  suggests  that  he  has 
come  to  the  party  in  company  with  Thrasymachus.  At  3400— b  he  says  a 
few  words  urging  that  Tbrasymachus  shall  be  allowed  "  fair  play."  Pre- 
sumably he  is  the  Clitophon  mentioned  by  Aristotle,  'AOvivai'wv  HoXire/o,  34, 
as  one  of  the  more  moderate  supporters  of  the  establishment  of  the  400  in  411 
B.C.,  whose  object  was  to  return  to  the  institutions  of  Clisthenes.  Aristotle 
classes  him  with  Theramenes,  Archinus  and  Anytus. 


APPENDIX  537 

again,  when  he  is  exposing  the  error  of  the  belief  that  injustice  is 
ever  "  voluntary,"  x  and  the  folly  of  trying  to  use  what  you  have 
not  yet  learned  how  to  use,  or  insisting  that  if  a  man  does  not 
know  how  to  "  use  "  his  ipvjtf,  he  would  be  better  dead,  or  under  the 
control  of  another  who  has  this  knowledge,  which  is  the  "  art  of 
the  statesman."2  (That is, Cl. accepts  the  whole  of  the  theoretical 
Socratic  ethics.)  But  when  one  has  been  converted  to  the  necessity 
of  "  learning  justice  "  and  is  anxious  to  set  about  the  task,  Socrates 
fails  one.  We  may  illustrate  the  nature  of  the  failure  thus.  A 
medical  man  can  do  two  things  with  his  knowledge.  He  can  make 
another  man  a  medical  specialist  by  imparting  it  ;  over  and  above 
this,  he  can  cure  a  patient.  Socrates  should  not  merely  tell  us 
that  by  "  learning  justice  "  we  shall  become  specialists  in  the 
subject ;  he  should  also  explain  what  justice  produces,  as  medicine 
produces  health  in  the  patient  (4096).  We  want  to  know  what 
"  health  of  soul  "  is.  Some  say  that  the  product  of  justice  is  the 
expedient  (avjtfieQov),  some  that  it  is  the  right  (Mxaiov),  some  that 
it  is  the  profitable  (hvoiTehovv),  or  the  beneficial  (dxpe^i^v).  None 
of  these  answers — they  are  taken  from  Rep.  3360-^  where  Thrasyma- 
chus  says  he  will  not  be  fobbed  off  with  any  of  them  as  a  definition 
— are  very  enlightening.  An  associate  of  S.  has  said  that  justice 
produces  friendship  (^iXia)  in  cities.  But  he  went  on  to  say  that 
some  tyittai,  those  with  boys  or  animals,  are  not  good.  True  fyiMa 
is  6n6voia,  the  concord  of  two  minds,  and  6p6voia  is  a  science 
(Imartifiirj).  The  argument  went  no  further,  because  no  one  could 
explain  what  it  is  about  which  all  just  men  are  "  of  one  mind." 
Clitophon  referred  the  question  to  Socrates,  who  told  him  that 
justice  makes  us  able  to  "do  good  to  our  friends  and  harm  to  our 
enemies."  Yet,  on  being  pressed,  S.  admitted  that  a  "  just  "  man 
will  do  no  harm  to  any  one.3  It  looks,  then,  as  though  one  of  two 
things  must  be  true.  Either  Socrates  has  the  same  limitations  as 
a  man  who  can  speak  eloquently  in  praise  of  a  science  in  which  he 
is  himself  only  a  layman,  or,  more  probably,  Socrates  did  not 
choose  to  explain  himself  fully.  Clitophon  is  sure  he  needs  a 
physician  of  the  soul,  but,  unless  S.  can  do  more  for  him  than  he 
has  so  far  done,  he  will  be  left  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  Thrasy- 
machus  or  another  for  practical  treatment  (^loa-e). 

It  is  not  quite  clear  to  what  conclusion  the  writer  is  leading  up, 
but  it  should  be  plain  that  the  apparent  commendation  of  Thrasyma- 
chus  at  the  expense  of  Socrates  is  ironical.  Clitophon's  point  is 
that  unless  Socrates  can  do  more  for  him  than  simply  preach  on  the 

1  407^-0,  where  the  allusion  is  to  the  treatment  of  this  topic  in  the  Prota- 
goras. 

a  4070  if.  The  allusions  seem  to  be  to  the  "  protreptic  "  discourse  of  Socrates 
in  the  Euthydemus ;  4086  3  seems  to  refer  to  the  simile  of  the  mutineers 
in  the  Republic  itself  (4880  ff.). 

8  The  allusion  is  to  Rep.  3320-^,  but  there  it  is  Polemarchus  who  offers 
the  definition  and  Socrates  who  criticizes  it  on  the  very  ground  mentioned  by 
Clitophon. 


538        PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

necessity  of  "  tending  "  the  soul,  he  is  in  the  position  of  a  sick  man 
in  danger  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  a  confident  "  quack/'  I 
suspect  that  if  the  writer  had  gone  on  with  his  argument,  Socrates 
would  have  been  made  to  explain  why  the  physician  of  the  soul 
cannot  simply  give  his  "  patient  "  a  set  of  rules  for  moral  regimen, 
why,  in  fact,  morality  is  not  a  professional  specialism.  Such  an 
argument  would  furnish  a  sound  Academic  commentary  on  the 
discourse  between  Socrates  and  Polemarchus  in  Rep.  I.  We  might 
understand  the  piece  better  and,  perhaps,  discover  something  about 
its  origin,  if  we  could  be  sure  how  to  interpret  the  reference  to  the 
eraiQos  of  Socrates  who  maintained  that  "  justice  "  produces  6^6voia 
in  cities  and  that  6p6voia  is  a  science.1  Since  the  passage  cannot  be 
explained  out  of  the  Republic  itself,  we  clearly  have  here  an  allusion 
to  some  actual  controversy  2  ;  the  very  irrelevance  of  the  thesis 
to  its  immediate  context  shows  that  the  point  is  one  to  which  the 
writer  attaches  importance.  That  this  writer  is  not  Plato  seems 
to  be  proved  by  his  manifest  dependence  on  Republic,  Euthydemus, 
Protagoras.  There  would,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  be  no  linguistic  diffi- 
culty in  admitting  Plato's  authorship.  Hence  I  should  ascribe 
the  piece  to  some  fourth-century  Academic.8 

Minos.  Like  the  Hipparchus,  this  dialogue  gets  its  name  from  the 
introduction  of  an  historical  narrative  ;  the  respondent  is  anonymous. 
The  question  discussed  is  the  nature  of  law,  and  the  point  is  to  be 
made  that  it  is  not  of  the  essentiaoi  law  to  be  a  command.  A  law  is 
the  discovery  (efevQeau;]  of  a  truth, — the  view  common  to  all  champions 
of  "  eternal  and  immutable  "  morality.  The  piece  opens,  in  an 
un-Platonic  way,  by  a  direct  question  from  Socrates,  "  What  is 
law  ?  "  (The  abruptness  seems  to  be  copied  from  the  opening  of 
the  Meno,  but  there  the  abrupt  question  is  put  into  the  mouth  of 
Meno  and  is  dramatically  appropriate.)  The  answer  given  is  that 
"the  law"  is  a  collective  name  for  rd vo/*i£6fteva,  the  aggregate  of 
"  usages."  But  this  is  like  saying  that  sight  (dyiig)  is  the  aggregate 
of  visibles  (oQw/teva).  The  statement,  that  is,  tells  us  nothing  about 
the  formal  character  of  the  "  legal  "  as  such.  A  new  definition  is 

1  That  justice  produces  <f>i\la  and  6jj.6voia  is  said  at  Rep.  351^  by  Socrates 
himself. 

*  The  question  in  what  "  goodness  "  makes  men  of  one  mind  is,  as  we 
saw,  raised  in  A  Ic.  /.,  but  the  allusion  cannot  well  be  to  that  dialogue  as  Adam 
thought,  since  there  is  nothing  there  about  the  <fn\iat  of  "  boys  and  animals." 
H.  Dittmar  suggests  Aristippus  as  the  lra?/>os  of  S.  intended.  It  seems 
improbable,  however,  that  he  wrote  any  Zw/c/xm/coi  Xoyot.  I  fancy  the 
guess  is  based  on  the  fact  that  the  iraipos  is  said  to  be  KojuL\f/6s  and  the  mis- 
taken identification  of  the  Ko/jL\j/oi  of  the  Philebus  with  Cyrenaics.  <pL\la  was 
a  standing  topic  with  writers  from  the  Academy ;  Speusippus,  Xenocrates, 
Aristotle  all  treated  of  it. 

8  See  C.  Ritter,  Untersuchungen,  93,  who  finds  the  language  closely  akin 
to  that  of  the  latest  Platonic  dialogues.  Perhaps  there  may  be  an  allusion 
to  the  view  that  6/t6p ota  is  an  ^inaT^^rj  in  Aristotle's  remark  that  agreement 
about  astronomy  is  not  o^ota  since  the  sphere  of  "  concord"  is  rd  irpaKTd, 
(of  which  there  is  no  &ri<mj/i77,  E.N.  n6ja  25).  E.E.  12366  2  ff.,  which  has 
some  remarks  about  0iX/cu  with  Gypta,  may  allude  to  the  same  discussion. 


APPENDIX  539 

offered  :  a  law  is  ddypa  n6Xe<o<;t  a  pronouncement  of  the  community. 
(I.e.  it  is  the  authority  of  the  "sovereign  "  which  gives  to  "  use  " 
the  formal  character  of  law — the  view  of  Hobbes  and  Austin.) 
S.  treats  this  statement  as  equivalent  to  saying  that  a  law  is  an 
opinion  (66£a]  of  the  community,  and,  in  spite  of  the  contemptuous 
comments  of  Stallbaum,  the  equation  is  a  sound  one.  On  the 
proposed  definition,  a  law  is  an  embodied  "judgement "  of  society, 
or  its  representative,  the  "  sovereign."  But  we  also  hold  that 
ol  voptfjioi,  "  respecters  of  law/'  and  they  only,  are  dlxaioi  and  that 
dixaioavvri,  regard  for  right,  is  good  and  preserves  society ;  its 
contrary,  dvopfa,  disregard  for  law,  is  bad,  and  destroys  society. 
Now  a  given  enactment  may  be  a  "  bad  law."  But  how  can  a 
bad  Soy/to.  ntiXsux;  really  be  law,  if  law  is  what  really  exalts  a  nation  ? 
It  is  suggested  that  we  should  define  law  as  a  sound  judgement 
(%Qr]OTr)  (5o'£a)  of  society.  But  here  sound  is  a  mere  synonym 
for  true,  and  truths  are  not  manufactured  but  discovered.  It  seems, 
then,  that  formally  a  law  is  e^evQeaiq  rov  dvro$,  a  discovery  about 
(moral)  reality.  This  is  the  main  point  of  the  Minos,  and  it  is  a 
perfectly  just  one.1 

What  are  we  to  say  about  the  notorious  divergences  between 
the  laws  of  different  communities  or  different  generations  ?  One 
thing  is  clear ;  no  society  ever  fancies  that  right  can  really  be 
wrong.  A  law  not  based  on  reality  (c6  ov)  is  an  error  about  16 
vo^ifjLov.  (It  may  be  accepted  as  law,  but  it  ought  not  to  be  so 
accepted.)  And  we  see  from  the  examples  of  medicine,  agriculture 
and  other  arts  that  the  laws  of  an  art  are  the  regulations  of  the 
lni<mjiLia)v,  the  man  who  has  expert  knowledge  about  some  region 
of  TO  ov.  So  the  true  "  laws  "  of  civic  life  are  the  directions  given 
by  "  kings  "  and  good  men  (the  experts  in  moral  knowledge),  and 
therefore  will  not  vary ;  a  mistaken  direction  has  no  right  to  be 
called  "  law." 

Now,  who  knows  how  to  "  distribute  "  (diaveipai)  seeds  to  differ- 
ent soils  properly  ?  The  farmer  who  knows  his  business.  The 
physician's  "  distributions  "  of  food  and  exercise  are  the  right 
distributions  for  the  body,  the  shepherd's  distributions  the  right 
ones  for  the  flock.  Whose  distributions  are  the  right  ones  for 
men's  souls?  Those  of  the  king  who  knows  his  business.2  In 
ancient  days,  there  were  such  "  divinely  "  wise  experts  in  kingship, 
of  whom  Minos  of  Crete  was  one.  The  current  story  is  that  he 

1  Cf.  Sir  F.  Pollock,  Spinoza,1  304,  "  Law  is  not  law  merely  because  the 
State  enforces  it ;  the  State  enforces  it  because  it  is  law,"  and  the  definition 
in  the  Institutes,  iurisprudentia  est  divinarum  et  humanarum  rerum  notitia, 
iusti  atque  iniusti  scientia. 

2  There  is  here  a  conflation   of  the  language  of  the  Politicus  about  the 
king  as  tender  of  the  human  herd  with  that  of  Laws,  7130-7140,  where  vo^uos, 
"  law,"  is  playfully  derived  from  vtfittv   in   the   sense   to   divide,  distribute, 
assign,    and   law  is  said  to  be   the   "  assignment  "    (Sicti/o^)    made  by  i'ous. 
The  allusion  to  this  passage  explains  the  awkward  double  use   of   vopeus  in 
the  Minos  as  covering  at  once  the  meanings  herdsman  and  dispenser. 


540         PLATO:    THE   MAN   AND   HIS   WORK 

was  a  savage  tyrant,  though  his  brother  Rhadamanthys  is  pro- 
verbial for  righteousness.  This  is  a  mere  calumny  of  Attic  poets 
on  a  successful  antagonist  of  Athens.  Homer  and  Hesiod  speak 
very  differently.  Homer  says  that  Minos  used  to  "  converse  " 
with  Zeus  every  ninth  year.1  Zeus  was  a  superlative  sophist  and 
Minos  his  pupil.  Rhadamanthys  was  not  taught  by  Minos  the 
whole  art  of  royalty,  but  only  how  to  do  the  "  understrapper's  " 
share  of  the  work.2  He  and  Talus  —  the  iron  man  of  the  tale  — 
policed  Crete  under  Minos.  Now  what  does  the  wise  king  "  dis- 
tribute "  to  souls  as  the  wise  trainer  "  distributes  "  food  and 
exercise  to  bodies  ?  If  we  find  ourselves  unable  to  say,  we  must 
confess  that  this  inability  to  say  what  is  good  or  bad  for  our  souls 
is  disgraceful.  (Thus  we  end  with  the  familiar  point  that  a  man's 
first  duty  is  to  get  knowledge  of  good,  to  "  tend  "  his  soul.) 

The  thought  of  the  Minos  is  Platonic  ;  not  so  Platonic  is  the  eulogy 
of  Minos,  of  whose  institution  the  Laws  speaks  with  some  severity.3 
Since  the  use  of  the  Laws  is  unmistakable,  the  date  of  composi- 
tion must  be  after  Plato's  death.  This  disposes  of  the  unhappy 
suggestion  of  Boeckh  that  the  Hipparchus  and  Minos,  with  two 
of  the  voOevo/jievoi  (de  lusto,  de  Virtute),  are  the  work  of  the  cobbler 
Simon,  who  was  believed  in  later  antiquity  to  have  circulated 
"  notes  "  (vnofjtv^/jLara)  of  conversations  held  in  his  shop  by  Socrates 
(D.L.  ii,  128).  The  language  is  really  open  to  no  exceptions.4 
Stallbaum's  theory  that  the  work  is  an  Alexandrian  forgery  is 
excluded  by  the  known  fact  that  Aristophanes  of  Byzantium  placed 
it  in  one  of  his  "  trilogies."  The  right  inference  is  not  Stallbaum's, 
that  Aristophanes  brought  the  work  into  the  Platonic  canon,  but  that 
he  found  it  there.  The  language  points  to  a  date  after  the  death 
of  Plato,  but  still  in  the  fourth  century.  Aristophanes  and  Thras- 
ylus  both  evidently  regarded  the  Minos  as  a  kind  of  "  introduction  " 
to  the  Laws.  The  discrepancy  between  its  estimate  of  Minos  and 
Cretan  institutions  and  that  of  Laws,  I.  shows  that  the  piece  can 
hardly  have  been  intended  so. 

I  subjoin  here  some  brief  notes  on  the  contents  of  those  among 


*An  allusion  to  Laws,  62^a-b,   where   Homer's   obscure  phrase 
6af)L<TTr)s  is  explained  in  the  same  way. 

2  The  distinction  between  the  king  and  his  "  underling,"  as  Boeckh  and 
Stallbaum  saw,  comes  from  the  Politicus.  The  explanation  given  of  the 
bad  repute  of  Minos  is  strictly  true,  in  spite  of  Stallbaum's  ridicule.  The 
venom  of  the  A  ttic  versions  of  the  legends  about  him  and  his  family  (Pasiphae, 
Phaedra,  the  Minotaur)  is  accounted  for  by  the  hostile  relations  between 
Attica  and  the  prehistoric  rulers  of  Cnossus.  To  the  Athenian  ear  the  name 
Minos  suggested  "  chains  and  slavery." 

8  At  Laws,  630^,  the  Cretan  complains  rbv    vo^od^r-rjv    ^wwj>    an  o/SdXXo/xev  e/5 


4  See  C.  Ritter,  Uniersuchungen,  92-93,  though  he  holds  that  the  style  is 
more  like  that  of  the  Gorgias  than  of  any  other  dialogue.  Stallbaum  took 
oftence  at  the  use  of  a.i\uorrfiv  =  convenire,  to  be  fitting,  at  3140,  as  only 
found  elsewhere  in  Ep.  viii.  356^.  But  the  author  of  Ep.  vhi.  was  Plato, 
and  our  writer  is  imitating  him. 


APPENDIX  541 

the  Epistles  of  which  I  have  given  no  account  in  the  body  of  this 
book. 

I.  By  an  unknown  and  turgid  writer  to  an  unknown  recipient, 
who  seems  to  be,  virtually  at  least,  an  autocrat.  The  writer  has 
long  held  the  highest  aQ%ai  in  "  your  city,"  and  has  had  to  shoulder 
the  odium  of  false  steps  taken  against  his  advice.  He  has  now 
been  dismissed  with  contumely,  and  so  washes  his  hands  of  the 
"  city  "  and  returns  an  insultingly  small  sum  of  money  sent  him 
for  his  present  expenses.  The  situation  answers  to  none  in  the 
life  of  Plato,  nor,  so  far  as  one  can  see,  in  that  of  Dion,  to  whom 
Ficinus  wished  to  transfer  the  authorship.  Yet  the  style  seems 
fourth-century,  and  its  total  unlikeness  to  that  of  all  the  other 
Epistles  shows  that  we  can  hardly  be  dealing  with  a  deliberate 
forgery  meant  to  pass  as  Plato's.  If  the  "city"  is  Syracuse,  the 
writer  might  be  a  Syracusan  who  has  been  sent  into  actual  or 
virtual  banishment  and  therefore  poses  as  no  longer  a  citizen.  But 
why  does  he  write  in  Attic  ?  Or  is  our  text  a  transcription  into 
Attic  ?  (I  have  sometimes  thought  of  the  historian  Philistus — 
who  had  been  sent  into  virtual  exile  at  Adria  by  Dionysius  I  but 
returned  at  his  death  and  was  the  chief  opponent  of  Dion — as  a 
possible  author.1) 

V.  Plato  to  Perdiccas  of  Macedonia.  A  letter  recommending 
Euphraeus  of  Oreus  as  a  political  adviser.  Constitutions,  like 
animals,  have  their  distinctive  "  notes  "  ;  Euphraeus  is  skilled  in 
the  knowledge  of  these,  and  would  not  be  likely  to  recommend 
measures  "  out  of  tune  "  with  monarchy.  An  unfriendly  critic 
might  discount  the  recommendation  by  urging  that  its  author  has 
not  even  caught  the  "  note  "  of  the  democracy  in  which  he  lives. 
But  the  truth  is  that  "  Plato  was  born  too  late  in  the  day  "  for  his 
country  to  listen  to  advice  which  he  would  have  rejoiced  to  give. 
Objections  to  the  letter  will  be  found  in  the  works  of  C.  Ritter  and 
R.  Hackforth,2  but  seem  to  me  trivial.  I  cannot  think  Plato,  who 
wrote  the  Politicus  and  played  the  part  he  did  at  Syracuse,  would 
have  thought  it  unreasonable  to  give  advice  to  a  Macedonian  king, 
and  the  influence  of  Euphraeus  with  Perdiccas  is  attested  as  a  fact. 
(Athenaeus  5060.)  The  attacks  on  the  very  intelligible  language 
about  the  "notes  "  of  different  constitutions  seem  to  rest  on  the 
arbitrary  assumption  that  the  writer  must  be  recalling  and  mis- 
understanding the  words  of  Rep.  493^-6  about  the  cries  of  the  demo- 
cratic belua.  Ritter  can  urge  nothing  against  the  language,  which 
he  regards  as  very  much  like  that  of  Ep.  iv. ;  he  gives  away  his 
whole  case,  to  my  mind,  by  suggesting  that  v.  is  a  genuine  letter 

1  The  same  suggestion  is  thrown  out  by  L.  A.  Post,  Thirteen  Epistles  of 
Plato,  130,  but  rejected  on  the  ground  that  the  writer  appears  not  to  be  a 
citizen  of  Syracuse.     As  explained  above,   I  think  this  inconclusive.     But 
why  should  Philistus  write  in  Attic  ? 

2  C.  Ritter,  Neue  Untersuchungen,  327-398.     R.  Hackforth,  Authorship  of 
the  Platonic  Epistles,  73-75. 


542         PLATO:    THE   MAN   AND   HIS   WORK 

of  Speusippus.  (I.e.  his  real  reason  for  denying  it  to  Plato  is 
that  he  cannot  rid  his  mind  of  the  notion  that  Plato  must  have 
been  "  above  "  corresponding  with  a  Macedonian  king.  I  think 
Plato  understood  the  political  situation  better  than  this.)  The 
letter,  if  genuine,  falls  some  time  in  the  reign  of  Perdiccas  (365- 
360  B.C.). 

VI.  Plato  to  Hermias,  Erastus  and  Coriscus.  The  two  young 
Academics  (Coriscus  is  Aristotle's  friend  whose  name  figures  so 
often  in  his  "  logical  examples  ")  are  introduced  to  Hermias,  who 
had  made  himself  "  tyrant  "  of  Atarneus  and  was  soon  to  be  the 
patron  of  Aristotle,  as  well  as  the  first  martyr  in  the  Hellenic 
"  forward  movement "  against  Persia.  He  needs  confidants  of 
high  character  ;  the  two  young  men  have  character  and  intelligence, 
but  need  an  dpwrudi  ovva^iq,  a  "  protector/'  whom  they  can  find 
in  him.  The  writer  hopes  that  his  letter  will  lay  the  foundation 
for  an  intimate  friendship.  We  are  not  likely  to  hear  any  more 
of  the  "  spuriousness  "  of  vi.  since  the  vigorous  defence  of  it  by 
Wilamowitz  in  his  Platon  and  the  throwing  of  a  flood  of  light  on 
the  philosophical  and  political  importance  of  the  "  Asiatic  branch  " 
of  the  Academy  at  Assos  by  Jaeger.1  The  letter  is  valuable  as 
showing  that  the  foundation  of  the  "  colony  "  at  Assos  was  under- 
taken in  Plato's  lifetime  and  on  his  initiative.  The  letter  must 
belong  to  the  last  years  of  his  life. 

IX.  Plato  to  Archytas.    Archytas  has  complained  of  the  heavy 
burdens  and  anxieties  of  public  life.     He  should  remember  that  our 
country  and  our  family  have  both  as  much  claim  on  our  thought 
and  our  time  as  our  personal  concerns.2    A  promise  is  made  to 
care  for  a  young  man  named  Echecrates,  from  regard  to  Archytas 
no  less  than  on  his  own  and  his  father's  account.     No  one  has 
alleged  anything  suspicious  in  the  language  of  ix.    The  difficulty 
which  has  been  made  about  the  youth  of  Echecrates  arises  from  the 
assumption  that  he  is  the  man  of  that  name  who  appears  in  the 
Phaedo.    Archer-Hind  rightly  called  attention  in  his  edition  of  the 
dialogue  to  the  mention  of  an  Echecrates  of  Tarentum,  the  city  of 
Archytas,  in  lamblichus's  list  of  Pythagoreans.     The  date  of  the 
letter  cannot  be  fixed.     Plato  and  Archytas  were  already  friends 
in  367  B.C.  (Ep.  vii.  338a)  and  we  do  not  know  how  much  earlier. 

X.  Plato  to  Aristodorus.    A  mere  note  commending  the  loyalty 
of  the  recipient  to  Dion  and  expressing  the  conviction  that  "  loyalty, 
fidelity,  honesty  "  (r6  ptfiaiav  xal  TO  marov  xai  vyitq)  are  the  true 
"  philosophy."    There  are  no  materials  for  judgement  either  way, 
but,  as  Ritter  says,  the  tone  "seems  genuine."    And  why  should 
one  forge  such  a  note  ? 

XL  Plato  to  Leodamas.    A  meeting  would  be  desirable,  but 

1  Jaeger,  Aristoteles,  112-124,  303-305. 

*  Cicero  quotes  the  sentiment  with  approval,  de  Finibus,  II.,  xiv.  45 :  ut 
ad  Archytam  scripsit  Plato,  non  sibi  se  soli  natum  meminerit,  seel  patriae,  sed 
suis,  ut  perexigua  pars  ipsi  relinquatur. 


APPENDIX  543 

L.  cannot  contrive  a  visit  to  Athens  and  Plato  is  not  equal  to  a 
journey  which  would  probably  bear  no  fruit.  He  might  have  sent 
Socrates,  i.e.  the  Academic  of  that  name  who  figures  in  the  Politicus 
— but  he  is  ill.  One  hint  may  be  given  to  L.  in  connection  with  the 
colony  he  is  projecting.  A  sound  public  life  requires  an  authority 
which  can  exercise  vigilant  supervision  of  daily  life.  Such  an 
authority  can  only  be  created  if  there  is  an  adequate  supply  of 
persons  fit  to  undertake  the  charge.  It  is  useless  to  dream  of 
setting  up  such  a  body  if  its  members  would  first  have  to  be  educated 
for  the  position.  The  date  of  the  letter,  if  genuine,  is  probably  about 
360  B.C.1  That  Leodamas,  a  mathematician  and  member  of  the 
Academy,2  as  well  as  a  statesman,  should  have  consulted  Plato 
about  the  founding  of  a  "  city  "  and  received  an  answer  is  in  keeping 
with  all  we  know  of  the  interests  and  position  of  the  Academy  in 
Plato's  advanced  age.  C.  Ritter,  who  finds  linguistic  affinities 
between  xi.,ii.  and  xiii.,  has  only  rather  pointless  objections  to  urge. 
He  thinks  that  the  precise  character  of  the  "illness  "  of  Socrates 
would  not  be  given  in  a  genuine  letter.  But  surely  we  all,  even 
if  we  are  philosophers,  do  give  such  information  to  friends  at  a 
distance,  and  there  is  real  point  in  making  it  plain  that  the  ill- 
ness is  not  "diplomatic/1  Ritter  also  thinks  the  reason  given  for 
Plato's  unwillingness  to  face  the  journey  himself  "  unworthy/'  (It 
seems  to  be  a  polite  way  of  saying  that  he  is  too  old.)  Finally, 
it  is  "  not  Platonic  "  to  say  that  when  a  situation  is  desperate, 
one  can  only  "  pray  "  for  better  things.  But  why  not  ?  Plato 
says  the  very  thing  at  Ep.  vii.  331^.  And  the  way  in  which  the 
younger  Socrates  is  mentioned  is  far  too  natural  for  the  Hellenistic 
forger.3 

XII.  Plato  to  Archytas.  A  note  acknowledging  the  receipt  of 
certain  "  papers  "  (vnojuvij^ara)  and  expressing  admiration  of  their 
author  as  fully  worthy  of  his  legendary  ancestors.  The  writer  sends 
certain  unre vised  "  papers  "  of  his  own  in  return.  Our  chief  MSS. 
append  a  note  that  the  authenticity  of  this  letter  was  disputed, — 
when  or  why  is  not  known.  C.  Ritter  inclines  to  attribute  it  to  the 
author  of  ii.,  vi.  and  xiii.  (that  is,  as  I  hold,  to  Plato).  The  strongest 
argument  on  the  other  side  is  its  apparent  connection  with  the 
pretended  letter  from  Archytas  to  Plato  prefixed  to  Ocellus  (or 
Occelus)  the  Lucanian  on  the  Eternity  of  the  Cosmos.*  If  this  were 
genuine,  xii.  would  be  Plato's  reply  to  Archytas,  and  the  "  papers  " 
sent  to  Plato  would  have  to  be  identified  with  "  Ocellus."  There 
is  no  doubt  that  "  Ocellus  "  is  a  fabrication  of  the  first  or  second 
century  B.C.  or  that  the  "  letter  of  Archytas  "  is  part  of  the  fabrica- 

1  Post,  op.  cit.,  37. 

2  Proclus  in  Euclid.  I.  (Friedlein),  66,  212. 

8  A  forger,  even  if  he  knew  of  the  younger  Socrates,  would  have  been 
afraid  to  make  his  document  look  suspicious  to  the  purchaser  by  a  reference 
which  would  seem  like  a  bad  chronological  blunder  about  the  great  Socrates. 

4  The  fiction  is  that  "  Ocellus  "  is  an  ancient  Pythagorean  of  the  sixth 
Century,  whose  work  has  just  been  unearthed  after  long  concealment. 


544        PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS   WORK 

tion.  Hence  Zeller  suggested  the  now  widely  accepted  view  that 
Ep.  xii.is  also  the  work  of  the  same  hand.  This  plausible  view  has, 
to  my  thinking,  one  fault.  It  assumes  that  the  fabricator  had  the 
wit  and  sense  to  avoid  introducing  into  Plato's  "  reply  "  a  single 
word  which  would  definitely  identify  the  "  papers  "  spoken  of 
with  "  Ocellus."  Of  course  the  introduction  of  such  language  is 
just  the  way  in  which  the  ordinary  fabricator  "  gives  himself  away/' 
but  the  cleverness  of  avoiding  the  blunder  seems  to  me  a  little  too 
clever  for  the  sort  of  persons  who  "  faked  "  Pythagorean  remains. 
I  think  it  possible,  then,  that  Ep.  xii.  may  be  a  genuine  note  from 
Plato  to  Archytas  about  matters  otherwise  unknown,  and  that 
its  existence  may  have  suggested  to  the  fabricator  of  "  Ocellus  " 
the  basis  of  his  romance.1  But  appearances  are  certainly  strongly 
against  xii.  I  take  no  account  of  the  few  additional  "  letters  " 
which  figure  in  the  Life  of  Plato  in  Diogenes.  They  were  never 
included  in  the  "  canon/'  or  in  any  known  Platonic  MS.  It  was  a 
mistake  in  principle  on  the  part  of  C.  F.  Hermann  to  prejudice  the 
case  for  the  collection  of  the  "  thirteen  epistles  "  by  printing  these 
items  in  his  edition  of  Plato.2 

B.  The  "O0oi. 

This  is  a  collection  of  definitions  of  terms  of  natural  and  moral 
science.  The  total  number  of  terms  defined  is  184,  but  a  good 
number  of  them  receive  two  or  more  alternative  definitions.  In 
the  "  canon  "  the  collection  was  definitely  marked  off  from  the 
genuine  work  of  Plato  by  exclusion  from  the  "tetralogies."  Since 
our  collection  was  thus  known  to  Dcrcylides  and  Thrasylus,  it  must 
be  older  than  the  Christian  era.  I  do  not  know  that  there  is  any 
further  evidence  to  show  when  or  where  it  was  made.  The  genuine- 
ness of  the  contents  as  old  Academic  work  is  fairly  guaranteed 
by  two  considerations.  Many  of  the  definitions  are  simply  extracted 
from  the  dialogues  ;  others  are  quoted  and  criticized  by  Aristotle, 
whose  Topics,  in  particular,  are  rich  in  allusions  of  this  kind.  I 
think  it  will  be  found  that  there  are  no  signs  of  Stoic  influence, 
and  this  suggests  that  the  collection,  or  a  larger  one  of  which  it 
is  what  remains,  goes  back  to  a  time  before  the  rapprochement 
between  Academicism  and  Stoicism  under  Antiochus  of  Ascalon 
in  the  second  quarter  of  the  first  century  B.C.  There  seems  also 
to  be  no  serious  trace  of  Aristotelian  influence.  No  use  is  made 
of  the  great  Aristotelian  passe-partout  Ivigyeia  ;  the  genus  of  evdaipovla 
is  actually  given  (412^)  as  dvvapig;  the  Aristotelian  distinction 

1  Since  Zeller,  the  fabrication  of  "  Ocellus "  and  the  correspondence 
connected  with  it  has  usually  been  assigned  to  the  first  century  B.C.  The 
latest  editor,  R.  Harder,  argues  strongly  for  an  earlier  date  in  the  second 
century  (Harder,  Ocellus  Lucanus,  149  ff.). 

*  On  the  Epistles  generally  see  also  the  Introduction  to  J.  Souilhe's  edition 
of  them  in  the  Collection  des  University's  de  France.  But  the  conclusions 
reached  there  seem  to  me  vitiated  by  a  violent  animus  against  admitting 
authenticity. 


APPENDIX  545 


between  aofoa  and  intorripri,  the  speculative,  and  <f>Qovr\au;t  the 
practical  exercise  of  intelligence,  has  not  affected  the  terminology. 
On  the  other  side,  OQB^K;,  Aristotle's  technical  word  for  "  cona- 
tion," unknown  elsewhere  in  the  Platonic  corpus,  occurs  twice, 
in  the  definitions  of  wish  (4130)  and  of  philosophy  (414^).  The 
statement  that  vocals  is  GQXV  iniair\^r\^  (4140)  and  the  definition 
of  6eiv6tr)t;  (413^)  also  sound  Aristotelian.  But  these  are  trifles 
when  set  against  the  absence  of  the  distinction  between  tmarrffii) 
and  <^q6vr]aiq.  On  the  whole  I  believe  we  should  be  reasonably 
safe  in  saying  that  the  collection  fairly  represents  Academic  ter- 
minology as  it  was  in  the  time  of  Xenocrates  and  Aristotle.  Since 
we  know  that  Speusippus  was  keenly  interested  in  terminology,  and 
that  a  collection  of  OQOI  was  included  among  his  works  (D.L.  iv.  5), 
we  may  infer  that  he  is  likely  to  be  the  ultimate  source  of  much 
of  our  document.  The  Divisions  of  Xenocrates  (D.L.  iv.  13)  are 
also  likely  to  have  contributed.  As  Aristotle  quotes  and  criticizes 
Academic  definitions  not  found  in  the  collection,  it  is  clear  that 
we  possess  only  an  extract  from  more  copious  materials. 

C.  voOevoftevoi. 

de  Justo.  A  conversation  between  Socrates  and  an  unnamed 
friend  on  the  nature  of  r6  Mxmov.  Justice,  the  art  of  the  judge 
(dixaarrjs),  like  counting,  measuring,  weighing,  is  an  art  of  distin- 
guishing. It  distinguishes  the  rightful  from  the  wrongful.  A  given 
act,  e.g.  the  utterance  of  a  false  statement,  may  be  sometimes 
right,  sometimes  wrong:  right  when  it  is  done  "  in  the  appropriate 
situation  "  (Iv  dfovri),  wrong  in  all  other  cases.  It  is  knowledge 
which  enables  a  man  to  recognize  the  appropriate  occasion.  Wrong- 
doing, then,  is  due  to  ignorance,  and  so  is  involuntary. 

de  Virtute.  This  conversation  also  is  held  by  Socrates  with  a 
friend  who  is  anonymous  in  most  of  the  MSS.  In  the  Vatican 
MS.  called  by  Burnet  O  he  has  a  name,  Hippotrophus.  The  piece 
is  thus  presumably  that  mentioned  by  Diogenes  Laertius  under 
the  alternative  names  Midon  and  Hippotrophus.  It  has  the  same 
type  as  the  last.  The  question  is  whether  "  goodness  "  can  be 
taught.  In  both  pieces  Socrates  is  made,  as  in  the  Minos,  to 
originate  the  problem.  The  example  of  the  various  "  arts  "  is 
used  to  show  that  if  you  would  acquire  special  knowledge,  you 
must  put  yourself  under  a  specialist's  tuition.  But  "  goodness  " 
apparently  cannot  be  acquired  thus,  since  Themistocles,  Aristides, 
Thucydides,  Pericles  were  all  unable  to  impart  it  to  their  sons. 
Again  "  goodness  "  does  not  seem  to  come  "  by  nature.11  If  it 
did,  we  might  have  specialists  in  human  nature,  as  we  have  fanciers 
of  dogs  and  horses,  and  they  would  be  able  to  tell  us  which  young 
persons  have  the  qualities  that  will  repay  careful  training.  "  Good- 
ness/' then,  like  prophecy,  seems  to  depend  on  an  incalculable 
"  divine  "  inspiration. 

Bocckh,  as  we  have  said,  regarded  these  trifles  as  the  genuine 


546        PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

work  of  an  acquaintance  of  Socrates,  the  cobbler  Simon.1  They 
cannot  be  that  for  several  reasons.  For  (i)  they  are  slavishly 
close  imitations,  often  reproducing  whole  sentences  of  Plato's  text. 
Thus  the  argument  about  the  parallel  between  "  justice  "  and  the 
arts  of  number  and  measure  in  the  de  lusto  has  been  directly  copied, 
as  Stallbaum  said,  from  Euthyphr.  jb  ft.  The  de  Virtute  is  largely 
made  up  of  similar  "liftings"  from  the  Meno  and  Protagoras. 
(2)  The  discourses  ascribed  to  the  cobbler  Simon  must  have  been 
shorter  even  than  our  two  voOsvojuevoi,  for  there  were  thirty- 
three  of  them  in  a  single  roll  (D.L.  ii.  122).  (3)  The  work  ascribed 
to  Simon  was  almost  certainly  a  forgery.  (The  learned  Stoic 
Panaetius  said  that  the  only  certainly  genuine  dialogues  by  "  Socra- 
tic  men  "  were  those  of  Plato,  Xenophon,  Antisthenes,  Aeschines  ; 
those  ascribed  to  Euclides  and  Phaedo  were  doubtful,  all  others 
spurious.  D.L.  ii.  64.)  In  fact,  it  is  hard  to  doubt  that  we  are 
dealing  with  late  exercises  in  imitation  of  Plato's  style,  "  atticizing  " 
copies  of  a  classic.  The  purity  of  the  language  is  partly  explained 
by  this,  partly  by  the  presence  of  verbatim  extracts. 

Demodocus.  This  hardly  even  pretends  to  be  a  dialogue.  It 
is  a  direct  harangue  of  Socrates  to  an  audience  which  includes 
Demodocus  (?  the  father  of  Theages).  The  style  is  halting  to  the 
verge  of  inarticulateness.  The  drift,  obscured  by  verbiage,  is  that 
Socrates  has  been  asked  to  advise  the  audience  on  some  decision 
they  are  about  to  take.  The  request  implies  that  there  is  a  "  science 
of  giving  advice."  Either  the  present  audience  possess  this  science 
or  they  do  not.  If  they  all  possess  it,  there  is  nothing  to  discuss  ; 
if  none  of  them  possess  it,  discussion  is  waste  of  time.  If  one  or 
two  possess  it,  why  do  not  they  advise  the  others  ?  Where  is  the 
use  of  listening  to  rival  counsellors,  or  of  taking  a  vote  when  their 
counsel  has  been  heard  ?  How  can  persons  who  do  not  know  for 
themselves  which  is  the  advisable  course  vote  to  any  purpose  on 
the  advices  of  rival  counsellors  ?  Socrates  will  certainly  not  advise 
such  a  set  of  fools. 

At  this  point  the  shambling  speech  ends.  What  follows  seems 
to  be  a  detached  set  of  anecdotes,  having  nothing  in  common  with 
what  has  gone  before,  except  that  Socrates  is  apparently  the 
narrator,  and  that  each  anecdote  embodies  a  rather  puerile  dilemma. 

(a)  I  once  heard  a  man  blame  his  friend  for  accepting  the  story 
of  the  plaintiff  in  a  suit  without  troubling  to  hear  the  other  side. 
This,  he  said,  was  unfair  and  a  violation  of  the  dicast's  oath.    The 
friend  retorted  that  if  you  cannot  tell  whether  one  man  is  speaking 
the  truth,  you  will  be  still  more  at  a  loss  if  there  are  two  speakers 
with  different  stories.     If  they  should  both  tell  the  same  story, 
why  need  you  listen  to  it  twice  ? 

(b)  A  man  is  reproached  by  a  friend  to  whom  he  has  refused 

1  For  a  statement  of  Boeckh's  case  see  his  essay  In  Platonis  qui  vulgo 
ferlur  Minoent  (Halle,  1806).  It  is  fairly  met  and  disproved  by  Stallbaum 
in  the  introduction  to  his  own  commentary  on  the  Minos. 


APPENDIX  547 

a  loan.  A  bystander  comments,  "  Your  rebuff  is  your  own  fault. 
For  a  fault  means  a  failure  to  effect  one's  purpose,  and  you  have 
failed  to  effect  yours.  Also,  if  your  request  was  an  improper  one, 
it  is  a  fault  to  have  made  it ;  if  it  was  proper,  it  is  a  fault  not  to 
have  made  it  successfully.  Also,  you  have  not  gone  to  work  the 
right  way,  or  you  would  not  have  been  refused ;  ergo,  you  have 
made  a  fault."  A  second  bystander  urged  that  any  man  may 
fairly  complain  if  one  whom  he  has  helped  refuses  to  help  him  in 
turn.  But  the  first  speaker  said,  "  The  man  either  is  able  to  do 
what  you  ask,  or  he  is  not.  If  he  is  not,  you  should  not  make  so 
unreasonable  a  request ;  if  he  is,  how  is  it  you  did  not  succeed 
with  him  ?  "  "  Well,  a  man  at  least  expects  better  treatment 
for  the  future  if  he  remonstrates/'  "  Not  if  the  remonstrance  is 
as  groundless  as  it  is  in  this  case." 

(c)  A  man  is  blamed  for  giving  ready  credence  to  the  random 
utterances  of  irresponsible  persons.  Why  ?  Because  he  believes 
the  tale  of  "  anyone  and  everyone  "  without  investigation.  But 
would  it  not  be  an  equal  fault  to  believe  the  tales  of  your  most 
particular  intimates  without  examination  ?  If  a  speaker  is  an 
intimate  of  A  and  a  stranger  to  B,  will  A  be  right  in  believing  his 
tale  and  B  equally  right  in  disbelieving  the  same  story  ?  If  the 
same  tale  is  told  you  by  an  intimate  and  a  stranger,  must  it  not 
be  equally  credible  on  the  lips  of  both  ? 

The  shambling  and  helpless  style  of  these  anecdotes  shows 
that  they  come  from  the  same  hand  as  the  foolish  harangue  to 
Demodocus.  The  writer  must  have  been  a  person  of  low  intelli- 
gence, with  no  power  of  expression  and  a  taste  for  futile  "eristic." 
I  doubt  whether  his  scraps  were  meant  to  form  a  connected  whole. 

Sisyphus.  Socrates  is  in  conversation  with  a  Pharsalian  of 
the  singular  name  of  Sisyphus,1  whom  he  expected  to  have  seen 
the  day  before  among  the  audience  at  an  epidexis  or  show-speech. 
Sisyphus  explains  that  he  was  kept  away  by  "  our  rulers,"  who 
commanded  his  presence  at  an  important  consultation.2  But  what 
is  consultation  (r6  fiovheveoQcu)  ?  A  process  of  inquiry  (TO  £rpeiv). 
Inquiring  is  trying  to  get  fuller  knowledge  of  something  of  which 
we  have  some  preliminary  notion,  but  not  full  knowledge.  It  is 
the  presence  in  us  of  ignorance  which  makes  this  process  difficult. 
But  men  do  not  "  consult  "  about  what  lies  beyond  the  range  of  their 
knowledge  ;  hence  the  business  of  yesterday  should  have  been 
called  an  inquiry  into  the  interests  of  Pharsalus.  Why  did  not 
the  inquirers  take  the  course  of  "  learning  "  the  truth  from  some 

1  Presumably  the  Sisyphus  of  Pharsalus  mentioned  also  by  Theopompus, 
Fr.  19  (ap.  Athenaeus,  252/).  Sisyphus  was  perhaps  a  "  nickname." 
Xenophon  (Hellenica,  iii.  i,  8)  says  that  the  Spartan  commander  Dercylidag 
was  called  so  for  his  "  artfulness."  Athenaeus  (5006),  quoting  from  Ephorus, 
gives  the  sobriquet  in  his  case  as  <rKu<f>os,  an  obvious  corruption  (CK  for 
CIC). 

8  Then  is  Socrates  supposed  to  be  in  Thessaly,  or  were  the  "  government 
offices  "  of  Pharsalus  at  Athens  ? 


548        PLATO:    THE   MAN  AND  HIS   WORK 

one  who  already  knew  it,  rather  than  the  inferior  course  of  trying 
to  puzzle  it  out  for  themselves  ?  And  can  there  really  be  a  differ- 
ence between  better  and  worse  advice  ?  Advice  always  has  refer- 
ence to  the  future,  the  future  is  what  "has  not  happened  "  and 
therefore  has  no  determinate  character  (ovd£  <f>vaw  e%ei  ovdefilav). 
One  guess  about  it  cannot  well  be  better  or  worse  than  any  other. 

The  writer  is  perhaps  the  same  man  as  the  author  of  the  Demo- 
docus  ;  he  has  the  same  foible  for  childish  eristic,  the  same  interest 
in  the  alleged  puzzle  about  "  deliberation  "  and  the  same  helpless- 
ness of  style,  though  the  Sisyphus  is  not  quite  so  helpless  as  the 
Demodocus.  He  has  read  the  Meno  l  and  he  has  one  real  point, 
though  he  does  not  know  how  to  manage  it.  He  is  playing  with 
the  conception  of  the  future  as  something  which  is,  as  yet,  nothing 
at  all,2  and  therefore  not  a  subject  for  rational  consideration. 
Possibly  he  is  thinking  of  the  Cyrenaic  doctrine  that  the  future, 
being  unreal,  is  "nothing  to  us,"  3  and  trying  to  "expose  "  it  ? 

Eryxias.  This  is  a  much  more  serious  production  than  any  of 
the  four  just  examined.  The  writer  has  provided  a  definite  audi- 
ence, scene  and  date.  Socrates  is  talking  in  the  portico  of  Zeus 
Eleutherius  4  with  Critias  (the  "  oligarch  "),  Eryxias  and  Erasis- 
tratus,  nephew  of  Phaeax  (the  contemporary  and  rival  of  Alci- 
biades).  The  date  is  supposed  to  be  between  the  Peace  of  Nicias 
and  the  determination  taken  in  416  by  Athens  to  attack  Syracuse, 
as  we  see  from  the  opening  remarks  made  by  Erasistratus  on  the 
necessity  of  taking  a  firm  line  with  that  "  wasp's  nest."  The 
subject  of  the  discussion,  which  is  made  to  arise  quite  naturally, 
is  the  nature  and  worth  of  nAovros,  "capital,"  as  we  should  say. 
Erasistratus  holds  that  "  the  richest  man  is  he  who  owns  what  is 
worth  most."  If  so,  may  not  a  poor  man  in  lusty  health  be  said 
to  be  richer  than  an  opulent  invalid  with  whom  he  would  never 
dream  of  changing  places  ?  And  there  may  be  things  of  higher 
worth  than  health.  It  is  evident,  also,  that  the  thing  of  highest 
worth  is  happiness  (evdcujuovla).  It  should  follow  that  the  richest 
of  men  are  the  "  wise  and  good,"  because  they  do  not  impair  their 
happiness  by  making  false  steps  in  life  :  "  the  man  who  knows 
what  is  good  is  the  only  real  capitalist," — a  clear  allusion  to  the 
Stoic  paradox,  solus  sapiens  dives.  Eryxias  objects  that  a  man 
might  be  as  wise  as  Nestor  and  yet  in  want  of  the  bare  necessaries 
of  life.  Still,  says  S.f  such  a  man's  wisdom  might  have  a  high 
value  in  exchange  in  any  district  where  it  was  esteemed.  A  man 

1  As  we  see  not  only  from  his  reference  to  the  old  eristic  quibble  about 
rb  p/reir,  but  from  his  allusion  to  "  inquiring  "  into  the  ratio  of  "  diagonal  " 
to  "side,"  to  which  he  adds  the  later  problem  of  the  "  duplication  of  the 
cube." 

2  The  view  adopted  by  Dr.  C.  D.  Broad,  Scientific  Thought,  66  ff. 

1  Cf .  the  saying  ascribed  to  Aristippus,  fiovov  ^repov  elvai  rb  irapov,  pyre  81 
rb  rpOdvov  /x/^re  rb  TrpoffSoK&fJievov:   rb  f*,iv  ybp  aTroAwX^vcu,  rb  de   AdrjXov  clvat 

OTCU,    R.P.   267. 

4  For  which  see  Pausanlas,  i.  3,  2.     It  is  also  the  scene  of  the  Theages. 


APPENDIX  549 

who  understood  the  direction  of  life  might  make  capital  of  his 
knowledge,  if  he  chose.  Eryxias  treats  this  as  a  verbal  quibble, 
and  this  leads  to  a  dispute  between  him  and  Critias  in  which  S. 
acts  as  seconder  to  Eryxias.  Leaving  on  one  side  the  verbal  paradox 
that  the  wise  man  is  the  true  capitalist,  we  may  more  profitably 
ask  what  ways  of  acquiring  wealth  are  honourable,  and  whether 
wealth  itself  is  or  is  not  good.  Eryxias  thinks  it  is,  Critias  that 
it  is  not,  since  for  some  persons,  those  whose  wealth  leads  them 
to  perpetrate  follies  or  crimes,  wealth  is  so  clearly  not  good ;  but 
what  is  not  good  for  everyone  is  not  properly  called  a  good.  That 
argument,  says  S.,  is  a  mere  borrowing  from  Prodicus,  who  had 
publicly  defended  the  thesis  that  everything  is  good  for  the  man 
who  knows  how  to  use  it,  bad  for  the  man  who  does  not,  but  had 
been  silenced  and  put  to  shame  by  a  mere  lad.  The  lad's  counter- 
argument was  that  only  a  fool  expects  to  get  as  answers  to  prayer 
things  he  might  learn  from  a  teacher,  or  find  out  for  himself.  Pro- 
dicus, like  other  men,  asks  in  his  prayers  that  "  his  lot  may  be 
good  "  :  on  his  own  theory  this  amounts  to  praying  that  he  may 
himself  become  good,  and  also,  according  to  his  own  theories,  good- 
ness is  something  a  man  can  learn  from  a  teacher.  Critias  is 
borrowing  the  argument  of  Prodicus,  and  if  he  is  not  hooted  down, 
that  is  only  because  reasoning  which  would  be  seen  to  be  bad  in 
a  "sophist "  imposes  on  hearers  who  respect  Critias  as  a  gentleman 
and  man  of  the  world. 

Here  S.  directs  attention  to  the  original  and  still  more  funda- 
mental question  what  wealth  is.  You  may  say,  "  abundance  of 
XQij/iriTa,  means."  But  what  are  means  ?  It  is  argued,  with  a 
little  needless  display  of  general  information,  that  means  are 
"  possessions  which  are  of  use  to  us."  Hence  a  cartload  of  Car- 
thaginian currency  would  not  be  "means'1  at  Athens,  where  it  will 
not  exchange  for  anything.  Coin  is  popularly  confused  with  wealth 
simply  because  it  exchanges  freely  for  clothes  and  all  other  com- 
modities. Now  a  professional  man  can  exchange  his  professional 
services  for  commodities,  and  thus  Kmarrjuai,  knowledge  of  pro- 
fessions, seems  to  be  one  form  of  capital.  Again  an  article  is  only 
capital  to  one  who  knows  how  to  use  it,  and  the  xahol  xdyaOol 
are  the  persons  who  know  how  to  make  the  right  use  of  everything. 
Thus  there  is  a  sense  in  which  to  make  a  man  wiser  is  to  make 
him  richer.  Critias  still  protests  that  possessions  are  not  wealth, 
but  the  argument  is  continued.  In  any  trade,  a  man's  capital 
clearly  includes  not  only  his  materials  but  his  implements,  and 
sometimes  also  appliances  for  making  those  implements.  If  a 
man  were  once  fully  equipped  with  all  that  his  body  requires, 
money  and  such  things  would  be  useless  to  him.  Again,  since  to 
learn  you  must  be  able  to  hear,  the  money  a  man  pays  his  doctor 
for  taking  care  of  his  hearing  is  actually  useful  as  a  means  to 
"goodness."  This  money  may  have  been  made  in  a  "base" 
calling,  and  thus  a  "  base  "  thing  may  be  useful  for  good.  We  are 


550        PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

almost  tempted  to  say  that,  since  a  man  can  only  become  wise, 
healthy,  good,  if  he  has  previously  been  ignorant,  unwell,  bad, 
ignorance,  disease,  vice  are  conditions  sine  quibus  non  of  their 
opposites,  and  therefore  useful,  and  ought,  by  consequence,  to 
be  called  wealth.  But  apart  from  this  paradox,  we  may  ask  our- 
selves one  question,  "  When  is  a  man  happier  and  better,  when  he 
has  the  most  or  when  he  has  the  least  numerous  and  expensive 
wants  ?  "  Since  this  amounts  to  asking  whether  a  man  is  happier 
in  disease  or  in  health,  the  question  answers  itself.  The  rich,  who 
have  many  and  expensive  wants,  are  not  the  truly  happy. 

I  think  it  clear  that  the  purpose  of  the  dialogue,  which  is  very 
interesting  for  its  economic  theses,  is  to  canvass  the  Stoic  doctrine 
that  wisdom,  virtue,  wealth  are  identical,  and  that  the  sage  is 
the  only  "  capitalist."  This  is  the  thesis  which  Eryxias  treats  as 
idle  playing  with  words  and  Socrates  "  side-tracks,"  in  order  to 
discuss  the  more  than  verbal  question  whether  riches  are  good  or 
bad.  It  is  part  of  the  anti-Stoic  polemic  that  S.  supports  Eryxias 
against  Critias  who  denies  that  "  property  "  is  wealth.  The  author 
means  to  protest  against  "  pulpit  declamation  "  which  amounts  to 
nothing  but  words  and  to  replace  it  by  the  dispassionate  Academic 
view  that  wealth  and  wisdom  are  different  things,  the  one  at  the 
bottom,  the  other  at  the  top  of  the  scale  of  good.  The  Greek  of 
the  dialogue  is  not  the  Attic  of  Plato,  yet  it  is  hardly  the  vulgar 
MOW}.  I  should  conjecture  that  the  work  belongs  to  the  begin- 
nings of  the  Academic  polemic  against  Stoicism,  in  the  early  decades 
of  the  third  century.  The  writer  seems  to  have  drawn  some  of 
his  material  from  the  Callias  of  Aeschines,1  in  which  the  wealth 
of  the  famous  "  millionaire  "  family  was  a  prominent  topic  and 
Prodicus  received  some  notice.  Suidas  ascribes  an  Eryxias  to 
Aeschines  himself,  but  there  seems  to  be  no  other  evidence  for 
the  existence  of  such  a  work.  Presumably  our  Eryxias  is  meant, 
and  Suidas  has  made  a  mistake  about  its  authorship. 

Axiochus.  In  style  this  dialogue  is  far  inferior  to  the  Eryxias. 
The  language  is  a  vulgar  *o«v?},  full  of  non-Attic  words  and  phrases. 
The  mise-en-sc&ne  shows  complete  ignorance  of  the  personages  of 
Plato's  dialogues.  The  principal  figure,  apart  from  Socrates,  is 
Axiochus  of  Scambonidae,  the  uncle  of  Alcibiades.  The  supposed 
date  is  fixed  by  a  reference  to  the  trial  of  the  generals  after  Ar- 
ginusae  (368^)  as  not  earlier  than  405,  and  Axiochus  represents 
himself  as  having  supported  the  protest  of  Socrates  against  the 
unconstitutionality  of  the  proceedings.  The  writer  has  forgotten 
that  Axiochus  was,  next  to  Alcibiades,  the  chief  victim  of  the 
scandals  of  415  and  shared  the  capital  sentence.2  In  the  opening 

1  See  H.  Dittmar,  Aeschines  von  Sphettos,  198-199,  who,  however, 
perhaps  mistakes  a  probability  for  a  demonstration. 

8  Andocides,  i.  16,  Agariste,  wife  of  Alcmeonides  and  widow  of  Damon, 
gave  information  against  Alcibiades,  Axiochus  and  Adimantus,  *al  £0iryor 
retire*  M  raury  rjj  nyvfoei.  Alcibiades  afterwards  had  his  hour  of 


APPENDIX  551 

scene  (3640:)  Damon  is  mentioned  as  the  music-master  of  Axiochus' 
son  Clinias  (the  Clinias  of  the  Euthydemus),  and  Socrates  sees  the 
two  "  running  towards  him/'  though  Damon,  a  contemporary  of 
Anaxagoras,  would  have  been  almost  a  centenarian  if  he  had  been 
living  at  the  supposed  date.  The  scheme  of  the  dialogue  is  simple. 
Axiochus  has  been  seized  by  a  severe  "  fit  "  and  apprehends  death  ; 
Socrates  is  called  in  to  "  console  "  him.  He  does  this  by  the 
arguments  that  (i)  death  is  utter  unconsciousness  and  after  it 
there  are  no  more  pains  to  fear  ;  (2)  life  in  the  body  is  one  unbroken 
scene  of  anxiety  and  suffering,  so  that  it  is  a  positive  good  to  have 
done  with  it.  This  second  point,  intended  to  rule  out  the  possible 
rejoinder  to  (i)  that  even  if  death  brings  no  posthumous  disagree- 
ables with  it,  it  is  still  dreadful  because  it  puts  an  end  to  the  joie 
de  vivre,  is  argued  at  length  in  a  speech  professedly  taken  from 
the  eminently  wise  Prodicus.  (3)  A  further  argument,  also  ascribed 
to  Prodicus,  is  the  dilemma,  "  death  matters  neither  to  the  living 
nor  to  the  dead ;  while  we  live,  death  is  not  there,  and  when  we 
have  died,  we  are  not  there."  Axiochus  rejects  these  "  consola- 
tions "  scornfully.  They  are  the  "  superficial  twaddle  "  which  is 
coming  into  vogue  just  now  with  empty-headed  lads.  It  all  sounds 
fine,  but  when  one  is  face-to-face  with  death  it  proves  idle  bravado 
(369^).  In  the  remainder  of  the  dialogue  Socrates  drops  the  pre- 
tence of  holding  the  views  of  Prodicus  and  discovers  himself  as 
a  convinced  believer  in  the  blessed  immortality  of  the  soul.  This, 
he  says,  is  proved  (i)  by  the  achievements  of  man  in  his  ascent 
from  barbarism  to  civilization,  (2)  and  particularly  by  his  great 
intellectual  triumph,  his  creation  of  astronomy,  the  science  which 
reveals  to  us  the  magnolia  Dei.  Man  could  not  have  done  all 
this,  "  were  there  not  indeed  the  breath  of  God  in  his  soul."  This 
message  goes  home  to  the  heart  of  Axiochus,  who  feels  himself 
now  delivered  from  his  terrors.  Socrates  then  completes  his  good 
work  by  relating  a  myth,  in  the  Orphic  style,  of  the  blessedness 
of  souls  in  the  next  life,  professing  to  have  learned  it  from  a  Persian 
magus.  The  myth  leaves  Axiochus  actually  "  in  love  "  with  death. 

I  feel  personally  convinced  that  Immisch  is  right  in  the  view 
taken  of  the  purpose  of  the  dialogue  in  his  edition  of  it.1  As  he 
points  out,  the  third  of  the  pretended  "  consolations  "  produced 
by  Socrates  is  the  familiar  Epicurean  dilemma,  "  death  is  nothing 
to  us,  for  while  we  are,  death  is  not,  and  when  death  is,  we  are 
not."  2  This  is  the  argument  of  which  Axiochus  speaks  with 
marked  contempt  as  superficial  "  twaddle  "  momentarily  fashion- 
triumph  and  restoration,  but  he  had  been  banished  again  before  405  and 
all  his  connections  were  then  in  the  worst  odour.  The  alleged  "  support  " 
given  to  Socrates  is  unknown  to  the  historians,  and  the  reference  to  irpbedpot 
in  the  ecclesia  (3680)  seems  to  show  ignorance  of  the  fifth-century  method  and 
procedure. 

1  O.  Immlsch,  Philologische  Studien  zu  Plato.  Erster  Heft.  Axiochus, 
Leipzig,  1896. 

•  Epicurus,  Ep.  iii.  125  (Bailey),  Lucretius  iii.  830. 


552        PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

able  with  mere  boys.  Immisch  seems  also  to  have  shown  that 
there  are  numerous  distinctively  Epicurean  turns  of  speech  through- 
out the  so-called  discourse  of  Prodicus  on  the  misery  of  existence. 
Hence  I  cannot  reject  his  conclusion  that  the  dialogue  is  a  piece 
of  anti-Epicurean  polemic,  intended  to  contrast  the  Platonic 
with  the  Epicurean  answer  to  the  perennial  question  What  may  I 
hope  for?  and  to  insinuate  that  the  "wisdom"  of  Epicurus  is  not 
even  original.  It  is  a  mere  revival  of  the  ideas  of  a  second-rate 
sophist,  and  a  "  doctrine  of  despair  "  into  the  bargain.  It  is 
natural,  though  not  absolutely  necessary,  to  draw  Immisch's 
further  conclusion  that,  in  the  writer's  day,  Epicureanism  was 
just  beginning  to  be  in  vogue  among  fin-de-siecle  youths.  In  that 
case  we  must  date  the  composition  as  early  as  somewhere  c.  305-300 
B.C.,  since  Epicurus  established  himself  at  Athens  in  307/6.  Other 
scholars,  such  as  Wilamowitz  and  H.  Dittmar,  reject  this  date 
as  too  early,  but,  though  I  do  not  want  to  be  over-confident,  I 
suspect  they  may  be  ascribing  to  "lateness  "  faults  of  style  and 
vocabulary  which  may  only  mean  that  the  writer  is  neither  an 
Athenian  x  nor  a  person  with  a  literary  sense.  I  see  no  need  to 
suppose  a  date  later  than  the  time  of  Epicurus,  whose  Greek  is 
much  of  the  same  stamp.  There  was  an  earlier  Axiochus  by  Aes- 
chines  of  Sphettus  of  which  all  that  is  known  is  that,  as  we  learn 
from  Athenaeus,  it  painted  an  unfavourable  picture  of  the  debauched 
life  of  Alcibiades,  and  presumably  of  his  uncle  also.  It  can  hardly 
have  supplied  our  author  with  material.2 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  anything  of  the  little  trifle,  not 
contained  in  our  Plato  MSS.,  called  the  Alcyon  and  attributed, 
in  MSS.,  variously  to  Plato  or  to  Lucian.  (It  is  commonly  included 
in  printed  texts  of  Lucian  ;  the  only  recent  editor  of  Plato  to  print 
it  is  C.  F.  Hermann.)  This  piece  of  silly  prettiness  is  certainly 
neither  Plato's  nor  Lucian's  ;  since  it  was  already  known  to  Favori- 
nus  of  Aries,3  it  must  be  the  work  of  some  Atticist  earlier  than 
Lucian.  It  describes  Socrates  and  Chaerephon  as  walking  by  the 
Bay  of  Phalerum,  where  they  hear  the  cry  of  the  (mythical)  halcyon. 
Socrates  relates  the  legend  that  the  bird  is  a  transformed  woman, 
argues  that,  since  God's  power  is  incomprehensibly  great,  we  must 
not  be  too  ready  to  reject  such  "  miracles,"  and  commends  the 
story  for  its  moral  of  wifely  devotion. 

Diogenes  Laertius  (iii.  62)  gives  the  following  list  of  vo6ev6fievoi : 
Midon  or  Hippotrophus,  Eryxias  or  Erasistratus,  A  Icy  on,  [a  corrupt 

1  The  attempt  to  argue  from  3650,  368^  that  the  writer  must  be  an  Athenian 
because  he  makes  his  characters  talk  of  their  national  heroes  as  they  naturally 
would,  does  not  deeply  impress  me. 

*  On  the  Axiochus  of  Aeschines  see  H.  Dittmar,  Aeschines  von   Sphettos, 
159-163. 

•  Favorinus  ascribed  it  to  a  certain  Leon  (D.L.  iii.  62).     Athenaeus  (5i6c) 
calls  the  author  "  Leon  the  Academic,"  on  the  authority  of  Nicias  of  Nicaea. 
If  this  means  the  fourth-century  mathematician  Leon,  the  ascription  is 
most  improbable. 


APPENDIX  558 

word],  Sisyphus,  Axiochus,  Phaeaces,  Demodocus,  Chelidon,  Heb- 
dome,  Epimenides.  The  only  "  work  "  we  possess  not  included 
in  this  list  is  the  de  lusto.  This  is  absent,  unless  it  is  covered 
by  the  corrupt  entry  dxefaAois  or  d«^<£cdoi  or  d*,v<£aAo£  rj  (Schanz, 
tj),  before  the  Sisyphus.  As  there  was  a  dialogue  Cephalus  ascribed 
to  Speusippus  (D  L.  iv.  4),  the  reference  of  Diogenes  may  be  to 
that,  as  the  Basle  editors  of  the  Vita  Platonis  suggest.  Athenaeus 
(506^),  apparently  following  Hegesander  of  Delphi,  the  author  of 
a  foolish  diatribe  against  Plato,  refers  to  an  otherwise  unknown 
Cimon,  alleged  to  contain  invectives  against  Themistocles,  Myro- 
nides,  Alcibiades  and  Cimon  himself.  Some  of  the  statements 
made  in  this  attack  on  Plato  are  so  absurd  that  one  may  wonder 
whether  the  Cimon  ever  existed,  except  in  the  imagination  of  a  care- 
less scribbler. 

There  still  survives  in  Syriac  a  translation  of  a  "  Socratic  " 
dialogue,  Herostrophos  *•  dealing  with  the  soul.  The  text  was  pub- 
lished by  Lagarde  in  his  Analecta  Syriaca  (1858) ;  there  is  a  German 
version  with  a  discussion  of  provenance  by  V.  Ryssel  in  Rheinisches 
Museum,  N.F.  xlviii.  175-196,  on  which  the  following  remarks  are 
based.  The  dialogue  is  shown  by  its  vocabulary  and  other  pecu- 
liarities to  be  a  genuine  version  of  a  Greek  original ;  the  trans- 
lator, according  to  Ryssel,  was  the  priest  and  physician  Sergius 
of  Rasain,  a  student  of  Aristotle  who  died  at  Constantinople  soon 
after  536  A.D.  The  name  of  the  interlocutor  Herostrophos  appears 
to  be  a  miswriting  of  Aristippus.  (He  is  represented  as  a  stranger 
attracted  to  Socrates  by  his  reputation  for  wisdom,  exactly  as 
Aeschines  of  Sphettus  (D.L.  ii.  65)  related  that  Aristippus  was 
drawn  to  Athens  xatd  *A&>£  ZawQarovs.  The  two  names,  as 
written  in  Syriac,  only  differ  by  a  single  letter.)  The  problem  to 
which  he  desires  an  answer  is  that  of  the  fate  of  the  soul  at  death. 
Does  it  perish  with  the  body,  enter  a  new  body,  or  die  for  a  time 
and  revive  again  with  the  same  body  ?  (The  last  alternative  seems 
to  be  suggested  by  the  Christian  dogma  of  the  "  resurrection  of 
the  flesh/'  but  might  allude  only  to  the  Pythagorean  and  Stoic  con- 
ception of  "  cyclical  recurrence  "  ?)  I  do  not  myself  understand 
the  confused  reply  of  Socrates.  He  seems  to  be  combining  insis- 
tence on  the  thought  that  the  soul  is  imperishable  and  immutable 
with  the  notion  that  it  has  fire  as  its  chief  component,  and  the 
suggestion  of  an  analogy  between  death  and  sunset.  As  the  sun 
rises  again  to-morrow,  so  the  soul  reappears  again  with  a  new  body 
after  the  death  of  the  present  body.  It  does  not  appear  that  the 
lost  Greek  original  was  ever  taken  by  anyone  for  a  work  of  Plato, 
and  I  find  it  hard  to  believe  that  it  is  not  influenced  by  Stoicism. 
This  might  account  for  the  apparent  materialism  and  also  for  the 
suggestion  of  the  reappearance  of  the  same  body,  if  this  is  not 
actually  a  borrowing  from  Christianity. 

«  My  attention  was  first  drawn  to  the  point  by  Mr.  W.  L.  Lorimer  of 
St.  Andrews  University. 


554        PLATO:    THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 

The  Anthology  contains  a  number  of  epigrams  ascribed  to  Plato 
(though,  in  one  or  two  cases,  to  other  authors  also).  The  fact  of 
the  ascription  does  not  prove  authenticity.  On  the  other  side, 
the  manner  and  diction  of  Greek  epigram  is  so  stereotyped  that 
it  would  probably  be  impossible  to  prove  any  of  these  compositions 
spurious  on  linguistic  grounds.  The  collection  will  be  found  most 
conveniently  in  Hiller-Crusius,  Anthologia  Lyrica,*  Pt.  /.  The 
items  which,  if  genuine,  would  throw  some  light  on  Plato's  per- 
sonality are  i,  the  well-known  couplet  on  Agathon,  translated  by 
Shelley  ;  8,  the  lines  on  Alexis  and  Phaedrus  ;  14,  15,  two  famous 
couplets  on  a  beautiful  boy,  perhaps  called  Aster  ;  7,  a  fine  epigram 
commemorative  of  Dion,  i  and  8,  at  any  rate,  if  genuine,  would 
prove  Plato  to  have  had  the  "  erotic  "  temperament.  To  my  own 
mind,  the  occurrence  of  the  names  Agathon  and  Phaedrus  is  proof 
of  spuriousness.  The  author  clearly  has  in  his  mind  the  parts 
taken  by  Agathon  the  poet  and  Phaedrus  of  Myrrhinus  in  Plato's 
great  IQIDTMOS  Adyog  the  Symposium,  and  has  forgotten  that  both 
were  grown  men  when  Plato  was  under  twelve.  I  see  no  reason 
why  most  of  the  other  epigrams  should  not  be  Plato's,  except  that 
there  is  no  particular  reason  why  they  must  be.  Even  the  lines 
on  Dion,  though  worthy  of  Plato,  can  hardly  be  said  to  contain 
anything  which  might  not  be  said  by  any  other  good  epigrammatist. 
And  it  is,  perhaps,  hardly  likely  that  Plato,  writing  after  he  was 
seventy  about  his  devotion  to  a  friend  who  had  lived  to  be  over 
fifty,  would  use  the  word  EQWS  to  describe  the  attachment.  I 
fear  we  must  be  content  to  say  that  though  some  of  the  verses 
may  be  Plato's,  none  need  be  so. 

A  more  interesting  personal  document  is  Plato's  Will  (D.L. 
iii.  41-43).  The  probability  is  that  this  and  the  Wills  of  Aristotle 
and  Theophrastus  are  genuine.  The  Academy  would  have  legal 
reasons  for  safeguarding  the  document,  just  as  a  society  to-day 
preserves  its  charter  of  incorporation  or  its  title-deeds.  The  Will 
runs  thus  :  "  Plato  leaves  possessions  and  devises  them  as  here- 
uncler.  The  property  at  Iphistiadae  bounded  on  the  N.  by  the 
road  from  the  shrine  at  Cephisia,  on  the  S.  by  the  shrine  of  Heracles 
at  Iphistiadae,  on  the  E.  by  the  land  of  Archestratus  of  Phrearria, 
on  the  W.  by  the  land  of  Philippus  of  Chollidae,  shall  be  neither 
sold  nor  alienated,  but  secured  in  every  way  to  the  boy  Adimantus.1 
The  property  at  Iresidae  purchased  from  Callimachus  and  bounded 
on  the  N.  by  the  land  of  Eurymedon  of  Myrrhinus,  on  the  S.  by 
the  land  of  Demostratus  of  Xypate,  on  the  E.  by  the  land  of  the 
said  Eurymedon,  on  the  W.  by  the  Cephisus.2  .  .  .  Item,  three 
minae  of  silver.  Item,  a  silver  goblet,  weight  165  dr.  Item,  a 
cup,  weight  45  dr.  Item,  a  gold  finger-ring  and  earring,  com- 

1  Presumably  a  descendant  (?  grandson)  of  Plato's  eldest  brother. 

2  There  is  no  statement  about  the  way  in  which  this  property  is  devised. 
Either  the  text  is  defective  or  we  must  understand  that  this  property  also 
is  part  of  the  settlement  on  Adimantus. 


APPENDIX  555 

bined  weight  4^  dr.  Euclides  the  stone-cutter  owes  me  three 
minae.  I  give  Artemis  her  freedom.  I  leave  the  following  house- 
hold slaves,  Tychon,  Bictas,  Apollonides,  Dionysius.  Also  the 
household  furniture  specified  in  the  annexed  schedule  of  which 
Demetrius  has  the  duplicate.  I  leave  no  unpaid  debts.  I  appoint 
as  executors  Leosthenes,  Speusippus,  Demetrius,  Hegias,  Eury- 
medon,  Callimachus,  Theopompus." 

By  comparison  with  the  similar  wills  of  Aristotle  and  Theo- 
phrastus  we  can  see  that  Plato  was  by  no  means  in  affluent  circum- 
stances. 


See  further  on  the  works  dealt  work  above : 

SHORE Y,  P. — What  Plato  Said  (pp.  415-444,  "  Doubtful  and 
Spurious  Dialogues  "). 

SOUILHE,  J. — Platon,  Dialogues  Suspects  (Paris,  1930.  The 
author  tends  to  accept  the  Clitophon,  and  Alcibiades  I)  : 
Platon,  Dialogues  Apocryphes.  (Paris,  1930.) 

FRIEDLANDER,  P. — Die  Platonischen  Schriften  (Berlin  and 
Leipzig,  1930),  pp.  117-127  (on  Hipparchus),  147-155  (on 
Theages),  233-245  (on  Alcibiades  I).  All  these  are  accepted. 


INDEXES 

I.     INDEX  OF  PROPER  NAMES 


(This  index  makes  no  pretensions  to  be  exhaustive,  but  it  is  trusted  that 
it  will  be  found  sufficient) 


Academy  (the),  5-7,  21,  286,  290,  318, 
343  n.,  375.  37».  393,  4°9  «-.  4*7. 
464,  503  ff.,  529,  53L  544 

Acton,  Lord,  472 

Adam,  ].,  396  n.,  397  n.,  522 

Addison,  J.,  5 

Adimantus,  2,  263,  271 

Adrastus,  510  n. 

Aeschines  (orator),  156,  165  n.,  212  n. 

Aeschines  (of  Sphettus),  35  n.,  132  n., 
133  n.,  143,  147, 163  n.,278,  517  n., 
521  n.,  522  n.,  525  n.,  534  n.,  550, 

553 

Aeschylus,  147  n.,  279 
Agathon,  210  ff.,  221,  240,  554 
Alcibiades,  13,  44,  91  n.,  u6n.,  127, 

158,    161,    165  n.,    210,    233,    236, 

309  n.,  473,  512-14,  550 
Alcmaeon,   120,   184  n.,   194,   306  n., 

453 

Alexander  (Aphrodisiensis),  355 
Alexander,  S.,  455 
Amipsias,  58,  91  n. 
Anaxagoras,  83,  199,  201,  208,  212, 

214,  294.  3H'  352,  387,  449  n.,  524, 

55i 

Anaximander,  447-448,  457 
Andocides,  158,  237,  550  n. 
Antiochus  (of  Ascalon) ,  544 
Antipater  (of  Sidon),  533 
Antiphon  (orator),  101-102 
Antiphon  (son  of  Pyrilampes),  351 
Antiphon  (sophist),  101-102,  119  n., 

271,  336 
Antisthenes,  35  n.,  86  n.,  89  n.,  96  n., 

180  n.,  273,  331  n.,  333  n.,  3860., 

423  n.,  522  n. 
Anytus,   117  n.,   130,   140,   158,   167, 

173  n. 

Apollodorus  (of  Phalerum),  210 
Arcesilaus,  12  n.,  528 
Archelaus  (of  Macedon),  105,  113,  527 


Archelaus  (philosopher),  199,  383 

Archer-Hind,  R.  D.,  542 

Archytas,  6,  8,  322,  542,  543 

Aristarchus  (of  Samos),  449 

Aristides,  57,  128,  142  n. 

Aristippus  (of  Cyrene),  427,  434, 
548  n.,  553 

Aristocles  (Peripatetic),  353 

Ariston,  i,  2 

Aristophanes  (Byz.),  n,  497 

Aristophanes  (Com.),  2  n.,  51  n.,  58, 
75,  85,  105,  n6n.,  125  n.,  129  n., 
161,  163  n.,  209,  210,  219,  220,  234, 
240-241,  263  n.,  264,  325  n.,  461 

Aristotle,  3,  6,  10,  13,  14,  17,  26,  32  n., 
35,  41,  61,  64,  76,  81  n.,  82  n.,  90, 
105  n.,  120,  148  n.,  176,  185,  203, 
235,  258  n.,  269,  286,  297  n.,  312  n., 
328  n.,  334  n.,  341  n.,  345,  347  n., 

350  n.,  356,  376~378>  393.  4°6. 
408  ff.,  413  n.,  415,  417,  423  n., 
427,  443,  447-449,  45°  n.,  469,  472, 
484  n.,  492,  503  ff.,  536  n.,  538  n., 
544.  555.  al. 

Aristoxenus,  i  n.,  283 

Aspasia,  13,  41,  42,  278 

Athenaeus,  541,  547  n.,  553 

Atticus,  443 

Augustine,  St.,  28  n.,  225,  232  n.,  263, 
490  n. 

Axiochus,  90,  550  ff. 

Bentley,  R.,  16  n. 

Berkeley,  G.,  152  n. 

Bethe,  E.,  213  n. 

Bevan,  E.,  211  n. 

Bignone,  E.,  102  n, 

Blake,  W.f  119  n.,  209,  220 

Blass,  F.,  1 6  n. 

Boeckh,  A.,  445  n.,  448,  540,  545-546 

Bois-Reymond,  E.  du,  57 

Bonaventura,St.,  225 


557 


558 


PLATO:   THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 


Bosanquet,  B.,  277 

Bradley,  F.  H.,  288,  329 

Broad,  C.  D.,  548  n. 

Browning,  R.,  308  n. 

Brunnecke,  H.,  534  n. 

Buraet,  J.,  9,  19,  101  n.,  102  n.,  104, 
120  n.,  132  n.,  137  n.,  146  ff.,  151, 
153  n.,  156  ff.,  163  n.,  175  ff.,  178  if., 
199  ff.,  207,  210,  231,  233,  287, 
289,  294,  318  n.,  320,  342  n.,  346, 
372>  376,  383ff->  390,  408,  41 i* 
433  a.,  437-438,  448-449,  484- 
485  n.,  495  n.,  517.  51$,  al. 

Bury,  J.  B.,  320  n. 

Bury,  R.  G.,  211  n.,  214  n.,  215-216, 
41 7n.,  434 

Butler,  J.,  270,  271,  315  n. 

Callias,  24,  75-76,  76  n.,  237,  409 
Callicles,  105,  115 
Callippus,  8 
Camillus,  M.  Furius,  9 
Campbell,  L.,  u,  18,  381  n. 
Carlyle,  T.,  116,  317,  473 
Carnot  (Sadi),  principle  of,  195 
Cephalus,  263  n.,  266-267 
Chaerephon,  105,  106  n.,  161 
Charmides,  2,  3,  49,    158,  162,  240, 

532 
Chesterton,  G.  K.,  34  n.,  162  n.,  269, 

290,  322,  344 
Cicero,  M.  Tullius,  14, 1 6,  90,  319,  448, 

533  n.,  542 
Cobet,  G.,  1 6  n. 
Connus,  91  n. 
Copernicus,  N.,  Copernicanism,  449, 

45i»  518 

Crashaw,  R.,  225 
Cratylus,  3,  69  n.,  76 
Critias  (elder),  2,  220,  437 
Critias  ("  oligarch  "),  2,  3,  49  ff .,  138, 

162,  165  n.,  548 
Crito,  97  n.,  167  n. 
Croiset,  M.,  522 
Cudworth,  R.,  151 
Cyrenaics,  427,  548 
Cyrus,  471 
Cyrus  (the  younger),  129 

Damon  or  Damonides  of  Oea,  58,  263, 

524*  55i 

Danaids,  the,  120  n. 
Dante,  121  n.,  220,  250 
Darius  I,  117,  471 
Darwin,  C.,  293 

Democritus,  208,  293,  384,  531  n. 
De  Morgan,  A.,  88  n. 
Demus    (son    of    Pyrilampes),     105, 

116  n. 
Dercylides,  10-11,  521,  544 


Descartes,  199,  200  n.,  201,  290,  313, 

454 

Dickens,  C.,  63  n. 

Diels,  H.,  5  n.,  346  n.,  449  n.,  458  n. 
Dies,  A.,  315  n.,  423  n. 
Diogenes  (of  Apollonia),  177,  199,  220 
Diogenes  (Cynic),  423  n. 
Dion,  7,  8,  20,  372 
Dionysius  I,  5,  7,  372,  541 
Dionysius  II,  7-9,  22  n.,  284,  356  n., 

371  ff.,  465 
Diotima  (of  Mantinea),  11411.,  146- 

147-  224 

Dittenberger,  W.,  18 
Dittmar,  H.,  41,  45,  75  n.,  262,  278  n., 

522  n.,  524  n.,  534  n.,  538  n.,  550  n., 

552 
Dropides,  2 

Echecrates,  542 
Ecphantus,  346 

Empedocles,  69  n.,  134,  177,  194,  207, 
218,  308  n.,  345,  383,  387,  396,  436, 

454.  4^1 

Epaminondas,  320,  463-464,  484  n. 
Epicurus,  551 
Epimemdes,  465 
Eratosthenes,  I 

Eryximachus,  69  n.,  210,  216-217, 314 
Euclides    (geometer),    290-293,    324, 

377.  507 
Euclides  (of  Megara),  4,  176,  184  n., 

287,  320  ff .,  353,  386 
Eudemus,  322 
Eudoxus,  7,  290,  322,  373,  410,  434, 

447,  451,  485  n.,  498,  499  n.,  504  ff . 
Euphraeus,  541 
Euripides,    83  n.,   85,    105,    118-119, 

122  n.,  162  n.,  223  n.,  306  n.,  314 
Eurytus,  354 

Euthydemus,  77,  79  n.,  91  ff. 
Euthyphro,  77  n.,  83,  146-147 

Favorinus  (of  Aries),  i  n.,  552 
Fichte,  J.  G.,  478  n. 
Francis  (of  Assisi),  St.,  295 
Franklin,  B.,  247 
Frege,  G.,  293,  505  n. 
Friedlander,  P.,  522 

Galileo,  G.,  283 

Glaucon,  2  n.,  263,  271,  517 

Goethe,  J.  W.,  18,  296 

Gomperz,  Th.,  142  n. 

Gorgias,  29,  104-105,  108  n.,  129  n., 

134,  221,  314,  408,  430 
Grote,  George,  16  n.,  29,  97,  241  n., 

260,  357,  372,  421,  448,  522,  532  n. 
Grote,  John,  298 
Grotius,  Hugo,  267  n.,  487 


INDEXES 


559 


Hackforth,  R.,  541  n. 

Harder,  R.,  544  n. 

Hardy,  G.  H.,  505  n.,  511  n. 

Heiberg,  J.,  504  n. 

Helicon,  373 

Heraclitus,    Heracliteans,    69  n.,    70, 

85,   185,    195,   218,   325  n.,   337  ff., 

350  n.,  383,  387 
Hermann,  C.  F.,  522,  544 
Hermias,  532,  542 
Hermocrates,  437 
Hermodorus,  4,  176 
Hermogenes,  75-76 
Herodotus,   85,    122  n.,   276,   2790., 

297,  310 
Hesiod,  52,  69,  150  n.,  167,  228,  278, 

346,  395.  452.  500 
Hipparchus,  535 
Hippasus,  195 
Hippias,  29  ff.,  241,  252 
Hippocrates  (geometer),  322 
Hippocrates  (med.),  218,  315,  459 
Hobbes,  T.,  120  n.,  151,  244,  268 
Homer,  35,  38-40,  51,  52,  82,  223  n., 

228,  241,  278,  317,  394,  425,  470 
Hume,  D.,  31,  48,  434 
Hutcheson,  F.,  151 
Huxley,  T.  H.,  194:8. 

lamblichus,  322,  436  n. 

Immisch,  O.,  551 

Isocrates,  3,  5,  19,  43,  44,  101,  147  n., 
165  n.,  212,  238,  263  n.,  301,  310, 
318-319,  336,  373,  401,  473,  529, 


Jackson,  H.,  417 

Jaeger,  W.,  15,  343  n.,  356  n.,  489  n., 

53i  n.,  542 

John  of  the  Cross,  St.,  225 
Johnson,  Samuel,  472 
Johnson,  W.  E.,  377 
Jowett,  B.,  522 
Justinianus,  Flavius  (Emperor),  487 

Kant,  I.,  16,  50-51,  55,  94,  124  n., 
140  n.,  148,  189,  191-192,  195,  207, 
271,  291,  376,  430 

Laches,  58  ff. 

Leibniz,  G.  W.,  199,  293,  423,  442 

Leodamas,  322,  543 

Leon  (of  Salamis),  157,  165 

Leon  (Academic),  ^52  n. 

Leucippus,  384 

Libanius,  117  n. 

Locke,  J.,  151 

Lorimer,  W.  L.,  515,  553  n. 

Luria,  S.,  102  n. 

Lutoslawski,  W.,  18-19,  522  ri 


Lycurgus,  466,  471 
Lysias,    43,     157-158,    212,     263  n., 
300  ff.,  310  ff.,  318 

Macaulay,  T.  B.,  159,  250,  257 

Meletus,  157  ff.,  163,  170 

Melissus,  357 

Menedemus,  357 

Meno,  129-130,  538 

Meton,  449 

Meyer,  E.,  14,  16  n.,  372 

Meyerson,  £.,  288 

Milhaud,  G.,  507  n. 

Mill,  J.  S.,  122,  258,  298 

Miltiades,  126 

Morris,  W.,  473 

Miiller,  F.,  498 

Newman,  J.  H.,  413  n. 
Newton,  Isaac,  283,  441,  506 
Nicias,  58,  105  n. 
Nietzsche,  F.,  116,  119 

"  Ocellus,"  518,  543 

Orpheus,  Orphics,  128,  136,  147, 
150  n.,  162  n.,  167,  175,  178,  186  n., 
272,  279,  299  n.,  308  n.,  433  n.,  452 

Panaetius,  546 

Parmenides,  83,  85,  96  n.,  327,  337- 

338,  349  #..  383,  387 
Parmentier,  L.,  22  n..  301  n. 
Pausanias,  214,  548  n. 
Peano,  G.,  293,  369 
Perdiccas,  541 
Pericles,  2,  41,  44,  74,  109,  123,  126. 

242,  314,  523-524.  al. 
Perictione,  I,  2,  351,  517 
Phaedrus,  210,  212,  300,  311  n.,  554 
Pherecydes,  383 
Philippus  (of  Opus),  14,  17,  497 
Philistion,  459 
Philistus,  541 
Philolaus,     I2on.,     175,     194,     207, 

346  n.,  436  n.,  459 
Pindar,  38,  117 
Pittacus,  253  ff. 

Plotinus,  225,  232,  300,  389,  396  n. 
Plutarch,  208,  443,  450,  464  n.,  491, 

512  n. 
Polemarchus,   263  n.,   266-271,   301, 

310 

Pollock,  Sir  F.,  539  n. 
Polycrates   (sophist),    104  n.,    1170, 

165  n.,  211  n.,  318  n. 
Polyxenus  (sophist),  355  ff.,  373 
Posidonius,  120  n.,  281 
Post,  L.  A.,  541  n.,  543  n. 
Potone,  2 
Praxiphanes,  319  n. 


560 


PLATO:  THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 


Pioclus,  ii,  14,  17,  37,  299,  352-353» 
386,  396  n.,  497,  498  n.,  510  n., 
543  n. 

Prodicus,  101,  240,  252,  254,  325,  549, 

55i 

Protagoras,  72,  79,  82,  91  n.,  96  n., 
127  n.,  141,  236,  247  n.,  314,  325  ff., 

333  ff-.  35°  n-.  381 

Pufendorf,  S.,  487 

Pyrilampes,  2,  105,  351 

Pythagoras,  Pythagoreans,  93,  120  n., 
124,  128,  132  n.,  163  n.,  175,  181  n., 
182-183,  i86n.,  194-195,  218,  269, 
281-283,  330,  345-346,  357.  386, 
396,  403,  408  ff.,  412,  414,  426  n., 
448-450,  452  n.,  457,  462,  508  ff. 

Pythodorus  (son  of  Isolochus),  351 

Quiller-Couch,  Sir  A.,  442 
Quintilian,  134  n. 

Rabelais,  F.,  216 

Raeder,  H.,  14,  17,  29v.  375  n.,  417  n., 

498  n.,  522  n.,  525  n. 
Richards,  H.,  16  n. 
Ritter,  C.,  i6n.,   18,  299  n.,  479  n., 

522  n.,  526  n.,  534  n.,  536  n.,  538  n., 

540  n. 

Rivaud,  A.,  437  n.,  461  n. 
Robin,  L.,  512  ff.,  513  n.,  516  n. 
Rohde,  E.,  167 
Rousseau,  J.  J.,  243,  268 
Ruskin,  J.,  280,  473,  487  n. 
Russell,  B.,  293 
Ryssel,  V.,  553 

Schanz,  M.,  553 

Schleiermacher,  F.,  375  n. 

Scotus,  Johanne  Duns,  203 

Shaw,  G.  B.,  269 

Shelley,  P.  B.,  268 

Simon,  540,  546 

Simonides,  241  n.,  248  n.,  253  ff. 

Socrates,  3-4,  24,  27-28,  41-42,  58, 
75,  100  n.,  104,  ii2n.,  129-130, 
141,  156-157,  166-167,  173  n., 
175  ff.,  199-200,  211,  233,  290, 
309  n.,  322,  324,  348,  352,  372,  375, 
385-386,  439-440.  532 

Socrates  (the  younger),  393,  394  n., 

543 

Solon,  2,  317,  437,  439 
Sophocles,  279,  297,  306  n.,  314 
Souilhe",  J.,  544  n. 
Spengel,  L.,  375 
Speusippus,  n,  120,  148  n.,  373,  377, 

409,  416  n.,  423  n.,  429,  434,  458  n., 

509,  5i5»  542,  545.  553 


Spinoza,   B.,   192  n.,   197,   428,  442, 

454.  455  n. 
Stallbaum,  G.,  375  n.,  386  n.,  396  n., 

522,  526  n.,  533,  534,  535  n.,  539, 

540,  546  n. 
Stenzel,  J.,  498  n.,  501  n.,  506  n.,  509, 

511  n.,  513  n.,  515-516 
Stesichorus,  305 
Stewart,  J.  A.,  308  n.,  396  n. 
Stout,  G.  F.,  418  n. 

Thackeray,  W.  M.,  no  n. 
Theaetetus,    20,    290,    320  ff.,    393, 

504 

Themis  tocles,  109,  123,  142 
Theodorus  (geometer),  322,  393 
Theon  (of  Smyrna),  449  n.,  510  n. 
Theophrastus,  346  n.,  450,  555 
Theopompus,  547  n. 
Thomas  Aquinas,  St.,  151  n.,  232  n., 

472 

Thompson,  W.  H.,  299  n. 
Thrasylus,  10,  n,  41,  521,  531  n.,  544 
Thrasymachus,  263  ff.,  267,  313,  536 
Thucydides  (historian),  296 
Thucydides  (son  of  Melesias),  57 
Timaeus  (historian),  5  n. 
Timaeus  of  Locri,  120  n.,  292,  322  n., 

436 

Ueberweg,  F.,  n 

Varro,  M.  Terentius,  n,  252,  489 

Ward,  James,  57  n.,  199 

Ward,  W.  G.,  196 

Whitehead,  A.  N.,  190  n.,  293,  440, 

456  n. 
Wilamowitz-Moellendorf,  U.  von,  15, 

16,  103  n.,  117  n.,  333  n.,  464,  542, 

552 
Wordsworth,  W.,  283 

Xavier,  St.  Francis,  212,  234 
Xenocrates,    10,    n,    148  n.,    416  n., 

423  n.,    429,    442,    443  n.,    464  n., 

503  ff.,  515,  534,  545 
Xenophanes,  383 
Xenophon,  29,  49  n.,  52  n.,  101  n., 

129,  166,  209-210,  214,  322,  523  ti , 

524  n.,  525,  529  n.,  533  n.,  547  n. 

Zeller,  E.,  11,  373^,  443,  491,  544 
Zeno  (of  Elea),  91-92,  98  n.,  100  n., 

199,  203,  290,  311-312,  349 ff. 

361  ff.,  505 
Zeuthen,  H.,  504  n. 
Zoroaster,  524  n. 


II.     INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS 


(The  list  is  unavoidably  far  from  exhaustive) 


Analysis      (logical).      See      Division 

(logical) 

Analysis  (mathematical),  511  ff. 
Arithmetic,  290  ff.,  323-324,  342,  430, 

485.  507-513 
Art  (fine),  279-280 
Art  (the  statesman's),  97-98,  530-531, 

539 
Association  (of  **  Ideas  "),  136,  186- 

187 
Astronomy  (Platonic),  447,  452,  485, 

498-500,  518 

Beauty,  34,  113,  229-231,  280,  308 
Being    and    Becoming,     95,     202  ff.. 

226  ff.,    326  ff.,    337,    383  ff.,    414- 

415,  427  ff.,  440  ff. 
Being    and    Not-Being,    85-86,    96, 

388  392 

Categories  (Platonic),  386  ff. 
Causality,  34,  202  ff .,  415,  441, 453, 491 
Classes  (in  Republic),  275-276 
Comic,  the,  analysis  of,  425-426 
Conceptualism,  357 
Constitutionalism,  375,  393,  401-404, 

470-474 

Copula,  the,  392 
Courage,  57  ff.,  248-249,  257  ff.,  280- 

282,  466-467 
Creation,  391,  442-444 

Definition,  47,  132,  149,  151,  248 
Democracy,  126  ff.,  140  ff.,  157,  296, 

401  ff.,  471  ff. 
Depletion  and   Repletion,    120,   217, 

297.  4i8  ff.,  453.  458 
Dialectic,   82,   98,   224,   230,   291  ff., 

313.  387.  41*,  430.  497 
Division  (logical),  153,  313,  375~395 

passim,  398-400,  412 
Drama,  criticism  of,  279-280 
Dyad,  the  Platonic,  512-513 

Earth,  motion  of,  448  ff.,  485 
Economics  273-275,  276,  478,  534  ff., 

548  a. 


Education,    2375.,    241  ff.,    278  ff., 

480,  482-486 
Eristic,  86  n.,  89  ff.,  380 
Eros,    Platonic   conception   of,    224- 

231.  305-309 
Evil,   involuntariness  of,   26-27,   37- 

38,  112,  259,  459,  476;    source  of, 

455.  476.  491-492 

Family,  the,  in  Republic,  277-278  ; 
in  Laws,  480  -482 

Forms,  in  minor  Socratic  dialogues, 
30  n.  (Hippias  I),  70-71  (Lysis), 
8 1  (Cratylus)  ;  in  Gorgias,  112  n., 
121  n.  ;  in  Meno,  132  ;  in  Euthy- 
phro,  149  ;  in  Phaedo,  181  n., 
190  n.,  202-203,  204-206  ;  in 
Symposium,  230  ff.  ;  in  Proiagoras, 
257  ;  in  Republic,  286-289  ;  in 
Phaedrus,  308  ;  why  absent  from 
Theaetetus,  348  ;  in  Pavmenidcs, 
349-359  ;  in  Sophistes,  384-386, 
388-389  ;  in  Philebus,  417-418  ;  in 
Timaeus,  442,  456 

Forms,  Aristotelian  criticism  of, 
508  ff.,  518 

Forms  and  numbers,  503  ff. 

Forms  and  sensibilia,  188,  190,  202, 
353-359,  411.  442.  508,  514 

Friendship,  64-74,  537 

Geometry,    137-138,    186-188,    289- 

291,  324.  36i.  485.  5°i»  5°4.  5*3- 

5M 
God,  Platonic  doctrine  of,  442,  489- 

494.     See  also  s.v.  Good,  Form  of 
Good,    Form   of,    231-232,    285-289, 

441-442 
Good,  Goods,  nature  of,    26-28,  227, 

257  ff.,  410  ff.,  431  ff.,  475  ff. 
Goods,  hierarchy  of,  27-28,  73,  93,  99, 

114-115,    144-145,    180  ff.,   227  ff., 

295  ff->  304.  43i  ff-.  475  ff«.  522  ff. 
Goodness.     See  Virtue 
Guardians    (in    Republic),    275-276. 

280,  282-284,  295 
"  Gymnastic,"  in,  460,  482,  486 


561 


562 


PLATO:  THE  MAN  AND  HIS  WORK 


Health,  physical  and  moral,  49,  70, 
120  n.,  123,  132  n.,  170,  194,  217- 
218,  269-270,  315  n.,  332,  402,  415, 
459-460,  537,  548 

Hedonism,  120,  258-261,  298,  420  ff., 

427-429,433-435.  4.76~477 
Homo  mensura  doctrine,    79,   96  n., 

247  n.,  251,  325-334»  336-337*  474 
"  Hypothesis,"  nature  of,  139,  201- 

202,  258  n.,  289  ff .,  359-364 

Imitation  (artistic),  86,  381-382,  391 
Immoralism,  115  ff.,  267  if. 
Immortality,    arguments    for,     136, 

138  n.,  183-206,  306,  452,  491,  55i 
Incommensurable,   the,    137  n.,   322, 

324,  414,  444,  485,  501  n.,  504  ff. 
Inspiration    (poetic),    38-41,    162  n., 

234,  256,  306 

Justice,  in,  114,  248,  249,  474,  488, 
498,  530.  537 

Knowledge,  character  of,  27,  54  ff., 
94,  97-98,  284-285,  320-348,  389- 
392,  429-431,  440-441,  498  ff. 

Knowledge  and  Opinion,  108,  125  ff., 
143,  246,  280,  339-348,  390-391, 
440 

Knowledge  and  Sensation,  iSoff., 
187,  290  ff.,  325-339,  384-385, 
453  ff- 

Language,  functions  of,  77-82,  84-89 
Law,    character   of,    403  ff.,    474  ff., 

538  «. 
Lives,  the  three,  125,  191,  213,  229, 

260,  281,  298 

Mean,  doctrine  of  the,  269,  399,  406, 

415 

Music,  279  ff.,  468,  482-483,  485 
Mythology,  current,  150  n.,  271-272, 
301,  452,  590  n. 

Necessity,  454-456 

N6/xos   and  Morality,  no  ff.,  244  ff., 

266  ff.,  334,  336,  490 
Numbers.     See  Forms 

Perception,  theory  of,  325-339,  453 
Philosopher,    character    of,     I79ff., 

282  ff.,  334-335.  53i 
Planets,  446  ff.,  485,  499-500 
Pleasure   and    Pain,    psychology   of, 

120-122,  297,  418-427,  458,  476  ; 

metaphysics  of,  427-429 
Prayer,  526  ff. 


Predication,  151.  202-205,  287,  369, 

386-392 
Pre-existence,  136,  186,  188,  196,  307, 

452,  460 
Prophecy,  305,  458 

Reincarnation,    128,    136,    184,    191, 

307  ff.,  460 
Reminiscence,     theory     of,     I35ff., 

i86ff. 
Rhetoric,  107-112,  122  ff.,  310-319 

Sciences,   hierarchy  of,   289  ff.,   399, 

430,  508  ff. 

Self,  knowledge  of,  28,  53  ff.,  523  ff. 
Sensation,  function  of,  156,  187,  338  - 

339,  453 
Sicily,  Plato's  projects  in,  7-9,  284, 

336,  37I~374»  465 
Socialism  not  Platonic,  276,  477  ff. 
Society,  stages  of,  in  Republic,  273  ff. ; 

in  Laws,  470  ff. 
Sophist,  definition  of,  379-381,  389- 

392 
Sophrosyne,    nature   of,    47  ff.,    123, 

248-250,  285,  405,  466  ff .,  530 
Soul,  definition  of,  306,  491,  525 
Soul,  tendance  of,  27-29,  52,  65,  128, 

145,  154,  164,  180  ff.,  401,  460,  525 
Soul,  tripartite,  120  n.,  281,  307,  458 
Statesman,  character  and  function  of, 

in,    125,   281,  282-285,  397-399* 

401-404,  474  ff.,  525 
Stoicism,   12  n.,  526,  528,  533,  544, 

550 

Temperance.     See  Sophrosyne 
Theology,  the  Platonic,  489-493 
Tragedy,  162,  234,  279-280,  483 

Veracity,  35  ff. 

Virtue,  "  popular "  and  "  philo- 
sophic," 143-145,  183,  246,  257  ff., 
280  ff. 

Virtue,  unity  of,  28,  57,  64,  94,  132- 
133,  247-251,  257-261,  284-285 

Virtue,  whether  identical  with  know- 
ledge, 28,  56-57,  62-64,  93ff»» 
143-145,  183,  259-261 

Virtue,  whether  teachable,  i3off., 
242-246,  262,  267 

War,  274,  466,  483 

Wine,  uses  and  dangers  of,  467-469 

Woman,   goodness   of,   42,    132-133, 

220,  278,  484 
Women,  status  of,  in  Republic,  277- 

278  ;  in  Laws,  481,  482,  484,  485 


