POLITICS AND PHILOSOPHY IN
PLATO’S MENEXENUS
Menexenus is one of the least studied among Plato’s works, mostly because
of the puzzling nature of the text, which has led many scholars either to
reject the dialogue as spurious or to consider it as a mocking parody of
Athenian funeral rhetoric. In this book, Pappas and Zelcer provide a persuasive
alternative reading of the text, one that contributes in many ways to
our understanding of Plato, and specifically to our understanding of his
political thought.
The book is organized into two parts. In the first part the authors offer a
synopsis of the dialogue, address the setting and its background in terms of the
Athenian funeral speech, and discuss the alternative readings of the dialogue,
showing their weaknesses and strengths. In the second part, the authors offer
their positive interpretation of the dialogue, taking particular care to explain
and ground their interpretive criteria and method, which considers Plato’s text
not simply as a de-contextualized collection of philosophical arguments but
offers a theoretically informed reading of the text that situates it firmly within its
historical context.
This book will become a reference point in the debate about the Menexenus
and Plato’s political philosophy more generally and marks an important
contribution to our understanding of ancient thought and classical Athenian
society.
Nickolas Pappas is Professor of Philosophy at City College and the Graduate
Center, City University of New York, USA.
Mark Zelcer is Visiting Assistant Professor of Philosophy at the State
University of New York, Oswego, USA.
Page Intentionally Left Blank
POLITICS AND
PHILOSOPHY IN
PLATO’S
MENEXENUS
Education and Rhetoric, Myth
and History
Nickolas Pappas and
Mark Zelcer
First published 2015
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2015 Nickolas Pappas and Mark Zelcer
The right of Nickolas Pappas and Mark Zelcer to be identified as authors of
this work has been asserted by them in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known
or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent
to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Pappas, Nickolas, 1960- author.
Politics and philosophy in Plato’s Menexenus : education and rhetoric, myth and
history / Nickolas Pappas and Mark Zelcer.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Plato. Menexenus. 2. Rhetoric, Ancient. 3. Rhetoric--Philosophy. I. Zelcer, Mark,
author. II. Title.
B376.P37 2015
184--dc23
2014029207
ISBN: 978-1-84465-820-6 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-74446-9 (ebk)
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Taylor & Francis Books
CONTENTS
Acknowledgements vii
Introduction 1
An eccentric dialogue 1
The question of parody 4
If not parody 7
PART I
The Menexenus, its persons, its problems 13
1 Synopsis of the dialogue 15
Opening dialogue (234a–236d) 15
Funeral speech (236d–249c) 16
Closing dialogue (249d–e) 19
2 Persons and dates of the dialogue 20
Socrates 20
Aspasia 31
Other tutors: Connus, Antiphon and Lamprus 37
Archinus and Dion 40
Menexenus 42
Pericles 45
3 The Athenian funeral speech 58
The genre: three cautions 58
The Menexenus against the backdrop of its genre 67
The funeral speech in Loraux 71
4 The Menexenus as parody, as improvement 77
The relationship between the two funeral speeches 77
Positive arguments: the Menexenus speech as improvement 82
Positive argument from precedent 85
Negative arguments: against the Menexenus speech as parody 88
PART II
Education and rhetoric 95
5 Scenes of instruction; Pericles’ missed opportunities 97
Education and rhetoric 97
Pericles and moral education 99
Scenes of instruction in the Menexenus 103
Instruction as intrusion 111
6 Philosophical rhetoric 116
Logos and ergon 116
Praise 121
Improvisation 132
PART III
Myth and history 141
7 Myth 143
Stories of Athens 143
Mythic passages in the Menexenus 146
Plato’s myths 150
Autochthony in Athens 157
Autochthony in Plato 162
Autochthony and nature in the Menexenus 166
Autochthony and human difference in the Menexenus 169
The meanings of autochthony 174
8 History 182
Philosophical history 182
Omissions and other distortions of history 183
The Menexenus and the historians 195
Order in history 199
Soul, city, world 201
A parody of history? 206
Conclusion: Buried in philosophy 214
The Menexenus’s improvements to the funeral speech 214
The Menexenus and other dialogues 215
The Phaedrus 218
Bibliography 222
Index 231
CONTENTS
vi
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Although the Menexenus is a short dialogue and the scholarly literature on it
small compared with every other Platonic work, a book of this kind incurs
many debts. Its ideas arose out of a broad range of research and benefited
from contributions to that research along the way.
Several scholars helped our research in correspondence, often giving us
looks at unpublished material and providing useful specific advice. We
gratefully acknowledge J. E. Lendon, Peter Liddel, Christopher Long, Bruce
Rosenstock, Ed Sanders and Kendall Sharp. M. M. McBride offered generous
comments on earlier versions of this material.
Some parts of this book were presented as lectures. We are happy for this
chance to thank audiences at the Ancient Philosophy Society, at City College
and at Stony Brook University. Heidi Northwood’s comments at the APS
added much of value to the argument now developed in Chapter 8.
We are also grateful to the students at City College, Baruch College and the
Graduate Center, to whom we taught the Menexenus and whose enthusiasm
convinced us to move forward with this project.
From M. Z.: Work on this book often was interrupted, by teaching, a
dissertation, a wedding, a war and fatherhood. I only made it through
because of the support of family and friends. It is a relief, if a small one, that
I can thank them publicly. My parents, siblings and their families, whose
respect for scholarship is unparalleled, have been a great font of generosity
and support. Alex and Rachel Kozlowsky have been extremely encouraging
throughout the whole time I have known them and I am grateful for their
presence in my life. Finally, aharon aharon haviv, Dahlia, sine qua non.
From N. P.: The Menexenus has long been an object of interest. Of the many
teachers I have to thank, William McCulloh is especially relevant. How telling
that he taught Greek at Kenyon College not only to me but also to another
recent scholar of the Menexenus. I am happy to thank Burt Hopkins and
Brian Seitz for many kinds of philosophical help and encouragement. As for
my wife Barbara’s help to me, I can only describe it justly in hyperbolic terms.
I thank her again.
Nickolas Pappas
Mark Zelcer
vii
Page Intentionally Left Blank
INTRODUCTION
An eccentric dialogue
One line from the Menexenus has the sound of a proverb: “It is not hard to
praise Athens among the Athenians”; and Aristotle quotes the sentiment in his
Rhetoric as he might quote a proverb.1 He could not have known that this act of
citation would provide the telling evidence to later centuries that the Menexenus
is a genuine Platonic dialogue, maybe the only conclusive evidence. For in the
absence of this reference in Aristotle, the unusual character of the Menexenus
would have led most scholars to classify it as spurious.
As things stand, and despite its assured status among the authentic works,
the Menexenus has not found a place in the modern Platonic canon. Although
it has lately been the subject of some discussion by classicists, that discussion
focuses either on the Menexenus’s contribution to the genre of the Athenian
epitaphios logos “funeral oration, funeral speech”,2 or on the information it offers
about the intriguing figure Aspasia of Miletus.3Notwithstanding Charles Kahn’s
invaluable exploration of the Menexenus half a century ago,4 the time since
then has found few philosophers studying the dialogue.5
Why the inattention and the suspicion? The Menexenus may be Plato’s
most eccentric work. It contains very little argumentative back-and-forth; the
voice it represents is that of a shadowy woman; the framing dialogue around
its main speech is a playful tease; and most distinctive, the dialogue orients itself
against another text, whether in parody, homage or intended improvement.
Aside from the brief opening dialogue between Socrates and this character
Menexenus, and a mere breath of closing conversation between them, the
Menexenus amounts to a speech suitable for recitation at public funerals
during wartime and reminiscent of the great speech that Pericles had delivered
early in the Peloponnesian War.6 Socrates has made fun of existing Athenian
funeral rhetoric – at least, Menexenus understands him to be mocking that
rhetoric – and he recites the kind of speech that he says he would give on the
occasion of a public funeral. He claims that his tutor Aspasia composed this
speech, and her credentials are impeccable, she also having (as Socrates says)
written the speech that people attribute to Pericles.
1
The Menexenus already stands out for being so nearly a single stretch of
prose, and not the short-questioning, quick-answering exchanges that typify
Platonic dialogues. It is true that other dialogues contain long speeches too, and
enigmatic ones: think of some long unbroken sections of Plato’s Phaedrus,
Protagoras and Symposium. The Apology is almost entirely a monologue, while
the Timaeus and Critias come as close as the Menexenus does to being one
straight speech speedily introduced by prefatory conversations.
Indeed, many of those other long speeches in the dialogues claim to be the
words of other voices, often voices as exotic as Aspasia’s. Plato ventriloquizes in
the Phaedrus composing a speech about love in the style of the orator Lysias,
in the Symposium with the medical–cosmological speech of Eryximachus
and the tender encomium to love from Agathon. Timaeus in Plato’s Timaeus
is a non-Athenian bringing new cosmologies to town; the Critias’s Critias a
discredited oligarch; Hermocrates (had Plato ever written the dialogue in
which he speaks) a general from the Sicilian city of Syracuse.
As a platform for an unexpected authority’s voice the closest dialogue to
the Menexenus might be Plato’s Symposium, in which Socrates introduces a
view of erôs “love” as the teaching of the priestess Diotima. Diotima, like
Aspasia, is a woman Socrates speaks of as impressive. Nothing is known
about her today, as next to nothing is known about Aspasia. Diotima might
be a Platonic concoction and therefore even less available to historians than
Aspasia is, and yet this unknown woman delivers a philosophically ambitious
discourse on love.7
But the Symposium, the Apology and the Timaeus are among Plato’s most
widely read dialogues. Even that unfinished mythic history the Critias has
earned a special place in cultural history as the account of the island nation
Atlantis. What makes the Menexenus any more eccentric than those specimens?
And does its singularity account for its greater obscurity?
There is this, that the Menexenus revisits and rewrites an existing text.
Even more than it is about Athenian history or about patriotic sentiment it is
about another speech. In this sense, and it is a very specific sense, the
Menexenus possesses a literary quality the other dialogues do not. It needs
to be emphasized that this is a very specific sense of “literary quality”. The
literariness in question is not a matter of beautiful language or appeals to
human emotions, although some treatments of the dialogues as literary
understand what is literary in those terms, and moments in Plato’s critique of
poetry understand the poetic in the same way. Nor does the Menexenus’s
literariness much resemble that aspect of the dialogues that many literarily
minded readings seize on and turn on, namely their being dialogues among
concrete characters set in particular places. The Menexenus does contain
particular characters, and it refers to others worth bearing in mind (Aspasia,
Pericles); but what distinguishes it is the entirely different writing-effect,
sometimes called intertextuality, in which one work rewrites what has
already been written, making its assertions in resistance to a preceding voice.
INTRODUCTION
2
From a modern perspective this feature of the Menexenus makes it precisely
more literary than any other dialogue, which is to say literary in a precise
sense of that word. “Literature” today, largely unlike what Plato’s times
called poetry, implies works that exist in written form, mainly reaching an
audience by being read (silently and individually). The poetry that the
Republic censors is recited by its authors or performed at dramatic festivals,
sung by adolescent choruses or retold to children by their nurses. But Plato
lived at a time that saw oral transmission being replaced by writing and
reading. In Frogs, performed a few years before the trial of Socrates (performed
when Plato would have been in his mid-twenties), even the god Dionysus enjoys
Euripidean tragedies by reading them. Closer to home – as far as the
Menexenus is concerned – Thucydides takes pains to distinguish the history
he wrote from those ostensible rivals composed for recitation before a crowd.
His own history, presumably not delivered orally, is built to last, a ktêma
“possession” es aiei “forever”.8
The new pre-eminence of writing as the standard way to disseminate a work,
with reading as the standard way to experience it, makes one work’s incorporation
of another possible as it had not been before. There is no denying that
Euripides revisits Aeschylean tragedy in numerous ways. Aristophanes takes
over Euripidean scenes to complex effect. But the audiences of Aristophanes and
Euripides typically did not go through two passages side-by-side as Plato’s
readers could do with the speech in the Menexenus, whose precedent was
available for comparison in written form. As close reading becomes possible
when writing is common, so does intimate and specific rewriting that can
now announce itself as such.
In another way the revisitation of an earlier work can be seen as producing
an effect contrary to the effect that Plato’s dialogues achieve with characters’
conversations. For what typically happens in a Platonic dialogue is that its
participants set aside the contexts in which ideas are born. Whether a questioner
(usually Socrates) cross-examines someone else’s beliefs, or the leader develops
a new theory (be it Socrates, the Athenian Stranger, the Stranger from Elea,
Timaeus or Parmenides leading), claims are tested as if they had fallen from
the sky. These claims often begin with what the interlocutor says right now in
conversation. A verse from Homer might give Socrates an idea, or something
from Protagoras that he heard someone talking about, but the integrity of the
texts he quotes from does not concern him.9 Rarely does Socrates dig into a
written work to unearth what it is saying. Even from a distance of millennia
it seems possible to glimpse the unfairness in his reading of Anaxagoras.10
Outside the Menexenus there is one scene above all that finds Socrates
engaged in reading someone else’s composition. Protagoras challenges him
to explicate a bit of Simonides; Socrates tangles with the poem but then
declares the activity impossible. Responding to poems means speaking in the
poets’ absence as one should be speaking in their presence. The only philosophical
method that Socrates acknowledges is back-and-forth conversation
INTRODUCTION
3
with a live interlocutor. Certainly his dismissal of the poets’ wisdom in the
Apology implies that he questioned them. The task they failed at was that of
explaining their own verse. And an enigmatic passage from Diogenes Laërtius’
life of Plato says that Plato, then an aspiring young tragedian, burned his
poems pro tou Dionusiakou theatrou Sôkratous akousas “having heard Socrates
in front of the theatre of Dionysus”. Does this only mean that Plato heard
Socrates talking and put his childish poetry aside to follow him; or does it
refer to Socrates’ cross-examining Plato about the poems he’d written?11 In that
case Socrates is again seeking out poets to examine and not their poems.
If you colour-code philosophical methods as Nietzsche does, the practices
depicted in the dialogues are “blue” philosophy to be contrasted with “grey”
reading. The preface to On the Genealogy of Morals contrasts the grey hue of
Nietzsche’s own genealogy with the Hypothesewesen in’s Blaue “hypothesizing
out of the blue” that characterizes philosophical essentialism, or conceptual
philosophizing. Grey is the colour of the “hard-to-decipher hieroglyphic
writing [Hieroglyphenschrift] of humanity’s moral history” – which makes
grey the colour of reading, especially when the writing was produced so far
away that black marks on white paper blur into grey.12 In these terms the
typical Socratic conversation, treating everything people say as if it had
arrived out of the blue, defines itself as a setting in which one does not read
much in order to do philosophy.
Compare those exchanges among Plato’s people present to one another
with the “exchange of ideas” that takes place in the Menexenus. To read the
speech in the Menexenus is to read with constant reference to the Periclean
speech in Thucydides, as well as with reference to the larger historical narrative
in which Thucydides embeds that speech. What the funeral speech says, it says
with and against the text of Thucydides. It talks by talking back, and hearing
what it says calls for a variety of overhearing that Plato’s dialogues have
mostly shut out of philosophical communication. More than any other work
of Plato’s, this one philosophizes not by inventing something new to say
where no one yet had said anything – or as if no one had said anything yet –
but presupposing what was said before, and so deliberately reducing the
vocabulary it will be able to speak with. This means that the challenge the
Menexenus takes on is the challenge of seeing how much it can say in that
antecedently existing vocabulary.
The question of parody
The word “literary” can signal a type of anxiety among philosophical readers,
when they use the word for what philosophers have written. Sometimes a
literary quality is even taken to distinguish some works by a philosopher
from others by the same author that are more recognizably philosophical –
Repetition from the Concluding Unscientific Postscript, in Kierkegaard’s case,
or Rousseau’s Promenades from his Social Contract.13The anxiety concerns
INTRODUCTION
4
how the reader might find philosophical content in the work. Is Thus Spoke
Zarathustra philosophical in the full sense of containing assertions about
philosophical questions and reasons for accepting them? Or (instead) does its
narrative enact philosophical ideas? And what is the (philosophical) content
of such enactment?
If the Menexenus is literary in a way that no other Platonic dialogue is, and if
its literariness explains why philosophers do not read it more than they do, the
particular species of literariness most often attributed to this work is parody.
Understood as parody, this revisitation of the famous speech by Pericles is a
mockery of the original. Plato writes his own funeral speech, magnifying the
flaws endemic to the genre of such speeches, as a joke at the expense of all
self-important public speakers; but especially a joke at the expense of Pericles,
the legendary democrat and regrettable influence on Athens.14
The prefatory conversation between Socrates and young Menexenus is one
reason readers cite for taking the speech to be a parody, in our opinion a
disproportionately influential cause of this interpretation. Already Plutarch
comments that meta paidias ta prôta gegraptai “the first part was written
playfully”.15 It is telling, and it should serve as a caution to modern readers,
that Plutarch does not treat this playfulness as cause to take the funeral speech
as a joke. Apparently the first part of the dialogue can have fun without spoiling
the seriousness of what follows. Even with respect to the opening dialogue, that
word that Plutarch uses, paidia “play”, says less than “joke” would about the
sentiments Socrates expresses in the conversation. (Plutarch’s word picks up
on one of the Republic’s and Sophist’s condemnations of mimêsis, that it is
paidia and not serious.16) Because of the way Plato writes, Plutarch worries
that he should not trust this part for historical information about Aspasia,
namely the claims that she wrote the speech of Pericles and then tutored
Socrates in rhetoric. That Plato might be saying something in a contrary
spirit, condemning Aspasia, does not occur to him. Speaking playfully might
mean that what is said could be exaggerated, wishful, or disengaged from
bitter reality; evidently not (as far as one can tell from Plutarch’s few words)
that what is said is sarcastic and a way of condemning Aspasia.
Aspasia is the second great reason for the lingering fear that Plato cannot be
serious. Patriotic oratory associated with Athens’s leading citizens turns out to
have come from a non-Athenian and a woman – not just any foreign woman,
but one who is known in some sources as a prostitute or madam. If more
information of a reliable kind had been preserved about Aspasia, this reason
for dismissing “her” speech would carry the day. In fact, though, such summary
judgements about Aspasia are both more unequivocal and more decided than
the actual evidence warrants.17
Finally parody is suggested by the long stretch of historical narrative that
takes up most of the Menexenus speech, a military history that reviews “the
Athenian century” from the city’s arrival on the world stage at Marathon,
holding back Persia’s first invasion (490), until the peace that ended the
INTRODUCTION
5
Corinthian War (386), a peace brokered by Persia and signalling Persia’s de
facto hegemonic control over Greece, Persia winning through diplomacy and
money what it could not take by force. Do the distortions and omissions in
this narrative reveal Plato’s facetiousness about patriotic history? If not,
there ought to be some order to the speech that leaves it not simply false and
incomplete, when it is, but false and incomplete in the interests of besting a
more accurate traditional (or Thucydidean) narrative.
After all, tone is hard to prove. Ancient anecdotes prefaced by “He said a
funny thing” now bring a weak smile or bafflement. Indeed – and this familiar
fact seems not to have affected those who call the Menexenus a parody – the
general rule regarding ancient witticisms is that their humorousness was
perceived then rather than now, or then much more than now, not that ancient
audiences failed to detect humour that modern ones all pick up. Almost as a
rule jokes lose their punch (which is why we say you had to be there); almost
never do they become funny much later after having been originally heard as
serious. We will address the question of parody by asking not whether the
Menexenus is serious or funny,18 but whether its speech is intended to
improve upon the original in Thucydides. A defensible answer to that question
will speak to the question of parody, since a parody points to faults in its
original by exaggerating and worsening those faults. If Plato puts this funeral
speech forward as something better than the speech attributed to Pericles, he
is not also spoofing Pericles or the funeral speech tradition. Parodies are not
written that way.
Suppose someone objects that a work can parody some other work and also
be a superior example of the same genre as the original work, and in fact be
intended by its author as superior to the original. This would be a minority
view of parody, if only because one normally sorts parodies into different genres
from their objects. The parody of a love song is a joke-song or a novelty, not
another love song. Spoofs on adventure tales are not adventure tales. And as
a rule parodies do possess those amplified failings.
Rather than quarrel over the meanings of critical terms, the interpretation
in this book will focus on seeing the speech in Plato as intended to improve
on the speech in Thucydides. This reading is denied by every interpreter who
calls the Menexenus a parody. If some readers share our conclusion about
the Platonic speech’s intended superiority, but they still want to call it a
parody on some new understanding of that term, they are welcome to do so.
The question of intended superiority speaks more directly to Plato’s purpose
in writing. Light touch and jokey tone do not prove that he either did or did not
envision this speech delivered in Athens; they do not settle whether he thought
the speech showed how much more a philosopher could accomplish with
public rhetoric than even the best public speakers. Cicero appears to report
that in his (Cicero’s) day Plato’s funeral speech was read aloud annually in
Athens, evidently to a popular audience. The point of this passage is narrow,
arguing for the excellence of Plato’s prose style, but notwithstanding the
INTRODUCTION
6
dispute over how to read Cicero in this passage, he does seem to call the
Menexenus a superior piece of public oratory.19 In similar spirit Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, who lived in the generation after Cicero’s, praised the beauty
of a sentence from the Menexenus speech in his On Literary Composition,
while his essay On Demosthenes celebrates the dialogue as a whole – treating
it not only as something serious or earnest, in other words, but as a good
example of oratory.20
Two centuries after Cicero, during the period now called the Second
Sophistic, the rhetorician Hermogenes of Tarsus comments on the Menexenus
amid his general flattering assessments of Plato, whom he judges to possess
the most beautiful panegyric style of all prose authors. Hermogenes quotes the
funeral speech approvingly for the solemnity with which it opens. He does not
address the question whether Plato meant the speech as a joke – that question
seems not to have occurred to him – but it would be harder to get further
from a joking speech than one that exemplifies solemnity.21
Already the testimony from Cicero, if it is his and it can be trusted, makes
the hypothesis of a parody perverse, comparable with learning that the Irish
Parliament had passed Swift’s “Modest Proposal” into law. What blindness
would the later Athenians have to have been afflicted with to recite a mockery of
the city on patriotic occasions? More to the point, both Cicero and Dionysius
read the speech as a good work of rhetoric, thereby making it easier to see it
as written that way, which is to say written well, hence not as parody. Even
Robert Clavaud, for whom this is counter-evidence against his own view,
seems to concede that Aristotle’s quote from the Menexenus communicates
no hint that Aristotle sees the dialogue as ironic. In fact Clavaud turns to
Dionysius for a judgement about how well the speech is written but does not
trust Dionysius’ sense that it is not written ironically (nor Proclus’ sense for
that matter).22
This book will develop the argument against reading the Menexenus as
parody, not mainly on the basis of praise for the speech from other authors,
rather on the grounds that too many elements in the speech and in the
framing dialogue make more sense, from a Platonic point of view, as intended
improvements upon the speech of Pericles than as parodic exaggerations of
that earlier speech’s failings.23
If not parody
Deciding whether or not the speech is parody does not bring the discussion
to an end. Quite the contrary: “Does Plato mean it?” invites important further
questions, such as: “What does he mean when he means it?”
Take the considerable praise in this speech. Socrates finds every good word
to say about Athens and Athenians. Reading the speech as a parody implies
that it gushes with praise in order to mock the patriotic praise generally found
in funeral speeches. If the speech is not a parody, what does its hyperbole
INTRODUCTION
7
imply about how to use language of praise? Can it be that excessive praise is
really the correct amount – or to put the point conversely, can the speech be
saying that praise rightly calibrated to avoid excess will fall short?
Or consider the abundant Socratic references to education that do not
correspond to anything in the original speech, except insofar as they contradict
Pericles’ contempt for Sparta’s tradition of endless training. Pericles depicts
an Athens whose example teaches other Greek cities but that never had to
do any learning to achieve its excellence. If the Menexenus speech should be
seen as better than Pericles’, what is the speech telling its imaginary audience
when it harps on education? That education is a good thing, to be sure; also
no doubt that Pericles neglected to educate; but maybe also something more
specific about the uses and the possibility of moral education within a
democratic culture.
Above all there is the historical narrative that dominates the speech, which
constitutes Plato’s reply not only to Pericles (and perhaps, through him, to
the funeral speech genre) but also to the entire work of history that contains his
speech, the History of the Peloponnesian War. Thucydides presumed to teach
the world how one writes history, and to a remarkable degree he established
standards of exposition, evidence and explanation. Picture Plato, whose
dialogues rarely talk about history, witnessing the influence Thucydides had
begun to have. What if Plato wished he could curb that influence from the start?
What if he saw some fundamental difference inmethod between how Thucydides
narrated events and how a philosopher would tell the same story?
The difference in methods of historical narrative rests on the kind of difference
that Bernard Williams identifies between Plato (together with other philosophers)
and Thucydides (along with Sophocles), Thucydides finding the world
indifferent to virtue.24 The Thucydidean narrative treads onward driven
by error and chance as much as by the insight of a few remarkable leaders; by
some cities’ grand ambition and restless need to dominate, other cities’ fear
and their self-interested machinations to prevent being dominated. Moral
psychology only rarely accounts for historical change, and then only under
serendipitous circumstances.
The alternative to a Thucydidean narrative does not have to involve
rewriting history so that it forcibly reaches a happy ending. Plato is hardly
committed to optimism about human events; anyway there is only so far that
he could distort Athenian history before losing credibility with the readers who
knew what had happened. But even a sad tale can be told in more than one
way. On some tellings, missed opportunities and misjudgement send history
down one path when it could have gone another way. Other stories make the
trip to the bad end the only way possible. Thus for Plato the preceding century
displays the same psychological forces at work that determine the good city’s
slide through worse forms of government in Republic Books 8 and 9, and
that cause the soul to deteriorate from virtue into the basest vice. In Plato’s
city and soul, happiness issues from the wisest participant’s education of the
INTRODUCTION
8
others; increasing vice and misery occur when the other players rebel against
that oversight. So too on the world stage, where history becomes explicable,
as Plato must have found the version told in Thucydides confusing and
devoid of purpose.
Again, reading the Menexenus speech as a paradigm of philosophical history
requires not reading it as a parody that magnifies the faults of the work it
rewrites. The Menexenus’s history would have to be Plato’s proposal for new
and better history.
Amid these teachings about praise, education and history, philosophers
might also glimpse what example the Menexenus speech is supposed to set for
them. By showing how a philosopher would refashion the political performance
known as the funeral speech, Plato is showing not only what rhetoric is but
also part of who the philosopher is: a speaker who educates in a certain way,
praises in a certain inflated way, worships in a certain way, recounts history
in a certain psychologizing way. On this reading Plato sees that you will not
grasp everything about what philosophers are like when you watch them
officially philosophizing. You should also see how philosophers do the things
that non-philosophers do: philosophers when they’re at home. (One of Plato’s
words for the most capacious home humans have is “cave”. The Republic
makes clear that what philosophers do inside the cave is no small part of
who they are.) So the Symposium makes Socrates not just a philosopher but
also a lover and a fighter, albeit a lover the world never saw before and a kind
of soldier almost as unprecedented. In the same spirit the Menexenus puts the
philosopher up on the speaker’s platform to say, “Here is the philosopher
doing what only democratically chosen leaders have done before now”. This
is perhaps a first motion towards making philosophers into kings.
Some of the claims about the Menexenus in the coming chapters will sound
straightforward. They might be obvious to anyone who reads the dialogue
carefully. Other claims need to be developed against the backdrop of historical
contexts that the general reader does not know. Besides its overall obscurity
of purpose, the greatest barrier to reading the Menexenus, the reason it
remains so unknown within Plato’s hyperfamiliar corpus, is that it is the
most time-bound of his dialogues. The Apology presupposes ancient Greek
judicial standards and expectations, but any modern reader can see what it
means that Socrates is on trial for his life. The Symposium’s model of
courtship between adults and adolescents is not the model in use today, and
the Euthyphro equates religion with a now-alien polytheism, but people do still
fall in love and religion does claim to justify morality, and it can be easy for
readers to see continuities between those dialogues’ concerns and their own.
(Sometimes too easy.) The Menexenus and its funeral speech operate within
such a specific setting that the dialogue’s dominating concern can be hard to
glimpse. Aspasia, the tradition of the funeral speech, the speech of Pericles:
these were familiar to Plato’s contemporaries but hardly known today.
So more than most of the other dialogues this one requires stage-setting,
INTRODUCTION
9
some explanation of the names that appear in the Menexenus and of the
genre that its funeral speech belongs to. These preliminaries will take up the first
part of this book (Chapters 1–4). Many readers will not need those chapters.
But they might help the Menexenus reach an audience it has failed to speak
to before now.
Notes
1 This sentence, from Menexenus 235d, appears twice in the Rhetoric: 1.9 1267b8,
3.14 1415b30.
2 Thus Loraux (1986). In this connection also see Dean-Jones (1995), Frangeskou
(1999), Poulakos (1990), Pownall (2004), Stern (1974).
3 Henry (1995).
4 Kahn (1963); also see Huby (1957).
5 The exceptions are worth citing: Clavaud (1980); Coventry (1989); Long (2003);
Monoson (1992); Rosenstock (1994); Salkever (1993); Wickkiser (1999).
6 The speech of Pericles, commonly referred to as his Funeral Oration, was
apparently delivered in 430. N.B.: Unless otherwise indicated or where it is
obviously CE (e.g. a reference to 1989), all dates are BCE. The reader should bear
in mind that this speech is known only through the version that Thucydides
relates in History of the Peloponnesian War 2.35.1–2.46.2. There is no other
surviving record of the speech, nor even a surviving reference to any source for
the speech besides Thucydides. Thucydides may have compiled several witnesses’
recollections of the speech, combined more than one speech, or otherwise
rewritten what Pericles said. Plato had not been born in 430, so he must have
known the speech through the text of Thucydides’ History.
7 It has even been speculated that Diotima is Aspasia, a fictional character based
so closely on Aspasia as to have been transparent to Plato’s contemporaries.
David Halperin, one proponent of this reading, calls Diotima a non-erotic
“surrogate for Aspasia”: Halperin (1990: 129); cf. Clavaud (1980: 59n.131).
8 Aristophanes Frogs: Dionysus reading tragedies in script, 53–54; each spectator
has a biblion “book”, 1114. On rival historians see Thucydides History 1.22.4.
9 Plato: line from Homer, Lysis 214a; something from Protagoras, Theaetetus 152a.
In this latter dialogue Socrates discounts the act of reading Protagoras without
having done so. The man must possess an esoteric doctrine that he communicates
only to his students, so it is no use reading his book: Theaetetus 152c.
10 Plato Phaedo 98b–99c. On one reconstruction of Anaxagoras that shows the
flaws in Socrates’ reading, see Sedley (2008: 8–12).
11 Plato Protagoras: Socrates reading Simonides, 338c–348a; speaking in poets’
absence, 347e. Socrates dismisses the wisdom of poets, Apology 22b. Diogenes
Laërtius, Lives of the Eminent Philosophers: life of Plato, iii; Plato aspiring poet,
iii.5; “having heard Socrates”, iii.6. On Socrates as interpreter of poetry in
Protagoras see Carson (1992); Pappas (1989).
12 Nietzsche On the Genealogy of Morals Preface §7.
13 Stanley Cavell comments on these and other works – works by philosophers but
not quite in philosophy – with special reference to Wittgenstein’s Philosophical
Investigations: Cavell (2005: 193).
14 Arguments for reading the speech as ironic or parodic have a long history
among modern scholars. Chapter 4 will take up this question in detail; among
recent relevant articles see Long (2003), Salkever (1993), Trivigno (2009). For an
overview of the modern issue see Clavaud (1980: 45–74). Clavaud himself, while
INTRODUCTION
10
reading the Menexenus as parody, takes the object of that parody to be not just
Pericles’ funeral speech but all the funeral speeches of democratic Athens.
15 Plutarch Pericles 24.4.
16 Imitation paidia: Republic 10.602b, Sophist 234b. In the Phaedrus it seems all
writing is paidia: 278b. The Timaeus calls the study of nature paidia: 52d. See
Nehamas (1982: 53–54).
17 Chapter 2 will weigh the ancient testimony concerning Aspasia and its implications
for reading the Menexenus.
18 When Clavaud reviews the literature on the Menexenus he sorts its opposing
sides into “les partisans du sérieux” and “les partisans du comique”. We find that
procedure unpromising because it invites subjectivist assessments of exactly the
kind we are trying to avoid. For a discussion of a strikingly incomprehensible
joke from antiquity see Borthwick (2001: 494) on a passage from Plutarch’s
Laconian Apophthegms (Moralia 233a).
19 Cicero Orator ad M. Brutum 151. Cicero speaks of the circumstances that an
author has to face in populari oratione “in a public speech”. Some modern authors
cite Cicero in favour of the view that Plato meant the speech as good political
oratory: Kahn (1963: 229); Huby (1957: 105–6). The sentence that claims an
annual reading for the Menexenus has been questioned for over a century, on the
grounds that Athens with its “degenerate citizens” under Roman rule would not
have been permitted to voice patriotic sentiments: Sandys (1885: 162–63). The
reasoning is dubious. Precisely because Athens no longer posed a risk, it could
be permitted a nostalgic voicing of past glories. See Trivigno (2009: 49n.2). Not
surprisingly, Clavaud (1980: 251) joins those who doubt Cicero’s testimony.
20 Dionysius of Halicarnassus: on a sentence from Menexenus 236d, De compositione
verborum 18; on the dialogue generally Demosthenes 23–30. Dionysius makes
clear what he considers the shortcomings of Plato’s rhetorical style, but mainly
by comparison with the high standard set by Demosthenes.
21 Hermogenes of Tarsus Peri Ideôn “On Types of Style”: Plato the most beautiful
panegyric stylist, 389; Menexenus 236d example of best solemnity, 250.
22 Clavaud (1980): no sign Aristotle perceived the speech as ironic, 21; grants that
other ancient sources accept the speech as serious, though he finds them wanting
as a result, 34–35; turns to Dionysius, 183.
23 See George Grote: “The funeral harangue in the Menexenus proves that, whatever
he [Plato] thought about Rhetoric generally, he was anxious to establish his
title as a competent rhetorical composer” (Grote 1865: 9). John Cooper, in brief
introductory remarks to the Menexenus for his anthology of Plato, records the
view that the dialogue is parody as one common interpretation, but he replies:
“better, since Socrates’ speech is in fact a highly skilled oration of the genre … is
to think that it may show (as indeed the Phaedrus claims) how very much better
a skilled philosopher is at the composition of speeches than the usual rhetorical
‘expert’” (Cooper 1997: 950). Given his role, in his compilation, of introducing
each dialogue quickly, Cooper cannot say much more; but this book as a whole
spells out the justification for a reading essentially like his.
24 See Williams (1993: 163–64): “Plato, Aristotle, Kant, Hegel are all on the same
side, all believing in one way or another that the universe or history or the structure
of human reason can, when properly understood, yield a pattern that makes
sense of human life and human aspirations. Sophocles and Thucydides, by contrast,
are alike in leaving us with no such sense. Each of them represents human beings as
dealing sensibly, foolishly, sometimes catastrophically, sometimes nobly, with a
world that is only partially intelligible to human agency and in itself is not
necessarily well adjusted to ethical aspirations”.
INTRODUCTION
11

Part I
THE MENEXENUS, ITS PERSONS,
ITS PROBLEMS

1
SYNOPSIS OF THE DIALOGUE
The Mene xenus divides obviously into two parts of unequal length: the frame ,
which consists in the opening and closing dialogues between Socrates and
Menexenus , and the speech attributed to Aspasia sandwiched between them.
The speech itself can be further divided into numerous sections , but for a
useful first look it is worth identifying three: a history of Athens , an exhortation
to virtue and a consolation for the living.
Opening dialogue (234a-236d)
The dialogue opens when Socrates encounters the young Menexenus , who
wants to be chosen to deliver the coming funeral oration for the war dead.
Socrates and Menexenus engage in atypical Socratic banter , in which
Socrates describes how noble the orators can make anyone who died in
battle seem to have been. Menexenus treats this as Socratic mockery. He
laments the performance that the Athenians are likely to hear this time ,
given that the council will be making its decision at the last minute , leaving
speechwriters very little time to compose.
But the speeches are generally prepared well in advance , Socrates says;
and anyway, how hard could it be to praise Athenians in front of an Athenian
audience ? He speaks so breezily about the oratorical art that Menexenus asks
whether Socrates could manage a funeral speech were he to be chosen. (One
of the atypical touches in this exchange is the sight of Menexenus
as questioner challenging Socrates ' claim to knowledge and ability -
though Socrates does not crumple under questioning as his interlocutors
tend to do.)
Yes, Socrates says, he could manage. He has a tutor in rhetoric , Aspasia ,
whom he just heard preparing a funeral speech. She has taught him what
needs to be in such speeches , such as the one she composed for Pericles to
deliver. After his training , Socrates could recite a funeral speech on the spot .
He is or pretends to be reluctant , not wanting Aspasia to discover that he is
g1v1ng her speeches away. But Menexenus insists and Socrates begins to
recite.
15
SYNOPSIS OF THE DIALOGUE
Funeral speech (236d-249c)
The praise for Athens begins with a mythical prehistory that elides into a
century's worth of Greek history told from Athens's point of view.
Praise of the dead via Athenian prehistory (236d-239c)
The speech as a whole begins with self-consciousness about its own role in
the praise of heroes. The praise in this speech will cite the good lineage of the
dead , their education and finally their deeds.
The dead soldiers boasted a pure lineage. Their ancestors did not immigrate
from elsewhere; rather , Athenians sprang from and were nourished by the
same earth to which they now return. Thus honouring the Athenian land
honours the men. Athens itself deserves praise first because it is loved by the gods,
and second because Athens bore men while all the other lands bore animals. As a
proof , says Socrates, realize that Athens alone at the time produced the ideal
food to nourish humans; and a true mother innately possesses and provides
the resources to feed her offspring. The earth then introduced unnamed gods
to educate her Athenian youth in the basic arts of life and weaponry.
The first Athenians created a good regime - also worth mentioning , inasmuch
as good regimes make men good and bad ones ruin them . Thus praise for the
dead soldiers should also include mention of the regime that educated them. The
first Athenians established a constitution under which all Athenians since their
time have lived, which is to say an aristocracy , regardless of the different
names that subsequent generations gave to their form of government. For
even when Athenian governance goes by the name "democracy" it consists
in the multitude's approving the best man to rule - which is to say that it
amounts to aristocracy . The Athenian people are willing to put their best
citizens into positions of authority because of their fundamental equality.
Once upon a time all Athenians were born equal , so no one will be anyone
else's master or slave.
The poets have already hymned the accomplishments of those mythical
first generations of Athenians: fending off the Amazons , protecting the
Argives against the Cadmeians and then the Heracleidae against the Argives.
No speech can match the poets' versions of these great deeds; so why not
devote the speech to the story still untold or unsung, the story of what
Athens has done in recent years and within the community 's memory.
Athenian history (239d-246a)
The bulk of the speech follows; it is a history of Athens that mainly lists
battles and wars, beginning on the eve of the first Persian invasion. Persia
expanded under Cyrus the Great , first freeing the Persians from the Medes
and then enslaving the Medes in turn. 1 Cambyses enlarged the empire into
16
SYNOPSIS OF THE DIALOGUE
Egypt and Libya; his successor Darius added Scythia and took control
of the sea.
Then Darius accused Athens and Eritrea of plotting against Sardis. He
sent an army into Greece that the Athenians repelled at Marathon , while the
rest of the Greeks refused to participate. Even without joining in, though ,
those other Greeks learned from the Athenians' victory that the Persians were
not invincible. By teaching that lesson to the rest of Greece , the Athenians of
Marathon became the fathers of Athenian freedom and continue to deserve the
highest praise. Second only to them are the victors at Salamis and Artemisium.
Those victories at sea were notable for liberating Greeks at large from their fear
of superior naval forces. And third in the praise they deserve are those participants
in the Persian War who secured the joint victory over Persia - Athenian
and Spartan forces fighting together - at Plataea.
Socrates' history continues with more engagements between Greece and
Persia: the final blows against the Empire at Eurymedon, Cyprus, and Crete.
Athens and its Greek allies frightened the Persian king away by defeating Persia
and Egypt at sea. The other Greek cities first wanted to emulate Athens and
then were overcome by envy, and the result of this envy was warfare among
Greeks.
First Athens fought on behalf of Boeotian freedom at Tanagra and
Oenophyta , prevailing when the Spartans abandoned the battle. Then all
Greece took up arms against Athens. The Athenians won again , defeating
the Greeks and their Spartan leaders in sea battles at Sphagia, but refrained
from destroying their vanquished enemies outright. Athenians consider it
wrong to destroy fell ow Greeks as one destroys barbarians, so they spared
the lives of the Spartans at Sphagia.
In a third war, Athens fought in Sicily on behalf of freedom for the
Leontinians. Treacherous Greek cities imposed heavy losses on Athens in land
battles. Many cities also joined in naval warfare in the Hellespont, where
Athens won a ruinous sea battle over an alliance of Greeks. Those other cities'
treachery took the form of secret alliances with the same barbarians that a
unified Greece had once expelled. Nevertheless Athens showed its strength
at Mytilene, in the battle of Arginusae , defeating Sparta and Persia at sea in a
disastrous battle.
By now Athens had earned a reputation for being undefeatable; what
conquered the city was no outside enemy but internal strife. Even so, this civil
unrest in Athens was the kind that all cities ought to wish for, if they had to
endure civil divisions. Everyone was amicable , thanks to the kinship that
began with Athenians' collective birth from earth; today they have forgiven
one another for a conflict that began in misfortune rather than in malice.
But Athens did not forgive the other Greek cities, which repaid the generous
treatment they had received from Athens first by joining the Persians and
confiscating Athenian ships, then by taking down the city walls. The Athenians
decided not to go on fighting against the enslavement of Greeks , whether by
17
SYNOPSIS OF THE DIALOGUE
barbarians or by other Greeks. Sparta took this inaction as an opportunity
to reduce the rest of Greece to slavery, and soon Argos, Boeotia , Corinth
and even Persia came to Athens seeking help. Prone to pity as usual , Athens
liberated the Greeks ; and indirectly saved Persia too , by permitting exiles
and volunteers to help the Empire.
After being forced into the war Athens fought Sparta so successfully that
the Persian king sought a quick resolution. He offered to side with Athens in
exchange for recognition of his rights over the Greek cities in Asia Minor ;
but Athens , purely Greek that it is, refused the bargain. In the end Athens
managed to keep its fleet, its walls and its allied cities, and bring the war to a
close. Nevertheless the city lost good men , forced into defeat by rough terrain
at Corinth and treachery at Lechaeum. For that matter those Athenians who
freed the Persian king and drove the Spartans from the sea were also good
men , and also deserving praise and honour.
Exhortation (246a-247c)
Socrates promises to keep reminding the audience of the praise that has gone to
brave Athenian soldiers who died for their city. He links the dead with the living.
As the soldiers now being mourned did not leave their posts in battle , the
living must not abandon their virtue. He speaks in the first person on behalf
of the fallen soldiers, fashioning a "speech from the dead" out of the kinds of
things they had said while still alive. Here is what they would be saying to
their family members now if they could.
Regardless of how they lived (the dead say), they died nobly. They did not
disgrace their descendants. Their children ought to follow suit , for such other
good possessions as wealth , physical beauty and knowledge lose their value ,
or even make the one who has them look worse, if they are not accompanied
by virtue , and particularly by the virtue of courage. The dead ask of their
children only that their children surpass them in virtue. 2
Consolation (247c-249c)
The speech ends by consoling the dead soldiers' family members. They in turn
ought to console their parents , urging them to bear up under this misfortune.
No further laments: what all parents wish is for their children to grow up to
be virtuous and respected, and their dead sons now are both. It will only
dishonour the fall en soldiers if their parents now indulge in grieving them.
What the dead really want and need is that their families be cared for, and
Athens has seen to this responsibility, with institutions to protect both the
parents and the children of the war dead. In particular the city will nurture
the orphans as a father does and arm them for battle when they are grown.
Socrates now dismisses his fictitious audience. They have discharged their
duty to mourn and they should depart .
18
SYNOPSIS OF THE DIALOGUE
Closing dialogue (249d-e)
Socrates and Menexenus exchange a few words before parting. Menexenus
says he has met Aspasia and knows what kind of woman she is. He doubts
that she wrote the speech. Anyway he thanks Socrates for reporting the
speech and promises not to tell anyone that he heard it; to which Socrates
replies with the promise to deliver more fine speeches.
Notes
1 Although Persians and Medes were two different peoples, the classical Greeks
seemed to have used the two names for them interchangeably. Thus one who
adopted Persian customs and clothing was said to medizein "mede-ize" , to
become a Mede. The biblical Book of Esther combines them too, never referring
to Persia alone but rather to "Persia and Media " (Esther 1:3, 14, 18; 10:2).
2 For an insightful summation of this passage (which we will not spend much time
discussing) see J. T. Roberts (2012: 142-44).
19
2
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE
DIALOGUE
Readers can take the dialogue form of Plato's works too far. He was not
writing modern biography. Nor does the dialogue form have to mean that
everything said in the dialogues , said by Socrates for example , must be
understood strategically, as a claim being pitched to a particular person on
one occasion with some concrete aim in view; or contextually, as a claim
whose meaning always returns to its being meaningful for the person who
espouses it. Accordingly , this book will try to base its claims about the funeral
speech in the Mene xenus on what that speech says about education , rhetoric ,
myth and history ; not on what the speech must be saying about Socrates or
Aspasia.
And yet there is no point in denying that the conversations in Plato take
place among specific people. And unlike the characters in epic and tragedy
(though significantly like some of the characters in Old Comedy) , these
speakers are actually existing Athenians , together with some non-Athenian
Greeks , both famous ones and also obscure citizens who happened to know
Socrates . Modern scholarship knows a few things about these people independently
of what Plato says about them . So, it makes sense to ask , what does
Plato think it means that this person in particular is defending patriotism , or
relativism , or materialism? Surveying the names that appear in the Mene xenus
is probably the best way to insert the modern reader into the conversation
that Plato has written - attaching bodies to those names - and sketch out
what might be at stake for its participants.
Socrates
Because he dominates any list of Platonic characters , but mainly because he
dominates Western culture , Socrates can be talked about without the usual
introductions. Still it is worth observing how the Mene xe nus's depiction of
Socrates differs from other testimon y about him. Here and probably nowhere
else Socrates is trained in rhetoric 1 and almost intimate with the man
who ran Athens. As only a few other Platonic works do , the Mene xenus
casts Socrates as authority rather than interrogator. And it portrays him as
20
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
dead - not in the sense in which the Phaedo's last page describes his cold and
lifeless body , but with an exceeding anachronism that seems to suggest this is
not Socrates speaking with Menexenus but his ghost.
Socrates as authority
The Socratic pose of ignorance , making no claims but only challenging other
people's puffed-up claims to knowledge , is partly a characterization found in
some of Plato's and Xenophon's writings about him and partly an easy
exaggeration based on that portrayal . This one-dimensional figure never
asserting, only quizzing , is memorable and a delight , but untrue to many of
Plato's greatest works , in which Socrates propounds and defends theories
about politics , psychology , poetry and other substantive topics. Plato 's
Socrates is quite capable of claiming intellectual authority for himself, as he
does in the M enexenus.
In one way the Mene xe nus shows what it might have been , a dialogue in
which Socrates the negative spirit attacks the interlocutor's pretensions to
knowledge without advancing a position of his own. For a second that old
familiar Socrates appears , when Menexenus tells him he has nominated himself
to deliver the speech at a military funeral. In the Euthyph ro or Ion such pretensions
lead to Socrates' burning away every scrap of confidence the pretender has.
But here Socrates merely raises an eyebrow at Menexenus before shifting the
conversation to what he, Socrates, is able to do with oratory; and where he
learned it; and what a fine speech at a public funeral would sound like if he
were to deliver it. Socrates passes up the opportunity to deflate someone
else's claim to knowledge so that he can present his own.
The departure from familiar Socratic interrogation is marked formally by
a departure from even the grammatical pretext of Socratic questioning. The
opening conversation is very short as Platonic back-and-forth exchanges go.
Yet it contains an unusual number of questions aimed at Socrates by his
interlocutor instead of the other way around. Menexenus asks Socrates what
he knows about rhetoric and how he knows it, and what kind of speech he
would give if he were so lucky as to find himself in Menexenus ' place. Plato
seems to abandon the pretence that Socrates only questions, as if questioning
had ceased mattering to a characterization of Socrates.
Socrates as public speaker
Socrates calls his rhetorical ability the result of tutoring. He studied with
Aspasia of Miletus. 2 Even a reader who is not surprised to find Socrates
claiming expertise about something would not expect the topic to be rhetoric.
Rhetoric is the activity of Sophists (as the teaching of rhetoric also is), and
amoral people like Thrasymachus. In the Gorgias Socrates denies rhetoric
the status of knowledgeable skill or profession. A better word for it is
21
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
empeiria "knack, know-how , practice", because rhetoric belongs among such
shady occupations as pastry-cookery. Socrates is more conciliatory in the
Phaedrus, the other dialogue that examines rhetoric , holding out the possibility
of a sound rhetoric grounded in philosophical understanding of the soul. But
this is a concession to what rhetoric could become not what it is. Its actual
practitioners steam ahead ignorantly, and even this Socrates who finds
potential in philosophical rhetoric would not brag about having studied the
business with a practitioner. 3 Why is the Socrates in the Menexenus bent on
advertising the trouble he went to to study rhetoric?
That question points towards the most significant question about the
Socrates in Plato's dialogues and probably also the unanswerable one. To
what extent does Plato use this recurring figure to tell of the person he knew
who lived in fifth-century Athens; and to what extent does he make the name a
fluid character, a synecdoche for the philosopher as such? The two possibilities
are not mutually exclusive. To a great extent Plato 's friend really did represent
the realization of human beings' philosophical possibilities , not only for
Plato but for many Athenians of his time. To them Socrates was a walking
synecdoche, and describing him amounted to describing "the philosopher".
This only makes the question that much harder to handle. As a portrait , a
dialogue containing Socrates will contain information about the historical
person. But to the extent that the portrait idealizes Socrates it inclines
towards being a vision of the philosopher as such as instantiated by Socrates.
Not every event can belong unambiguously to either the general or the
particular. Plato says that Socrates faced capital charges and was convicted
and put to death , and presumably says all this because it happened , not
because a true philosopher must suffer such misfortunes. And indeed the
figure who really existed is often relevant to how one reads Plato. 4 It matters
to a reading of Plato's Theaetetus , in which Socrates says his mother was a
midwife, whether this unique remark reports something true about the
Socrates of history or symbolizes something about the Socrates who belongs
to philosophy as such. That is to say, does Plato report the midwifery as
biography or only as part of his definition of the philosophical genus? And
when Socrates says in the Menexenus that Connus taught him music , it
matters whether this datum is biographically true or rather exists in the text
to show what kind of philosopher/spokesman Plato is constructing, one
who - perhaps in contradistinction to the historical figure - both learned and
practised music. 5
Finally , it matters to ask , as the M enexenus forces its reader to wonder ,
whether Socrates really studied rhetoric with Aspasia. If not , does Plato wish
he had? That is not a preposterous idea, considering the failure Socrates
made of his one attempt at public speaking , when he faced the Athenian
jury and turned them against him. A little good rhetoric might have made
that trial come out the opposite way; Plato can be indulging in "what if '
thinking.
22
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOG U E
At a more global level, contemplating not the Socrates who existed but
the philosophical type for which " Socrates " is a useful name , Plato might
see some value in philosophers ' acquiring skill at rhetoric. If their rhetoric
is not the manipulative kind , unchecked by reference to the truth , that
becomes soul candy without the accompanying nourishment of truth , it
could work as legitimate persuasion to the truth. And Plato must have
looked back on the beginnings of the Peloponnesian War, as many Athenians
did , with poignancy and regret. When the ruinous war began , Athens
had nothing better than a demagogue to speak at the military funeral and
articulate the city 's misguided values. If only a philosopher had stood before
the citizens instead of a politician! The speaker would not have to have been
Socrates , any more than Socrates has to serve as philosopher-king in the
Republic 's imagined city.
To put this question another way, without answering it now or even
pretending it will find a definitive answer: does the Mene x enus's opening
conversation attribute rhetorical and musical training to Socrates in order to
tell the reader something about Socrates (something that verges on embarrassing:
the bit that does not fit into a simplistic characterization of him ;
Socrates as odd individual); or is it in order to tell the reader about what
philosophers do, that when they want to they know perfectly well how to
pour out the magicked patriotic oratory?
Both options are available if the speech is a parody , and also if it is not.
Call the speech an earnest bid to one-up Pericles , as this book will do, and a
philosopher 's capacity to produce such a thing shows that philosophy knows
how to reintroduce its understanding of principle back into the workings of
ordinary politics . Indeed this is close to Wilamowitz 's description of the
Mene x enus, over a century ago.6 But the idealized philosopher does not have to
be the one who now and then reveals a masked rhetorical gift. Alternatively ,
if you call the speech in the Menexenus a parody of political rhetoric , the
dialogue is proving that the philosopher swears off rhetoric and mocks it not
out of stereotypical naivety but as a laudable choice. Real philosophers
could write flag-waving speeches if they wanted to. They fail to because they
choose not to. 7
The two readings of the M enex enus, jest and earnest , are also both compatible
with a biographical reading of this remark about his tutors. The opening
dialogue in which Socrates announces that Aspasia taught him rhetoric
either shows him to have possessed an expertise he claimed not to have, or
even to want , on all the famous occasions on which he cross-examined
pompous Athenians ; or it portrays him as the type of man who would pretend
to have taken such lessons from Aspasia. If the speech is a parody he can be
pretending to have studied rhetoric. If he really intends to put the speech
forward then it makes sense that he studied with Aspasia (and note his
insistence on keeping this fact a secret , as if in acknowledgement that people
otherwise had no way of knowing about his rhetorical expertise). 8
23
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
Socrates among the powerful
Could Socrates have known the woman Pericles lived with after divorcing his
first wife? The popular image of Socrates has him humble and barefoot , a
poor man at home in cobblers' shops or out in the streets of Athens , not the
type who would be familiar with the city 's first citizens in the halls of power.
To be sure, the popular image contains exaggerations. Socrates fought for
Athens as a hoplite, a soldier in armour with a heavy shield, and to belong
among the hoplites and own his personal armour, a man needed more property
than poor Athenians had. Socrates probably seemed poor to those friends of
his with real money , Plato and Xenophon for instance. (The very rich were
not always skilled at distinguishing between degrees of not being wealthy ;
they are not always adept at those distinctions today.) And the modest
wardrobe may have been more symbolic than financially necessary. Plato
depicts Socrates barefoot in a tribon but does not tell his readers what the
original readers would have known , that this was Spartan dress. Athenians
who admired the Spartan way of life wore the Spartans' simplified and
masculinized clothing , and not because poverty forced them to.9
Even without being poor , Socrates could have been an obscure private
citizen lacking access to Athenian luminaries; and some of the evidence
suggests that he was. Thucydides brings his story of Athens down to 411,
when Socrates would have been almost sixty, but the History never mentions
him. In Plato's Apology Socrates tells the jury he had mostly avoided public
life, and the exceptions are sufficiently unknown that he has to explain them.
Socrates refers to Pericles several times in the dialogues , but usually in the
way one refers to a public figure, a personage one knows , or knows of, at a
distance. The lone exception is the Gorgias, in which Socrates tells Polus it
would not be hard to find Athenian witnesses against the position Socrates is
defending. "If you wish to bring witnesses against me ... there is the whole
household [oikia] of Pericles" . This has the sound of an unexplained inside
joke , certainly not requiring that Pericles knew Socrates. 10
Against such signs of the obscurity that Socrates lived in, the main counterevidence
comes from Aristophanes. A mention here or there is one thing ;
Clouds made Socrates the great object of Aristophanic satire in 423, presumably
because the audience had already heard his name. Plato and Xenophon ,
who would write at such length about Socrates later, were still little boys,
and Athens knew about Socrates. Later the comedies Birds and Frogs direct
jokes against Socrates too. 11 The modem word "celebrity" does not apply to the
ancient world with any exactness, but if part of the concept of celebrity is that
people might have heard of someone without knowing anything about that
person , then Socrates played the Athenian celebrity at least to that degree.
And if Plato's dialogues contain no evidence that Socrates knew either
Pericles or Pericles' friend Anaxagoras , they leave no doubt as to the intimate
relationship between Socrates and Alcibiades , who was a foster son to
24
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
Pericles and (part of the time at least) a member of his household. Besides
Anaxagoras the other intellectual known as friend to Pericles was Protagoras
, and the dialogue named after that Sophist is premised on the fact of
a long meeting between him and Socrates. For that matter Socrates says in
the Protagoras that he met the Sophist at a meeting that Paralus and
Xanthippus were also present for. They were the sons of Pericles by his first
marriage , and Socrates mentions their presence as if he already knew
them. The other son of Pericles , the one also named Pericles whose mother
was Aspasia (Pericles the Younger) , converses with Socrates in Xenophon's
dialogues. 12
Poor or not , obscure or not , if Socrates could have Alcibiades for a close
friend or lover, know the younger Pericles well enough to talk to and his
half-brothers by sight; and if Protagoras could recognize Socrates when they
met; then he travelled close enough to Pericles to have met Aspasia. 13
But even if Socrates did not meet Aspasia through those other family
members, there is an additional grim connection that would have guaranteed
some familiarity , maybe some acquaintance , between him and Aspasia. As
Plato's Apology recalls the trial of the Athenian generals after Arginusae ,
and more specifically in Xenophon's retelling of the case, Socrates had stood
alone against the mass call for a collective trial and execution of six Athenian
generals in 406, near the end of the Peloponnesian War. One of those six was
Pericles the son of Pericles and Aspasia. Socrates demanded but failed to get
separate trials for the officers, who were already blaming one another (and their
crews) for having failed to recover the survivors in the storm that followed that
battle. A separate trial seemed to be each man's legal right. 14
One has to imagine Aspasia following the developments closely with her
only child on trial for his life, and hoping that Socrates would prevail . Given
such an interest in the case she could not have failed to know the role
Socrates played. Even if they had never met , she would know him thereafter
as the man who wanted to save her son.
Socrates as dead man
The last point to make about the Socrates of the M enexenus involves more
speculation. The speculation will not shape the general line of interpretation
in this book , but the textual facts are too striking not to comment on.
The Menexenus contains a sizeable anachronism. Other Platonic dialogues
have anachronisms in them too , but nothing that is anywhere near this
egregious. Socrates recites a funeral speech to Menexenus that contains a
lengthy history of Athens. One hundred years go by in this history, beginning
with the Persian Wars (490) and continuing to the King 's Peace or Common
Peace (386); and the last thirteen years of this chronology come after the
death of Socrate s in 399. Aspasia has also been dead, though the year of her
death is not known with the specificity that Socrates' death is. In any case the
25
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
anachronism would not be remarkable as it affects Aspasia. If Plato did not
know Aspasia intimately himself he may well not have borne in mind , while
summarizing recent history , which of the events he specified Aspasia would
have been alive to see. But Socrates had been his close friend; the execution
of Socrates divided Plato's life into before and after in that way that leaves
people aware, when thinking of any event, which of the two periods it
belongs in. ("My father was still alive when I got this job".) When Plato set
about summarizing local history , it would have been impossible for him to
forget that his friend had been dead for a decade.
To say "The Greeks did not have a modern sense of anachronism" is
irrelevant. This is not historical fussiness, it is the awareness of a friend's
death. One would have to say that the Greeks lacked an understanding that
the dead do not continue to walk the earth. Modern ideas of anachronism
have nothing to do with it. Plato could not have neglected to notice that
Socrates hadn 't lived to see these fresh humiliations to befall Athens; nor
could he have failed to realize that his dialogue portrayed Socrates still
speaking after the date of his death.
The anachronism leads back to the difference between Plato 's writing
about the man Socrates he knew who really lived, and his elucidation of the
philosopher as a type, someone who could live - a human possibility -
whether or not he had existed thus far. For what the anachronism in the
Menexenus means , the one that leaves this character "Socrates " speaking of
events the real Socrates could not have seen, depends on how Plato has
conceived this character in this particular dialogue. On one reading Plato
includes the anachronism because Socrates matters to him as a token of the
philosophical type rather than as a figure from history , and this dialogue will
show how that type delivers a funeral speech.
The other alternative reads Socrates as the historical figure who faced an
Athenian jury and was executed . If Plato wants that man to be his speaker in
this dialogue set clearly after his death, then he may mean for the M enexenus's
"Socrates" to be speaking after his own death: in other words for him to be a
ghost, a being summoned from the grave. Bruce Rosenstock 15 has developed the
proposal that Menexenus is speaking not to the eccentric Athenian gadabout
who occupies most of Plato's dialogues but to that man's shade; "Socrates "
is a revenant, a ghost that haunts the world.
Rosenstock 's reading solves the anachronism , though he has to disrupt
readers' expectations about Platonic dialogues to do so. Plato sets conversations
in everyday places: private homes , a walk through Crete , the king's porch in
the agora , a wrestling room at the gymnasium. In real life these are not
places where the dead speak and the long-gone present themselves, and such
things do not happen in the dialogues either. (In the Phaedo Socrates seems
to believe that the spirits of some dead can haunt monuments and tombs ,
but those are the souls of the vicious, still too attached to their bodily
desires. 16) The "revenant" reading calls for more than a new way to see the
26
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
Menexenus; the Platonic corpus would have to be seen in a new way as well,
now becoming a genre that can swerve into ghost stories.
How decisive is this consideration of what is possible in Plato's dialogues?
It matters; but as a criterion for reading Plato it has to be used judiciously. The
M enexenus stands alone in other ways too, depicting Socrates as a trained
orator and letting the demonstration speech he delivers take over the dialogue.
If your test for what is possible in Plato becomes the genre as its central
examples define it, then it is as easy to say Plato did not write the Menexenus
as to grant that he wrote it and deny he could make one character in it a
ghost. Maybe odder things happen in the odder members of a genre.
The positive argument for Rosenstock's reading is more specific than that
negative consideration. The reading harmonizes with a theme that recurs in
the M enexenus, of souls traversing the border between life and death.
Socrates says funeral speeches make him think he has travelled to the Isles of
the Blessed; Menexenus calls Aspasia makaria "blessed", a word used of the
dead. The funeral speech closes with a report of the words and sentiments of
the dead soldiers, as if Socrates - or Aspasia, who is presumably dead
alongside him - had heard their shades talking. 17
Because of such resonances with the dialogue's themes , the interpretation
is not just tacked on to handle the anachronism but works with the Menexenus
as a whole. A dialogue that looks into funeral rhetoric and proposes an
authoritative example of such rhetoric takes on added resonance if Socrates
derives the authority he speaks with from having already died. And when the
speech's final section purports to tell the thoughts of Athens's dead soldiers to
their surviving families, the possibility that the speech began on the other side
of death's divide gives that peroration a credibility that no living speechmaker
could boast. Pericles closed his funeral oration with sparing words to the
Athenians who mourned their dead, including the instruction to the widows
that they remain quiet, neither heard nor heard about; but the funeral speech
genre more typically closes with some reassurance about mortality. 18 The
Menexenus resurrects the dead soldiers as no other funeral speech does,
practically delivering the mail from the audience's lost sons and fathers.
This book will advance other reasons for seeing the Menexenus's speech as an
intended improvement upon its original. Those arguments are intended to
stand on textual grounds without the need of any such more mysterious
questions. But if Socrates is indeed functioning as a ghost who revisits
Menexenus from beyond the grave, that reading would work together with
the others to make this speech superior to its unphilosophical model. By
speaking from the side of the living Pericles could only speak politically or
ideologically, confining himself to the matter of what the city of the living
does next. Socrates' shade , having just conversed with the shade of Aspasia
(which is much what Socrates' closing words in the Apology had looked
ahead to doing 19), can reincorporate the dead into the assembly of Athenians
that came together at the funeral for the sake of the dead.
27
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
A rival account of the anachronism
This is as good a place as any to stay with the anachronism and ask what else
a reader can do with it. If in fact the framing dialogue is as mundane as it first
looks to be, and this is the same old Socrates breathing air with Menexenus ,
how can the speech that he recites travel so far into the future? Is there no
better explanation than an incredible word about those anachronizing Greeks?
Debra Nails argues with as much boldness as Rosenstock. Plato did not
write the anachronistic section of the funeral speech at all. Someone else did ,
a member of Plato's Academy who added this history after Plato's death. 20
Not a ghost , but that more familiar figure the ghostwriter , accounts for the
M enexenus's anomaly. Plato's text becomes consistent upon the removal of
its inconsistent false elements.
As Nails knows, one needs more reason to attribute 244b-246a to a later hand
than the bare fact that this attribution removes the anachronism. She offers a
reason, pointing out that such emendations took place in the Academy ,
"much writing of dialogues and editing of works that had varying degrees of
Platonic core; and it is no special feat to add a couple of pages in the style of
the existing Menexenus speech, to bring the work up to date". 21
It would indeed have been no great feat for one of Plato's young associates
to fill out the speech. But why add only a dozen years to the history? Plato
lived for forty years or so after the end of the Corinthian War. The speech
could have gone on much longer than it does and still only speak of events
he would have known. Better still, the hypothetical later author could have
taken the Menexenus's history of Athens only one decade beyond Plato 's
death to finish the story with the Battle of Chaeronea, when after all its
efforts to unify Greece Athens found itself and its allies defeated by Philip of
Macedon. That battle brings the end of the autonomous Greek polis and the
end of any alliances that matter among cities - one for the history books, it
is a fitting conclusion for a funeral speech. Certainly Demosthenes found
it fitting: his funeral speech came after Chaeronea. Plato's surviving student
could have made that the apt final moment in the Menexenus's history. If
Plato's heirs had added to the funeral speech it is surprising that they could
not do a better job of it.
Nails' main argument is the best kind of argument to make in support of her
claim. The shorter version of the history hangs together as a whole better than
the long anachronistic version does. Without the interpolated pages, she says,
the narrative moves from "the furthermost to the closest ", from gods and then
heroes to wars against barbarians, closer to home with the wars against other
Greek cities and finally at the doorstep to witness the Athenians ' civil war.
"To move . . . backward to war with other Greeks again before ending is a
rhetorical lapse that need not be attributed to Plato himself'. 22
Arguing in this way takes Nails ' proposal out of the realm of speculations
and makes it possible to disagree with her reasonably. If a rival reading to
28
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
hers makes the existing history ordered and compelling , her proposal for a
later co-author loses some credibility. But if the shorter history that Nails calls
the genuine one is more coherent as it stands than the longer version, there is
some reason to envision Plato's heir having rewritten what the master left
behind.
Chapter 8 will argue for a rival reading of the speech's history and a
coherent form to its existing story. Closing with the political triumph of
Persia does not amount to moving backwards , as Nails alleges, but if anything
all too Platonically forward , from bad to worse as Plato always depicts history's
movements. For the first appearance of the Persians shows them losing at
Marathon, while in their last appearance they broker the peace that ends the
Corinthian War.
There are two problems with Nails' argument even in the absence of a good
rival. First , she does not give a reason for the narrative to move from the far
to the near. 23 Why should Plato recount history as a progression from the
distant and divine to the close-at-hand and ordinary? The analytical history
of a city in Republic 8 does not follow that path. When the Timaeus and the
Critias together describe an original Athens that defended the world from
the predations of Atlantis , that narrative (however incomplete) establishes
Athens first before voyaging to the west for a look at the enemy, it does not
swoop in from far horizons to survey the Athenian homeland.
Finally it is a problem for Nails that if Plato does want to move his story in
towards Athens, he spoils that progress himself at a crucial point. Persia and
extra-Hellenic negotiations do not enter the story only after Socrates' death.
The speech itself depicts the last days of the Peloponnesian War (however
much it sugar-coats the chaos and desperation of those days) as a time when the
other Greek cities allied themselves with Persia. 24 Only then could they defeat
Athens. But this means Persia has re-entered Greek history even before the
swerve in that history away from its focus on Athens . If Plato did mean to
move history in one direction (for whatever reason) he would have ended it
still earlier.
The full reply to Nails requires an alternative to her reading of the historical
narrative , and that will have to wait until a discussion of the Menexenus 's
historical narrative. For now it is enough to note that the burden of proof
remains on her proposal for resolving the anachronism in this dialogue. The
anachronism between the framing dialogue and the speech within persists as
a problem, and perhaps a flaw in the dialogue.
What would account for such a flaw, assuming that Plato did not forget that
Socrates had died? Any answer must be an invented one, going beyond all
possible evidence. But here is a proposal that one can entertain without straining.
Suppose Plato wrote the speech in the M enexenus as free-standing oratory , a
prose monologue demonstrating that a philosopher could outdo Athenian
orators even at their own job - and while he was at it to outdo Thucydides
too . The motive is not far-fetched; nor is the exercise. Plato sometimes wrote
29
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
such free-standing speeches suitable for public delivery, if ancient testimony
about his lecture "On the Good" is to be trusted. 25 After having written the
funeral speech he enclosed it in a framing dialogue , because a framing dialogue
would let him ascribe this speech ( and the famous earlier speech too) to Aspasia ,
thus subverting the place of Pericles in Athenian history. The framing dialogue
had Socrates in it,26 which created an obvious inconsistency. But Plato could
not go back and change the speech , whose history ended where the laws of
history required it to. He left the speech and its frame together, ill fit as they
were, rather than give up either the frame's references to Athenian politics or
the speech's philosophically significant reconstruction of history. Chronological
consistency is desirable but not a summum bonum.
Imagining Plato's construction of the dialogue, even with unprovable
hypotheses , brings this discussion from the dramatic date to the date of
the Menexenus's composition. If Plato wrote all of the Menexenus, he must
have finished it in or after 386. But how long after? Did he write a speech whose
history of Athens ended on the morning that he was writing, or did he look
back after decades and compose a history that ended with the momentous
events of 386 because of their importance? A later date of composition
would at least have the advantage of excusing some of the mistakes in the
history - time plays tricks on even Plato 's memory - but it calls for some
substantial integrity on the part of the history, enough to make 386 the right
endpoint and not just the date that Plato had reached.
Conversely , the more integrity the history possesses, and the more orderly
its governing structure is, the less reason readers have to date the dialogue to
or near 386. In this sense, a persuasive interpretation of the historical narrative
may well leave the date of composition as unclear as ever - except with the
provision of course that Plato did not write the Menexenus before 386.
Two last comments are worth making. First, this book will find resonances
between the M enexenus and other dialogues, but especially connections with
the Republic. To the extent that theories of Plato's development are sustainable,
the Menexenus makes most sense as a rough contemporary of the Republic.
Aside from being short it does not fit among the ostensibly "early" dialogues.
Socrates never interrogates Menexenus; does not claim ignorance; does not
wish for analyses of vague moral language; does not finish the conversation
amid aporia. He does, as this book ought to show, embed education in the
workings of a good state; deploy language of self-conscious extravagance;
found a city in a tale of autochthonous birth; analyse historical events in
psychodynamic terms. Whether written before or after the Republic , the
Menexenus attests to philosophical commitments that are closer to that
dialogue's commitments than to those of any single other work.
Finally , the peculiar content of the Menexenus makes it the hardest dialogue
to date with traditional stylometric analyses. It has almost as little back-andforth
conversation in it as the Timaeus and the Apology, so that like those
dialogues its uses of certain interlocutory answers ("Of course, Socrates"; etc.)
30
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
are not available to be counted and compared. Moreover the funeral speech
orients itself to a much earlier model, as those other two monologic dialogues
do not. The language in the Mene x enus has too much to do with the language
of Pericles and Thucydides to permit straightforward comparison with other
dialogues. 27 Those who find the chronological ordering of the dialogues a
nuisance or worse will be just as glad to see that some standard techniques
for calculating that chronology do not work as well with the M enexenus.
Those who value and rely upon chronology will have to adjust themselves to
knowing less about the Menexenus , in this respect as well, than they know
about the more canonical works of Plato.
Aspasia
What makes Aspasia surpassingly difficult for readers of the M enexenus goes
beyond the usual difficulties caused by fragmentary evidence and untrustworthy
sources. Those are problematic enough. The best-known names from ancient
Greece , from Pericles to Socrates to Plato and Demosthenes , present more
challenges than our long familiarity with them would seem to promise. Lesser
figures threaten to disappear altogether to become mere tokens spoken of
contradictorily by different authorities .
What makes Aspasia's case different is the disproportionate place of the
Menexenus in the tradition of reports about her. If one decides that hostile literary
sources in antiquity combined to smother what otherwise would have been
a positive message about marriage and virtue , that is because the Mene xen us
participates in the scurrilous attacks on her that were led by comic poets. If the
classical sources seem trustworthy and capable of joining in some consensus
statement about Aspasia , that conclusion follows from a reading of the
Menexenus that understands the funeral speech as positive and valuable , and
that takes Socrates ' ascription of the speech to Aspasia as a nod to her
genuine rhetorical skills. The M enexenus tips the balance of ancient sources.
It often happens that the reputations of secondary characters from antiquity
hang on a single text. Certain names appear only in Herodotus or only in
Thucydides , and what those historians have to say about those names shapes
what the subsequent centuries thought of them. The present case is tricky in
that Aspasia is as important to determining the meaning and tone of the
M enexenus as determining the meaning and tone is to one's sense of Aspasia.
Madeleine Henry's book-length discussion of the information available about
Aspasia has become the standard treatment of her. 28 Both imaginative and
critical, Henry sifts through the mentions of Aspasia in Old Comedy 's plays
and quoted fragments , and then through the unstable evidence that derives
from philosophical works by "Socratics", if one may still use that word without
bias to characterize all those who associated with Socrates.
Henry correctly hears Old Comedy as mockery of Aspasia, "invariably sexual,
sexualized , and sexualizing". 29 Fragments of comedies by the playwrights
31
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
Cratinus and Eupolis contain the kinds of obscene insults that Athenian
comedy of the fifth century thrived on. 30 Aspasia comes in for stock accusations
of sexual shamelessness , concubinage and pandering. 31 An uncertain attestation
from Plutarch involves another comic poet, Hermippus , who allegedly
brought impiety charges against Aspasia. 32 It is hard to guess what kernel of
truth might lie deep within this claim. That Hermippus abused Aspasia in a
comedy of his? That she represented Athenian new thinking? Socrates certainly
did undergo prosecution for impiety , but the references to other such prosecutions
that come down from later antiquity might all have been inspired by
that one factual case, impiety charges coming to mean that someone had
been a controversial intellectual.
At least in the case of Aristophanes the mention of Aspasia survives in a
full-length work and there is less guesswork involved. It is his first extant
comedy, Acharnians , produced in 425. Already sick of the war with Sparta ,
an Athenian country boy Dikaiopolis tells his version of how the hostilities
began. Independent of Aristophanes it is known that some sort of Athenian
embargo against the city of Megara , a declaration known as the Megarian
Decree , ignited an already volatile situation among the Greek cities to bring
Sparta and Athens into open fighting. The real story behind the Megarian
Decree is obscure, involving Corinth and Sparta in balance-of-power considerations;
Dikaiopolis boils it down to Athenian pranksters' kidnapping a
prostitute from Megara and the Megarians' retributive theft of two of Aspasia's
prostitutes. Acharnians contains nearly the only mention of the decree by a
contemporary author. 33
What political reality lay behind this tale of a drunken romp? Quite likely no
more than a law that Pericles introduced for reasons that most Athenians could
not understand or did not fully trust; so Aristophanes puts the power behind
the throne, with Aspasia , and then compounds the joke in the tried-and-true
Old Comic way of making her a brothel keeper. 34
What rings true about the passage is the honest citizen's sense of exclusion
from power. Dikaiopolis will end the play negotiating his own peace with
Sparta, a move that shows the extent of corruption he perceives in Athens.
If you want a reasonable truce you have to make it yourself. A private citizen
so marginalized can only imagine what prompts political leaders to act as
they do, and when citizens try to understand political processes they often find
bedroom stories psychologically satisfying substitutes for real explanations.
Aristophanes does not have to embody misogyny to put this story in his
character's mouth. 35 Dikaiopolis lives outside the city walls and far outside
its centres of power, and he can only speculate about contemporary affairs in
his coarse way. Subtract the obscenities and the juvenile whoring and the
passage implies that Aspasia was a public figure with influence over Pericles.
Aristophanes wrote for an audience that , while understanding the complex
issues of the day, did not find them as funny unless they had been distorted one
way or another. 36 Nor should one have to add that Aristophanes habitually
32
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
took liberties with the Athenians he wrote about. Socrates is only the most
famous example. That Aristophanes turns Aspasia into a madam and retells
the Megarian Decree as a misadventure among prostitutes only goes to show
that he treats Aspasia in the same way he will later treat Socrates.
Against the evidence from Aspasia from contemporary comedy there are
the nearly contemporary writings by Socratic authors and the Life of Pericles
that Plutarch wrote centuries later. Plutarch's Pericles assists the historian
with basic facts about Aspasia's life: partly because of him it is known that
she must have been born around 470 in Miletus and moved to Athens in 450.
She may have been related , through marriage , to Athenian aristocrats. And she
must have begun her involvement with Pericles before 440, because their son
Pericles the Younger could not have been born after that date.
Pericles and Aspasia could not have been husband and wife in the full legal
sense, because she was not an Athenian citizen. Perhaps they lived in the kind
of domestic partnership in which she was the acknowledged pa/lake - what
used to be translated "concubine", but today that word is both dated and
prurient-sounding and does not acknowledge the range of the word's meanings ,
from a man's sexual relations with his slave to his cohabitation with a
woman who had not been made his wife through formal betrothal (perhaps ,
to use another modern phrase that risks anachronism , like a common-law
wife). 37 Her year of death is unknown , although she could not have survived
Socrates , or not by much. 38
Pericles , the son of Pericles and Aspasia , could not have been born an
Athenian citizen , thanks to legislation his own father had written and supported
in 450 or 451; ironically, before meeting Aspasia. But whether
through a special waiver that his father pleaded for or by some other means,
the son must have been made a citizen , because he went on to be elected
strategos "general ". He was one of the Athenian generals tried en masse and
executed after the battle of Arginusae , and only citizens could be elected to
that position.
Plutarch had access to countless sources that have since been lost. But
despite his good sense in reading those sources he does not subject them to the
direct criticism that is now standard practice. 39 He typically does not name his
sources, either. The unwary reader takes away vivid novelistic details of the
least trustworthy sort. Did Pericles really (and , it seems, uncharacteristically
for an ancient Greek man greeting his wife) kiss Aspasia every day?40 Unless
Pericles or Aspasia personally announced such a thing there could be no
source for the story, and a motive strong enough to make them tell the world
would be a strong enough motive to induce them to lie.
The historical uncertainty is too bad, because Aspasia 's relationship
with Pericles matters more than as gossip for readers of the Mene xenus . The
dialogue says she taught Pericles rhetoric. Does that statement rest on a
genuine intellectual and emotional closeness between them? The speech in the
Mene xenus that Socrates attributes to Aspasia manipulates the metaphors of
33
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
parentage, legitimacy and true Athenian citizenship. What does it mean that
by law she could only bear a bastard?
It may also have come time to stop calling Aspasia a hetaira "courtesan". The
word might appear to off er a compromise between comic playwrights who made
her a prostitute and the sources for whom she was practically a wife. But
the Greek category hetaira is nowhere near as well attested as this usage implies.
A hetaira may have been a porne "prostitute" and nothing more. 41 Though
desirous of avoiding the tendentious insult, the word hetaira perpetuates it.
Tellingly, the remaining testimony about Aspasia, the only references from
authors who might have known her (and who surely knew people who did
know her), does not make her either hetaira or porne. It is possible to read
the Menexenus as some obscure variety of attack or mockery: Menexenus
says "I know Aspasia" with what may be a wink. 42 Even so no one calls her
a prostitute in that dialogue. And the testimony from other friends of
Socrates has even less to do with whores and courtesans.
Plato's age-mate Xenophon, for instance, brings Aspasia's name up in two
works: the Memorabilia or Reminiscences of Socrates and the Oeconomicus. 43
Both times it is Socrates who speaks of Aspasia. One major subject of the
Oeconomicus is the training of a new wife, and Socrates offers to introduce his
interlocutor to Aspasia who will "explain everything" about such training. 44
Aspasia might be the source for marital principles that all newlyweds should
learn in order to create and sustain a good marriage.
Married love is the subject again when Socrates appeals to Aspasia in
Xenophon's Memorabilia. He quotes her directly on the subject of matchmaking,
appealing to her as an expert. 45 Aspasia says, according to Socrates, that
matchmaking is spoiled by false praise. False praise leads to disappointment; so
instead of praising indiscriminately , matchmakers ought to describe potential
spouses with the most accuracy they can. 46
The emphasis on marriage, and specifically this emphasis on marriage in
moral education - heterosexual desire conducive to developing virtue - is a
theme that Xenophon's Aspasia shares with the Aspasia represented in the
earlier Socratic author Aeschines, and one reason for seeing Aeschines as the
source for Xenophon's portrayal. 47 Aeschines wrote a dialogue Aspasia that
Cicero quoted f rom48 and that Barbara Ehlers has reconstructed. 49 In this
dialogue Xenophon and his wife become characters, and Aspasia interrogates
each in turn about envying someone else's wife or husband. "You would
rather have your neighbour's house than your own if it were better; doesn't it
follow that you'd rather have your neighbour's spouse as well?" Xenophon
and his wife are both embarrassed when the argument leads them to say yes.
Aspasia has presumably brought them to see a conflict between choosing the
best possible wife or husband ( or continuing to yearn for that impossible
ideal) and respecting the one they have.
The shrewd assessment of spouses, and the training of them, might appear
to be pedestrian domestic topics for the Menexenus's master rhetorician to
34
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
occupy herself with. Did she captivate the intelligentsia of fifth-century Athens
with common places about matchmakers' reports and men's imperfections?
On Henry's reading of Aeschines, his special merit consists exactly in
preserving the "Aspasian" philosophy as a theory of married life. "Aeschines'
Aspasia had observed that heterosexual eros could be a path to arete [virtue]
and had demonstrated that within marriage such a possibility was manifested
in each spouse's wish to be the other's best possible mate". 50 The M enexenus
does not speak of erotic attachment. It even seems unable to identify a place
for such attachment in an Athenian's life. If anything the founding myth for
Athens has its people springing up from the ground instead of from any
reproductive impulse. The city will not need eras when it can generate its
people in a new kind of lone motherhood. 51
But if celebrating true Athenians makes the Menexenus a masochistic
obsession (assuming this is Aspasia speaking its words) in the mouth of a
homeless non-Athenian and permanent illegitimate , she is just as likely to
feel inadequate by going on about glorious matrimony, considering that no
relationship she entered into in Athens could be a publicly recognized marriage.
This advocate of the virtue that grows in heterosexual marriage would be
declaring herself shut out of the pursuit of virtue in Aeschines' dialogue, just
as Henry says she is shutting herself out of Athenian public life in Plato's.
Henry cannot make Aeschines a champion of Aspasia's wisdom and read
Plato as abusing her.
And after all, while courtship and marriage are the subject matter of all
these excerpts from Aeschines and Xenophon, 52 unifying those philosophical
treatments of Aspasia and differentiating them from Plato's, the available
evidence from those Socratics also shares the themes of teaching and praise. In
Xenophon's Memorabilia Aspasia represents the right calibration of praise and
in the Oeconomicus she is the authority on educating a man's young bride.
Aeschines represents her questioning husband and wife about prizing the best
spouse, the one worthiest of highest praise, as well as performing a crash course
in dialectical education. 53 These subjects praise and pedagogy dominate the
Menexenus.
For one thing , the talk of teaching and learning between Socrates and
Menexenus alerts the reader to the role that education will play within the
funeral speech. Part II of this book will argue that education, and in particular
education in virtue , pervades the speech. Socrates will call the speech
educational when he introduces it, and use the same language about the
speech-within-the-speech that he claims to report from the underworld. He will
insert education into the version of the Athenian autochthony myth that he
tells, even though such stories traditionally did not speak of the gods'
teaching humans. 54 The M enexenus depicts the city of Athens as a teacher to
other Greek cities, not in trivialities but in the virtue of courage. Pericles
himself, despite having called Athens "the school of Greece", treated courage
as a trait that was best when not taught but only spontaneous. 55 Aspasia
35
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
informs this substantial motif of the Mene x enus not as a matchmaker but as
an educator whom Socrates represents .
As for praise and exaggeration, which can blur into one another in Plato ,
again the Aspasia glimpsed in these other authors resembles the character
that Aspasia would have had to be to write the Menexenus's funeral speech,
but not insofar as she represents heterosexual virtue. Understanding the
rhetoric of the funeral speech, which will be the principal goal of Part II,
entails scrutinizing the ways in which it praises Athens , especially in one
passage that piles praise on top of praise. As there is a difference between the
street-savvy teaching that Aspasia passes along in other authors' works, and
the teaching that the Menexenus credits her with, so too there is a parallel
difference between the Aspasia who assumes that everyone knows what
overvaluation amounts to, and this Aspasia , behind the Mene x enus speech,
who forces her audience to wonder what praise really is and how to calibrate
it, and what degree of praise suits the greatest and highest objects. Plato may
be bringing forward potentialities in Aspasia that Aeschines and Xenophon
left unexplored ; he may be the author who best recognizes the significance of
her talk of praise and overvaluation in a marriage. The others , however
sympathetic they are, hear that talk of praise in marriage and assume that its
real subject is marriage. Plato understands that what Aspasia says will find
its full significance (as her model of how to cross-examine does) when
applied to a subject larger than marriage. Her real concern is praise. Examining
the praise and pedagogy at work in the M enexenus speech will reveal the
specific dimensions along which Plato extrapolates from what Aspasia said
to what she must have really been saying.
Far from demeaning Aspasia , Plato may be said to liberate her concerns
from the focus on courtship and marriage that existing conceptions of woman
imposed on everything a woman said. Such liberation resembles what the
Republic promises to talented women in Kallipolis , de-domesticating them so
that the intelligence they had wasted on gossip about romance and betrothals
can serve the city. Plato sees, as Aeschines and Xenophon fail to see, that
Aspasia merely uses womanly subjects to communicate philosophical teaching.
The test for the claim that Plato depicts Aspasia respectfully will be the test
of this interpretation as a whole. If the Mene x enus can come to look like a
worthy candidate for improving upon the original speech by Pericles, then
attributing that speech to Aspasia is some kind of compliment. It might even
be the substantial compliment that she was indeed , as Socrates says, the one
who taught Pericles all the rhetoric he knew.
The point can be put more narrowly. The Men exenus raises questions
about teaching and about praise. The most philosophical evidence available
about Aspasia concurs with the Mene x enus in associating those themes with her
name . Far from subverting other philosophical representations of Aspasia ,
Plato sublimes them. The famous funeral speech known as Pericles' own resists
its own ambitions either to praise or to teach. If the Mene x enus speech
36
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
proves to treat praise and education seriously in response to Pericles, then it
will make sense to say that Aspasia, its author , is being taken seriously , by a
philosopher , as another philosopher. If (again) the speech is a mockery of
rhetorical praise and of the possibility of moral education , then Aspasia will
have functioned only as a way to mock rhetoric in general.
***
There is a story about the Spartan woman Cynisca whose brother , King
Agesilaus , encouraged her to breed horses. Late in Socrates' life Cynisca
entered some of her horses in the Olympics as a chariot team; for only in this
way could women participate in the Games. Cynisca's team even won , and
Agesilaus then said he put her up to entering, wanting to show how little
value an Olympic crown must have if even a woman could win it. 56
Is that also Plato's strategy in the Menexenus? If even Aspasia can write a
funeral speech, has Plato delivered the most stinging criticism possible
against rhetoric? But Diotima differentiates univocal from equivocal predication
in the Symposium , and that dialogue's readers do not conclude that
metaphysics must be a pretty easy pastime if girls can figure it out. To be a
real insult the funeral speech will have to be a bad speech , and parodically
bad. Aspasia's participation by itself does not make it a parody.
Other tutors: Connus, Antiphon and Lampros
Several of the minor names in the Menexenus occur within a dozen lines of
text. They are not names of participants in the dialogue, but they add a
backdrop to Socrates' claim that he studied rhetoric with Aspasia.
Shortly after crediting Aspasia with having tutored both him and Pericles ,
Socrates adds that he had studied music with Connus the son of Metrobius;
and that "even the student of much worse teachers- someone who learned music
from Lampros and rhetoric from Antiphon of Rhamnus - might distinguish
himself praising Athens in front of Athenians" as most public speakers content
themselves with doing . 57
Lamprus is scarcely mentioned in Plato's corpus or anywhere else before
later antiquity . But he matters the least of these three for comparison with
Aspasia, considering that he shares neither a student nor a discipline with her.
Connus the son of Metrobius was a figure of somewhat greater fame , even
though the attention that is known to have come to him was mostly cruel. 58
In Plato's dialogues his name appears twice as tutor to Socrates , here and also
in the Euthydemus, where he is said to be still alive and teaching . The dramatic
date of the Euthydemus must be late in Socrates' life, inasmuch as tutoring
him earns Connus the nickname gerontodidaskalos "the old men 's teacher ",
so the reference might be a small anachronism. 59 The non-Platonic mentions
of Connus are clustered around the year 423, when he was already being
37
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOG U E
spoken of as over the hill . He would have to have been highly superannuated
another twenty years after that.
Those non-Platonic references come from Athenian comedy . At least one
comic playwright , Ameipsias , wrote a comedy titled Connus. 6° Connus must
have enjoyed some kind of reputation . But not enough remains to tell what that
reputation was. Comedy about a music teacher? Why did it have a chorus of
ph rontist6n "thinkers "? One can only guess.
The surviving comedies of Aristophanes contain two jokes involving
Connus. In Knight s ( dated to 424) he is a man past his prime ; rather he is the
proverbial man past his prime , the basis for comparison that other old-timers
resemble. 61 He is a standard for shabby treatment two years later in Wasps
when Bdelycleon tells his father that no one values the old jury men of
Athens , any more than they value "the vote of Connus ". 62 The Wasps merely
testifies to the low esteem in which Connus is held; the context in Knight s
puts him in the company of has-beens , contrasting that low status with some
greater repute he once enjoyed. "How are the mighty fallen " . In both cases
the man was sufficiently prominent that he could be ridiculed on stage.
Thus far nothing definite follows about Aspasia. Pairing her name with
Conn us suggests more that Socrates had two famous teachers than anything
else. He was taught by the best.
If Connus is a colleague to Aspasia , Socrates cites Antiphon 63 as her opposite.
This is Antiphon of Rhamnus , a necessary qualifier, as many ancient figures
have the same name , even others in Plato 's dialogues. 64 The Antiphon th at
Socrates speaks of in these unflattering words appears in other classical works.
He taught rhetoric and wrote sample speeches , as Socrates says Aspasia did.
Clement of Alexandria later called him the first to accept pay for writing
forensic speeches. Probably because of his practice in rhetoric , he is called a
Sophist by Xenophon in his own recollections of Socrates , in which Antiphon
plays a sybarite and hostile rival trying to poach Socrates ' students. But
Thucydides , emphasizing the man 's character over his way with words ,
makes him a reserved figure not given to public speaking but a natural
leader. After the oligarchic revolution failed , Antiphon defended himself
"the best of anyone up to my time ". The restored democrac y executed
Antiphon , who responded to the death sentence , according to Aristotle , with
philosophical greatness of soul . 65
But here is Socrates , portrayed in conversation at least a decade later (maybe
two or three) , sneering at Antiphon 's abilities and associating him with the
rhetoric that truckles to its audience. What could be the motive behind this
swipe at a man long dead ? More importantly for the reader , what is its point ?
Not only anti-democratic enough to represent the oligarchs , Antiphon even
refused to address the Athenian assembly . To Thucydides his reticence shows
his seriousness ; a democratic thinker could read it as contempt for fellow
citizens; neither one would expect this type to pander to the public. And how
to explain the contrast with Aspasia ? If she becomes the anti-Antiphon , does
38
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
that make her a democrat? But this speech that Socrates credits her with , while
conciliatory towards democratic institutions, hardly repudiates the oligarchs'
slogan about rule by the best. 66 Plato does sometimes distance Socrates from
prominent oligarchs, as if in an ongoing effort to clear his name: Socrates
does not belong among the Thirty Tyrants and the ref ore did not corrupt the
youth. The Tyrants were on the verge of executing him when they were
forced out of office; and he never slept with Alcibiades. 67 But the setting and
the purpose of the M enexenus speech do not make this a natural occasion
for such distancing.
One part of the explanation is that Antiphon represents professional persuasion
in a kind of opposition that is familiar to Plato's readers. If Xenophon
bears witness to genuine rivalry between Antiphon and the Socratics ,68 then
Socrates stands for philosophy as it would refashion public rhetoric. By
invoking Aspasia as his teacher he supplies the new philosophical rhetoric
with an old pedigree. This is rhetoric that , being philosophical , cares for the city's
welfare and orates in agreement with sound reasoning. Meanwhile Antiphon's
competitiveness with Socrates leaves him vulnerable to being classified with
all other professional rhetoricians. Not seeking truth as philosophers do ,
those speechmakers must be basing their craft on appeals to the crowd. It is an
occupational hazard of both writing and teaching 69 for money , activities that
Plato and other Socratics routinely contrast with the unpaid philosophizing of
Socrates. 70
Seen as one more persuader for hire, Antiphon threatens to blend into the
crowd of Sophists whom Plato routinely contrasts with Socrates. There is
something generic about the opposition - not trivial, only not specific. One fact
about Antiphon that might enhance the contrast is a claim, credited to him ,
that goes to the heart of the Menexenus: Antiphon said that Greeks and
barbarians are alike by nature. Socrates will tell a story of Athens in this
funeral speech that is organized around the difference between the ethnicities,
and it may be that he mentions Antiphon by name to bring the issue of Greek
and barbarian into the dialogue. 71
Another reading of Antiphon rests on shakier ancient testimony , but it would
add a meaning to his name if that testimony can be trusted. Hermogenes ,
writing in the second century of the present era , says, "I hear from many that
Thucydides was the pupil of Antiphon of Rhamnus" .72 Hermogenes does not
believe this tradition ; nevertheless a book probably dating to the same time as
his, the section of pseudo-Plutarch's Lives of the Ten Orators on Antiphon,
attributes the same claim to Caecilius. 73 The two passages seem to ref er to
more than one another. Evidently a tradition existed that made Thucydides
the pupil of Antiphon.
If the report is true, it adds an edge to Socrates' mention of Antiphon.
Now the opposition between Antiphon and Aspasia makes their students into
opposites, Socrates on one side (with Plato behind him) and Thucydides on
the other. This would immediately mean that Plato is treating Thucydides as the
39
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
de facto author of the speech of Pericles. Moreover , setting Thucydides against
the Socratics draws attention to the historical narrative in the M enexenus. For
the largest most obvious difference between the Menexenus speech and the
speech it answers is the chronicle of Athens that Plato inserts into his memorial.
It is a history to rival the one that Thucydides tells, tucked into the speech
where the historian tucked his great speech into his chronicle; as if to draw
attention to the rhetorical nature of Thucydidean history as a whole.
Archinus and Dion
Menexenus tells Socrates that either Archinus or Dion is likely to be chosen
as funeral speaker. 74 On at least one interpretation of the Menexenus, these
names tell us how to take the funeral speech. Archinus and Dion were both
unacceptable speakers, the one too brutal and the other not a citizen. So the
mentions of their names , being as they are not factual references to funeral
speakers, must in some other way describe the parameters within which
Socrates/ Aspasia will be speaking. 75
Even if this reasoning is sound , it proceeds from a combination of clear
and contestable claims about the two names. Perhaps the phrase "Archinus
and Dion" carried immediate significance in Plato's time; today the allusions
threaten to remain opaque.
A scattering of information survives about Archinus. 76 The difficulty lies
in determining which facts typify his place in Athenian politics and which
are anomalous. A speech by Demosthenes calls Archinus meta ge tous theous
aiti6tatou "the one most responsible , after the gods ", for the restoration of
Athenian democracy after the Tyranny of the Thirty. 77 In the same spirit the
Aristotelian Constitution of Athen s classifies Archinus approvingly among
non-extremists who opposed the Tyrants. 78 It was presumably as a moderate
that on the one hand Archinus worked to prevent the oligarchy 's sympathizers
from emigrating to Eleusis - effectively punishing them - but also enforced
the post-Tyranny amnesty that protected both the Thirty and their supporters ,
and also opposed dramatic expansions of the Athenian citizenry to include
the non-citizens and slaves who had fought on behalf of democracy. 79 Perhaps
this means that Archinus represented constitutional stability and lawful
democracy.
Archinus was capable of acting with violence. He not only supported the
amnesty under which the Thirty Tyrants stepped down, he had someone
who violated that amnesty executed without trial. But one doesn't need to
get into the business of excusing Athenian violence to question whether his
name in the Mene xe nus must function as the name of a bloodthirsty politician.
Archinus also proposed a decree reducing the comic poets ' pay. 80 What makes
his murderous enforcement of the amnesty (an amnesty that protected
Socrates) the salient trait that his name refers to, and not one of his other
public deeds, above all his effort to restore democracy? Especially considering
40
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
that Archinus' name does not appear elsewhere in Plato , the reference resists
definite interpretation.
More to the point , there are some respects in which Archinus ' actions in
Athenian politics bear on the content of the Menexenus. If it is striking that
his violent enforcement of the amnesty clashes with the funeral speech's
claim that Athens ended its civil war with gentle reconciliation, 81 it is equally
worth noting that his fight against expanding the citizenry - his insistence on
a sharp distinction between Athenians and non-Athenians - squares with the
funeral speech's use of that same distinction. If Archinus appears at the start
of the dialogue as a comment on internal relations in Athens , he may just as
easily appear to remind Plato 's reader of the salient fact about relations
between Athens and other Greek cities.
The question of relevance also applies to friendship or collegiality between
Archinus and Anytus of Euonymon. The two evidently represented similar
political sensibilities and perhaps worked as allies;82 but Anytus would soon
prosecute Socrates. 83 That fact about Archinus' political bedfellows could
also be called the salient piece of information about him; but there are no
grounds for singling that fact out as the significance of Archinus' name in
the M enexenus.
Much less is known about Dion, at least about the Dion that Menexenus is
likely to be ref erring to. The name has inspired controversy thanks to the
famous Dion, Plato's friend from Syracuse, who embroiled Plato in Syracusan
politics and died fighting the tyrant Dionysius II. That is the first Dion that
a reader of Plato's would think of; but if he were the Dion being referred to
in the Menexenus, the mention of his name would have to be a joke. Dion's
status as a non-Athenian would have disqualified him from speaking. Did Plato
identify a foreigner as a likely funeral speaker by way of a sly observation that
the issues at hand transcend any individual city's interests? 84
More probably the Menexenus's Dion is one whom Xenophon mentioned
in Hellenica , a Dion who served as ambassador for Athens to Persia in
392. 85 The very existence of another Dion suggests that Plato is not alluding
to his friend from Syracuse. If the name "Dion" had a natural Athenian
referent , a joke about internationalism would have been so understated as to
go unnoticed. Plato is probably naming a political figure who participated in
the negotiations that led to the "King 's Peace ", that treaty brokered by
Persia that concludes the Menexenus 's history.
The Athenian Dion also makes sense as the reference of this sentence
inasmuch as he offers a contrast to the young Menexenus . For if Archinus
more than anyone else saw Athens back to democratic functioning after the
Thirty Tyrants, and Dion's name belongs in the story of how Athens reached
the endgame that led to the King's Peace , then both of these potential
speakers are active political figures who participated in the events that the
Menexenus's history tells about. 86 Maybe Menexenus ought to take a hint
from them and involve himself in Athenian politics and accomplish
41
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
something on the city's behalf , as these other men had to do before anyone
considered them for funeral speakers.
The figure of Socrates, however , stands as a reproach to both Archinus
and Dion. He is a funeral speaker too, after all; and compared with the
service he provided to Athens, the efforts of Archinus and Dion are trivial
and wrongly directed. Flurries of activity in the assembly and on diplomatic
voyages to Persia, barely a moment (as far as the historical record shows)
spent on improving the people of Athens. 87
Menexenus
Aspasia speaks to the reader of the Menexenus from backstage: Socrates
delivers her part. Menexenus has much less to say in this dialogue, but he
gets to speak his own lines.
The obvious reading of this Menexenus is that he is the same young man
Plato put into two other dialogues: the Lysis, in which he appears as such a
close friend of the title character that Socrates examines them both hoping
to detect the nature of "the friend"; and the Phaedo, which is a significant
appearance for the character despite Menexenus' not saying anything ,
because belonging to the group that witnessed Socrates' death puts him
among the circle of Socratic insiders. If the Menexenus that Socrates runs
into who is now coming out of the council meeting is the same one as in
those other dialogues, the Phaedo confirms that he will be an intimate friend
to Socrates, while the Lysis leads one to expect an enthusiastic young man,
quick to answer if not always good at answering.
Leslie Dean-Jones has argued for another Menexenus. Socrates is known
to have had a son by that name; and Dean-Jones makes the case that
Menexenus in the dialogue bearing his name is this son. 88 The Menexenus
who appears in the Lysis is addressed by Socrates as "son of Demophon", 89
but Demophon's name is not mentioned in the Menexenus.
Too many considerations weigh against the hypothesis. Menexenus and
Socrates engage in banter that hardly sounds like what we would expect from
an Athenian father and son. Would a father offer to strip naked and dance for
his son's pleasure, even sarcastically? Maybe under the right circumstances.
Would a son call his father by name? Not likely. Could an Athenian child get
away with openly doubting his father's honesty? 90
The substance of what Socrates tells Menexenus also suggests he is not talking
to his son. He tells Menexenus that he studied with Aspasia and Connus, which
is autobiographical information that his son surely would have known by
this time.91 But beyond such specifics, the tone of the conversation is unsuitable
for father and son. Menexenus acts as if he were as qualified as Socrates to
speak in public - overt disrespect for an Athenian son. (And one wonders
how he could have prepared a text and presented himself to the council
without his father's having learned of the plan.)
42
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOG U E
One reason it is difficult to pin down Menexenus ' identity is his tender age.
Whether Socrates' son or just a young man Socrates knows , he is junior
enough to invite condescension and a show of indulgence from Socrates ,
who inclines towards reacting that way towards everyone . Does Menexenus
sound big and brash about speaking at the funeral despite his youth because
he is talking to his father , or because he is so self-aggrandizing that he talks
that way to everyone?
In an important respect the answer does not matter. Menexenus has such a
high opinion of his own talents as to have presented himself to the boule as
one qualified to speak for the city at a military funeral . Son or not , he has
the uneducated confidence of the interlocutors that Socrates undoes through
interrogation: Ion , Euthyphro , Callicles and the well-known rest of them .
Menexenus even thinks highly enough of himself to question Socrates. And
here is something singular about the Menexen us and a reason to entertain
Dean-Jones ' reading in addition to the reasons she gives: Socrates positively
indulges Menexenus. Shyness or not he will recite a stirring patriotic speech
at the boy 's behest (with an offer of naked dancing thrown in for good
measure). 92 Menexenus asks what kind of speech Socrates would give and
Socrates uses none of his dialogical judo on him but answers the question.
He learned a fine example from Aspasia , he says, and delivers the funeral
oration.
Menexenus ' mocking spirit creates a problem for readers who deduce from
the opening dialogue that the speech is a parody of public rhetoric. The greatest
support for that reading comes from the opening and closing conversations ,
barely if at all from the speech itself. And within the conversation it is
Menexenus , not Socrates , who represents this position. Menexenus is the one
who thinks Socrates is joking and actually hates all rhetoric ; it is Menexenus
who believes that Aspasia could not have written the speech . Socrates by
contrast keeps claiming that Aspasia is a skilled rhetorician , and does not
change his story. When readers of the Menexenus say they hear the joke and
the mockery in the speech , they are sounding like the brash and cocky
interlocutor rather than resembling the philosopher.
The reader who wants to link philosophical views to the Platonic characters
who espouse them ought to do so here, and ask: which character thinks
Socrates is mocking public speakers ? Which one thinks the speech is a joke ?
The unseasoned boy talks that way, the one who knows less than he should ;
the one who at the end of a fine speech (a speech he acknowledges to be fine)
still thinks the important question is "Who wrote it?" If you really want to
read Plato as an author who keeps claims sorted by the characters of those
who put those claims forward, then you should associate the interpretation of
this speech as ironic with the type of auditor who is young and self-absorbed ,
and prone not to detect the merit of another person 's accomplishment.
Even more relevantly , Menexenus offers Plato the chance to begin this
dialogue with a tailor-made opportunit y to satirize rhetoric. Menexenu s
43
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
sounds something like Ion in the dialogue named after him; but Socrates is
relentless with Ion and what he knows, until Ion admits his incompetence. Why
does Socrates not put Menexenus to the same test? There is any number of
concepts that Menexenus could be shown not to grasp. Even better, given that
Menexenus wants to be the city's speaker, Socrates can have him give his
speech right now. That would show the failings of his rhetoric, as the failings
of rhetoric show in the "Lysias" speech in the Phaedrus. A hapless sample
speech from Menexenus would shut the boy up and parody Pericles both at
once. That Plato elects to have Socrates deliver a speech instead of a
wrongheaded speech by Menexenus suggests that the speech given here has
philosophical value.
One last thought about Menexenus as the son of Socrates. Although
deciding either way on this question does not affect this book's reading of
the funeral speech, Dean-Jones' proposal works in a fascinating way together
with the suggestion, already raised , that Socrates is a shade returned from
Hades. If Rosenstock and Dean-Jones are both correct, the Socrates who
speaks in the M enexenus is a shade appearing in the presence of his son, as
part of the process of humbling the son. And the historical background to this
time suggests a meaning to such an appearance. The Peace of Corinth that
marked the end of the Corinthian War in 386 was (as implied by one other
name it had: the King's Peace) a treaty brokered by Persia to quiet the fights
among Greece's cities. While bringing peace 93 the treaty had the effect, and
revealed the motive, of consolidating Persia's influence over Greece. In particular
this treaty recognized Persia's control over those Ionian cities along the
coast of Asia Minor (including Miletus, home town to Aspasia) that had
revolted early in the preceding century. At that time Athens had supported
their revolt, and Persia's first march into Greece , until it was stopped at
Marathon, had been planned as a punishment for Athens. Ceding the same
Ionian cities to Persia constituted a final acknowledgement by Athens that
its struggle had been in vain. One hundred years after Marathon, Persia won
the war with Greece - or rather won in the Peace what it had lost at war.
Meanwhile 386 was the year in which Athenians first included revivals in
their annual dramatic festivals. Until then all tragedies performed in Athens
were new plays, written for that occasion and never played again, at least not
performed again in Athens. In 386 the Athenians first dipped back into
their dramatic history and reperf ormed a tragedy by Aeschylus. As the
fourth century proceeded they made tragic repertory an ever more common
occurrence. 94
It is not known what play by Aeschylus the Athenians revived in 386. But
even if it was not Persians, the city would have been alerted to Aeschylus (who
had been dead a lifetime by then) more than it had for years, and alerted to
allusions to his plays. And if both interpretive suggestions about the
M enexenus quoted here are true , that Socrates is dead and the ref ore present
as a ghost and Menexenus is the son he appears to, then their conversation
44
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
re-enacts the scene in Persians in which the ghost of Darius appears to
Xerxes. 95
In the Persians Xerxes sees his father after having returned to Persia ,
defeated by the Greeks at Salamis. In the Menexenus it is the Greeks who are
lost, defeated in the peace brokered by the Persian King. Xerxes has just met
with the Persian elders. Menexenus just met with the Athenian boule. His
father 's ghost appears and surveys the loss - the father of Xerxes but also the
father of Menexenus. Darius' elegy for his empire includes a recapitulation
of Persia's glorious history; Socrates recounts the glorious past of Athens.
Again, this proposal rests on two suggestions , both of which have to be
true for this interpretation to be. Then too the relationship between the
Menexenus and other literary works has more to do with Thucydides than
with Aeschylus. Both the funeral speech of Pericles and the historical narrative
it is embedded in are assessed and rewritten in the funeral speech of Socrates
and the historical narrative embedded within that. But rewriting Thucydides
is not inconsistent with also rewriting Aeschylus. On the contrary , in one
respect the two appropriations of earlier works reinforce each other. For as a
response to Pericles' speech the Menexenus puts Socrates in the place of the
man who , during Socrates' lifetime , wielded more power than any other
Athenian. Socrates as Aspasia's favoured student, the one she told her real
speech to, for a moment becomes the man who runs Athens. The allusion to
the Persians puts Socrates in the place of Darius , the most successful of the
dynasty of successful Persian monarchs. Either way you read the dialogue,
this is what rhetoric would sound like if Socrates ruled the world.
Of course Socrates did not rule. He lived a private life and died an unenviable
death , and for all Plato knew that was the end of him. Even so, Plato seems to
remember Socrates drawing the same comparison at his trial , when he wondered
if his coming death might feel like a dreamless sleep. The king of Persia himself
doesn't sleep so well! - Socrates saying that as if a comparison between him and
the great king were the most obvious pairing in the world. 96
And to the extent that Socrates represents more than Socrates alone, to
the extent that he also carries the meaning of "the philosopher " with him
everywhere , the sight of him addressing Athens as a man of power brings the
change to mind that Plato will register in other words in another place, when
he has Socrates conceive the day that either kings turn to philosophy or
philosophers turn into kings.
Pericles
The historical person of Pericles, the author of the most famous funeral
oration in the ancient world, is named only twice in the M enexenus, but in
some form his voice is heard throughout the dialogue ; and in a way (so goes
the argument of this book) his ear is present too, Pericles being part of the
target audience for the M enexenus speech. His own funeral speech defines
45
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
Pericles for later ages, and to a great respect it had already defined him in
ancient Athens. Readers of the speech since his time or a little later took it to
exhibit the height of his rhetorical abilities and to display the power of his
personality and his thought. And that speech, more than anything else is, is
the subject of the Menexenus.
In numerous unmistakable ways the Menexenus harks back to the Periclean
speech, with Plato expecting his reader to compare the speech Socrates gives
with Thucydides' version of the speech by Pericles. To remove all doubt
Socrates ascribes the entire speech he delivers to Aspasia. Plato suggests that
Aspasia wrote the original funeral speech for Pericles, just as she wrote the
speech Socrates delivers in the M enexenus, maintaining the old slander that
Aspasia taught Pericles how to speak.97 But the connection between the
speeches does not have to depend on Aspasia's relationship to them when
the speeches are as structurally similar as they are. The M enexenus speech
ultimately comes out of Pericles' mouth and talks back to his speech, whether
to silence that first speech and all the rhetoric it stands for (if it works as
parodies do) or to improve upon it (if it is meant as an improvement).
Given his importance to the Menexenus even from a position outside the
dialogue, Pericles needs a few words of introduction of the sort that Plato 's
contemporaries would have taken as too obvious to mention - not an
attempt at a summary of his life, for which many sources are available,98 but
an encapsulation of those aspects of his life and public persona that are most
relevant to the Mene x enus.
The ancient evidence about Pericles is sparse for someone who must rank
as the most famous statesman to emerge from classical Greece. Pericles left
no memoirs , correspondence, or other writings.99 Some of his speeches were
reported by Thucydides , and statements attributed to him were handed down
by contemporaneous authors. But as a rule the authors of his own time
record only satirical fragments in the plays of Aristophanes and other comic
poets, a story in Herodotus about the birth of Pericles.100
In an indirect sense Herodotus might be speaking of Pericles elsewhere
too, in disguised form. Perhaps the comments of the Histories on the origins
of Athens 101 are motivated by the wish to correct the patriotic version of
those origins as propounded by Pericles.102 But such allusive references are a
long way from usable biographical evidence.
Much more detail exists in such later sources as Plutarch's Life of Pericle s
(together with his Life of Cimon) and the Byzantine Suda. These were written
many centuries after the time of Pericles: their authors had access to earlier
sources now lost, but it can be hard to sift out what is reliable in their
reports on those earlier sources.103
The main sources for a study of Pericles date to the century between his
death and the death of Alexander the Great. The Constitution of Athens
comes from around the end of that period: it is an Aristotelian document ,
traditionally credited to Aristotle himself but now sometimes attributed to a
46
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
member of his school. That portrait of the Athenian democracy includes
information about the early life and career of Pericles. 104
The most significant source is Thucydides. His History loses some of its claim
to impartiality when its narrative repeatedly endorses the policies and tactics of
Pericles. But no one can doubt Thucydides ' access to information about the
prominent figures of Athens, nor his scrupulousness in gathering and presenting
that information. Born into a world that lacked traditions of scholarly method ,
Thucydides invented his own rules and then followed them.
Most relevantly to the present topic , the History preserves an account of the
funeral oration Pericles delivered after the first year of the war. It is likely that
Thucydides was present when Pericles spoke; and considering Pericles' fame
and the fame of this speech he must have felt constrained to repeat Pericles' own
words, for otherwise too many people could have spotted errors in his version ,
errors of the sort that he was most dedicated to avoiding. For his part Plato not
only responded to Pericles through the funeral speech as Thucydides reported
it, but also must have read the Histor y in its entirety; 105 presumably he
expected his reader to be familiar both with the speeches of Pericles and with
the man's entire political legacy, as Thucydides presents that legacy. 106
Plato himself supplies different evidence about Pericles. Pericles is a
recurring topic in Plato's Protagoras and Gorgias, while in other dialogues he
comes in for glancing criticisms , occasionally damned with faint praise. Once
Plato does have Socrates compliment the man: panton teleotatos eis ten
rhetoriken genesthai "the most perfect at rhetoric of anyone alive" .107 Most
generally one can say that Plato looks at Pericles as a parent , an educator , a
statesman and an orator; and one reason for seeing the Menexenus as a significant
Platonic work is that it connects with all these more isolated comments
about Pericles.
As for the life itself: Pericles , born around 495, died in 429 of the plague
that killed a considerable fraction of Athens. On his mother's side he belonged
to the powerful and sometimes scandalous Alcmaeonid family. He married as
a young man and had two sons, Xanthippus and Paralus, who are sometimes
mentioned together in Plato. 108 He divorced this wife, and some years after
the divorce he took up with Aspasia .
Pericles probably made his first mark in political life when he was in his
early thirties and brought a prosecution against the Athenian statesman
Cimon. Cimon had been the hero of the battle of the Eurymedon , at which -
more than a decade after the Persian War - Athens led Greek forces to a
primarily naval victory over Persia. Thanks to Cimon , Persia ceased to be a
threat on the Greek seas, and the alliance of Greek cities led by Athens
became a notable military force. But back in Athens, Cimon's main rival was
Ephialtes , political mentor to Pericles. No doubt because of his association
with Ephialtes , Pericles prosecuted Cimon for taking bribes after an audit of
Cimon 's term as strategos "general " found a discrepancy in the official
accounts. Cimon was acquitted , but Pericles' action had proved that he
47
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
could be defeated politically. Within a couple of years Cimon had been
ostracized. 109
Pericles did not emerge from complete obscurity to bring legal charges
against Cimon. Sometime before the trial , in 4 72, he served as choregos
"chorus leader, producer" of a trilogy by Aeschylus that included Persians.110
A choregos spent his own time and money organizing a dramatic production.
This seems to have been ( and seems to have been seen as) an aristocratic
institution surviving into democratic culture , 111 and Pericles may have taken
on the production to establish himself as a public figure. In any case he went
beyond merely being known to operating within Athenian politics when he
initiated the prosecution.
His mentor Ephialtes was assassinated within a year of the ostracism of
Cimon , and Pericles soon moved into the position of greatest prominence
and power in Athens. From 454 until his death in 429, he was annually
elected , almost without fail, to the position of strategos. Although officially
the strategoi were military leaders , in practice they wielded authority in the
Athenian assembly as well, with the right to speak first on proposed legislation.
Pericles seems to have taken advantage of these privileges. In practice he
ruled Athens without effective rivals ; so a famous passage from Thucydides
can sum up his political career: "He was not led by the multitude [plethos]
but rather led it"; and Athens "became democracy in word [logoi], but in
fact [ergoi] rule by the pre-eminent man [hupo tau protou andros arche]" .112
The Menexenus might be acknowledging the same domination of Athenian
politics by a single person when it says that some call Athens a democracy ,
others by another name, but it is really an aristokratia in which the populace
approves rule by the best. 113
Beyond literal politics , Pericles represented the new ideas that characterized
Athenian culture after the Persian Wars. He associated with the sophist
Protagoras and the Parmenidean philosopher Zeno. Above all he was influenced
by Anaxagoras. How close such connections were is impossible to estimate.
These men may simply have dined and talked together, or Pericles may have
studied with them, as Plutarch says he studied music with Damon .114
As de facto leader of Athens Pericles pursued and expanded the democratic
agenda of Ephialtes. Domestically this agenda consisted in transforming the
Athenian constitution to put more power than ever in the hands of its citizens.
Pericles also expanded the policy of paying citizens for performing public
service, above all for jury duty. This controversial move 115 democratized the
city more than any official restructuring of the constitution could do ,
because it meant that people could afford to take days off work to judge
criminal cases and lawsuits and perhaps to fill other public offices. Even that
is putting the point weakly. The working poor (and the non-working poor)
not only had an obstacle removed to their participation in public life, they
had a substantial positive reason to involve themselves in politics when they
otherwise would not have bothered to.
48
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
It was also Pericles who championed and oversaw the remarkable building
project that created most of the ancient Athens that today's tourists flock to.
Drawing on the funds of the Athenian-run alliance the Delian League , Pericles
saw to the extravagant reconstruction of the city's Acropolis , including the
Parthenon.
A democratic agenda informed Athenian foreign policy under Pericles ,
inasmuch as he emphasized the construction of new ships and the presence
of the Athenian fleet in the Aegean . Citizens of the lowest economic ranks
could not afford the armour that a hoplite warrior wore into battle. On land
they served as auxiliary lightly armed archers or not at all. But they could all
row in Athens 's ships, and the navy came to be identified (by both proponents
and detractors) with democracy and the poor. To enhance democracy was to
enlarge the fleet; in this sense it was the democratization of Athens that led
to the city's overwhelming power in the Aegean Sea, a growth of power that
contributed greatly to the other Greek cities' fear and resentment of Athens and
the ref ore ( as Thucydides saw it) made the Peloponnesian War inescapable . 116
The war between Athens and Sparta had plenty of specific and more
immediate causes besides the existence of the navy. Most of those involved
Pericles as well. He formed alliances with strong states long opposed to
Sparta and fostered the spread of democratic constitutions throughout
Greece. In general he seemed , if not bent on inciting a war with Sparta , at
least aware that open warfare between the two cities was bound to develop ,
and concerned to prepare for a fight. He shaped the military strategy that
Athens followed as long as he was alive and commanding the city. Conscious
of Sparta 's infantry superiority , Pericles gathered the Athenians who lived in
the countryside to move within the city walls so that Sparta would find no
one to attack when they marched against Athens. Meanwhile Athens could
use its ships both to strike against other cities and to protect the imports that
sustained its population when all the local farmers were living inside the
walls and left their fields untended . The goal was a war of attrition that
would ultimately discourage Sparta.
The war had begun in 431 when Pericles delivered the funeral speech that
Thucydides records in his Histor y. Whether or not the strategy Pericles
envisioned was the best one to follow is a moot point, for within two years
he had died of the plague, and Athens subsequently followed a different
strategy for the twenty-five remaining years that ended in Sparta 's victory.
This much about Pericles is enough to identify several points over which
Plato would have opposed him. In general Plato most takes issue with the
democratic innovations that Pericles brought to Athens and the credibility
that his name and charisma lent to democracy. Plato is notorious today for his
opposition to democracy , though the issue does not figure prominently in the
Menexenus . The Mene xenus even appears to have made its peace with this
unruly form of governance , except insofar as democratic culture obstructs
education.
49
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
Also vague, or only indirect, are references in the Menexenus to the friends
of Pericles who represent the new ideas afoot in Athens. Glamorous and
compelling rhetoric was part of the new era that included sophistry and
tragedy; and broadly speaking , to the degree that the Menexenus directs
itself against Pericles' rhetoric it has reason to suspect his intellectual
attachments as well. Nevertheless Plato's attacks on the associates of Pericles
are more explicit in other dialogues , scarcely surfacing here. 117
As a political leader, however , Pericles is everywhere in Plato's funeral
speech even if his name is not. Pericles constructed the empire that inspired
countless battles and ruined Athens; so the Menexenus 's story of the city is a
story of his effects as a leader. Beginning almost at once after the Persian War,
that story recounts the shifting alliances and exhausting wars that Pericles
either led Athens into himself or left behind him as the legacy of his foreign
policy and military strategy. Whatever Plato 's attitude towards Athenian
history is in the end , it begins with the political reality that Pericles created ,
either criticizing that reality , trying to accept a redescribed version of it, or -
the subtlest transformation , one to watch for throughout - willing away
Pericles' role in history in favour of larger, impersonal forces that are
comprehensible only to a philosopher.
Finally, a word about the occasion that history preserves as the first
appearance Pericles made before the public , his work as choregos "chorus
sponsor, producer" for Persians (and other plays by Aeschylus , now lost).
This last thought develops comments made above: Dean-Jones' proposal
that Menexenus is the son of Socrates; the argument from Rosenstock that
Socrates is a ghost; our own suggestion that the conversation between
the two reprises the "seance" scene in Persians. Suppose Plato planned
the Menexenus as a reply to Pericles along another dimension. First his
dialogue rewrites the most famous speech that Pericles gave, and then it
rewrites the play he famously produced. What an optimist (and ignoramus)
Pericles had been to imagine Salamis as the end of Persia 's empire. Socrates
now contemplates the end of Athens's empire at the hands of Persia. And
where the Persians may have functioned as a political message from its
choregos endorsing the work of Themistocles in routing Persian ships, 118 the
Menexenus makes its image of imperial decline the indictment of Periclean
policies.
Even without summoning Aeschylus , the Menexenus comes at Pericles
from several directions at once. In this respect, even if not in any others, it
belongs in the centre of a discussion , informing and deepening all the
comments about Pericles that other dialogues make in passing.
Notes
1 But note that the remark that Connus is his tutor in music is also found in the
Euthydemus 272c, 295d. See below on Connus.
50
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
2 See below on Aspasia. Socrates also speaks of his tutor in music, Connus the
son of Metrobius, a much lesser figure than Aspasia; nevertheless see below on
Connus.
3 Plato: Socrates learned rhetoric from Aspasia , Menexenus 235e; rhetoric an
empeiria like pastry-cooking, Gorgias 462d-e; rhetoric based on understanding
the soul, Phaedrus 270b- c; its actual practitioners , Phaedrus 272d- 273a. See the
Conclusion on the relationship between the Menexenus and Plato 's criticisms of
rhetoric.
4 The Symposium offers an example along these lines. For obvious reasons
the Symposium has invited updated versions , reinterpretations, in fiction and
on the stage. Plato peopled it with a comic and tragic playwright, physician ,
politician and the rest, and for the most part these can be replaced with
stock characters from other cultures. But replacing Socrates with another
philosopher - whether real , fictional or archetypal - puts out the Symposium 's
fire. Thus an otherwise successful production in June 2007 , The Dinner
Party , directed by David Herskovits (with dramaturg Kathleen Kennedy Tobin) ,
at the Kitchen in New York City. See Isherwood (2007) . What made that
production fizzle? Simply that one great reason for Socrates to tell what love is,
is discovering the love that might have motivated him , Socrates , the philosopher
people wanted to understand in ancient Athens and would still like to
understand today - not "the philosopher ", but this peculiar example not yet
duplicated.
5 Plato: mother of Socrates a midwife, Theaetetus 149a; Socrates' never practising
music, Phaedo 60e-61a. On the historical status of the midwife-mother story see
Burnyeat (1977).
6 As Pamela M. Huby puts his position (not far from her own): "Wilamowitz
thinks that the speech was an attempt to show that Plato could do as well as the
orators if he chose . . . The jesting dialogue was added as a screen for the fact
that it was the writer of the Gorgias who was now trying to write a speech ".
Huby cites Platon I, pp. 265- 67 and II, p. 142. Huby (1957: 104n.2). Other
readers have held variants on this view. Clavaud cites Croiset and Kennedy , who
called the opening dialogue comical but the speech within serious , while Hude
thinks that as Plato writes he passes from being ironical to being serious . See
Clavaud (1980: 49-50, 56).
7 According to a memorable anecdote that Aristotle tells - memorable because it
sounds as unlikely today as it did in his time - Thales proved the practical
potential of philosophers by cornering the market on olive presses one year
when he foresaw a bumper crop of olives: Politics 1259a6- 23. If the Menexenus
were out to prove the rhetorical abilities of philosophers , it would belong in the
same tradition of philosophers' demonstrating pragmatic knowledge .
8 M enexenus 249e.
9 See A. G. Geddes (1987: 320). Plato portrays Socrates in tribon: Protagoras
335d, Symposium 219b.
10 Plato: Socrates in public life, Apology 32b-d; the household of Pericles , Gorgias
427a-b . On other references to Pericles in the dialogues see the section on
Pericles below.
11 Aristophanes: jokes about Socrates , Birds 1280-83; Frogs 1492.
12 Plato: Socrates not acquainted with Anaxagoras, see Apology 26d, Phaedo 97b-d;
Socrates and Alcibiades , Symposium 213b-223a; "in love with" Alcibiades , Gorgias
481d , Protagoras 309a, Symposium 213d; Paralus and Xanthippus , Protagoras
315a. Socrates and Pericles the Younger, Xenophon Memorabilia 3.5.
13 Plato Pro tagoras: Protagoras recognized Socrates , 316c.
51
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
14 Nails (2002: 79-82). For ancient descriptions of the case see Plato Apology 32b-c ,
Xenophon H ellenica 1. 7; see Xenophon's direct reference in Memorabilia 1.1.18
and the more oblique allusion at 4.4.2.
15 Rosenstock ( 1994).
16 Plato Phaedo 8lc-d .
17 Menexenus: Socrates eis makar6n nesois "on the Isles of the Blessed ", 235c;
Aspasia makaria, 249d; speech f ram beyond the grave, 246d-248d.
18 Thucydides History: Pericles to survivors, 2.45.2 . On the genre of funeral speeches
see Chapter 3 below. For reflections on mortality in those speeches see Lysias
2.77-78 ; Demosthenes 60.37; Hyperides 6.42-43 .
19 Apology 4la-c.
20 Nails (2002: 319-20).
21 Ibid: 319.
22 Ibid: 319. Emphasis in original.
23 Another problem is that "far" and "near" are sometimes literal terms in this
description , sometimes metaphors . Persia is literally further away than Sparta; but
the gods' role in the history takes place right at home , when the first Athenians
sprout from the earth. This is far away only in a conceptual sense. And then the
tales of Athenian heroes sometimes take place in Greece , further from Athens
but still nearer than Persia is.
24 See Menexenus 243b.
25 On the lecture see Aristoxenus , Harmonics 30.10- 31. Gaiser (1980) collects the
relevant evidence on this much-anecdoted speech. Whether or not that lecture
points the way to an esoteric Platonic doctrine lies beyond the scope of this
chapter; it is enough if Plato wrote a lecture.
26 With only cautious appeal to the dialogues' chronology , one can still observe
that the works in which Socrates is not the main speaker are all dialogues
thought to have been written later than the rest. Whatever his reasons , Plato first
made Socrates his exclusive protagonist and only later introduced other speakers
in that role. So, if the Menexenus is not a late work (see below) , Plato would
have put Socrates in it as a matter of course , even though his purpose was to
connect the speech with Aspasia .
27 For a summary and assessment of stylometric and other methods of dating the
dialogues see Brandwood (1992).
28 Henry (1995) .
29 Ibid: 19.
30 For a succinct contrast between "Old" and "New" Comedy see Aristotle , Nicomachean
Ethics 8.4 l 128a21- 24. Aristotle might not be using the words "old" and
"new" in consciousness of two distinct comic genres (Irwin 2000: 226). Nevertheless
his word aischrologia "shameful language; obscenity " captures Old Comedy in
the technical sense as that is known today.
31 Henry (1995: 20-25). See especially two fragments of Cratinus from his Cheirons:
Kassel and Austin (1998: fragments 258, 259). Eupolis' Demes has Pericles the
Younger, Aspasia 's son , ashamed to have a whore for a mother: Kassel and
Austin (1998: fragment 110).
32 Plutarch Pericles 32.1.
33 Aristophanes Acharnians: "Some young guys drunk from playing cottabus
[a game with wine-dregs] go to Megara and steal the whore Simaitha. And
the Megarians all worked up stole two of Aspasia 's whores in turn .. .
Then Pericles the furied Olympian shook Greece with his lightning bolts" ,
passing the decrees that barred imports from Megara, and that prompted
the Megarians to seek help from Sparta: 524-34. See Henry (1995: 25-26) for
52
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
discussion. For a passing reference to the Megarian Decree see Thucydides
History 1.139.
34 See Sansone (1985) on parallels between this putati ve explanation in Acharnians
and the opening sections of Herodotus ' Histories , which mock the Greek
penchant for tracing wars back to abductions of women (starting of course with
the Trojan War).
35 Sometimes Henry identifies misogyny too freely: Colakis (1998). Henry 's
assessment of the testimony about Aspasia suffers the most from her tendentious
reading of Old Comedy as a genre - for example , women can 't govern in Old
Comedy and "their attempts to do so .. . must always be considered an inversion
of the norm " (Henry 1995: 21). This is an uncharacteristically inattentive
response on Henry 's part to Ly sistrata , whose title character is both sage and
savvy; or to Ecclesia zusae, which celebrates its feminist utopia at almost as
many points as it mocks the idea. It would be fair to complain about this play 's
ambiguity , but Henry does not. She is right that women in the assembly represent
" an inversion of the norm " . It would not be the premise for a comedy otherwise .
But inverting the norm is not a problem when the norm is diseased , as
Aristophanes often pictures the Athenian norm . If rule by women inverts the
norm , all the better for rule by women .
36 The audience that saw Wasps knew that Athenian litigiousness and widespread
criminal prosecution were really about finding a balance between democracy and
demagoguery. But what worked on stage was an inverted battle between generations
that involved a reasonable if supercilious son and his randy , uncontrollable
old father.
37 See Roy (1997) for a fuller discussion of the available variations on marriage. "A
pa/lake seems to have been any woman living with a man over an extended
period but not married to him by engye [formal betrothal] . The term pa/lake
could cover women of very different standing " (ibid .: 17).
38 For a reasonable summary of evidence see Henry (1995: 10-17) . Also see Nails
(2002: 58- 62). Nails comes to different conclusions on some particulars. For
archaeological evidence that helps to confirm Aspasia 's relations with the family
of Alcibiades see Bicknell (1982).
39 But Henry (1995: 70- 74) argues that Plutarch cannily withholds agreement from
most of what he reports about Aspasia. Also see Ginsburg (1997).
40 Plutarch Pericle s 24.6. Athenaeus tells the same story: Deipnosophistai 13.589e.
41 On the difficulty of maintaining a clear distinction between the terms see Cohen
(2006: 96-99) .
42 Menexenus 249d.
43 On Xenophon 's Aspasia see Henry (1995: 45-52).
44 Xenophon Oeconomicus 3.14.
45 Socrates calls himself a metaphorical matchmaker in the Theaetetus 's "midwifery "
passage , in which he speaks of his mother the midwife and himself as midwife of
philosophical thoughts. The analogy takes a surprising turn when Socrates
claims that midwives also introduce men and women to each other , planting the
seed they will har vest later . He too makes matches , joining fertile souls to
the teachers most likely to impregnate them with philosophy . There is no evidence
that Athenian midwives played a role in arranging marriages ; significantl y,
Socrates does not pretend that his mother ever did any matchmaking. Wherever
the midwifing analogy comes from - whether or not the mother of Socrates ever
served as midwife at a birth - the matchmaking could the ref ore have been
inspired by either what Aspasia really did around Athens or what she was
reputed to do; reputed widely enough that Xenophon would have reported and
53
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
assumed the truth of the claim. Also see Republic 8.546a-d on the beginning of
the good city's decline. The city begins its downward slide because of failures in
matchmaking. "When the guardians give brides in marriage to bridegrooms
[sunoikiz6sin numphas numphiois] at the wrong time [para kairon] , their children
will be neither well-born nor fortunate" (ibid .: 546d).
46 Xenophon Memorabilia 2.6.36. Once again Socrates speaks as if he knew
Aspasia personally. So when he says in the Menexenus that he studied rhetoric
under Aspasia, that is not an automatic signal of parody. On this last point see
Pomeroy (1996). Pomeroy points out that during the Peloponnesian War, "the luxury
of secluding respectable women had to yield to harsh necessity" ; she concludes that
"the traditions that Aspasia lived in the same household with Pericles' married
sons and their wives and that she conversed with married women are believable"
(ibid.: 649). In the same spirit we might point to associations in Greek authors
between wartime and women's freedom: Aristophanes Lysistrata, in which
Greek women rise up against male militarism; or Herodotus Histories 5.87, in
which Athenian women use their broaches to stab a man to death after a ruinous
battle against Aegina . The less secluded a life Aspasia had to have lived, the
likelier it is that she would have talked to Socrates, whether about funeral speeches
or about the best way to sell a husband to a potential wife.
4 7 Barbara Ehlers proposes Aeschines as the source for Xenophon 's portrayal of
Aspasia . See her reconstruction of Aeschines' dialogue Aspasia in Ehlers (1966:
101- 3). Henry seems to adopt Ehlers' proposal with enthusiasm - see Henry
(1995: 52, 56) - although her notes call it a "plausible but unprovable view"
(ibid.: 15ln.53).
48 Cicero De Inventione 1.31.51- 52.
49 Ehlers (1966). Henry takes issue with Ehlers ' proposal that the dialogue cast
Aspasia as a courtesan - how (she asks relevantly) could a young man 's father
send him to a courtesan for lessons in rhetoric? - but generally accepts and relies
on the reconstruction: Henry (1995: 40-45) . On this see Ginsburg (1997: 191).
50 Henry (1995: 50). Henry sees the enticing presentation of Aspasia in Aeschines
as the path not taken by philosophy. "For a moment , philosophical discourse
allowed a woman to advocate that women and men, connected by eras , search
together for the good" (ibid.: 56).
51 Discussing the myth in Part III we will remark on its even repressing the traditional
story behind Athenian autochthony, a story that retains erotic impulse in
the form of Hephaestus ' attempted rape of Athena , hence his ejaculation that
wound up on the fecund earth. Not very satisfying as images of er6s go; but
even this is missing from the spontaneous birth of Athenians when Plato 's
M enexenus retells the story.
52 The same is true for a passage in Athenaeus , writing about a century after Plutarch .
In Deipnosophistai 5.219e a character tells of the love advice Aspasia gave to
Socrates when he fell in love with Alcibiades.
53 Cicero appreciated the exchange that Aeschines reports, and not because it
pleads for marital harmony. According to Cicero 's Aeschines, Aspasia invented
induction , the form of cross-examination in which an interlocutor responds to
several uncontroversial examples and the questioner finds a general principle
fitting all the responses. The principle will then undermine what the interlocutor
had said or claimed to believe about the contentious subject at hand . That the
subject for Aspasia is wanting someone else's wife or husband might distract you
from noticing that Aspasia's method is the strongest crowbar in Socrates '
elenchtic toolbox. If he learned this from her then she was his teacher in the full
sense of that word. Cicero De Inventione 1.31.51-52 .
54
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
54 Autochthony is identified explicitly at Lysias 2.17, Demosthenes 60.4-5 and
Hyperides 6. 7-8; in every case, when those other speech writers mention education ,
they keep that subject sequestered from autochthony.
55 Thucydides History 2.39: Pericles contrasts Athenians ' automatic courage with
the kind Spartans exercise.
56 Kyle (2003). See Xenophon Agesilaus 9.6; also Plutarch Agesilaus 20.l ; on
Cynisca's victory , Pausanias Description of Greece 3.8.
57 Mene x enus: Socrates studied with Connus , 235e; "even the student ", 236a; most
speakers content to flatter, 235d.
58 On Connus see Nails (2002: 103-4) .
59 Plato Euthydemus: "He is teaching me to play the lyre even now [ eti kai nun]",
272c; Socrates in present tense again saying that Connus "gives me trouble when
I don 't obey him ", 295d; Connus as gerontodidaskalos , 272c .
60 Athenaeus Deipnosophistai 5.218c on the play Connus , which seems to have been
another attack on intellectuals produced in the same year as Clouds .
61 The chorus of Knights brings Connus up when speaking of the Old Comic
playwright Cratin us, neglected by his former fans and wandering around Athens
angling for a free dinner - "like Connus ", 534.
62 Aristophanes Wasps 675. Nails (2002: 104) renders this line differentl y, as if it
called Connus himself one of the old jurors , and the salt fish and so on were gifts
that the state bribed them with to gain votes. But the gifts in question are supposed
to indicate luxuries that old jurors are not getting . Bdelycleon is telling them all
they have been duped .
63 On Antiphon see Gagarin (2002); also Nails (2002: 32-34).
64 The Parmenid es as a whole is a conversation remembered by one Antiphon who
is said to have a grandfather of the same name , 126a-c. An Antiphon who is
neither of those , Antiphon of Cephisia , is present at Socrates ' trial: Apolog y 33e.
Avery (1982: 145n. l) .
65 Antiphon : took money for speeches , Clement Stromata l . 79; Sophist , Xenophon
Memorabilia 1.6.1- 15 (cf Nails 2002: 33); public figure, Thucydides Histor y
8.68.1-2 ; executed by the restored democracy , History 8.90-91; accepted sentence
with greatness , Aristotle Eudemian Ethics 1232b6-9. Avery (1982: 157-58).
66 The theme of education that pervades the speech already distinguishes its politics
from democratic ones. On this subject generally see Part II below. Also consider
the M enexenus 's reworking of something Pericles says about the word "democracy "
(Thucydides Histor y 2.37.1) to yield the claim that what looks like democrac y
nevertheless behaves like an aristocracy: Mene x enus 238c-d .
67 Plato: the Thirty Tyrants and Socrates, Apolog y 32c- d; on Alcibiades , Symposium
2 l 9c-d; also see Charm ides for Socrates' ways of distancing himself from this
young man who would grow up to be one of the Thirty.
68 Xenophon 's judgement of Antiphon has proved controversial. Was the Sophist
and teacher in his works this same Antiphon of Rhamnus? Avery (1982) identifies
the two; Pendrick (1987) distinguishes them. Most recently Gagarin (2002: 41)
has defended Xenophon 's credibility.
69 Pendrick (1987: 49) says there is "no evidence" that Antiphon of Rhamnus
taught , but then he has to explain away the testimony of Menexenus 236a. Avery
(1982: 156) reads Mene x enus 236a as proof that the orator was a teacher ; this
naturally becomes part of his argument that the orator was the Sophist. See
Gagarin (2002: 41).
70 Blank (1985).
71 On this claim about Antiphon and its political implications - how could this
egalitarian have been an oligarch? - see Avery (1982: 147-49).
55
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
72 Hermogenes Peri Ide6n [ On Types of Style] 400. Wooten (1987: 122).
73 "Plutarch " Lives of the Ten Orators 832e.
74 Menexenus 234b.
75 Monoson (2000: 184n.7) .
76 See Nails (2002: 43-44) for all ancient mentions and a summary of known material.
77 Demosthenes Against Timocrates 24.135. Archinus participated in the uprising
in the deme of Phyle, and his name appears on stele fragments honouring those
participants . For discussion of epigraphical evidence see Raubitschek (1941 ).
The name Archino[sj appears at ibid.: 288, line 55.
78 "Aristotle" Constitution of Athens 34.3.
79 Ibid.: 40.
80 Nails (2002: 43).
81 The citizens of the city and of Piraeus hasmen6s kai oikei6s allelois sunemeixan
"gladly and appropriately mingled with one another" , Menexenus 243e- 244a.
82 "Aristotle" Constitution of Athens 34.3.
83 Plato Apology 18b.
84 This too is part of Monoson 's reading.
85 Xenophon Hellenica 4.8.13. This reading is proposed by Herrman (2004: 46n.9).
86 Incidentally, a reference to Dion in Xenophon tells against readings of the
Menexenus that see some parts of the dialogue 's history of Athens as interpolations
by later hands , for if the Dion who might be selected to speak is being rewarded
for his public service, the allusion must date to 392 at the earliest. More likely,
since Dion's negotiations with Persia were ultimately related to the King 's Peace
of 386, his opportunity to speak at a public funeral may well show that the
treaty had already been agreed to. Thus the opening frame of the M enexenus
would reinforce the substance of its historical narrative in pointing to a date of
composition of around 386 - unless , unbelievably, the later editors who inserted
historical information bringing Socrates' narrative to 386 also then thought to
go back to the dialogue's opening and insert Dion 's name there in the interests
of historical consistency.
87 If Archinus proposed reducing the pay for comic poets , Plato would have to
acknowledge his participation in the moral improvement of Athenians, however
small and indirect that contribution was. Archinus is also said to have proposed
a decree specifying the 24 letters of the Greek alphabet in what became their
standard form: in a very literal sense (though insufficiently Platonic) this bears
on Athenian education too.
88 Dean-Jones (1995) .
89 Plato Lysis 207b.
90 Socrates ' offer to strip naked and dance , Menexenus 236d; call Socrates by
name, Menexenus 234a , 234b, 235c, 235e, 236c, 249d; doubt Socrates ' honesty ,
Menexenus 249e. Aristophanes Clouds is just one text indicating that Athenian
young men called their fathers "father": Pheidippides addresses Strepsiades as
pater at 35, 81 and 93, for example, and even at 1326, the closing scene of his
greatest rebelliousness.
91 We are grateful to the anonymous reader who pressed this point .
92 Dancing naked , Menexenus 236d .
93 The ancient world had seen truces for centuries before this one ; this treaty seems
to envision not just the cessation of open killing but a way of pre-empting future
warfare (Tritle 2007: 180- 81 ).
94 Pickard-Cambridge et al. (1988: 99-100).
95 Aeschylus Persians 629- 842. Commenting on another passage in the dialogue
Clavaud asks rhetorically and with heavy irony, Does Plato mean to supplant
56
PERSONS AND DATES OF THE DIALOGUE
Persians? See Clavaud (1980: 138). Our answer: yes. A more general version of
this point, connecting the Menexenus with the revenants of Athenian drama,
appears in Petre (2009), although Petre does not include the possibility that
Menexenus is the son of Socrates .
96 Plato Apology 40d-e .
97 Henry (1995: 27- 28).
98 Recent examples include Kagan (1991 ); Tracy (2009).
99 Kagan (1991: xi). Plutarch Pericles 8.5: Pericles left behind nothing eggraphon
"written" except for psephismata "proposals approved by the assembly".
100 A story about the birth of Pericles and the dream that came to his mother
Agariste before she gave birth to him appears in Herodotus Histories 6.131; the
same story is found in Plutarch Pericles 3.
101 Herodotus Histories l. 56-57.
102 Gray (1997); see Moles (1996: 268- 69).
103 On ancient sources for the life of Pericles see Kagan (1991: xii).
104 "Aristotle" Constitution of Athens 26.3-28.3 .
105 Yunis (1996: 137n.4).
106 In addition, the discussion of the Menexenus 's historical narrative in Chapter 8
below will argue that it responds to the Thucydidean history as a whole , and to
the spirit of Thucydides' historiography , not merely to anything in the funeral
speech that Thucydides reports.
107 Plato: glancing criticism or faint praise for Pericles, Symposium 2 l 5e, 221 c,
Meno 94a-b; "the most perfect", Phaedrus 269e.
108 Plato: Paralus and Xanthus , Protagoras 315a , Meno 94b.
109 On Pericles: Eurymedon, Thucydides History 1.100, Plato M enexenus 241 e,
Plutarch Cimon 13; Cimon 's rival Ephialtes , "Aristotle " Constitution of Athens
26; Pericles prosecuting Cimon, "Aristotle " Constitution of Athens 25, Plutarch
Cimon 14.2.
110 Kagan (1991: 36).
111 On the details of the institution and also on its political significance see Wilson
(2000).
112 Thucydides History: Pericles leading rather than led, 2.65.8; nominal democracy
led by one, 2.65.9. This characterization of Pericles as pr6tos aner is hard to
translate. The literal English "first man" is not idiomatic. Some translations say
"first citizen " but "citizen " is not in the Greek. Perhaps the nearest connotation
that remains true to Thucydides' Greek is "number-one man ", informal to the
brink of slang but correct in its overtones.
113 Menexenus 238c- d.
114 Plutarch Pericles: Pericles and Zeno, 4.3; influence of Anaxagoras , 4.4-5 .1 (see Plato
Phaedrus 270a); music lessons with Damon , 4.1-4 .2. For discussions of Pericles and
his intellectual circle (some more persuasive than others) see Podlecki (1998).
115 Aristophanes Wasps hints at the enmity that Pericles aroused among some
Athenians for his policy of paying people to perform their duty to the state.
116 Thucydides History 1.23. On the fleet, see Hale (2009) for engaging overview;
more discussion in Chapter 8, in connection with the navy's role in history .
117 Protagoras and Theaetetus criticize Protagoras; Phaedo 95a- l 00a ascribes
mindless materialism to Anaxagoras.
118 Some historians read Pericles' staging of the Persians as a political act by which
he allied himself with Themistocles; most recently Podlecki (1998: 11). But see
Balot (1999), who objects that as choregos Pericles would have had little influence
over the content of a play.
57
3
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL
SPEECH
The genre: three cautions
Some features of the Athenian funeral speech genre remain fixed over
time , and for obvious reasons. A speech that belittled the dead would be
hard to recognize as a funeral speech at all; one that made no comments
about the city's values and continuing needs would not register as a military
funeral. But these persistent features are very broad characteristics. To
be more specific about the Menexenus either meeting or defeating expectations
will require a more detailed sense of the genre within which Plato is
writing.
It would be anachronistic to speak of "literary genre" in Plato's time .1 But
he would have understood the impulse behind grouping certain types of
speeches together and identifying their common properties , and the opening
conversation of the M enexenus is enough to show that these funeral speeches
were regarded as a type when Plato was writing .
An Athenian epitaphios logos2 was a speech delivered at a collective
military funeral; the Athenians seem to have held one such funeral each
year. 3 The custom began early in the fifth century , estimates of its origin
going from 508 to 460; it continued until late in the following century. Some
form of the observance may have persisted into Hellenistic times and later,
well after Athens ceased being an independent state with its own army
and wars.
Developing over a century and a half, and representing more than a hundred
authors , the genre must have exhibited a wide range of possibilities. In fact
the surviving speeches, as different as they are, still share a basic outline or
internal structure and a set of topics to touch on. This does not mean that all
the topics appear in every speech; but every speech contains some of them ,
and the elements are ordered by all the existing speeches in more or less the
same structure.
To speak of "surviving speeches" can be misleading , however . At some
point late in the fifth century some funeral speeches began to exist in
written form , and some of these are known today. But the reader of the
58
THE ATHENIAN F UNERAL SPEECH
Mene x enus who begins with these works would do well to keep three
cautions in mind:
1 The funeral speech tradition existed for a generation , maybe longer ,
before ever taking written form .
2 The extant speeches are mostly not what they appear to be (i.e. records of
speeches delivered) . Indeed the group contains no canonical members of
the genre.
3 Despite the value of looking at the genre as a whole before reading the
Men ex enus, the speech attributed to Pericles is overwhelmingly the most
relevant one for Plato; it is the one that the speech in the Mene xe nus
enters into conversation with , as no other speech is.
First a few words elaborating these cautions ; then a few words about what the
tradition of the funeral speech can and cannot reveal about the Mene xenus.
A cryptic remark in the late encyclopedic Suda says that Pericles was the
first who "spoke a written speech in a law court , those before him having
improvised [pr6tos grapton logon en dikasteri6i eipe, ton pro autou schediazont6n
]". 4 If this report reflects some historical reality , the one thing it will
not mean is what it appears to , that Pericles brought texts of his speeches
with him into court and spoke from a scroll or tablet. First of all his oratory
(aside from funeral speeches) took place in the assembly , not in court . His
authority and his reputation rested on what Pericles said to the collected
public of Athens on a regular basis for decades , not what he occasionally
said to jurors . As a frequently elected strategos "general " he enjoyed speaking
privileges during assembly meetings , and he is known to have pushed hard
for the passage of certain bills. Plutarch says Pericles left behind nothing
eggraphon "written " except for psephismata "legislative proposals " . 5 He did
find himself entangled in legal actions , first when he brought charges against
Cimon , then again as a defendant when he was convicted of embezzlement. 6
He would have had to speak in court on both of those famous occasions.
Also , in Plutarch 's story about Aspasia 's trial for impiety , Pericles explicitly
speaks in her defence , moved to tears. If that trial never took place then
neither did his tearful plea. 7 And needless to say if the trial did take place ,
Pericles did not choose that occasion to introduce the practice of reading a
prepared speech. The other two trials did take place , but they both would
have been odd occasions for Pericles to innovate with formally prepared
speeches , in the first case because he was making his name as a public figure
and in the second because his integrity had been impugned and he needed to
re-establish his credibility.
The Suda also does not have to be reporting that Pericles arrived at the
speaker 's platform - whether in court , in the assembly , or at a state funeral -
holding the written form of his speech to read from. The entry says not that
he read his speech from a written text , using a verb like anagign6sk 6, but that
59
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
eipe "he spoke" a speech that was already grapton "written" , by contrast with
his predecessors' schediazonton "improvising". 8 The sentence is clearly consistent
with the meaning that Pericles memorized previously composed
speeches before delivering them. If there is some kernel of truth in that
claim , minus the connection with court cases , the Suda could be saying that
funeral speeches before Pericles were composed on the spot, but that he for
the first time prepared a speech in advance. 9
It is hard to get much further with this bit of testimony. It may originate in
a stilted delivery that Pericles had , or the formality of his speeches compared
with more conversational rhetoric that politicians used before him. Formality
and stilted delivery would work well with Platonic passages about Pericles ,
here and in other dialogues , to flesh out what Plato found worrisome about
political rhetoric of his day. On the other hand the report might be doing
nothing more than preserving in confused fashion the fact that Pericles' funeral
speech and others after it existed in written form , but no speeches did before it.
As a set of written speeches the genre began when Thucydides , writing his
history of the Peloponnesian War, included in it the funeral speech that
Pericles delivered early in the war.
The evanescence of earlier speeches does not make them irrelevant to the
developing rhetorical form. Most of the surviving texts make some reference to
what speeches before them have said. Pericles distinguishes his own wariness
about speeches at funerals with his predecessors' enthusiasm for the custom;
he declines to tell all the details of recent Athenian military history, perhaps
in contradistinction with what other funeral speeches have done. Other
extant funeral speeches from Athens likewise refer back to the models they
follow and will try to surpass. 10 Such clues will not reconstruct the lost
speeches , but they do suggest that the general form of the speech already
existed before Pericles.
With Pericles comes the written speech, then - but here again there is a
caution (number 2 above). The six surviving examples of funeral speeches
(discussed below) constitute a nearly incommensurable bunch. In no sense
are they six comparable specimens ready to be assigned to a single species. If
one were to attach an asterisk to each speech whose membership in the
genre was problematic for one reason or another, each of these six would be
asterisked , though for different reasons.
For starters , the speech of Pericles purports to be a summary or presentation
of what he said in public; but it found its written form in a work of history
composed years later , by an author who does not pretend to transcribe
speakers ' actual words , and in a style of Greek much closer to the rest of that
author's History than to what most audiences would expect from a public
oration. Thucydides makes clear that he is not writing to impress a listening
audience. Early in his history he outlines the methods he used; the result of
patient research may be dry, he says, lacking the mythic elements that season
other people's stories. But readers who want an accurate chronicle of the war
60
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
will find this form more useful than the entertaining alternatives. "It is composed
as a permanent possession [ktema ... es aiez] rather than as a competition-piece
[ag6nisma] to be heard right now [es to parachrema akouein]". 11 He could
hardly be saying more plainly that the words in his History are not words of
public proclamation.
This form of writing that does not resemble the winning language of
public address will be the history's governing voice. Thucydides will not write
in different styles when presenting what people said. The many speeches he
includes in his account will not contain the words people actually speak. It was
too hard to bear in mind ten akribeian auten ton lechthent6n "the very exactness
of what was said", the words of the speeches verbatim. 12
In short, the genre of the written funeral speech began not with a text
produced by an orator to be delivered publicly, but with an after-the-fact
reconstruction of what that orator said by a historian who was unconcerned
with verisimilitude in transcription (to a great extent , unconcerned with what
Plato will call mimesis). This leaves the later written speeches in the curious
position of joining and often emulating a speech that was made into writing
accidentally - a particularly curious position in light of the fact that several
of the genre's other members never existed except as written speeches that no
one planned to deliver.
The speech in the Menexenus , for instance , is not even put forward within
the fiction of the dialogue as an actual speech. That is, Plato does not write a
dialogue in which Socrates, Aspasia or anyone else delivers this funeral
speech. Socrates does not even tell the speech to Menexenus in the thought
that Menexenus will deliver it if he is chosen as this year's speaker. Even
within the fiction of the dialogue , the performance by Socrates is meant as a
secret: Socrates tells the speech for Menexenus alone.
Of course the speech in the Menexenus is the oddest case of the six. There
is no point deciding in advance how it is related to the other examples when
this book as a whole is engaged in determining what its purpose and function
are. It is only safe to say that if any of the six speeches are parasitic upon the
genre this one is, as much a comment on public rhetoric as an example of
that rhetoric.
But two of the remaining four speeches, both of which lie chronologically
between the one by Pericles and the one in the M enexenus, were also written
without being intended for public delivery. Gorgias of Leontini and Lysias the
son of Cephalus, who were both professional orators, evidently wrote those
speeches as professional samples of their work.
From the time that Socrates was still alive until after the death of Plato ,
professional rhetoric-experts in Athens wrote sample speeches - samples of a
defendant 's or plaintiff's speech in court , for instance , to show how persuasively
they could assemble the facts in a legal case to favour one side or the other.
Presumably the public read these samples to gauge the speechwriters ' skill,
and people who found themselves involved in a legal case would then hire
61
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
the writer whose speeches had impressed them. But speeches for demonstration
were not restricted to courtroom rhetoric. Gorgias, the expert in rhetoric best
known from the dialogue that Plato named after him , was famous for selfadvertisement.
The Encomium to Helen first sets itself the supreme oratorical
challenge of exonerating Helen from the charge of having caused the Trojan
War; then piles on more self-advertisement with the argument that powerful
rhetoric from Paris left her helpless to refuse his seductions.
As it happens , Gorgias was one of the authors of a surviving sample of a
funeral speech. This speech exists only in fragments quoted by other later
authors .13 Enough of it survives to communicate Gorgias ' signature style: a
sensation in his own time but stilted today , when the symmetry in his
sentences feels more mechanical than prestidigitatious , and turns of phrase
are memorable as preposterous rather than as mots justes. Already the great
work of literary criticism from later antiquity, On the Sublime, mocks Gorgias'
language in the funeral speech as characteristically overblown for effect and
senseless at heart: "Xerxes the Zeus of the Persians" indeed! 14
In fairness to Gorgias , his rhetoric was no joke in Athens when he first
arrived and demonstrated what he could do with a speech. Even Plato, for all
his suspicions about the influence that rhetoric could exercise over the masses,
paid grudging tribute by making Gorgias the spokesman of this new nihilism.
For Plato it is Gorgias and the power of persuasive language that usher in a new
kind of politicking , one that is capable of accomplishing anything it wants in a
democracy , and that is coolly careless about what ought to be accomplished ,
as long as one keeps winning public support.
Although some of the funeral speech of Gorgias survives only as short
phrases, one stretch of continuous prose identifies it as an epitaphios logos
suited to Athenian public funerals. The context does not let Gorgias' readers
determine what his purpose may have been in writing the speech, aside from
showcasing his rhetorical talents. One problem is that a funeral speech written
as a demonstration needs to leave out specifying details. Imagine an all-purpose
eulogy today , written to guide members of the clergy in composing their
remarks for a funeral. The sample eulogy will propose an order of topics and
maybe comments about the family members ' grief, the nature of mortality ,
and so on. But to the degree that it can adapt to fit any deceased person the
sample will not contain specifics about an individual. 15 Almost like such a
eulogy, the funeral speech by Gorgias does not comment on a particular war
or battle that Athens is engaged in at the moment or on an enemy it is
fighting. The relative ahistoricity of the speech lets it display the general
form of the genre better than it would do otherwise, but not the tactical
political function of political rhetoric .
Lysias wrote the other speech that was apparently produced as a demonstration.
Lysias was a speechwriter and a friend of Socrates. One anecdotal
tradition holds that when Socrates was indicted on the charges for which he
would be convicted and executed , Lysias offered to write his defence speech
62
THE ATHENIAN F UNERAL SPEECH
(Socrates refused). And Plato writes as if he knew Lysias and his writings. The
Republic is set in the house of Cephalus , a wealthy Athenian resident alien , with
his sons Polemarchus and Lysias present. Although Lysias only receives a
mention in the Republic , in the Phaedru s it becomes his turn to represent
Athenian rhetoric . Socrates uses a speech about love purportedly written by
Lysias as a springboard for investigating both the nature of love and the
nature of rhetoric. 16
Lysias has the same incentive Gorgias does for producing a demonstration
speech. Aside from the difference that his sample survives whole , it should
resemble Gorgias ' in exhibiting the general features of a funeral speech while
omitting the political details that show where a speaker tailors civic traditions
to fit a particular situation.
Lysias does not omit all such details. The Athens of his speech is
embroiled in the Corinthian War, that war that ended with the "King 's
Peace " that the Mene x enus finishes its history with. And yet the war, and the
Peloponnesian War too , receive only cursory treatment in this funeral
speech . Lysias reviews the mythic wars that Athens played a part in, and
dwells on the Persian War, to produce a historical backdrop that would suit
nearly any period of the Athenian democracy.
Lysias resembles Gorgias in another crucial respect. Neither author
was an Athenian citizen. Where Gorgias as itinerant teacher came and
went , Lysias belonged to a family that had settled in Athens permanently ;
during the rule of the Thirty Tyrants the sons of Cephalus did not affect a
non-citizen 's neutrality but committed themselves to seeing democracy
reinstated . But their commitment underscored their non-citizen status. The
Tyrants had Polemarchus killed , and Lysias escaped death only thanks
to paying heavy bribes. 17 As a non-citizen he was vulnerable regardless of his
family 's long residency in Athens and their wealth .18 No matter how long
his family had lived in Athens , Lysias was bound to experience its laws
and customs as an outsider. And there is no possibility that Lysias either
delivered his speech or wrote it for delivery at a funeral. Such patriotic
occasions called for the speakers ' own words , and those speakers had to be
citizens. The speech of Lysias , like that of Gorgias , could never have been
spoken.
The remaining two speeches are attributed to Demosthenes and Hyperides ,
though some scholars challenge the attribution to Demosthenes and speak of
"Demosthenes " or pseudo-Demosthenes when referring to that speech.
Apparently both of these works were written for specific occasions and
actually delivered. They are Athenian funeral orations in the complete sense.
The authors were Athenian citizens , and the existing text came from their
hands . No doubt it is for this reason that the speeches attempt to explain
recent events - Demosthenes recounts the Athenian loss to Philip of Macedon
at the Battle of Chaeronea - instead of describing the more etern alized city of
the demonstration speeches.
63
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
When Socrates jokes with Menexenus about funeral rhetoric early in the
M enex enus, he is plainly talking about speeches delivered in public at military
funerals . In this sense, these last two members of the genre should be the
ones most relevant as background to the Men ex enus. The problem with
taking the speeches by Demosthenes and Hyperides to define the genre is
simply that they join the group late, having been composed and delivered in
338/337 and 322 respectively. As regards what the genre does and says, these
late dates mean that the speeches come from a time long after the end of
the Athenian empire, even after the end of the city 's restored fortunes in the
fourth century. How well Athens fared after losing the Peloponnesian War
can be debated indefinitely. Its legal institutions were sound and it remained
economically dominant well after giving up imperial ambitions. But that is
Athens in the time that we ref er back to as "the fourth century ", or rather
the first two generations of that century . Despite the continuing strengths of
Athens before 338, it lost its independence as a freestandingpo/ is for good upon
losing to Philip at Chaeronea , even if there was a brief time after the death of
Alexander - a time celebrated by Hyperides - when it seemed that Athens
might throw off the Macedonian yoke and return to its old self-sufficiency.
Demosthenes and Hyperides could only write elegiacally and nostalgically
about Athens as a culture and a form of government , and those topics had
helped to define the genre of the funeral speech. Their funeral speeches only
pretend to cover the main topics of the genre.
The late date for the last two speeches also matters because it means they
were written after the Menexe nus and after Plato had died . They speak of a
political reality unlike any that Plato knows or can guess at. The Men exe nus
speech sees Persia 's re-established influence over Greec e as the permanent
new unpleasantness , never imagining that soon after Plato 's death Persia
would crumple before Macedonian and Greek attack and Athens would find
its wings clipped by a new Greek-speaking empire.
The most obvious implication of these two speeches ' late dates needs
acknowledging too, and emphasizing. Plato could not have read them preparatory
to writing the M enex enus. They will not be part of his conversation
with the funeral speech , except in the indirect respect in which they reflect
features of that genre that may have existed in now-lost speeches. By this
indirect reasoning , examples of the genre even much later than its other
members can suggest the parameters of the genre ; its lingering assumptions.
Then Plato might be responding to speeches that , although they themselves
have not survived, still exercised some influence over the later speeches that did.
The late speeches are certainly worth studying , in other words, as indicators of
how Plato 's audience might have received the Menexe nus. But in no sense
will they explain the speech in that dialogue.
In fact , if some agreement between Plato 's version of a funeral speech and
the version by Demosthenes or Hyperides appears too close for coincidence ,
then unless some unknown speech served as influence and source for both of
64
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
them, the later speech may well be following Plato's lead. The possibility is
not to be ruled out. The last two speeches in the group cannot be said to
reveal generic causes for what the Menexenus says when they too might be
effects of that speech.
Proof does not exist for an influence that the speech in the M enexenus had
on either Demosthenes or Hyperides. Although it seems likely, given what has
survived of the Athenian funeral speech , that its available examples included
the Menexenus along with the speech of Pericles - meaning examples that
were available to Athenian orators: written, known - nevertheless this does
not constitute evidence that Demosthenes and Hyperides drew on those
surviving examples as models for their own speeches. But there is an issue
here of locating the burden of proof. Our point is that the speeches of
Demosthenes and Hyperides cannot be cited as evidence for the funeral
speech genre as it existed before Plato , the genre independent of Plato's
contribution , for the simple reason that they wrote after he did. The burden
of proof falls on anyone who wants to use these later speeches as separate
evidence for the genre, because using them as such evidence requires showing
that Demosthenes and Hyperides did not read the speech in the Menexenus.
And how would you show that?
The group of funeral speeches now seems to contain no full-fledged members.
The tradition of the written speech starts with one whose author did not write it
and whose written form does not aim at duplicating the speech that people
heard. The sample speeches by Lysias and Gorgias stand outside the tradition
they presuppose; and the authentic speeches by Hyperides and Demosthenes
arrive too late to contribute to the genre they are joining. 19
The Menexenus stands further outside the imagined heart of the genre
than any of the other cases do in ways that go without saying. The fact that
its readers continue to debate whether or not it is a parody, a question that
does not come up about any of the other speeches , already marks off the
distance between the Menexenus and a typical funeral speech. At the same
time, and curiously enough, the speech in the Menexenus inserts itself into
the centre of the genre.
1 It is structured as a response to the speech of Pericles, which is the
example that continues to found the written genre.
2 It details the relationship between Athens and other cities and nations as
do the later speeches (by Demosthenes and Hyperides) that were actually
delivered.
3 It follows the speeches of Gorgias and Lysias in presenting itself as a
sample funeral speech, not to be presented, and authored by the non-citizen
Aspasia.
It can be fairly paired together with any of the other members of the group.
Indeed the surest proof that this genre is a motley is that an example as
65
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
perpendicular to the group as the Mene xenus speech is can be ensconced within
the group as it is. This might be the Mene x enus speech's self-consciousness at
work. A self-conscious member of a genre in one respect belongs outside the
genre (not arising "spontaneously " or "naturally " among the other members)
and in another way has to be in the genre, willing itself to be exemplary.
That the M enex enus is self-conscious is evinced by how often readers call
it a parody. A certain kind of audience interprets all self-consciousness as
parody , perhaps in the well-intentioned wish to save the self-conscious work
from being considered mannered or stylized.
The point of dissecting the genre 's surviving members is not to serve a
flippant scepticism that denies the existence of the genre. Funeral speeches
did exist. Athenians wrote and delivered such speeches and they took a
recognizable form. But for all the value of studying this aspect of the historical
background to the Mene x enus, the patchwork quality of the genre as
it has survived shows that the funeral speech tradition does not determine
and fix the funeral speech that Plato writes. One will not be able to buy an
explanation of the Menex enus on the cheap by deriving its features from
those of the genre, if the genre lacks canonical members that could display
those features.
Turning away from the genre as a coherent group leads back to the speech
of Pericles and the third caution , that none of the other speeches matters to
a reading of the Mene xe nus anywhere nearly as much as the Pericles speech
does. The speech in the Menexe nus hones its points by contrasting itself with
the speech it seeks to undo , the one that Socrates calls the speech of Pericles.
This word "undo " is the vaguest one available. It is consistent with the
dominant judgement of the Men exe nus as a parody of the Periclean speech,
for one does undo an earlier work by mocking it. But you can also undo the
predecessor by supplanting it and robbing it of the place it had once had.
The point now is that if Plato has written a parody it parodies the speech by
Pericles and not funeral speeches as such; if Plato 's speech purports to best
its rivals it does so by besting Pericles' speech.
To the extent that the speech that Pericles delivered , as it exists in written
form in Thucydides , founds the tradition of written funeral speeches, the
M enex enus's orientation to that one predecessor locates the Men exe nus
within the genre in a striking additional way. Socrates reports the speech of
Aspasia 's as in effect the same one she had taught to Pericles. He does not
specify whether Pericles botched his speech in the telling with inept delivery
or whether the fault lay in his intentional tampering with the speech Aspasi a
had taught him. Whatever went wrong between Aspasia 's composition and
Pericles ' delivery, Socrates promises to right that wrong by going back to the
source and origin of all written funeral speeches. In this sense he is not
adding a sp eech to the genre and following after the speeches that other
authors contributed , but retrojecting his speech back into a place that precedes
the written genre. Hijacking history , Plato restates what the genre had been.
66
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
He makes the predecessors to his speech into its copies. This may be the best
new epitaphios logos, this unknown speech that Socrates is giving Menexenus ,
but as Aspasia's composition it is older than all the others. It is the model
that had been followed by the speech that became a model for later speeches.
Thanks to Aspasia 's influence over Pericles, this new funeral speech refuses to
be measured against the others but establishes itself after the fact as the measure
for all the others.
The Menexenus against the backdrop of its genre
All cautions about the genre of funeral speeches would add up to a half-truth
without the acknowledgement that the surviving examples share a general
structure. They do fit together in some ways. 20
First of all, the speeches that survive as wholes begin with an introduction ,
traditionally called the prooimion. The prooimion announces the occasion
and comments on the fact of the speech: that a speech has been mandated ,
that it will be no easy task , that these fallen soldiers already distinguished
themselves more than enough by fighting and dying for Athens.
Beyond saying "A speech is coming" , the funeral speech prooimion revisits
the justification for such a speech, and it traditionally reproblematizes that
justification. What are these words for? Is such a thing even possible? Pericles
begins his speech by denying that any words belong in a tribute to the dead.
Words are the wrong currency for paying back these soldiers whose excellence
consisted in their actions. Lysias imitates Pericles with friendly hyperbole. An
eternally long speech would still not suit these fine men's deeds. Multiply
these words ' value by infinity, and they will still not be worth enough. Again
Demosthenes: the brave men's virtue exceeds what any speech can tell. Even
the speech of Hyperides , the very start of which has been lost , sounds a note
of worry about its poor words and the rich deeds of the fallen soldiers.21
Whether Pericles legislates the form of introduction for subsequent speeches,
or he too follows in the steps of a tradition that effaces its own words ' worth,
the prooimion that questions the value of mere words is a condition of the
genre if anything is. 22
So when Socrates begins his own idea of a speech, the introductory comments
will either lose some of their force, to the extent that they harmonize with the
generic prooimion , or gain force by cutting against the genre 's grain. Socrates
says the law commands a speech, in addition to the deed constituted by this
funeral , as tribute to the city's dead soldiers; and it is right to deliver such a
speech given the many fine functions of speech: to praise and honour the
dead , to console and exhort the living. 23 Plato 's introduction speaks to the
justification for a funeral speech as much as the others do. It acknowledges
the dead soldiers' sacrifices as piously as they do. That it interprets piety as
calling for a speech rather than providing a reason not to speak, surprises the
conditions of this rhetorical form enough to be a Platonic assertion about
67
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
the functions of public language. Especially in light of what the speech goes
on to say about those functions of language , praise and moral education and
consolation - all in need of scrutiny , and all of them laid out for scrutiny in
the Men ex enus - Socrates' embrace of good words for the dead neither
reduces to formula (for it would be a peculiar formula that contradicted the
genre 's tradition) nor winks as parody (unless praise and exhortation are
being set up as laughable) .
Third and fourth in every complete speech come the consolation and
conclusion. These are closely similar too but not as simply as the introductions
are. The epilogos "conclusion " rounds off every speech: "Now I have spoken ":
"You are dismissed " . The part just preceding it, known as the pa ramuthia
"consolation" , varies more than the conclusion does , but its possibilities are
bound to be limited. In the consolation the speaker addresses the dead soldiers '
families, and there are only a limited number of socially acceptable ways to
speak of the dead to the ones mourning them .
For the most part , these speeches do not identify the dead by name. They are
a citizens ' collective and they died collectively.24 The rhetoric of democracy
might account for this anonymity , but democracy is not the only explan ation
when non-democratic cultures also submerged their individuals into a band
of equals - the Spartans for example calling their male Spartan citizens
homoioi "equals " or "peers " . The Spartans too , without being democratic ,
saw one another as equals. Therefore , when Plato follows this tradition in his
own consolatory section and speaks of the soldiers as an anonymous crowd ,
he does not have to be taking on the values of democracy , whether seriously or
in jest . Nor is he necessarily subverting democracy with collectivist fantasies of
esprit de corps. The nameless condition of its dead comes with the genre and
may be perpetuated for different reasons in different speeches.
Another aspect of the Menexenus speech's pa ramuthia makes it stand out
from the other speeches. The funeral speeches tend to acknowledge the soldiers '
mortality , offering as compensation for their death in battle not eternal life in a
different realm but eternal tributes to the dead in this realm. Living forever is
not an option for any human being , the speeches say; the fact makes the loss of
these family members easier to bear, for they did not surrender immortalit y
when they fought for Athens .25 The speeches promise an endless remembrance
of the kind that people do not receive in death after long and safe lives. 26
The two speeches written after the Men exenus try to have things both ways,
pledging eternal glory for the dead in the memories of their compatriots while
still holding open the possibility of continued personal existence after death.
Demosthenes treats this possibility as a reasonable expectation in spite of
human ignorance on the subject. After him Hyperides goes further to imagine
which Greek heroes the general Leosthenes will meet in the underworld .27
It would strike a harsh and tasteless note if the Menexe nus speech did not
anticipate endless tribute to the wartime dead by their survivors . But along
with that general desire to honour the fallen soldiers it also speaks of specific
68
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
institutions to be perpetuated in their honour . The finest memorial for the
dead is extensive publicly funded education and training for their children. 28
As for the afterlife, a subject on which one might expect emphatic assertions
by Plato , there the Menexenus seems inclined to follow the tradition. Death
sounds thoroughly other than life, not its continuation. 29 At most , more
tentatively than Demosthenes will do, this speech nods at the possibility that
the dead might retain some sensation or awareness of the living. 30 This
hypothetical hope is slender enough not to contravene what earlier speeches
said, as if it might sound disrespectful to surviving family members to proclaim
their sons' and fathers' afterlife; as if dwelling on their lucky being-whiskedaway
to blessed rewards could diminish the recognition of their achievement
and sacrifice.
But the Menexenus speech's doctrinal agreement with the rest of the genre,
that the dead are dead and only these memorials to them remain alive, combines
with a passage that is unmatched by the consolation sections of the other
speeches. In an extended speech-within-the-speech Socrates reports what the
dead soldiers had said and thought while they were still alive, and what they
would say to their families now if they could. He speaks on the dead men's
behalf, knowing what they want to say. Their sons should try to exceed them
in virtue; their parents should restrain themselves from excessive lamentation.
Because they died virtuously these Athenian soldiers enjoy the right to urge
their families on to greater virtue even from beyond the grave.31
Without actually asserting the existence of life after death , this voice from
the grave carries the moral authority of a resurrected soldier. Because it
keeps itself from contradicting the other speeches' treatments of death and
remembrance and yet invents a new section for the funeral speech that (as
far as the evidence indicates) seems not to have existed before, this speech
reads as a careful interpolation. The speech-within-a-speech is as it were the
nearest thing to a Platonic myth about the afterlife in a setting that does not
permit explicit talk of immortality.
Even in light of this Platonic variation on the paramuthia , the first, third and
fourth sections of the speeches still tend more towards uniformity than towards
diversity - that is to say their introduction , consolation and conclusion. In the
part of every speech that comes second, though, a wide array of topics becomes
available. Moreover this part, the epainos "praise" section, accounts for most of
the length of all the existing speeches. 32 In each case it is longer than the
other three parts combined. Praise can speak of the dead soldiers' origins;
the city's mythical accomplishments ; its brave and benevolent victories in
more recent history; the Athenian constitution; the customs that characterize
the city, such as its ten tribes. Finally the customs might lead the speech to
meditate on how Athens preserves and transmits its culture.
Some speeches' epainos section includes all possible topics. More often
they omit one or more. Thus the speeches by Pericles and Hyperides leave
out the usual history of Athens. When two speeches do both contain all the
69
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
same elements in their epainos, they can differ in how much space they allot
to each one and in how they treat the subject.
Consider the references to freedom ( as the meaning of democracy) , history
and education in the epainos of the speech in the Menexenus as that compares
to the epainos sections of other speeches.
When Socrates associates the Athenian people with freedom , the freedom
he recognizes is independence from foreign rule , not a liberty within and
recognized by the state, as the freedom of speech would be. But when other
speeches praise Athenian civic culture they equate democracy with freedom
and precisely with the freedom of speech. 33 Socrates' failure to mention free
speech when he characterizes democracy therefore takes on an edge it would
not have showed except against the backdrop of the funeral speech genre.
The tradition does not speak as clearly about history. Some epainos sections
recount no history at all. Lysias emphasizes the mythic history of Athens and
almost completely skips over the Peloponnesian War. Demosthenes prefers the
legendary origins of the ten Athenian tribes , mythic material attached
to present social institutions. 34 If it is only being compared with the speech by
Pericles, the one in the Menexenus might appear to be more obsessed with
Athenian history than it looks alongside Lysias and Demosthenes. Socrates
includes both mythic and human history and harps on the benevolence of
Athens , just as Lysias and Demosthenes do. On the other hand he sounds
nothing like any of the other speakers in diagnosing the Greek enemies of
Athens, let alone when he blames their enmity towards Athens on their ethnic
impurity. Pericles sets Athenians apart from Spartans and above them , but he
does not call the Spartans half-Greek or Sparta no better than their stepmother.
This tripartition of humanity - Greek , half-Greek , barbarian - belongs to the
M enexenus alone. 35
As for education, the most wide-sprawling of these examples , Socrates makes
it both a purpose of his funeral speech and the main undertaking for which a
state is responsible. 36 In this case the conventions of the genre do not help
modern readers. Pericles finds the subject barely worth mentioning. Athens is
a "school for Greece" and its constitution is imitated by other cities, but
Athenians themselves seem not to stand in need of learning anything. Spartan
training in particular is too onerous. 37 Gorgias appears to credit soldiers'
excellence to some sort of training but there is not enough in this passage to
say clearly. Lysias announces that his speech will bring a pedagogical effect;
but at points when it would have been easy for him to equate Athenian battle
virtue with training he praises the Athenians' nature , that which does not
come of training. The writers after Plato fore ground education Platonically, or
in language close enough to Plato 's that one cannot rule out the Menexenus as
an influence on their speeches. 38
The Menexenus stands alone among the speeches in one detail. Perhaps in
keeping with classical prejudices rooted in aristocracy , or in agrarian culture ,
none of the other speeches mentions technai "skills, professions". If they
70
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
acknowledge education , that does not encompass training in a productive and
marketable skill. But in the Menexenus education precedes even culture , for
after giving birth to the first Athenians the Attic earth brought gods to them
to teach the aboriginal people the technai essential to both war and peace. 39
Training in techne is education in a precise and literal sense, comprising
teachers and factual knowledge and measurable results.
It may be that Demosthenes and Hyperides speak of education as they do for
the reason that the funeral speech in the M enexenus had already done so. That
would be the strongest reading , that Plato introduced education so forcibly
into his speech that it became a part of the convention for the epitaphios logos
as it had not been before him. The historical record is too incomplete to prove
such claims of influence. The weaker lesson to draw from the variety in how
the speeches treat education is that the genre , or the tradition, taken as a
whole , offers no useful context explaining Plato's statements on education.
The comparison should be made specifically to the speech of Pericles.
These have been glances at topics that call for deeper examination and that
stand up under the scrutiny to reveal more about Plato's purposes in writing
his speech . Later chapters will expand these comments about education to
show how persistently the Menexenus returns to the subject. Education also
connects back to Plato's introductory reference to ergon "deed, action" and
logos "word, speech "; for the opposition between ergon and logos famously
runs through and organizes the entire speech of Pericles , with word always
deferring to deed. The subservient logos comes to be associated on one side
with nomos "law, custom ", on the other side with any training or discipline
superadded to natural human action. Even in elevating the logos to a status
compatible with battlefield action , as the Menexenus does , by no means to a
rank above action but now belonging in its company , the Platonic speech seeks
to return pedagogy to a productive contributing role in culture. Education no
longer opposes the natural excellence of Athenians but helps to create that
excellence.
History too needs to be explored at length. Here the uniqueness of the
Menexenus in dividing humanity three ways will bear fruit in the history it
tells. What sounds like a crude insult about other Greeks ' bastardy lets Plato
describe history as a dynamically evolving process akin to the process by
which souls and cities decline in Republic 8 and 9. Athenian policy becomes
a story freed from the haphazardness that history had seemed to possess , in
which one event follows another. History is now rendered as the outcome of
psychological forces as surely and as scientifically as one soul or city
becomes another.
The funeral speech in Loraux
Nicole Loraux is the pre-eminent commentator on Athenian funeral oratory.
Her book The Invention of Athens collects and analyses the members of this
71
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
group synoptically and sheds much light on the funeral speeches.40 Loraux's
argument contains too many elements to be summarized here, and most of
those elements while helpful to anyone who wants to understand Athenian
democracy lie outside a study of the Menexenus. Loraux's work bears on the
present study mainly insofar as it argues that:
1 Athenian funeral speeches promulgate an ideological but unstable
"theory" that enlists aristocratic values in the defence of democracy.
2 Plato's Menexenus is an ironic funeral speech , a parody of the genre
aimed at exposing the falseness in the other speeches' salutes to democracy.
The two points go together. Loraux is attributing not just loose-gun irony to
Plato that mocks everything about funeral rhetoric , but the particular pointed
mockery of the democracy's attempt to understand itself.
For Loraux to be right about the compound point , the funeral speeches of
Athens have to be playing an ideological role of the sort she describes ; and
the Menexenus must be criticizing that role - criticizing the speeches not just
any way, but by means of the ironic hypertrophy of their ideological elements.
The first claim is dubious or still unproven; 41 the second must be wrong if
any of the guiding ideas in this book are right.
Some of the ideological features that Loraux claims to discover in the funeral
speeches are no more than one would expect to find in any public rhetoric . The
orations constitute "hegemonic speech" that sees history from Athens's point
of view and with Athens always a benevolent power. "Athens is always in the
forefront; this is both necessary and good". But this is a very general point.
Even if you deplore patriotism you will not be shocked to hear about patriotic
language at soldiers' funerals , any more than readers are shocked at Loraux 's
claim that Pericles represses mention of the Athenian empire. 42
The point becomes more specific when Loraux characterizes the funeral
speeches as maladept attempts at democratic theory . According to her,
Athenian funeral rhetoric has an aristocratic genealogy. This does not mean
that funeral speeches attack democratic institutions, but it does leave the
democracy bereft of its own democratic language in which to defend , or even
to describe, its way of life. The imbalance in articulateness between aristocratic
and democratic values forces the funeral speakers to defend democracy on
aristocratic grounds. Thus the funeral speeches say nothing about such concrete
democratic practices as the drawing of lots and wages for public service; they
make democracy a government/or the people , as if from above, not government
of the people. 43
Democracy appears to have always possessed a false consciousness. In this
spirit Loraux even takes M. I. Finley to task for his scepticism about alienation
in ancient Athens. 44 But with her evocation of alienation and her divide
between mutually uncomprehending aristocracy and democracy, Loraux
begins to sound anachronistic . The Marxian analysis attaches an ideological
72
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
function to the funeral speeches that is difficult to sustain on the basis of what
the speeches say. And to the extent that a claim about the speeches' ideology is
unconvincing , so is Loraux's reading of the Menexenus as a critique of that
specific ideology.
There is nothing wrong with seeing the Menexenus as a critique of Athenian
public rhetoric. But critique does not have to mean parody. The speech in the
Menexenus can also criticize other funeral speeches by offering an alternative
to them, as this book will argue that it does. Loraux does not leave room for
that kind of critique. "It would be pointless to try to see the Platonic epitaphios
as a 'reasonable' funeral oration", she writes , despite the interpretive tradition
to the contrary. The existing funeral speeches "must have attracted the irony "
of Plato , who enacted his pastiche by overstating the incoherence about
democratic ideals that Pericles and others tried to make work. 45
If the funeral speeches are not obfuscatory aristocratisms to begin with , the
Platonic parody of course cannot operate as Loraux says it does, exaggerating
distortions of democracy. More generally Loraux needs to recognize , as she
seems to have inoculated herself from doing, that Plato can mark his own
speech off from the tradition he inserted it into without making it the ludicrous
version of that tradition; and absolutely without that tradition 's having propagandized
for Athenian democracy in the half-powerful and half-clumsy
way that she finds it doing.
One of the readings that Loraux cites (with disagreement) is Victor Cousin's ,
whose preface to an 1827 edition of the Mene xenus called it a reasonable
version of the Athenian funeral oration. "For Cousin , the dialogue is 'both a
criticism of the ordinary funeral orations and an attempt at a better manner,
the accepted genre"'. Loraux does not say enough to rule out this approach
to the Menexenus , that it stands as a proposal for how funeral speeches
ought to look from now on and always should have looked. 46 As such a
proposal the Menexenus would be a reproach to past members of its genre
without mocking them or itself; not in the least satirical , it would correct the
genre by offering a better example of a funeral speech, not an example so
bad it defames all the others .
But to see just how the M enexenus speech might be a serious alternative
to Athenian funeral, it will be necessary to learn more about the topics that
have done no more than cross the stage so far: education and rhetoric, myth
and history. Once the speech in the M enex enus can be seen as containing
viable proposals on these subjects, it will no longer be a bare logical possibility
that this speech is a serious alternative to other funeral speeches , but the
most natural description of it.
Notes
1 The main problem with speaking of literature to Plato 's Athenians is that the
nearest concept they had was poiesis "poetry "; and for them as for most people
73
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
today poetry meant verse. It would take Aristotle 's Poetics , written in Plato 's
wake , even to begin challenging that association of poetry with verse, and to
challenge the association of literature with poetry: 1447a29-b24.
2 English-language references to the famous speech by Pericles call it his "Funeral
Oration ". There is nothing inaccurate about "oration " but then there is nothing
inaccurate about "speech" either . Indeed , just because it is so much broader
"speech" translates logos better than "oration " does. But mainly for the sake of
plain-spokenness this book will tend to say "speech ". In Greek a speech like this
one, delivered at a funeral , was called an epitaphios logos, and some discussions
today use the Greek phrase in emphasizing the genre as a whole and an idealized
object , in contradistinction to this or that speech that serves as its example. We
do not feel the same need to keep genre and examples strictly distinguishable ,
above all because Plato 's speech has much more to do with the single example of
epitaphios logos that Pericles made famous than with the genre that claimed him
as its founder .
3 According to common estimates , classical Athens engaged in battles in two out
of every three years. But this figure seems not to include smaller border clashes ,
raids and ongoing sieges by Athenian garrisons ; add those and the average
Athenian citizen could be felled in armed conflict in more than two out of every
three years.
4 Suda "Pericles ", Adler pi 1180. The Suda is a late Byzantine source , dating to
the tenth or possibly the eleventh century CE. For that reason among others it is
often unreliable. Yet it does draw on sources that are otherwise lost , and cannot
be ignored across the board.
5 Plutarch Pericles 8.5.
6 Plato and Thucydides report the embezzlement trial from very different perspectives
on Pericles , which confirms that it took place: Gorgias 515e- 516a;
Histor y 2.65.2-4 .
7 Plutarch Peri cles 32.3. Some argue that this is not just a garbled recollection of
a comic playwright 's attack on Aspasia , because impiety was an offence too
grave to be thrown around in comedy ; thus Bauman (1990: 38).
8 Because this verb for "improvise " schediazo appears in the M enexenus, and
because improvisation is a topic in later chapters of this book , the passage from
the Suda will come up again later .
9 Lysias 2.1, written about the same time as the M enexenus, says that speakers
only had a few days to prepare their speeches. It seems the boule chose a speaker
only days before the funeral. Menexenus remarks on the short notice (Mene xenus
235c), and explicitly concludes from this fact that the speaker will have to autoschediazein
"improvise " . The short notice further supports the belief that
speakers before Pericles did not write their speeches down at all.
10 Thucydides History: Pericles on his predecessors , 2.35.1; on not reviewing all known
history, 2.36.4. Other references to predecessors: Lysias 2.2, Demosthenes 60.1.
11 Thucydides Histor y : method , 1.22.1- 3; permanent work not contest winner,
1.22.4. This remark may be a dig at Herodotus , who is said to have read sections
of his Histories aloud at the Olympics (i.e. in a competitive context) .
12 Thucydides History 1.22.1 . These methodological remarks have inspired much
debate . How close to historical fact did Thuc ydides aim when quoting public
speeches, and how close did he hit? Here what matters is that Athenians knew the
speech that they called "the speech of Pericles" in the form relayed by Thucydides ,
which may have hewn close to the content of the original speech or wandered
quite far away from it, but was never meant to reproduce the rousing effect of
the man 's public performance .
74
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
13 Herrman (2004) gathers together new translations of all the speeches under discussion
in this section .
14 "Longinus" On the Sublime 3.2. Why is "the Zeus of the Persians " risible?
Pseudo-Longinus does not seem to find it blasphemous , except insofar as the
comparison comes from a domain too far above the thing compared with it;
like calling your wallet pocket "the Fort Knox of my trousers ". Note that the
inverse figure, in which Fort Knox becomes America's wallet pocket , sounds
unobjectionable, as it would have been acceptable in ancient days to call Zeus
the Xerxes of heaven.
15 Such models exist online; see Keefer (2011) who calls them "sad libs".
16 On Lysias: offered to write for Socrates , Cicero De Ora tore 1.231; speech
attributed to him , Plato Phaedrus 230e-234c . This speech must be Plato 's own
concoction; but inventing a speech to represent an author takes more intimacy
with the author's work, not less, than it takes to quote something the person did
write. Plato must have been deeply familiar with the real Lysian rhetoric in order
to pass off a fake like this one.
17 Lysias 12 Against Eratosthenes gives a synopsis of his arrest and narrow escape.
If an Athenian drachma is one day 's pay for a labourer , the amount Lysias paid
in bribes (12.11 ), three talents or 18,000 drachmas (besides other properties , and
quantities of other cities' currency) comes to what a labourer could expect to
earn in fifty years.
18 See, for example , 12.6 on the Tyrants ' targeting wealthy metics to seize their
money. Lysias survived the Thirty Tyrants and saw the reinstatement of the
democracy, though later certain specifics of his history become obscure. He
requested Athenian citizenship in return for services to the democracy , but if
he was granted full citizenship he may have had that converted to a secondary
protected status.
19 Loraux (1986: 134) summarizes the problem of the evidence perfectly: "lacking
any epitaphios dating from the Pentecontaetia [the fifty years between the end of
the Persian War and beginning of the Peloponnesian War], historians of the
oration find themselves .. . forced to deduce the model from its imitations " .
20 For the broad four-part outline given here see most recently Herrman (2004: 6).
21 Thucydides History 2.35.1- 2; Lysias 2.1; Demosthenes 60.1; Hyperides 6.1- 2.
The opening of Gorgias' speech might be read as the suggestion of words'
inadequacy as such, but that is a stretch; anyway in its fragmentary condition
this speech may be missing its introduction .
22 Again , Demosthenes and Hyperides write after Plato , and very plausibly conscious
of him. But if they do know the M enexenus and they nevertheless revert to an
effacement of oratorical language despite the different stance in that dialogue ,
their doing so speaks to the standing power of the genre in this particular .
23 Menexenus 236d- e. Needless to say this is a first look at a cluster of topics to be
considered separately and extensively in the later parts of this book.
24 The remarkable exception is Hyperides, who surrenders his entire speech to the
Greek general Leosthenes ( despite the protestation that in honouring Leosthenes
he is honouring all the soldiers, 6.15).
25 Lysias 2.78 makes this point explicitly; also see Thucydides History 2.43, Gorgias 6.
26 Eternal memory: Thucydides Histor y 2.43.2-3 ; Gorgias 6; Lysias 2.79-80;
Demosthenes 60.32; Hyperides 6.41- 42. This sentiment while possibly in tension
with the troops ' anonymity - how will they be remembered forever if no one
says their names? - does square with what is known of Spartan burial customs ,
according to which graves were unmarked unless they held a man who died in
battle or a woman who died giving birth .
75
THE ATHENIAN FUNERAL SPEECH
27 Demosthenes 60.33-34; Hyperides 6.35-39. This mythic imagining by Hyperides
should not be taken too literally, for in a later fragment of the same speech he
refrains from asserting the soul's existence after death , contenting himself with an
either-or reminiscent of Plato's Apology: either death is the end, or it is followed
by a further existence in Hades , 6.43.
28 Plato Menexenus 249a- c. Pamela Huby (1957: 104- 14) reads this section as the
historically specific reaction to a proposal that Athens stop caring for the
orphans of the war dead . Whether or not Huby is right about this historical
point , she has spotted the centrality of education to the Menexenus; she should
be more widely cited for having made a point of that theme.
29 Plato Menexenus: dying bravely as opposed to continuing in a cowardly life,
246d; the parents of these soldiers did not expect immortality for their sons, and
by implication did not get it, 247d.
30 M enexenus 248b- c.
31 Ibid .: 246d-248d.
32 Ziolkowski (1981: 57, 95) begins with the general four-part structure for all these
speeches but then examines the epainos sections in further detail.
33 Menexenus 238d. See Thucydides History 2.37.2 , 2.39.1; Lysias 2.18;
Demosthenes 60.26.
34 Lysias: history , 2.4-70; mythic accomplishments , 2.4-16 , Persian War 2.21-47 ;
battles of the Peloponnesian War, 2.58-60 . Demosthenes: history , 60. 7-11 and
60.27- 31; the ten tribes , 60.27- 31.
35 Demosthenes blames the Theban commanders who led combined Athenian and
Theban troops to defeat against Philip , 60.22. But he does not blame the
Theban rank and file for the loss, let alone their ethnic origin.
36 Plato Menexenus: education in funeral speech , 236e; as the main undertaking of
the state, 237a , 238b, 238c, 241 b.
37 Thucydides History: school for Greece, 2.41.1; constitution imitated (never imitating
in turn) , 2.37.1; no need for Spartan training , 2.39.1 .
38 Gorgias on training: 6. They exercised both body and mind. Lysis: pedagogical
effect of the speech , 2.3; battle-virtue natural , 2.50-51 , 2.61. Writers after Plato:
Demosthenes 60.16; Hyperides 6.8.
39 Plato Menexenus 238b. Loraux (1986: 212- 13) also points out the absence of
technai from the other speeches. But she draws different conclusions about
Plato 's purpose in introducing techne when he does.
40 Loraux (1986).
41 At least one reviewer emphasizes the distance between Loraux 's interpretation of
the funeral speeches and the available information: Loraux's "specific arguments .. .
sometime stray from the actual evidence ", rendering the result "provocative but
not always convincing" (W C. West 1988: 396).
42 Loraux (1986): "hegemonic speech" , 133; "Athens ... in the forefront ", 191; Pericles
represses mention of empire, 88. On this last claim see Tompkins (1988: 308).
43 Loraux (1986): democracy defended on aristocratic grounds, 219- 78 (e.g. 274-75);
lots and wages not mentioned , 223; government for the people , 231.
44 Ibid .: 347. The reference is to Finley (1973: 64-68) .
45 Loraux (1986): "would be pointless ", 404; on ancient readers who took the
speech as serious , 52ln. l 76; modern readings to the same effect and Loraux 's
comments on them, 225, 476n .27, 52ln .175; "must have attracted the irony ",
198- 99; Plato overstating words of Pericles to expose "what the epitaphios
merely hinted at", 239--40.
46 Ibid.: 52ln. l 75. Paula Winsor Sage (1989: 67) is one reviewer who finds unsupported
Loraux's claim that Plato writes ironically.
76
4
THE MENEXENUS AS PARODY,
AS IMPROVEMENT
The relationship between the two funeral speeches
Speaking of other Athenian funeral speeches , and especially the one ascribed
to Pericles , raises the inevitable first question , or rather a meta-question ,
about the Menexenu s. Like other meta-questions this one feels as if it ought
to come before anything else, while in another sense it is the kind of issue
that can only be settled after working through the entirety of the dialogue:
is this dialogue 's funeral speech a parod y, a joke, and a condemnation of
public rhetoric? Or can Plato really mean this as a worthy funeral address and
right political speech?
Certainly the Mene x enus is sometimes read as a joke or satire. The funeral
speech presents itself so patently as a version or a rewriting of the speech by
Pericles (to choose two deadpan nouns) that one can hardly describe or
summarize the Mene x enus without saying something about the tone of the
rewriting . At the broadest level one can classify all readings of this dialogue
on the basis of whether or not they take the speech to be a parody .1
The question of parody as we are treating it is a question about the
Mene x enus alone . A general discussion of how to read Plato 's dialogues would
derail this scrutiny of a single work. This is not to disparage the larger debate
and the value of recent contributions to it,2 only to acknowledge the space it
would take to respond to the general questions. What follows will neither
draw on global claims about Plato as author of dialogues (whether he does or
does not endorse the statements made by Socrates, the Eleatic Stranger and so
on) nor seek to support one global claim over another. The answer to the
question "Is the Mene xe nus a parody? " will be independent of whether or
not all Plato 's dialogues are parodic; and it will turn on the characteristics of
this dialogue , not on characteristics that all the dialogues share . 3
Regarding the Men ex enus, the main problem with casting the question in
terms of "parody" is specifying the alternative. What else could the funeral
speech be, and how else could it relate itself to the speech made by Pericles?
The commonest alternatives - that the speech is serious or in earnest, or
straightfor ward - invite objections of false dichotomy . "The speech can be
77
THE ME N EXE N US AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
ironic and in earnest at the same time ", someone might say, or it can be both
playful and serious , and so on. And where every description of the dialogue
can merge into its ostensible opposite , this debate seems doomed to have no
resolution.
Franco V. Trivigno (2009) directly attacks the dichotomy between seriousness
and parody. "Adherents on both sides seem to think that the options [parodic
or comical, serious] are mutually exclusive". Reading Aristophanes ' Frogs as
an example of what would have been recognized as parody in classical
Athens , Trivigno points to the "serious purpose" that parody can have. He is
unsatisfied with would-be compromises that parcel the Mene x enus up into
some funny parts and some that are not. On his view the funeral speech is
parodic throughout and serious throughout - serious in that it is seriously
engaged in attacking Pericles and Periclean Athens . Martial virtue is inadequate;
Athens has not cared for its citizens properly ; overpowering praise in
public rhetoric is a dangerous thing ; Athenian imperialism betrayed the
city's principles. These are deadly serious charges and they all come sheathed
in the merriment of parody. 4
Trivigno's discussion attributes a number of specific positions to the
Menexenu s, some of them more plausible than others. But his programmatic
account of parody is separate from any specific parodies he identifies and the
serious import that might lie behind them. To begin with , transcending the gulf
between comical and serious as easily as this should not count as a resolution.
If the existence of some serious intention at all suffices to make a parody
serious, then even the intention to show how good you are at parodying should
satisfy. You find a song insipid so you write a spoof of it. By Trivigno's criterion
that assertion you would make in all seriousness "The song is insipid " brings
your spoof into a complex middle state , simultaneously comical and serious.
The problem begins in Trivigno 's definition of parody as "an imitation
that distorts a target text, author , or genre " . Trivigno calls this description
"intentionally broad " and it is in fact broad enough to illuminate numerous
examples. 5 But in one respect it narrows the field, for the word "distorts "
must mean that a parody imposes changes on its target for the worse. You do
not seek out cosmetic surgery that promises to distort your ears or nose. When
the writer tells the critic "You distorted what I wrote ", that is never a way of
saying "Thank you ". The other words in Trivigno 's definition are neutral , but
"distorts " implies that the parody amplifies the target 's flaws or absurdities.
But then, when Trivigno focuses on the parodies in Frogs, he identifies
"two techniques of parodic distortion , inversion and amplification " . 6 These
two can be techniques for improving a work as much as for demeaning it.
Now parody would seem to be capable of changing its target for the better .
In one of the first examples of parody that Trivigno identifies , Socrates
opens his speech with an antithesis between logos and ergon that recalls the
opening of Pericles ' speech , but elevates logos to parity with ergon where
Pericles made ergon the clearly superior term. 7 The allusion has been noticed
78
THE MENEXENUS AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
and treated as a critique of what Pericles said. 8 But for Trivigno , because the
change from Pericles to Socrates inverts the original, it counts as a passage
in which "Plato seems clearly to be parodying Pericles" .9 That is an unconventional
understanding of parody that runs parody together with homage ,
devotion and variation on a theme. Parody of this new kind might indeed be
serious in many ways, but it does not bring the bite normally associated with
parody. The parody that ridicules its target will not go that easily into the
same category as "serious" and "earnest".
The distorting effect of parody suggests a different way to put the question
that might arrive more successfully at what people are asking about with the
word "parody". This is the approach already described in the Introduction.
Suppose that instead of wondering how ironical , comical or satirical the
funeral speech is ( or the opposite: how solemn or serious) the question asks:
is this speech meant to be better than the speech that Pericles gave? Does
Plato intend to improve and correct the speech that his peers regarded as the
greatest of all funeral orations? Or has he made a worse speech than Pericles'
was, to demonstrate the faults of the original through magnified versions of
those same faults?
By and large the readings invested in calling the speech parodic find the
speech presented as flawed and failing , neither a better production than
Pericles' nor meant to be, though probably resembling his speech enough so
that their shared errors can be made visible. And the readings that call the
speech serious, as ours does, say that Plato wrote it to be a better funeral
speech than the funeral speech of Pericles.
The new cast to the question does not reorient the discussion completely ,
only provides more manageable terms. For all that it is a better specimen of
rhetoric the Menexenus speech may have humorous passages in it, just as on
the opposed reading one might want to call the speech a serious object , for
all that it is not meant to correct and improve upon the speech of Pericles.
What makes a speech appear to have been "intended as better" is still not a
trivial question , let alone what makes it one that Plato (who is often given to
idiosyncratic literary preferences) would consider a better speech.
Interestingly , two recent articles on the Menexenus that most successfully
avoid unproductive talk of parody and seriousness do so by asking whether
and how the dialogue's version of a funeral speech is better than the speech
of Pericles.
Stephen Salkever tries to bridge the divide between opposed readings by
speaking of the M enex enus's "playfulness " . Conceived as a third way between
irony and earnestness , this playfulness is unsatisfying. It suggests too much of
a light touch for readers who want Plato to be proposing this funeral speech
as legitimate rhetoric; it is not committed enough to comedy for those who
smell a joke seeping throughout the Menexenus. Salkever starts with a strong
conception of irony, possibly too strong to satisfy the second group: "Most
of those who characterize the Mene xe nus as ironic ... characterize that irony
79
THE ME N EXE N US AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
either as a rambunctious parody ... or as bitter satire " . Meanwhile the " serious"
statement has to be very serious. Salkever says "there is no clear political
program or set of principles to be found in the dialogue ", as if only a political
statement so fully elaborated could qualify as a serious statement. 10
Salkever 's reading of the Menexenu s makes the funeral speech into a wise
contribution to political philosophy , a voice against inflated political ambitions
and in favour of modest ethical life for individuals. Salkever 's "playfulness "
means not one more calibration of tone between the poles of dogmatism and
sarcasm but rather a resistance to political formulas . It bespeaks a combination
of frankness and humility on the part of the statesman . In the end the word
"playfulness " is misleading , because the value of Salkever 's interpretation
does not inhere in its having found the right name for the tone of the
M enexenu s, but in the way he sifts through the speech to find its points of
improvement over Periclean rhetoric . Here the merits of his approach reveal
themselves. The mythical origin of Athenians out of the Attic ground
"makes the greatness of Athens depend on the good fortune of her natural
origin and on divine favour, not on the special bravery of Athenian men of war "
to which Pericles had given the credit. The myth elevates the character of public
rhetoric ; and elsewhere Salkever points to examples of "Plato 's aspiration to
match and exceed the scope of Pericles ' oration " . 11 What makes Salkever 's
investigation into the Mene x enus so valuable to other readers , even when
they disagree with specific conclusions that he comes to , is this very focus on
the dialogue 's attempts to outdo Pericles. References to its ironical or comical
features merely lead Salkever 's discussion towards that goal.
Christopher Long is the other recent commentator who finds a useful
fresh way to cast the problem of parody. Long emphasizes the Mene x enus's
ambiguities and free play as Salkever did. His reading envisions a dialogue
between two speeches. Plato composes the Aspasian oration as a complement
to the speech of Pericles, overstating where that speech does, not because Plato
really wants to assert such extreme claims about democracy , governance and
military virtue ; instead because these one-sided pronouncements talk back to
the one-sided argument in Pericles. The readers who can let both political
voices sound in their heads will move towards a fuller understanding of what
the city is and should be. "The two voices, when heard together , give rise to a
broader , more complete picture of politics than either provides in isolation " . 12
Plato supplied the counterpoint to what had been , until his Mene x enus, a
song sung solo that let its hearers believe it was the only music in town.
This Platonic reply to Pericles has a sceptical effect. Hearing both sides, one
comes to trust neither side blindly. The Aspasian oration dissolves "the aura of
authority on which such political ideologies depend " . At this abstract level
Long 's assessment resembles Loraux 's, and he acknowledges the resemblance.
Undermining alone can be the effect of irony, mockery and humour , and at
times Long accordingly emphasizes the parodic aspects of the M enex enus, as
when he dwells on an alleged "unwillingness to laugh " in young Menexenus. 13
80
THE MENEXENUS AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
But Long has less need to insist on the dialogue's comical or parodic elements
than Salkever does. His image of an implicit dialogue between the two speeches
does not require the M enexenus to be ironical. Long identifies freedom as the
governing value of the speech of Pericles, and he sets that freedom against the
care and communal justice that inform the speech Socrates attributes to
Aspasia. Where Pericles relates the citizens to their city as lovers to a love
object , Aspasia connects them with a different species of love, her citizens
now being children of the motherland; the individualistic ethos of courtship
and reciprocity yields to an ethic of care. Or rather , as Long emphasizes , the
ethos does not yield. The most philosophical reader's task is now neither to
stay with the values of Pericles, nor to abandon them in favour of the values of
Aspasia , but to recognize that an ongoing exchange between the two sets of
values belongs in all serious thinking about politics , thinking that seeks "the
self-reflective path between spellbound patriotism and deaf disengagement ,
between a politics of freedom and one of justice ". 14
Long forces the relevant question to be not how playfully or ironically
Socrates speaks in the Menexenus, but how good his speech is supposed
to sound compared with the speech of Pericles. His reading marks out a
midpoint among answers to the question "Is this speech supposed to be
better or worse than the speech of Pericles?" inasmuch as Long sets the two
up as peers. To a degree Salkever aims at a similar resolution , as his reading
pictures the dialogue's readers forced to negotiate between two compelling sets
of values in the two speeches. Salkever and Long are both worth looking at
in this much detail because neither of them takes barbed or humorous
remarks to gainsay philosophical merits in the funeral speech; they both try
to hear what positive contribution to political discourse the Menexenus is
putting forward.
It is striking that neither Salkever nor Long makes much of the theme of
pedagogy, despite their both dwelling on care and nurturance as the public
values that the Menexenus extols. One might expect Plato to make educating
people an important part of any process of caring for them . Salkever takes
the response to Pericles to consist in attention to personal virtue , "living the
life we have as well as possible " .15 Long finds an ethic of care and familial
cooperation resisting what is otherwise a distorting attention to freedom.
Surely it helps both approaches , when setting the two speeches up as one
another 's peers, that both sides of the dichotomies they examine are valuable.
Freedom has its merits as an ethic of care also does, and the best political
philosophizing can be said to give voice to both. For Salkever the play
engages several oppositions , though the opposition between personal virtue
and political greatness dominates; and when these are the terms Salkever's
own position does sound like the most sensible one, that true statesmanship
has to recognize both sides.16
What happens in another type of case, when the difference between the
Mene xe nus speech and the one that Pericles delivered consists in attention to
81
THE MENEXENUS AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
education (see Part II of this book) , or in the discovery of intelligible forces
at work in world history (see Part III)? Then it is harder to see the outcome
of the two speeches' dialogue with one another as a playful active tension in
which judicious philosophers take heed to find history both coherent and
meaningless; or in which wise thinking about the polis consists in both
pursuing and slighting the moral education of its citizens. Readings like
Long's and Salkever's lose some of the appeal to a tension between the two
peer speeches to the degree that the Menexenus can be seen as embodying
political positions whose contraries - the neglect of education ; history
understood as meaningless - have no serious standing in political discourse.
The Menexenus's views about education and historiography are two of this
book's main subjects , so we will not be able to equate the Menexenus with its
predecessor.
Positive arguments: the Menexenus speech as improvement
Put in general terms, the argument for seeing the Menexenus speech as better
than Pericles' might sound dogmatic. That argument can only be spelled out
over the length of this entire interpretation. But even a rough itemization of
the dialogue's parts shows how the argument will go. Consider the Menexenus
divided into sections as follows:
1 A dialogue between Socrates and Menexenus in which Socrates mocks
rhetoric but also claims to know a funeral speech superior to the one
attributed to Pericles.
2 An introduction that juxtaposes ergon "work, deed , action" with logos
"word, speech, argument" , opposing those concepts but also seeking a
balance between them , where Pericles had opposed them to elevate ergon
above logos.
3 A mythic prehistory of Athens in which its first citizens are born out of
the earth and educated by gods.
4 A history of Athens , covering the preceding hundred years , full of
omissions and misrepresentations.
5 A speech within a speech that represents the beliefs and wishes of dead
Athenian soldiers , now repeated to their survivors as moral exhortation.
6 Menexenus and Socrates again in a closing dialogue that jokes about
Aspasia's authorship of the speech.
Take it as uncontroversial that (1) and (6) speak in a joking spirit. But put
those sections aside and look at (2)-(5), comprising the funeral speech. This
book will read those passages not so that parody becomes impossible , but
along lines that make coherent sense of all these parts of the funeral speech
without the need to appeal to parody as explanation. What follows here is a
thumbnail sketch of the interpretations in later chapters .
82
THE MENEXENUS AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
First, (2) can be shown to be consistently Platonic. Even without reference to
other dialogues' uses of erg on and logos, this harmonizing of the two only needs
to be compared with analogous passages in the speech by Pericles, to appear
as an intended improvement over the original rather than a parody. A parody
would more likely exaggerate and mimic the original's habit of championing
erg on over logos; the speech in the M enexenus resists that habit.
Also, (2) addresses the challenge of praising Athens and the Athenians.
Again the Socratic speech is more thoughtful than its predecessor. Where
Pericles asked rhetorically "How can a speaker praise to the right degree?"
to imply that no speaker can, that the funeral speech nomos "custom" laid a
burden on all would-be orators , 17 Socrates treats the question as one that has
an answer. The question about rhetoric is no longer a rhetorical question.
What is the right degree of praise? A speaker should determine what it is and
deliver praise to that degree. Pericles sees praise, being logos, as an adornment
always prone to going wrong. The answering speech assumes that the logos,
therefore also the logos of praise, can be calibrated to suit its subject.
The prehistory in (3) includes an autochthony myth about the first people
which, in one form or another, was a common enough story in classical Athens.
Section (3) adds an uncommon epilogue to that myth in which Olympian
gods teach survival skills to those ignorant newborns. This section might be
the most overtly Platonic. The Republic's noble lie celebrates autochthony , but
other dialogues also find Plato endorsing the self-sufficient patriotism that
autochthony means to underwrite. Birth from the soil together makes all
Athenians siblings, too. No mythic belief could be more salutary in Plato 's eyes.
Meanwhile, the addition of gods and lessons to this version of the myth,
by inserting education into a time even before organized society, validates an
emphasis on training and acculturation that Plato could not imaginably
make the object of parody.
The last part of the speech (5) might appear in some critique or parody, but
only one in the worst taste, a speech that was willing to mock dead soldiers in
the interests of scoring a hit against a political opponent. (The Athenians
would really have had grounds for convicting Socrates if he'd voiced such
sentiments.) The speech that Socrates reports as coming from the fallen soldiers
to their families and children is full of pieties; but those are the pieties about
courage and self-sacrifice that Plato's dialogues never criticize and often
repeat. As Salkever writes, "the living are urged to do better than the dead
and to do so in a truly extraordinary but thoroughly Platonic way" .18
So far sections (2), (3) and (5) all make more sense as improvements upon
Periclean rhetoric than as the funny exaggeration of it that they would have
to be to qualify as parody. Pericles says nothing about autochthony despite
that concept's pre-eminence in Athenian life; Socrates insists on it. Pericles
hardly mentions the death of the soldiers being honoured at the funeral, but
Socrates brings them into the public gathering with their own speech to add
to the conversation. This is the stuff of reformation not lampoon.
83
THE ME N EXE N US AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
In the case of ( 4), the M enex enus's dry, long and only occasionally accurate
survey of Athenian history, it is again true that Plato answers a silence from
Pericles with a superabundance of talk. Pericles declines to review the Athenian
history that he says his audience already knows. The speech in the Mene x enus
dwells on the city's history , some of it so recent that Plato 's readers would
have known all this and much more about the events recounted.
But such a simplified contrast will not settle the question of parody.
Section ( 4) contains too many worrisome details for that. It tells the history
of Athens far from comprehensively , omitting events that even modern
readers know about , and distorting others. Some events are identified by the
names of the battle sites; others appear only in circumlocution. The ironic
reading of the speech as a whole fits this section (which is the Mene x enus 's
longest part by far) much more plausibly than it fits any other section.
Any good assessment of such a passage needs to begin with a patient study
that attends both ex ternally to its departures from known events, and
internally to the patterns within the narrative , such as its alternation between
naval and infantry battles. Existing discussions have accomplished the first of
these tasks , contrasting the Mene x enus chronicle with what happened , how it
came out and how Plato 's contemporaries must have interpreted those
events.19 But a narrative 's departures from historical fact will not always reveal
the narrative 's own shape or structure. Looking for the omissions can even
distract from the narrative 's commission , which is to tell a certain intelligible
kind of history - to tell a familiar story in a newly intelligible way.
Looking for internal integrity in this history brings to light a desire to find
order in a historical sequence that could otherwise resemble a chaos of events.
Somewhat as Plato's Timaeus seeks to tame the universe into a natural history
organized around a few abstract principles , the M enex enus sketches out an
organized political history. It simplifies and omits not to show that all local
histories are propagandas , but because a philosophical history will be one
that does not replicate the confusion of actual events.
More specifically, as Part III of this book argues , historiography in the
M enex enus parallels the psychological and political narratives in Republi c
8 and 9. This parallel does not make the history true or even more plausible
than it had been , but it does make (4) look less like a way of ridiculing
the writing of history as such, and more like a first stab at scientific coherence
in a practice that had been an unscientific jumble. If an interpretation
along these lines is possible , then even ( 4), prima fa cie the most troubling
part of the M enexe nus, no longer has to demonstrate irony at work in the
speech .
Clavaud (1980) makes the astonishing claim, more than once in his study
of the Mene x enus, that only section (5), the moralizing finish of the speech ,
reads as serious and reflective. For this reason , according to him , adherents
to the "serious " reading of the Men ex enus focus on that passage. 20 A
position like Clavaud 's would be easy to hold if such a claim were true ; we
84
THE MENEXENUS AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
hope that by the end of this book it will become clear how much needs to be
overlooked and misread in the Menexenus to be able to say such a thing
about it.
Positive argument from precedent
This book's introduction cited ancient references to the Menexenus: Cicero ,
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Hermogenes of Tarsus, Plutarch. The dialogue's
name did not appear in other ancient authors anywhere near as often as they
referred to the Timaeus or Theaetetus, but now and then a mention does turn
up, and it is notable that in those mentions no commentator takes the speech
to have been humorously intended ( even if acknowledging humour in the
opening conversation).
It is even more worth noting that no ancient author speaks of anyone
else's belief that the speech is a parody. The best place to find such a mention
would have been the Anonymous Prolegomena to Platonic Philosophy, dating
to the sixth century of our era, because that introductory set of lectures
contains the only clear description of how others were reading the Menexenus.
If the Prolegomena comes late, and to that degree is distanced from ancient
intellectual trends, it is also well situated by virtue of its lateness to survey
many predecessors , over roughly nine centuries of the dialogue's reception.
And the author's words for that reception are clear.
Negative criticism of anyone cannot be the purport of a dialogue
either: this would be unworthy of the divine Plato, finding fault
for its own sake. Thus we refute those who held that the object of
the Menexenus is to criticize and rival Thucydides. They say that the
funeral oration was written for that reason , in competition with the
funeral oration of Thucydides, but this is untrue. 21
The book mentions no other description of the Menexenus. In fact it does
not mention the Menexenus again. So the one tendency in reading the
dialogue that another work sees fit to reply to sounds much like the reading
that our book is defending. The desire to "rival" Thucydides and the spirit of
"competition" would call on Plato to write a funeral speech better than the
one Pericles delivered , not a burlesque of that speech.
To be sure, the author would object to the conclusions we are pressing for. But
those conclusions correspond to a known ancient reading of the Menexenus.
The Prolegomena's author does not respond to, and shows no sign of having
heard about, the approach that reads the dialogue as mockery.
In the century before the Prolegomena , Proclus' commentary on the Timaeus
includes a reference to the Menexenus. Proclus is discussing Timaeus 19c-d, at
which Socrates says he wishes he could deliver a worthy encomium to the
good city described in the Republic. Proclus rebukes unnamed earlier readers
85
THE MENEXENUS AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
who said Socrates lacked the skill that such rhetoric called for. The Greek
that follows is open to different translations, but on one reading Proclus says
that those who say such a thing , denying Socrates' ability to make good
speeches, are "questioning the authenticity of the M enexenus". 22 He means
not that someone other than Plato might have written the dialogue , only that
the dialogue might not represent Socrates accurately. And the charge of
biographical inaccuracy apparently presupposes that the funeral speech is a
good one, as it would take no exaggeration to believe that Socrates the
dialectician could produce an unskilled speech.
To the extent that we can piece together ancient responses to the Menexenus ,
they are oblivious to the possibility that one reads the speech as a parody
or joke, even when commentators diminish the dialogue in some other way.
Only much later, a dozen centuries after the Anonymous Prolegomena , did
modern ears hear the parody that had eluded Plato's ancient readers. 23
In fact, although the parodic reading is the received view today, the earliest
modern readers treated the M enexenus as earnest political rhetoric. And later
evidence, down to around 1700, suggests this treatment to have remained a
common one.
The obvious place to begin is with Marsilio Ficino , who wrote short
summative commentaries to most of the dialogues when he produced the first
complete translation of Plato into Latin in the last third of the fifteenth century.
Ficino's pages on the Menexenus are disproportionately interested in Athenian
autochthony. He acknowledges that oratory is not Socrates' metier: Aspasia's
name is in the dialogue , according to him , to explain why Socrates should be
speaking in such uncharacteristic ways. But for Ficino the dialogue reflects
Plato's pious love for Athens more than it communicates anything else, and it
seeks to arouse the same sentiment in its readers. Parody is not in question. 24
It is equally hard to see parody as a live possibility one century after
Ficino, when Thomas Thomas comes to light as printer for Cambridge
University Press, possibly the first university printer at Cambridge who did
print books there. Thomas was best known for the Latin Dictionary he
published, but in 1587 the Press also issued a Greek text of the M enexenus.
This was the first Greek text put out by Cambridge , apparently only its
twenty-seventh volume overall. 25 The website for the Press calls Thomas'
Menexenus "the first of any work by Plato in the original to emerge from an
English press". 26 The scholarly consensus of the day must have been something
very different from the interpretation of the dialogue as parody, or it would
not have made the dramatically early appearance it did.
When the Menexenus first appeared in English translation , the context
again makes clear that it was read as earnest oratory. Gilbert West published a
collection of Pindar's odes and other Greek texts translated into English,
among which the only Platonic work was the M enexenus. West's introduction
takes Plato to task for asserting the absurd doctrine of Athenian autochthony ,
and he seems embarrassed by the dialogue's partiality to Athens ; nevertheless
86
THE ME N EXE N US AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
both criticisms imply that Plato held those positions. And West calls the last part
of the speech, which reports the thoughts of the slain soldiers to their families,
"as beautiful! a Piece of Oratory , as is to be met with in all Antiquity " .27
Works on other subjects written in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries sometimes use the Mene x enus to substantiate claims . Louis Ellies
Dupin 's mammoth history of Christian thought , Nouvelle Bibliotheque des
auteurs ecclesiastiques, sprawls over fifty-eight volumes , which appeared
between 1686 and 1704; the first volume cites Plato as Mosaic religious
thinker , but also once, quoting the M enex enus, for information about the
Persian Emperor Darius. 28 A long essay by Jean Barbeyrac "An Historical
and Critical Account of the Science of Morality " accompanied his transl ation
of Samuel Pufendorf's Of the Law of Natu re and Nations into French , and
then was translated into English , together with that book , in 1729. Barbeyrac
condemned Plato , with reference to the Men ex enus, for speaking of non-Greeks
indiscriminately as barbarians. 29 And the immensely popular Dictionnaire
Hi storique et Critique of Peter Bayle 's, which began appearing in 1696 in
French , then in English in the 1 730s, includes extensive discussion of Aspasia
in its entry on Pericles . It is a sympathetic discussion , unpersuaded by the
ancient slanders against Aspasia , that draws on the Menexe nus.30
Bayle and Dupin treat the dialogue as a historical source, where Barbeyrac
finds evidence for Plato 's political opinions in it. Neither use would make
sense if the dialogue 's status as parody were considered a possibility.
Two last examples. Theophilus Gale , expounding his religious nonconformism
in 1677, spends over fifty pages on Plato's philosophical debts to
Hebrew Scripture. In this enterprise Gale uses the Menexe nus funeral speech
in support of his claim that good constitutions made their citizens good and
bad ones the reverse. That thought appears within the funeral speech (238c) as
a postulate of politics ; and Gale lists the Menexe nus with the Republic, La ws
and other unambiguous examples as a work of Plato 's political philosophy. 31
James Geddes , writing a lifetime after Gale , devotes himself to most
un-theological topics , what we call "style", in his Essay on the Compo sition
and Manner of Writing of the Ant ients, p articularly Plato. Geddes is almost
quoting Ficino , and shares Ficino 's appraisal of the M enexe nus, when he
describes the dialogue as an exhortation to patriotism , and for that reason part
of the introductory reading before the Republi c and La ws. More relevantly to
the question of parody , Geddes compares the funeral speech to both its
precedent in Thucydides and its successor in the oratory of Demosthenes. On
the one hand he says that Plato imitates the sublime speech associated with
Pericles ' name ; on the other hand , his extended analysis of the Menexen us
makes it the model that Demosthenes was to imitate , expressing the same
thoughts as Plato 's.32 Geddes locates the Men exe nus so continuously in
the history of Athenian rhetoric as to leave parody on either hand unimaginable:
Demosthenes could not be mocking Plato any more than Plato mocks
Thuc ydides.
87
THE ME N EXE N US AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
Negative arguments: against the Menexenus speech as
parody
Along with the positive arguments it may help to reply to some assumptions
or arguments that readers sometimes use when they call the Mene x enus a
parody , and a speech that is meant to be worse than the speech of Pericles.
These are a minor part of the approach to this dialogue. Arguments against
other arguments , or against assumptions about what makes a work a parody ,
will never matter as much as a reading that finds, as this book 's reading tries
to do, worthy positive claims being made in the work.
First , anyway, there is the business of Aspasia. At one time readers might
have assumed that crediting Aspasia with authorship of the speech was itself
Plato's act of disavowal. How could a woman have taught Socrates rhetoric ,
and such a shady woman? Even allowing for the example of Diotima in the
Sympo sium who is said to have taught philosophy to Socrates, there is
Aspasia 's reputation. But the difficulties in knowing anything sure about that
reputation have been pointed out. It might be worth repeating that the
reasoning about the M enex enus and Aspasia 's reputation threatens to
become circular. It is more likely that the M enexenus joins with the comic
poets on record in mocking Aspasia if the funeral speech is a joke and she is
one of its butts. Her questionable status cannot prove the satirical intent of
the dialogue if its satirical intent is first posited in demonstrating Aspasia 's
questionable status.
Other assumptions enter more obliquely. Modernity 's experience with
literary works that quote and rewrite other works has encouraged the belief
that such appropriation and reproduction is mocking and subversive critique.
On this view, a work with multiple references to another work is engaged in
deflating it and quite likely deflating itself in the process. That is a reliable
expectation for reading Thus Spoke Zarathustra with its steady reuse of
Luther's biblical German; also when navigating among the mock-heroic
allusions that are woven into the texture of Lolita. But rivalry among ancient
authors could be more direct than its modern varieties. An ancient work
often incorporated its predecessor in order to best it. Homeric scenes and
themes in Herodotus ' Histories show how Herodotus is trying to fashion a
new and better epic; they are not there to ridicule either Herodotus or Homer.
Subversion has not always been the only tactic in literary competition.
A third consideration may be the most straight[ orward , and has frequently
been advanced . The framing dialogue - those sections (1) and (6) of the
M enex enus taken as a pair, according to our list - has a rib-elbowing tone that
seems as unmistakable a signal of a joke as the formulas that introduce literal
jokes ("Did you hear the one about . .. "; "How many cowboys does it take .. . ").
This frame , but especially the dialogue 's "prelude ", the conversation before the
funeral speech , sets the stage for Socrates to present the speech he attributes
to Aspasia. It might sound counter-intuitive to downplay the import of this
88
THE MENEXENUS AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
major clue - or it can sound like the wilful dogmatic approach to reading
Plato (an approach now widely chided) in which the interpreter looks
away from scene and setting , frame and metaphor , in search of thesis and
argument.
But consider first the general question of what such a frame may and may
not mean. Then we can ask the question specific to the Menexenus, what the
tone of this frame is.
Why does the levity in a frame trump the gravity of the material inside? To
give the framing dialogue a preponderating significance is often to do no more
than pay disproportionate attention to what comes first. What interpretive
theory justifies that practice? Some literary readings of stories , plays and
poems do function by deciphering those works in accord with rules or
examples laid down within those works. Such works are said to possess a
particular kind of self-consciousness, to contain the instructions for reading
them. Leopold Bloom takes apart Molly 's wordplay "bass barreltone" in
Ulysses as a nod to readers to go after the novel themselves. Within Plato's
corpus, the reading of Simonides that Socrates develops in the Protagoras
functions remarkably well as a demonstration of how philosophers read , and
how they may read the Protagoras. 33 But such embedded tips to readers do
not have to appear at the beginning of the work, as these do not. The frame
does not achieve special status as master key to the work simply by virtue of
being a frame. Rather, what the frame says has to be a fruitful way of reading
the particular piece.
There is even something aprioristic about looking to the frame to learn the
secret about what it is framing. How did frames function in ancient poetry?
That question almost never comes up in readings of Plato. The Odyssey starts
off with "Muse, tell me [moi] about the man" , and committed attention to that
narrative frame ought to turn the subsequent epic into a first-person report.
But the "I" fades away as the poem goes on. Maybe it matters throughout
that the Muse (knowing , with an excellent memory , perhaps also unreliable)
spoke forth the story. To make the Odyssey as a whole significantly into a
Homeric monologue or memoir calls for readings of specific passages in it.
The moi "to me" in the opening line will not be enough. Similar remarks
apply to Hesiod's Theogony, with its own invocation of explicit untrustworthy
Muses. 34
Later analogues from Plato's own time or just before him are less exact.
Does a Euripidean prologue behave as a frame? What about the chorus's
closing lines in a tragedy by Euripides? The chorus is more likely to be in the
position of telling the story of the tragedy than the god who recites the prologue.
The nearest analogy to a dialogue like the Menexenus might be the poem of
Parmenides , who reports his argument about being as something the goddess
told him. This goddess in his poetry underwrites what otherwise might
sound like human pomposity , given Parmenides ' oracular presentation. The
frame brings credibility to the poem , somewhat (but not exactly) as Homer's
89
THE ME N EXE N US AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
and Hesiod's Muses explain how these two poets could know everything
their poems say.
If contemporary framing devices endorsed important discourse more than
they undermined that discourse , then Plato would have known the device as
an invocation of authority. He may or may not have used any particular frame
for that purpose. But the discussion that appeals to frames ought to begin
here , with a historical approach to poetic and dramatic frames antedating
Plato , rather than with fantasies about what the frame "must " mean .
This much of our point is negative. To criticize the act of privileging the
opening dialogue is not to assert any theory of ancient literary frames. We
are noting that readers who call the Mene x enus a parody often base their
assessment on the opening conversation. Against this procedure we begin
simply by asking whether it has any justification , for instance in literary
frames as they existed before Plato. The burden of proof lies on those who
would argue , from the putative tone of the opening conversation , that what
follows is parody.
But it is possible to say more of a specific nature about Platonic frames , if
we again take Proclus for a guide to ancient interpretive practices . Writing
close to 800 years after Plato did , and having immersed himself in the Platonist
tradition , Proclus knew what methods his predecessors brought to
bear on the dialogues . In his commentary on the Parmenide s he distinguishes
specifically among the ways that readers have taken the prooimia "preludes " .
There have been commentators who did not look closely into the openings of
the dialogues at all - oud ' . . . kathient6n "not stooping " to look , Proclus
says - but of those who did trouble themselves to study the prooimia , some
took the opening scenes morally , deriving instructive lessons from the behaviour
of the participants in the first paragraphs of a dialogue. Others , the
ones Proclus most agrees with , made that moral reading part of a larger
interpretation of the dialogue , working to understand the philosophy of the
whole work so that they can then see it pictured or exemplified in the opening
words . 35
Myles Burnyeat (2012) explicates this passage with an added word of
warning for those who think they already read Plato this way. What Proclus
recommends is not to be confused with the approach (Burnyeat calls it the
Straussian approach) that takes the prelude as guide to the whole. "So far
from the opening scene telling you how to read the philosophy that follows, it
is the philosophy that tells you how to read the opening scene " . 36 One who
takes the prelude as the instruction may conclude that the Menexenus has to
be a joke ; but it is easier to argue this position if you have not read the
funeral speech first. In keeping with Proclus ' method , we would be better off
studying the speech for its philosophical content , only subsequently asking
how the framing conversation anticipates the themes in the speech .
For example , the reader who finds Part II of this book persuasive , on the
subject of fresh emphases on education in the funeral speech , and on the
90
THE MENEXENUS AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
specific manner of improvisation at work in the process of composing it, will
then profit from returning to the preface in which Socrates speaks of education
with Menexenus , and explains the improvisatory composition of funeral
speeches.
But suppose you do insist on starting with the framing dialogue. How funny
and mocking is it really? Trivigno says in support of his own reading that
"Menexenus immediately recognizes Socrates' praise as ironic and accuses
him of implicitly mocking and criticizing the orators in general". 37 Menexenus
does make that accusation. Only Trivigno's "recognizes" - a success word -
raises a red flag. Recognizing something requires that the thing be there.
Menexenus does say, "You are ridiculing [prospaizeis] the orators" 38 - but
why trust his description of what Socrates is doing? The reader has seen
Menexenus being glib and ignorant about subjects that call for thoughtful
expertise. To his face Socrates calls him incompletely educated. Indeed the only
appearance of the word philosophia in the dialogue is here, in the conversation
between them, and is here only because Socrates denies philosophy to Menexenus.
Perhaps his incompletely philosophical nature explains why Menexenus
hears Socrates' language of magic and incantation as pure mockery, when in
fact it resembles the one concession that Socrates repeatedly makes to poetry.
Long reads more sensitively when he speaks of an "unwillingness to laugh"
in Menexenus. 39 Unlike Trivigno , Long casts doubt on how well Menexenus
appreciates the funeral speech; the least that Plato's reader ought to do is to
learn more from the speech than Menexenus does. Menexenus hears this tour
de force and still has his mind on who really wrote the thing , Socrates or
Aspasia. 40 He bears more than a little resemblance to young Phaedrus in the
Phaedrus: in that dialogue Socrates delivers a powerful critique of writing , the
written word imperiled by its separation from its author , and Phaedrus congratulates
Socrates on the stories he can make up , as if he hadn't heard the
news of the disappearing author. 41 Menexenus too looks in the wrong place
for what he will be enlightened about.
Contra Long, however, what makes Menexenus unreliable is not his
unwillingness to laugh , but that he is the only one laughing. Socrates delivers
sublime praise to Athens and Menexenus is pleased with himself for getting
the joke, as if what mattered were not the worth of a city but who wrote the
compliment. Socrates attributes magical power to Athenian funeral speeches, a
power that overcomes the barrier between the living and the dead. His speech
when winding down will do the same, returning the dead soldiers' voices to
address their own relatives. All Menexenus hears is mockery.
If Menexenus is the only one laughing , the funeral speech becomes the
opposite of a joke that falls flat. It is a serious speech presented in a light-toned
conversation , and consequently mistaken for a joke. That light conversation
might lead clumsy readers to conclude that the whole speech is a joke. More
delicate sensibilities recognize Plato 's reasons to be ambivalent, and want to
look deeper into the speech to see what Platonic wishes it is releasing.
91
THE ME N EXE N US AS PARODY , AS IMPROVEMENT
Notes
1 Clavaud (1980: 45-74) classifies modern readings of the M enex enus into three
groups: those who take the speech as serious, those who find it comical ("comiqu e"),
and a third group that tries to find a compromise between the other two (" les
conciliateurs "). This classification is of course limited by the book 's publication
date of 1980.
2 See, for example , Klagge and Smith (1992); Press (2000).
3 Characteristics shared by all or most dialogues include their author 's absence
from them ; the interlocutors ' actual political histories ; framing dialogues , etc.
4 Trivigno (2009): "Adherents on both sides", 29; "serious purpose ", 31; on
would-be compromise readings , 48, 49n .3; on martial virtue , 44; on care for
citizens , 45; on overpowering praise , 46; on imperialism , 47.
5 Ibid.: "working definition ", 30; "intentionally broad ", 50n.8.
6 Ibid. : 30; emphases in original.
7 Thucydides Hi story 2.35.1; Plato M enexe nus 236d-e.
8 For example by Kahn (1963: 222).
9 Trivigno (2009): "inversion ", 36; "parodying Pericles ", 34.
10 Salkever (1993): "the M enex enus as ironic ", 134; "no clear political program ", 134.
11 Ibid.: modest ethical life for individuals , 139- 40; resistance to totalizing political
formulas , 135; "the greatness of Athens ", 137; "Plato 's aspiration ", 140.
12 Long (2003): 50-51 .
13 Ibid .: "aura of authority ", 51, c£ 66; resemblance to Loraux , 53n.10; "unwillingness
to laugh ", 53.
14 Ibid .: freedom against care and communal justice , 51, 64; Periclean citizens as
lovers, 54-58; Aspasian citizens as children , 59-63 ; "the self-reflective path ", 68.
15 Salkever (1993): 140.
16 There is some ambiguity in Salkever 's conclusion that "Plato sets in motion a
way of talking about political life that both recalls and challenge s Thucydidean
political discourse " (ibid .: 140) - ambiguity in that the recalling implies something
other than utter rejection of Thucydides , as if he had set the right terms for
a political conversation but did not examine them adequatel y.
17 Notably , all the other extant funeral speeches follow Pericles in calling their task
difficult. See Ziolkowski (1981: 65); Salkever (1993: 137). That Socrates makes
no such opening gesture to the challenge he faces may reflect, as Salkever says
(ibid.: 142n.31), his earlier comment about the ease of praising Athens to the
Athenians (Mene x enus 236a), but it also implies that intelligent and pedagogically
sound public speaking does not have to be unnatural and forced .
18 Salkever (1993: 140). Long (2003) works hard , with some success, to deny the
Platonic sound in this passage.
19 See, for example , Henderson (1975); Morgan (1998).
20 Clavaud (1980: 15, 126).
21 Westerink (1962: 49).
22 Proclus Commentar y on the Timaeu s 62.13; in Tarrant (2007: 156); also ibid .:
156n.159 on the meaning of this "authenticity " .
23 For a summar y of modern views on M enexe nus as parod y, see Clavaud (1980:
45- 74). In order not to let this section overgrow its proper bounds we have
focused on early modern receptions in English.
24 Ficino (2006: 140- 42).
25 S. C. Roberts (1921): Thomas Thomas printer , 22; M enexe nus in the list of early
titles , 154.
26 See "Ten Great Cambridge Authors " at www.cambridge.org /home /page /item
5695869/?site- locale=es - AR.
92
THE MENEXENUS AS PARODY, AS IMPROVEMENT
27 G. West (1753): absurd doctrine of autochthony, 11.282; dialogue's partiality to
Athens , 11.283; "as beautifull a Piece of Oratory" , 11.283. For a similar sentiment
from the same time see Antoine Leonard Thomas, Oeuvres Diverses , volume III ,
published in French in 1773. Regarding the speech's closing report from the war
dead to their survivors , Thomas writes: ''je doute que !'on trouve rien chez les
Grecs d'une eloquence plus noble" (Thomas 1773: 111.59). He considers the
thought to come , without irony, from Plato , whom one glimpses hidden behind
Aspasia (ibid .: 111.58).
28 Dupin (1690): Plato as thinker in agreement with Moses, 1.6, 1.406; Menexenus
containing evidence about the history of Persia, 1.41.
29 Barbeyrac (1729: 56, with footnote labeled "jjj").
30 Bayle (1739): sympathetic discussion, VIII.295; draws on Menexenus, VIII.305.
31 Gale (1677: IV158).
32 J. Geddes (1748): Menexenus an introductory work , 134- 35; funeral speech
imitates Pericles , 67; is imitated by Demosthenes , 325-29.
33 On this example see Pappas (1989).
34 See Ledbetter (2002: 40- 61) for helpful discussion of Hesiod 's Muses.
35 Proclus Commentary on Plato's Parmenides 658.34-659.23; quoted and discussed
by Burnyeat (2012).
36 Burnyeat (2012: 308).
37 Trivigno (2009: 33).
38 Menexenus 235c.
39 Long (2003: 53).
40 M enexenus 249d-e.
41 Plato Phaedrus 275b- c.
93
Page Intentionally Left Blank
Part II
EDUCATION AND RHETORIC
Page Intentionally Left Blank
5
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION;
PERICLES' MISSED
OPPORTUNITIES
Education and rhetoric
Even a glance at the Republi c suffices to show how broadly Plato understands
education and how entirely education pervades the new city. Rhetoric on the
other hand barely appears , except maybe in the form of the noble lie:
Socrates proposes that the city's leaders repeatedly tell all citizens of their
birth out of the ground , with metals in their souls that justify sorting them
into different social classes.1 Maybe the rulers would tell this story at public
meetings, maybe in schools. Anyway, and this must be no coincidence, the
noble lie shares more than one defining detail with the myth of autochthon y
that Socrates tells in the funeral speech.
It does not follow from resemblances between the noble lie and the autochthony
story that the speech in the Menex enus is a speech told within the
Republic 's beautiful city. Some passages in the funeral speech tempt its
reader to see the Athens being described as an Athens already transformed
by philosophy, but this interpretation will not hold for the speech as a whole.
But even without claiming the Republi c to be the theory whose practice is
told of in the Mene x enus, a reading of the funeral speech would profit from
seeing it as compatible with the Republic 's pedagogical politics. Both the
ends and the means of education in the Men ex enus overlap with the ends
and means of education as the Republic conceives that process.
The R epublic obviously politicizes education. But it matters more (and
requires something beyond simplistic talk about propaganda and the total
state) to understand how far the Republi c also seeks to educate politics. This
aspect of Plato 's reforms goes to the heart of his political enterprise. What
human society has henceforth left to occur according to the promptings of
instinct , an instinct that the same human society has corrupted , can be done
much better with instruction and regular practice.
Sometimes the instruction that the Republi c recommends is closer to
habituation , meant to instil tendencies to good behaviour in the city's guardians,
than to formal tutoring in bodies of knowledge. As children the
guardians ride out to watch battles so as to inure themselves to war's sights
97
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
and sounds. They fight bravely, ignore money , mourn only moderately and in
private. The education becomes intellectualized after Socrates identifies the
city 's rulers with philosophers , and recommends courses of study in arithmetic ,
geometry and astronomy . And often enough the least theoretical virtuous
behaviour - care for parents , reverence towards the gods ' temples - is said to
follow from the good ordering of the soul, which would make training in the
soul 's highest cognitive functions the real education from which all others
follow.2
In the Republic's city, institutions and methods combine to produce both
ordinary and extraordinary types of excellence: gymnastics and mathematics ,
music and dialectic . Exposure to beauty leads the young warriors to prefer
beautiful things to ugly ones, and a honed taste in beauty is supposed to
foster a preference for fine actions and the avoidance of sordid ones. 3
Modern audiences appreciate such "progressive" proposals in the Republic.
These show Plato 's imaginative powers at work , and they are indirect , shaping
what the twenty-first century would call "the whole person " . For Plato
mathematics produces good commanders both because it lets them calculate
battleground logistics and by bringing them to abstract thought as such , so
that they will command virtuously .4
Nevertheless , inasmuch as the familiar virtues of social behaviour appear
together with these more elusive phenomena that Plato calls harmony in the
soul, the pedestrian means that bring those traits into existence deserve to be
included together with the new and intellectualist techniques.
The fact is that the Republ ic does not give up on traditional moral education.
Plato is as much a reformer about commonsense moral training as he is
when introducing new ideas of training. From his point of view Atheni an
culture failed even at the unphilosophical task of making its children abstemious
and loyal . So the new education extends to traditional storytelling ,
retaining the form of children 's earliest learning about gods and heroes but
reversing the values they had learned . In place of the self-aggrandizing
behaviour associated with Achilles and other impetuous heroes , and instead
of reports about soldiers ' craving life and avoiding death , children in the new
city will hear about Odysseus restraining himself Out with the tales of gods
who lie and change shape , commit adultery with their brothers ' wives and
castrate their fathers ; in with statements of the gods ' goodness , truthfulness
and aid to pious humans . 5
The outcome of these changes will be catechism in a religion that the
ancient Greeks could scarcely recognize , and a legendary history cut off at
the root from nearly all the history they had known . With all due respect to
Plato 's innovations in logical training and music appreciation , the old-fashioned
teaching he imagines is more than revolutionary enough . He shows what
even traditional acculturation could accomplish in a new state.
Education becomes a more complex business when Socrates abandons
good and bad stories to speak of good and bad stor ytelling methods. The
98
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
target of his argument mime sis "imitation , emulation , enactment , representation
" is a name for a process in which one enacts a character , either
speaking as that person does or writing the words such a person would most
likely say. And although Socrates speaks mostly negatively about mim esis,
his dominating argument finds a double edge in enactment. Acting the part of
an inferior or vicious person makes the actor inferior and vicious; but there
would be no harm (and by the logic of the argument there ought to be some
good) in taking on the part of a virtuous man , especially when that man is
shown to be acting virtuously , exhibiting his intelligence and good sense. 6
Literature contains almost no such characters today. Nor did the poetry of
Plato's time . In practice this loophole for the enactment of "positive role
models" may be small. Still, even such acting might find its way into what
the Republic recognizes as education and acculturation.
This description of education in the Republic already touches on the types
of education that the Mene x enus will talk about . In the Mene x enus as in the
Republic , education includes tutelage in political leadership ; training in military
practice ; lessons from beneficent divinities; the mime sis of good models . The
speech does not politicize education , but it does try hard to educate politics -
you could say that it dreams of educated politicians - as if to imply that
when philosophers take over the writing of funeral speeches, their versions will
confront the task of educating the public as non-philosophers ' speeches had not.
In this sense funeral rhetoric becomes a microcosm. The Athens of the
Mene x enus is not the Republic 's city, but it does show philosophy bringing a
pedagogical impulse to funeral rhetoric that the Republic says philosophical
rulers would bring to all aspects of governing a city.
Pericles and moral education
Even if the kinds of education that appear in the M enex enus are recognizable
to the R epublic 's readers , they take the special form they do because of the
reply the funeral speech is making to Pericles. Whether or not the speech
attributed to Pericles faces the need to educate its audience - this has been a
disputed point - Plato certainly per ceives Pericles as having ducked pedagogical
and acculturative responsibilities. In a critique that extends across several
dialogues , Pericles is consistently one who had the opportunit y to educate
(his sons, his foster sons, the people of Athens) as well as the responsibility
to do so, but who left all his charges worse than he found them.
When Thucydides speaks in his own voice to assess the political leadership
of Pericles, he praises Pericles for controlling the moods of the Athenian
public. Pericles possessed both the rhetorical skill to inspire courage - and ,
when necessary , prudence in the face of a rash populace - and the judgement
to know which effect a situation called for.7 Controlling fear and rashness in
accord with knowledge of what should be felt would seem to be as good a
job of educating the public as a political leader could accomplish. It is the
99
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
task of directing the public's emotions in accord with a reliable standard. And ,
armed with Thucydides' verdict on Pericles, readers have argued that the funeral
speech contains a philosophical conception of courage, nearly a Platonic
conception , and one that enables Pericles to improve the Athenians' courage
as he does. 8 But looking at the words that Thucydides gives Pericles to say
produces a different impression from Thucydides' words about Pericles. The
speaker he quotes does not speak like the leader he describes. The funeral
speech sounds if anything like an abdication of the need to improve its listeners ,
and an expression of doubt that moral education is possible.
The first paragraph already announces a reason to despair at improving
the public. High praise for the dead will make the hearers who did not know
those dead envious. More generally "people respond envying [phthonountes]" to
whatever exceeds an accomplishment they would be capable of.9 Where envy
is the most natural response, emulation is not likely to occur. So much for
the good role models as means of moral education.
As he nears the end of his speech and its consolatory section Pericles does
speak of the courage the soldiers exhibited, and uses their example to inspire
his auditors. "Fall in love with Athens" , he urges the Athenians who are
listening to him. "Emulate [zel6santes] the fallen soldiers ... do not dwell on
the dangers of war". 10 But before those words he has spoken of the Athenian
meletais "training" for warfare as it were from a distance , describing the
practice rather than engaging in it. The result is a speech that voices no faith
in training. Athens is an open society with no secrets their enemies would
profit from learning; by implication Athenian military practice contains
nothing to be learned . "We trust in ... the courage that comes from our own
selves [t6i aph'hem6n aut6n ... eupsuch6i]". The Athenians do not "exercise
in pain" as the Spartans do. Their courage derives "not from laws [nom6n] but
from ways of life [trop6n]" .11 The effect of this tribute to Athenian preparation
for battle is to leave the preparation looking mysterious, unarticulated by
Pericles and probably inarticulable in his opinion .
One famous sentence calls Athens tes H ellados paideusin "the school of
Greece" (as this is most often translated). More broadly than the concrete word
"school", paideusis implies a process of education , even a curriculum. Pericles
has already said that the Athenian constitution does not zelousei "envy,
emulate" the constitutions of other cities. "We are a model [paradeigma] for some
rather than imitating [mimoumenoz] others". Such remarks make imitation and
learning seem to be happening everywhere in the world 12 - except in Athens.
To learn and to need to learn bespeaks inferiority. Pericles can hardly picture
the Athenians' learning martial virtue if their having to do any such thing as
learn implies a natural or default state of cowardice.
Perhaps the democratic spirit as such inhibits talk of learning and teaching.
When teachers stand above their students , education in virtue implies that one
citizen surpasses others in virtue. But Pericles does not set himself above his
fell ow Athenians , even if Thucydides will elevate him in the narration of the
100
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
History. The funeral speech is no place for setting one citizen apart from the
rest. The funeral honours all the dead soldiers together , and the speaker
although selected to address the crowd must not let himself stand out either.
Modern democracies voice suspicions about education often enough to
make the attitude familiar . "I never had a lesson" is a musician's boast , not a
lament. 13 For more than a generation , college admissions in the USA have
relied on students' scores on tests for which one "does not have to study "
and on which in theory one will not perform better after tutoring. Such tests
reflect the hope of offsetting all the advantages some students gain from
twelve years' worth of superior schooling, as it were espying the true aptitude
behind artificial differences in education.
Other interpretations of the speech by Pericles see a positive attitude in it
towards education in virtue ; but such interpretations have some hard passages
to explain away. The contrast between Sparta and Athens , for example ,
appears to associate training in courage quite consistently with the enemy
not the people of Athens. And so Ryan Balot, who wants to find a motive to
education in Pericles , has to concede that "Pericles does not offer much
explanation of how the Athenians' national character has been produced". This
"not much explanation " is what we have been calling Pericles ' silence about the
educational process, evidence that his speech does not articulate a positive view
of education. Instead of an account of where the fine national character
comes from , Balot goes on to say, "Pericles ' emphasis is on the Athenians '
relaxed lifestyle ... in spite of which they are still naturally courageous " . But
courage in spite of culture must be courage with a natural source . It will be
courage perhaps vulnerable to being corrupted by bad customs , but not
produced by good ones. 14 It is courage without an origin in public education .15
The attitude in the speech of Pericles is of secondary interest here.
Understanding the Mene x enus requires not knowing how to read Pericles
but knowing how Plato would have read him. The speech by Pericles , as
transcribed , contains passages that shy away from moral education even if
other passages lend themselves to a contrary reading. And Plato would have
recognized the anti-educational passages as the ones that are characteristic
of Pericles , given the tenor of his criticisms of Pericles in other dialogues.
Thus a passage in the Meno makes Pericles an anti-Socrates, the one who
should have faced charges of corrupting the youth. Anytus is defending
democracy , claiming that the private citizen passes virtue along to other
citizens, while political leaders pass virtue along more and better than anyone
else, such leaders being in Athens the best of a fine lot . Athenian political
democracy is an ongoing process of reciprocal education . In response
Socrates wonders why political leaders cannot instil virtue in their own
charges. He names Pericles , whose sons Paralus and Xanthippus learned how
to ride a horse but evidently not how to distinguish themselves ethically. 16
The example offends Anytus; Anytus will later join Meletus in prosecuting
Socrates , and his offence now conjoins the charge of corrupting the youth with
101
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
the prominent bad example of Pericles himself complicit in the degeneration
of Athenian youth.
Other dialogues contain what feel like replies to Anytus. The Symposium
makes Alcibiades a witness for the Socratic defence. As foster son to Pericles he
ought to know what the great statesman had accomplished; and Plato makes
Alcibiades say that Pericles never had the effect on him that Socrates did, of
making him ashamed of himself 17 Imagine how Alcibiades might have turned
out if more Athenians resembled Socrates, especially if Pericles had.
The Gorgias takes the offensive, pressing graver charges. Pericles fails as a
father, as the example of his sons shows. And in a grand version of the same
thing, he failed to improve the Athenian people. The people wanted the
treats of empire and Pericles fed them docks, city walls and shipyards until
they were glutted and so depraved they convicted him of embezzlement. 18
The Protagoras brings Plato's criticisms of Pericles closest to the Menexenus.
Pericles' boys Paralus and Xanthippus are both present for this conversation ,
Alcibiades too. The household evidently chases Sophists around ; which might
explain why Socrates poses the central question of the dialogue , whether
virtue can be taught , with special reference to Pericles. For all his wisdom
Pericles neither educated his boys himself nor entrusted them to a capable
tutor , but let them wander everywhere picking virtue up at random, automatoi
"automatically, spontaneously". Socrates tells the story of Clinias , brother of
Alcibiades and a known ne'er-do-well whom Pericles lacked either the skill
or the will to reform. 19
What gives the Protagoras its relevance to the Mene xenus is the combination
of criticisms it asserts, concerning both the kind of educator Pericles is and
the speaker he is. About ten pages (in a standard modern edition of Plato)
after the anecdote about Clinias , Socrates says that Pericles, that unimpressive
father (and despite his reputation as the city's master orator) , is not even much
of an orator either. He talks like a book! After finishing a speech Pericles is
incapable of responding to a question about what he just said, but goes on at
length like a brass gong that sounds on after being struck. 20
The dialogues are usually more generous about Pericles' oratorical skill.21
The Protagoras finds explicit fault with him even as a speaker. The Mene xenus
presumably does the same, for it has to be an insult to Pericles the rhetorical
expert to have Socrates claim that Aspasia wrote the most famous product of
his expertise. Suddenly the man who moved the assembly and shaped public
opinion resembles a stereotype out of modern politics, the candidate pretending
to address the public while reading someone else's words as they
scroll up an electronic screen.
If what Socrates says in the Menexenus is true, it would account for what
he says in the Protagoras. If other people write the speeches of Pericles, it is
no wonder he has no good answers to new questions. All he prepared to say
was this speech; ask him about any point in it and he will have to recite the
same speech again.
102
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
The Suda's entry on Pericles is provocative on this point , for associating
him with the general practice of speaking from a prepared text. It would be
invaluable evidence if not for the Suda 's overall unreliability; and contrary
testimony from (older, more trustworthy) antiquity does attribute skill at
quick retorts to Pericles, skill that ought to have made him a good improviser. 22
Most peculiarly the Suda says nothing about Pericles' speeches at funerals or
in the assembly , which were the most famous scenes of his oratory. Still the
report that he recited previously written speeches while others were still
extemporizing reinforces the Platonic criticism. Were Plato 's and the Suda's
descriptions responses to artifice in the speeches of Pericles , and formality in
his bearing; or did Pericles in fact stumble in unprepared settings and so rule
himself out of the dialectical exchanges that Socrates considers essential to
philosophy?
The specific pairing of accusations in the Protagora s raises a further
question , not necessarily to be answered in the Mene xenus but worth bearing
in mind when reading it. The Gorgias combines Pericles the father who cannot
make his sons virtuous with Pericles the political leader who presides over
Athenian citizens declining into spoiled children ; and those charges belong
together plainly enough. But what does failure at improving one 's children
have to do with the inability to answer philosophical questions? Do both
shortcomings show what an inattentive man Pericles is, oblivious at home to
the influence Alcibiades had on Clinias and oblivious in conversation to a
questioner 's need to understand? That would be damning enough , and it could
be Plato 's purpose in the Protago ras.
But accusing Pericles of inattentiveness would not explain his failure to
improvise. Not caring enough could be why someone does not improvise.
Picture a jazz musician who plays the same instrumental parts every night.
"Why did you get in that rut?" An answer could be: "I don 't care about this
band" or "about the music , the audience , the job " . Socrates speaks as if
Pericles would gladly improvise an answer but lacks the ability. Try as he might
he can only bring those same sentences to mind that he had memorized , and he
might as well run through all of them again. His failure is better understood as
lack of expertise. Pericles does not know how to handle surprising questions
any more than he knew how to handle his surprising children.
Getting clear on how Pericles falls short as educator will illuminate the
contrary standard that the Mene x enus is setting for itself And - to repeat our
guiding point - if the Socratic speech lives up to that standard , its success will
contribute to a general assessment of the new speech as improvement over
the old.
Scenes of instruction in the Menexenus
At first sight the occurrences of education in the Mene xenus make up a list
too varied to summarize. It is hard to see what single phenomenon these
103
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
examples could all be instances of Still one generalization emerges, even if it is
a negative one: the end product of education is rarely confined to knowledge
as knowledge is usually understood. Nor does the M enex enus describe a
process of education like what is usually thought of as the transmission of
knowledge . Instead this dialogue looks for paideu sis where it might not have
been spotted , where its difference from education in the literal sense made it
hard to see.
Framing dialogue
The opening of the Menexenu s casts everyone in the role of either teacher or
student , starting with Menexenus himself and what Socrates considers his
crazy proposal to speak at the next funeral. Has Menexenus completed the
course of education in philosophy that it would take to qualify him to
speak? 23
"I will study more if you think I should ", Menexenus says. He had not
imagined that making a speech might require learning something. But
Socrates insists on philosophy as equally the origin of good funeral rhetoric
and the first step in enlightened rule. And even if the joking tone about
rhetoric in these pages supports a reading of the speech as parody , Socrates '
call for philosophical training should show that the speech to come was born
of knowledge.
Not surprisingly for a Platonic dialogue , this first reference to education
presents an education that has failed. Menexenus did not study philosophy
to prepare for public speaking , and does not appear to have studied anything
else. Indeed Socrates ' opening talk of education has nowhere to begin ; it is
mostly empty talk. The educator who can take Menexenus through the
course of study he needs is no one specific and nowhere in sight. Nor has
Socrates explained what philosophical study he means.
Socrates shows what an education could be when he brings Aspasia 's name
up. He completed a course in rhetoric. Education now means formalized
teaching , with a tutor and a series of lessons , and threats of beatings to
punish the student 's lapses. And whereas the anti-Sophistic scenes in Plato
contrast the Athenian fad for lessons with Socratic conversation , direct and
gentlemanly , here Socrates sounds like an informed consumer comparing his
top-notch tutors to the inferior variety .
One of the tutors in question gave Socrates lessons in rhetoric. Plato 's
Socrates is normally the opposite of an expert in rhetoric. He prefaces his
defence speech announcing that he will speak off the cuff, and delivers such
an uningratiating speech that the jury convicts him. Book 1 of the R epubli c turns
into a showdown between Socrates and the rhetorical master Thrasymachus
cast as his antipode; and in the Gorgias, Socrates represents philosophy and
metaphorical doctoring of the soul against Gorgias ' rhetoric, the equivalent
of pastry-cooking and pander to the public. 24 As far as the trial of Socrates
104
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
goes, it is easy to imagine his friends' consternation when this man who had
bent interlocutors to his will suddenly could not work his miracles with the
jury. His way of speaking must be something other than rhetoric, even the
opposite of rhetoric , for he dominates private conversations in which orators
find themselves helpless, and then fails on those occasions of public speaking
at which orators shine.
Now however this claim that Socrates studied rhetoric with Aspasia
means both that Socrates knows what there is to know about rhetoric, and
that there is something to be known. This is one respect in which the
Menexenus lies closer to the Phaedrus than to the Gorgias, for in the Phaedrus
philosophy's superiority over rhetoric does not turn rhetoric into some
empty non-subject but leaves it a practice that philosophers can do better
than non-philosophers.
Pericles studied rhetoric under Aspasia , too. This mention goes by quickly
but invites a question. Where does Pericles stand on the subject of instruction
and being instructed? If Menexenus failed to study what a putative city
leader needs to know in order to speak well, while Socrates undertook the
study and mastered the subject, then Pericles represents the remaining third
possibility. He undertook the instruction but failed to learn. 25
First of all, Socrates ' claim about Pericles taking lessons from Aspasia
transforms Pericles from master of rhetoric into mouthpiece. At best he
learned the words that Aspasia wrote and delivered them aloud. The encapsulation
of Athenian values that made the speech famous as his greatest
oratorical achievement was someone else's work. This portrayal of Pericles
fits with what the other dialogues say. Studying rhetoric with Aspasia cannot
have sufficed to make Pericles a leader if he was the corrupt influence on the
body politic that the Gorgias says he was, or even if (as the Meno and the
Protagoras say) he possessed virtues himself but could not pass them along.
His education must have failed.
But it is crude and inaccurate to declare Pericles a failure , considering the
( occasional) compliments that Socrates pays him. Pericles learned philosophy
through his friendship with Anaxagoras, in a way that improved his
rhetorical skills (given that , as that dialogue says, rhetorical skills generally
require philosophical knowledge). 26 It is still conceivable, or it is just conceivable,
that both Pericles and Socrates are to be marked as educational
successes for Aspasia.
So whether or not Pericles counts as educated will hinge on Socrates '
explanation of where he heard the funeral speech he is about to recite:
Even yesterday I was listening to Aspasia going through a funeral
speech for these very ones. For she heard what you say, that the
Athenians are going to choose the speaker; then she recounted for
me what sorts of things one ought to say, some on the spot [ek tau
parachrema] and the others she had earlier prepared [proteron
105
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
eskemmene], from when I think she composed the funeral speech
that Pericles spoke, sticking together some leftover parts from that . 27
That some of the speech was the work of a moment goes to the matter of
improvisation ; the ready-and-waiting parts of the speech may tell where
Socrates stands relative to Pericles in Aspasia 's estimation. The thought of
her gluing together (sugkollosa) pieces of a speech , maybe literally sticking
one papyrus scrap to another , might sound casual enough to impugn this
new speech .28 But that those pieces are per ileimmata , leftover fragments ,
could make things worse. Did Aspasia lavish her best rhetorical inventions on
Pericles and then dig through the wastepaper basket for a speech to give
Socrates? Or does the clause mean that she held something back from the
first speech she wrote , saving those prize bits for the later ones? A third
possibility is more likely than either of those : Pericles either intentionally or
heedlessly left out parts of the speech that Aspasia had written for him.
Maybe he forgot those parts and maybe they struck him as inappropriate.
Whatever the explanation is for his omissions , the speech to come will
include passages that shore up the crumbling parts of the speech that Pericles
delivered. It will glue back in the crucial parts of the argument that he had
not thought to include.
Mimesis of virtue in the funeral speech
Pericles treated the funeral speech genre as an occasion for nothing but
praise. His opening remarks about the difficulty of such speeches have to do
with proper and improper praise and one 's ability to deliver it. The speech in
the Menexenus begins with the fine deeds of the dead , but it expands the task
of the speech with respect to those deeds: to praise those who have died and
"kindly exhort the living ", where that exhortation combines consoling the
grieving elders and "ordering their children and brothers to imitate [mimeisthaz]
their virtue " . Not surprisingly , the speech approaches its conclusion with
similar words , that the parents of dead soldiers tharrein "take courage " and
the soldiers ' children mimeis thai their parents. 29
Consoling the survivors does not educate them. Moreover this part of the
exhortation is present in Pericles, who does console the parents of dead soldiers.
What Pericles glosses over in the process , what does not belong in his view of
politics , is the praise that helps to make the surviving young citizens as brave
as the citizens who have died. If anything , Pericles doubts that the fallen
soldiers will earn such praise , thanks to the work of envy. He encourages the
living in admiring the brave dead , but without any advice about how they
should become brave. 30
The occurrences of mimeisthai as the Menexenus's speech begins and ends
therefore signal another intrusion of pedagogy where Pericles left it out.
In Plato's hands the verb mimeisthai "imitate , represent , etc. ", together with
106
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
its cognate noun mimesis, usually collect pejorative implications. Most famously
mimesis lies at the heart of Plato's attacks on poets and poetry in Books 3 and 10
of the Republic, as well as helping to define the Sophist , in the dialogue
Sophist , as someone distinct from the philosopher. In those works the verb
mimei sthai describes what duplicitous poets and ignorant painters do, actors
when they are taking on bad habits, and charlatans , posing as philosophers ,
who spin subtle webs of words that simulate truth and wisdom without
imparting any such things. In the Menexenus the same verb names what young
people should do to become braver, not quite contradicting what Plato's
arguments against poetry had said but rather seizing on the exception he
allows for in Republic 3 - that one may mimic the good man when he is
exhibiting virtue - perhaps also showing in the process that the loophole
is larger than its passing treatment in the Republic would suggest.
As the Mene x enus conceives it, education in virtue has teachers , in the
persons of the dead soldiers , and their sons as students ; its subject matter is
identified as "virtue " , with battlefield courage thought of as the central
example. Such education differs in another respect from the opening dialogue's
examples of education , for the success or failure of the process remains
indeterminate. Socrates calls for the young to imitate their parents , even as he
represents the parents ' speaking from beyond the grave to urge their sons to
surpass them in virtue. Whether or not the boys will become brave in the end
is not for Socrates or anyone else to know. And yet the essential character of
this education in virtue is definite. For what Socrates calls on the people of
Athens to do, when given the model that brave dead soldiers provide , is what
he claims the other Greek cities have already done thanks to the model that
Athens set for them. (See "Other cities follow Athens ", below.)
The origin of Athens
Socrates begins his speech by praising Athens and Athenians. For both the
land and its people, praise begins with this people 's birth out of their native
earth. The Athenians called themselves "autochthonous ", usually meaning
that their first ancestors had been born from the Attic ground , although
perhaps in de-mythologized form this boiled down to the belief that they had
always lived in the same place. (Chapter 7 says more about this myth.)
Pericles begins with the boiled-down version . A more extravagant national
myth might have embarrassed his chronicler. Socrates calls the Athenians
"autochthonous " and makes clear that he means this word in the fullest mythical
sense. The earth of Attica was the Athenians ' mother. As the best mothers do,
the earth not only produced those first Athenians but also had food waiting for
them , in the form of already-domesticated wheat and barley. Then , evidently
when their infancy was over, she brought gods to teach them. These unnamed
gods educated Athenians in the technai "skills, crafts , professions " and also
provided their first military training in the making and use of weapons. 31
107
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
The nearest story to this in Plato is the Republic's noble lie, a story for the
new city's people that mythically accounts for both their social status and
their education. The noble lie accounts for education by turning education
mythically into an act of creation. After their actual training has ended , the
young citizens learn that their lives to that point - birth , death and schooling -
had been a dream. In fact they sprang from the ground fully grown, with
metals in their souls corresponding to the social classes they now find
themselves in. The earth receives all credit for their education as well as for
the city's political divisions.
In effect the noble lie denies the existence of the very educational process
on which the city's continued existence depends. What the guardians took
for schooling while it was happening turns out to have been a dream. In this
sense the noble lie creates a kind of recollection for all people , for mythically
speaking they took in everything they learned before they were born.
On the other hand human society calls for education. Other dialogues offer
up myths of original acculturation to account for the possibility of human
social existence. Plato puts some of these explanations in other characters'
mouths. In the dialogue named after him Protagoras tells a creation myth in
which gods fly down to earth to imbue human souls with shame and justice.
Aristophanes , with his own origin story in the Symposium, pictures Zeus and
other gods cutting the first humans in half in a way that makes possible both
the interpersonal bond of love (among all people) and the city-wide bonds of
political engagement (for homosexual men). 32 The acculturated condition of
existing human beings is now their natural condition. Education is not artificial ,
certainly not in the sense of having been begun by humans.
The result of such stories is to render human physis "nature" indistinguishable
from nomos "law, custom". Education does modify the original condition
of the human , as Pericles saw that it imposed upon and modified the Spartans'
natures. But as he did not see, education is natural to the condition of
humans as known , not merely normal for Spartans; and thinking as he did
that Athens might escape the need to undergo training is fantasy.
Another reason for Plato's creation stories to include scenes of instruction
does not involve Pericles but harks back to Anaximander , who is sometimes
credited with having invented the theory of evolution. According to the few
reports of his views, human beings originated in the sea or moisture. Perhaps
he says that the first humans were fish who came ashore to dry land and
walked. 33 And there is one report of his evolutionary theory that adds an
argument why humans must have come from other animals rather than
generating spontaneously as those other animals do. Those other animals get
food for themselves as soon as they are born; so there is no trouble in imagining
them first wriggling out of the mud and going forth to survive. Human
beings are born helpless. Sprung straight from earth or sea or any other element
they would have died at once. Hence they must have descended from other
species. 34
108
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
Anaximander's theory is no proto-Darwinian hypothesis of the sort that
Empedocles will propose in the century after him . Even so it contains an
implied argument against autochthony. Infants scattered over the ground is an
image of mass death, not of the first life; between only these two alternatives ,
autochthonous birth and evolution from fish, evolution has the advantage.
Plato 's antipathy towards evolutionary theories is hinted at several times in
his dialogues , explicit in the Sophist . 35 An unworkable hypothesis about earthborn
humans would fall before Anaximander 's objection , so Plato posits a
mythic reply. In response to the specific claim about the newly sprung
humans' needing food, he makes the land around Athens domesticate wheat
and barley (and plant olive trees) before giving birth. Against the general
claim of aboriginal human helplessness, he sends gods to train those first
humans and show them how to defend themselves. "Thus I have no need of
the evolutionary hypothesis", he may as well be saying. Athenians could
have sprung from the earth , assuming they had access to an education that
precedes all education.
The theory of recollection makes for an apt comparison , despite the
obvious differences - above all that Plato's dialogues present recollection as a
non-mythical claim for which one can offer arguments. But both recollection
and these myths that incorporate education into creation try to show a way
out of predicaments about knowledge. In each case a highly prized form of
education presupposes some knowledge that could not have been acquired
through ordinary education. Ordinary education presupposes an extraordinary
pre-education.
One last remark about this first tutoring. The acquisition and use of
weapons must include military training , down to organization in a phalanx
and practice at charging without breaking ranks. The gods ' tutorials must
also make the first humans brave ; otherwise the weaponry would be useless.
Thus the myth begins to explain how human beings learn courage - male
human beings , on any natural reading of this passage. The Men ex enus's
version of autochthony is going out of its way to cover how both sexes learn;
for apparently before any mention of education , the speech has justified its
own act of calling Attica "mother " . "The earth has not mimicked [memim etaz]
woman in pregnancy and birth, but rather woman the earth " . 36 Part of the
remarkable enterprise in the speech 's first page , of heaping praise on top of
praise (on which see more below) , this remark about mime sis turns the
female act most identified with a woman 's nature 37 into learned behaviour.
Mime sis is now so powerful that it turns mere women into mothers ; or, to
put it less fancifully , mim esis no longer restricts itself to conscious human
behaviour , still less to the perverted behaviour that one finds in the theatre. It is
a natural force.
The thought occurs elsewhere in Plato. The Eleatic Stranger in Plato 's
Sophi st speaks of mime sis as though it could go beyond intentional copying
carried out by conscious beings. In that dialogue the word mim ema "copy"
109
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
applies to such naturally occurring images as shadows and reflections. The
Stranger speaks of gods mimicking; 38 but what counts in this image-making
is not that divine action is at work , rather that the process of mimesis has a
natural function apart from its manifestation in human arts. Shadows and
reflections result from regular natural processes. The tree's reflection in the
pond resembles the tree that it reflects for the reason that light from the tree
bounces back from the pond's surf ace. The resemblance in cases of natural
mimesis is the sign of a causal relation. So too , as the M enexenus says,
women are not merely like the earth when they reproduce , they are like the
earth because earth led the way.
Jean-Pierre Vernant famously said regarding Greek myth and morals that
marriage is for the girl what war is for the boy: her great civic task and the
object in mind as she passes the initiation into adulthood. 39 In the mythic part
of the speech accordingly male Athenians learn to make and wield weapons
while female Athenians learn to be wives for the city 's sake. Stretching beyond
the myth to the first and last parts of the speech, this mimetic act by women
(both in the past and in present-day Athens) parallels the mimetic act that
young men are being called upon to practise. They mimic their brave fathers
where woman mimics her fertile mother.
Other cities follow Athens
Pericles had both accused other cities' constitutions of copying the Athenian
constitution and called Athens the educator of Greece. Socrates enlarges that
image of Athens the teacher in the historical narrative that makes up most of
his funeral speech.
The history is mostly a depressing tale , but early on it is hopeful. Athens
leads the fight against Persia and then makes other cities its partners in
the fight. Socrates reads this brightest moment in the history as a scene of
education. The Athenian victories at Marathon and Salamis taught courage to
Sparta and other cities. Socrates says the non-Athenian Greeks paideuthenai
"were educated , acculturated " by those who "battled at Marathon and shipbattled
at Salamis ", those non-Athenian others mathontas kai ethisthentas
"learning and accustoming themselves " not to fear the barbarians. The nonAthenians
"dared to endanger themselves on behalf of salvation , having
become students [mathetai] of those at Marathon " .40
It sounds incredible to call Athens the source of the Spartans ' courage, not
to mention negligent of the story of Thermopylae , where without the benefit
of any training from Athens the Spartans showed what they were capable of.
Nevertheless these claims point to a contradiction in Pericles. He too made
Athens the teacher of all Greece, but then he turned around and explained the
Spartans' courage in terms of the military discipline they imposed on themselves.
Did Athens as the school of Greece teach Sparta , or did Sparta
thanks to its unending discipline teach itself? Pericles wants both , crediting
110
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
Athens with Greek leadership while freeing its citizens from having to
undertake training and discipline themselves. The M enexenus at least attributes
virtue to training in virtue , showing by contrast what is incredible about the
portrayal of courage in Pericles.
Instruction as intrusion
Each of these references to education and training in the M enexenus appears
within a passage that has its original in the speech of Pericles. But the passages
in Pericles omit calls to education, or undermine the education they
do speak of. The answering passages can be read as inserting talk of training
and acculturation where it should have been all along , answering questions that
no one had asked- in other words , improving on the original. It is because talk
of education intrudes into the original , surprising the flow of thought as it had
come from Pericles , but also crucially because it corrects that earlier thought ,
that we believe Plato must see these changes as improvements.
In Pericles, Athens is the school for all Greece , yet Spartans learn courage at
home ; Socrates corrects that error by making Sparta the student of Athenian
courage. Pericles wants to call Athenian soldiers courageous , but he shrinks
from holding up those who died as models for the survivors to emulate.
Holding them up would invite phthonos "envy" ,41 so Pericles foregoes the
mention of training in virtue; Socrates makes the change in the speech as
striking as he can , calling for mimesis with the same confidence that other
dialogues condemn that process.
As for the gods' training the first Athenians , that is intrusion within
intrusion. Pericles contented himself with mentioning the Athenians ' long
history in their home , a nod at the legend of autochthony that his fell ow
citizens knew about , before going on to describe the city 's military and cultural
achievements. In the version that Socrates replaces that speech with , the long
time of Athenians' lives in Attica becomes their aboriginal presence in the
land. Evidently one of the perileimmata that Pericles dropped from his speech
explained how the Athenians first appeared in their city. And then even that
story calls for another bit to glue into the text , what is unmistakable as
addition to it, namely the story of those first people 's education . They
learned how to practise both war and peace; so that now those exploits and
achievements that Pericles detailed can find an explanation he had not given.
What he left out of Aspasia's original composition , the parts that he cut off
and threw aside and she had to glue back on , now re-enters to explain the
brilliance of Athens as Pericles presented it, unaccounted for.
The forced appearances of education in the Mene x enus, what Socrates is
pleased to call their re-appearance from Aspasia 's unseen first speech , connect
education as it is spoken of within the funeral speech to the education everpresent
in the opening dialogue . At first glance the two seem to be divergent
phenomena. Conversing with Menexenus , Socrates speaks of the need for
111
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
paideusis "education" that will prepare the young man for the role of funeral
orator; he recalls the tutoring that had made ( or could have made) him and
Pericles into public speakers. This is directed individual instruction for
making political leaders. But for all the variety among the forms of education
mentioned within the funeral speech , those tend to be non-academic mass
instruction - mass acculturation, really - that aims at producing rank-and-file
citizens.
Even the claim that Athens taught courage to Sparta and other cities
conceives that teaching as it improved "the Greeks" , "those other Greeks" , not
the cities as some abstract individual entities but the collections of people
who live in them. What can these two pedagogical processes have to do with
one another? In the phalanx, courage consisted in remaining in place , literally
in rank and file, rather than spectacular one-man heroics. What does collective
preparation for cooperative behaviour have to do with a few men's solo
preparations for elevation to the first rank?
Suppose that the leftovers from the speech of Pericles that Aspasia stuck
together with other passages to make this speech had been left over because
Pericles left them out. Maybe he forgot to include those bits when he spoke:
Socrates tells how alert Aspasia was to his own lapses of memory , possibly
because Pericles had disappointed her in that respect. Otherwise Pericles left
these things out on purpose. Which parts would those deleted or forgotten
parts have been? Just the parts that press in to this speech unexpected; all the
references to education, to begin with.
Socrates minded his beatings and did not forget a word Aspasia told him , so
this speech will be a complete one. Having been educated properly in rhetoric ,
Socrates will deliver rhetoric that attends properly to education. When the
educated speak , their speeches educate.
The link between training for the speaker and training in the speech
appears in Socrates' challenge to Menexenus. You in the council chambers? Have
you completed your paideuse6s kai philosophias "education and philosophy"?
And will you follow the older members of your family in providing the citizens
of Athens with an epimeleten "caretaker, nurturer"? 42 To care for citizens, as by
leading them to moral improvement, one must have first completed one's
own education, even if one's own is formalized preparation in rhetoric and
the education one imparts or inspires is something different.
Similarly, one finds primary and secondary school teachers today qualifying
themselves to teach history or mathematics not mainly by learning those
subjects but through courses at schools of education, studying in the broadest
and finest sense the rhetoric of the classroom. What they learn in order to be
able to teach is not the same material they teach.
Lest the two kinds of training still seem too far apart, there is that insistent
mimesis bringing them together. In addition to the explicit references to
mimicry within the funeral speech there is its most unprecedented element,
the peroration in which the speech turns to "what your fathers said" and
112
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
"what they would tell you now if they could" . "You should believe you are
hearing those very men [the dead soldiers] in what I report". 43 This report of
the soldiers' words should seem to give the audience the very same soldiers
speaking. It can replace the soldiers. But that is to say that it functions as an
imitation or a surrogate does.
The Menexenus depicts three kinds of mimesis. Socrates performs one,
though he does not call it by that name , in re-presenting the speech that Aspasia
had taught him. The citizens of Athens learn by mimesis, its men when they
imitate their fathers' acts of courage and its women when giving birth. And it
turns out that Aspasia had her own learning to do, composing a last inspirational
message out of what the Athenian soldiers had said while still alive and
writing it - to use the language of Republic 3 - making herself like the soldiers.
In short , Aspasia imitates the dead in writing that part of the speech ;
Socrates imitates her in repeating the speech; the men of Athens will imitate
their fathers and take on their courage. As unexpected as this is bound to
appear to readers familiar with Plato 's other works, mime sis runs through the
otherwise disparate educations that make some people democratic leaders and
the others into their loyal followers .
Notes
1 Plato Republic 3.414b-415d .
2 Plato R epublic: guardian children watching battles , 5.467c- e; guardians ignoring
money , 3.416e-417a; private and restrained mourning , 10.605d; mathematics
and astronom y, 7.525a - 530c; the highest soul-education , 442e- 443b.
3 Ibid.: 3.402a.
4 Ibid .: 7.525b.
5 Ibid .: stories about gods , 2.377b- 383c; about heroes , 3.386a- 392c.
6 Ibid. : mim esis defined , 3.392c-393c ; corrupting effect of acting bad parts ,
3.395c-396b ; salutar y effect of acting the part of a good man , 3.396c-e.
7 Thucydides Histor y 2.65.9 .
8 See most recently Balot (2001). Balot does not equate the Periclean conception
of courage with the Platonic conception found in the La ches - for interpreters
who do , see ibid .: 506nn .2-4 - but he does ascribe an educational effect to
Pericles , a teaching through appeals to shame (ibid.: 513-15) .
9 Thuc ydides Histor y 2.35.2 .
10 The relationship between this ze los, the envy that inspires emulation , and
phthono s, a male volent envy, is left unexplored in Pericles . Chapter 8 will touch
on the contrast the M enexe nus draws between them .
11 Thuc ydides Histor y: dead soldiers ' courage , 2.42; "fall in love", 2.43 .1; "emulate ",
2.43.4; training for warfare , 2.39.1; "courag e from our own selves", 2.39.1; no
painful exercise, 2.39 .1; way of life rather than law, 2. 39 .4.
12 Ibid. : " school of Greece ", 2.41.1; "model for some ", 2.37. 1. Livy Hi story of the
Roman R epubli c 3.31 claims that in the mid-fifth centur y, a few decades before
this speech was given, Rome sent envoys to Athens to study the legal reform s
attributed to Solon .
13 In Duck Soup (dir. Leo McCare y, 1933), Chicolini (Chico Marx) kicks a lemonade
vendor (Edgar Kenned y), who says in fur y "I 'll teach you to kick me".
113
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
Chicolini's reply: "You don't have to teach me, I know how", and kicks the man
again. The vendor's "I'll teach you" is elliptical for "I'll teach you what happens
when . . . " and is, significantly , meant as a threat. (One threatens to teach.)
Chico's status as comic hero depends on his not having had to study.
14 Balot (2001 ): "not much explanation" , 512; "relaxed lifestyle ", 513.
15 For a less partisan look at moral education in the Periclean speech , as well as at
the critique in the Menexenus , see J. T. Roberts (2012: 141-44).
16 Plato Meno: Anytus on teaching virtue, 92e; Socrates on Pericles and his sons,
94a- b.
17 Plato Symposium 215e.
18 Plato Gorgias: Pericles as father , 4 72b; corrupting the populace , 517.
19 Plato Protagoras : Paralus , Xanthippus present , 314e-315a; Alcibiades , 316a;
Pericles a moral educator , 319e-320a.
20 Plato Protagoras 329a.
21 See especially Phaedrus 269e-70a .
22 Pericles and Alcibiades were both known for their quick wits: Thucydides History
6.16.6; Plutarch Alcibiades 2.2, Pericles 8.4.
23 M enexenus 234a-b.
24 Plato: Socrates speaking in court , Apology 17b- c; against Thrasymachus ,
Republic 1.336b-1.354a ; about rhetoric , Gorgias 485c . McCoy (2008) is an
excellent study of distinctions that Plato tries to draw between philosopher and
sophist as two kinds of speakers. That book also inf arms much in the discussion
of rhetoric later in this part.
25 Logically speaking there is also a fourth possibility that you learn without
studying. Fertile as that possibility proves to be in other Platonic works, it is not
explored here.
26 Plato Phaedrus: Pericles good at rhetoric , 269e; his friendship with Anaxagoras ,
270a .
27 Menexenus 236b.
28 Clavaud (1980: 97- 98) makes a great deal of this manual-labour image and the
ignobility it implies.
29 Thucydides History: praise and how to deliver it, 2.35.2; compare 2.36.1-2.
Plato Mene xe nus: praise and exhortation , 236e; advice to parents and children ,
248c .
30 Ibid .: Pericles consoling parents , 2.44; considering envy, 2.45 .1; encouraging the
living , 2.43.4 .
31 Ibid .: Pericles begins , 2.36.1 . Plato Mene xe nus: Athens autochthonous , 237b ;
earth had food ready , 238a; gods to teach Athenians , 238b.
32 Plato: Protagoras ' creation story, Protagoras 320c-322d; Aristophanes and first
humans, Symposium 189c- 193d.
33 Plutarch Symposium 8.730e.
34 "Plutarch" Strom. 2 = DK 12 A 10.
35 Plato Sophist 265c- d. Note that his resistance does not extend to theories in
which animals slip into increasingly worse forms (e.g. Timaeus 91d-92b). As it
will for Darwin 's critics , the trouble lies with explanations for human origins.
Fish may as well have developed from other organisms , even from humans. That
is no insult to humans , nor to fish (as far as humans are concerned) .
36 Mene xe nus 238a .
37 See Republic 5.453b- c, where the great objection Socrates entertains to making
women full guardians is their childbearing, and specifically the claim that
childbearing constitutes their nature.
38 Sophist 266b-c.
114
SCENES OF INSTRUCTION
39 Vernant (1974: 38).
40 Menexenus: non-Athenians "were educated ", 241a; "dared to endanger ", 240e.
41 In her invaluable comments on a presentation of part of this material before the
Ancient Philosophy Society (23 April 2009), Professor Heidi Northwood
observed that "envy" remains too narrow as a translation of phthonos . Rather
this emotion should be seen as the unhappy contemplation of another's good
fortune and the delight at the other 's misfortune. Chapter 8 will return to
phthonos .
42 Menexenus 234a - b. On the place of caretaking in the dialogue see especially
Salkever (1993: 136).
43 Menexenus 246c.
115
6
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
The Mene x enus finds fault with Pericles as orator not merely as educator.
Read this dialogue as a joke and it must be showing, by resembling the
speech of Pericles , how absurd that statement of Athenian principles really
sounds. Take the speech as earnest and intended for public performance , and its
departures from its Periclean model just as clearly demonstrate the inferiority of
the earlier speech.
The present chapter , more than any other part of this book , will read the
M enex enus with reference to Pericles. The speech that Socrates delivers
resists the tendency that Pericles' speech has to elevate ergon "deed , work ,
action " above logos "word, speech , reason " . Then the speech by Socrates
advocates praise of a sort that Pericles had shied away from - advocates such
praise , and also delivers it . This is praise taken to a hyperbolic degree . The
hyperbole of Socratic praise raises a question about improvisation , a topic
that Socrates touches on in his opening conversation with Menexenus. If the
suggestions about Pericles ' inability to improvise reflect a failure in his
rhetorical skills, improvisation works as a fitting last shot against him in
Plato 's enterprise to show how much better rhetoric can be when philosophers
produce it.
Logos and ergon
Historians of rhetoric associate Gorgias with the oppositional construction
that became a hallmark of Attic prose . Without deciding how much in the
speech of Pericles reflects Gorgias ' influence , or speculating how far Thucydides
tried to represent the way Pericles spoke, the reader who wants to understand
the thought of the speech and the manner of its thinking should approach
it through the conceptual oppositions that shape it. Balanced sentences and
balanced clauses within them , and balances between sections of the speech ,
point towards the speech 's logic and help to clarify its intent ; and the most
visible opposition is the one between logos and ergon. To some degree this
opposition organizes all six surviving funeral speeches. In the genre as a
whole , and especially in Pericles , logos and ergon play too large a role in the
116
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
argument not to be talked about, even if the play of those terms in Pericles
has long been a commonplace.
The commonplace observation holds that Pericles opposes logos to ergon
throughout his speech, not so that the two are complements but with ergon
in the superior position. Indeed , because ergon can mean both "deed" , hence
the brave deeds of the soldiers being buried , and "action" or "act", as in the
sacred act of the funeral ritual that honours those soldiers, 1 Pericles is able to
open his speech with an argument against all such speeches. These men distinguished
themselves with their erga, he says, so only erga can honour
them. 2 Ritual for battlefield behaviour becomes tautologically the right
exchange , while logos, a funeral speech , is a gesture as empty and therefore
as insulting as trying to settle a local debt with foreign money.
In that introductory argument the logos at stake is the speech Pericles has
been asked to give. As his funeral oration proceeds, the word logos will take
on more meanings and pick up travelling companions. For now Pericles tells
how hard it will be to calibrate the logos just right, by which he means the
praise that funeral speeches are known for. Not enough praise and the dead
man's relatives grumble resentment; too much and the rest of the crowd is
sore with envy. 3
One eloquent passage does appear to set logos on a par with ergon. The
passage formulates a Greek ideal , or a modern idealization of classical
ideals, and as a slogan for Greek antiquity it has taken on disproportionate
weight in the speech. Philosophoumen aneu malakias "we philosophize without
softness". The well-known Athenian exercise of deliberating over every
course of action does not stop the city from taking action. "We judge issues
for ourselves ... believing that actions [ergois] are not harmed by words
[logous], but by our not being taught in words [logoi] before coming to the
time of action [ergoi]". The Athenian people go to the assembly and talk all
day, but when the talking ends they vote on a bill, run their city and march
into battle. The Athenians accomplish more and better deeds when they
have first talked out their options. In these sentences talk and action seem to
belong together. Athenian logos exchanges for Athenian ergon with no
incommensurability of currency .4
But to read the passage as a variation on mens sana in corpore sano is to
miss its patriotic and racialist force. Pericles is saying that talk as such does
not go over into action as such; the fact that it does translate into action in
the Athenian assembly only shows how differently both talk and action work
when they have been minted in Athens. It is a tribute to the Athenians ' natures
that they are able to deliberate and then go ahead and fight a war or put
up public buildings. The compliment and the Athenian exceptionalism
would be lost if discussions did not typically weaken human action. "We
differ [diapherountes] in this respect .. . in others ignorance is boldness and
deliberation [logismos] leads to hesitancy ".5 As a rule, and away from
Athens , logos leaches the strength from ergon. In Athens logos and ergon
117
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
succeed at co-existing because Athenians possess such great reserves of
untutored natural strength, the same reserves that let Pericles look down on
Spartan discipline and every other kind of education. Athenians act boldly
despite their culture of debate, not because of it. Deliberation as such
imperils action. 6
Every foreign trait comes to be opposed to the spontaneous Athenian
ergon even if Pericles has to contradict his own stereotyping of the enemy
in the process. When introducing his contrast between Athenian life and
Spartan life, Pericles opposes courage "in our actions" to any mathema
"learning, information" that might help win a war.7 Learning is for nonAthenians
to use in military preparations. And as the speech progresses it
collects training, learning and acculturation together with logos - which is to
say: all of them as examples of logos - on the side that is not the ergon. In one
respect what is not action is speech and reasoning, while in another respect
the not-ergon is training and habituation.
As a result, the alternative to ergon that is learning becomes a necessary
supplement for action in the case of non-Athenians. They have to learn and
practice in order to achieve what Athenians are able to achieve in their native
condition. And yet the passage about deliberation and action , just noted , will
make logismos - that other alternative to ergon - the thing that saps native
energy. If you are a foreigner , only logos permits you to act; your action must
begin with the necessary infusion of logos in the form of learning; and yet
foreigners with a logos lose the power to act. A little logos undoes them. The
contradiction , for there is no other word for it, bespeaks the drive in Pericles'
speech to collect all Spartan traits into one contrary to ergon, even when
those traits are incompatible with one another. Athens is so much the place
of action that Sparta must be the anti-ergon even though anti-ergon is not a
single thing. Let Sparta be both enhanced and enervated by logos, but make
Athens the ergon.
Other parts of the speech elevate erg on above logos in more routine fashion.
In those passages logos literally means "speech". Talk is for the enemies of
Athens, who boast about a small win against the city and lie about their
losses. Talk is empty talk. When it comes to wealth and poverty , again ,
actions matter more than talk does, whether this talk be a boasting logos
about having money or the unimportant business of homologein "admitting"
to being poor. 8 Even shame attaches more to acts than to speeches.
Most surprising, and a bad fit with the ostensible harmony of ergon and
logos, is the grand boast with which Pericles concludes his praise of Athens ,
only one paragraph after celebrating the Athenian love of deliberation:
We shall be marveled at by both people of the present and those
who come later, having no need of Homer to praise us, nor any
other poet, who will momentarily delight with verses [epesi]: The
truth about our actions [ erg on] will outdo their own poetic meanings
118
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
[hyponoia] ... We have established eternal memorials of our own
good and evil everywhere. 9
Homer and other poets , a combined symbol of speech (because poetry is
after all a species of words) , education (because Homer and Hesiod taught
the Greeks) 10 and custom, represent anything that is not Athenian action.
The acts of the Athenians are causes of both good and evil but supremely
effective in either case.
Pericles associates logos explicitly with nomos "law, custom , convention " .
He begins with a reference to the unknown person who "established this
speech [ton logon tonde] in law [t6i nom6i]"; nomos is that which provides for
logos. The grounding for the logos is the nomos. Spartan courage, a product
of education and hence associated with logos, is also called the product of
Spartan laws. This celebration of ergon connects obviously with Pericles'
reticence about education. To the degree that Athenian action springs up
spontaneously out of the people 's natures, Athenians will have no need of
education in virtue. Or to put it the other way, perhaps a cynical way (and
quite possibly how Plato would put it), to the degree that Pericles wants to avoid
talk of improving his democratic supporters , he has to portray Athenians as
already fully prepared to act. Their activity is now independent of law and
culture and even independent of stirring rhetoric. 11
To identify these dismissals of logos in the speech is not to accuse Pericles
or Athenian democracy of anti-intellectualism. Modern "anti-intellectualism "
sometimes blurs the difference between native intelligence and education , and
it looks suspiciously at both. But on our reading Pericles moves along several
paths to equate logos with nomos, that is with the social , the legal and the
unnatural. And the education at stake is closer to enculturation or moral
habituation , not the lofty kind of schooling that famous friends of Pericles
like Anaxagoras and Protagoras brought to Athens.
The funeral speech in the Menexenus is not structured around logos and
ergon to the same degree that the speech by Pericles is. Specific allusions to
Pericles in the M enexenus's speech are plentiful in the opening sentences and
then fade , as if to fix the speech 's relationship to its precursor in mind before
going on in ways that Pericles could not have imagined. But in a sense the
answer to Pericles begins before Socrates embarks on the speech or mentions
Aspasia as its alleged author. In the framing conversation , Menexenus has no
sooner told Socrates about his desire to be the speaker at this year's funeral ,
than Socrates launches into a tribute to funeral speeches. Death on the
battlefield assures every man a splendid funeral. The speakers praise the dead
and the living alike. "When I hear them and I'm charmed [keloumenos]",
Socrates says:
I believe that I've become greater and nobler and better looking on
the spot ... And this majesty [semnotes] stays with me for three days.
119
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
Both the speech [logos] and the speaker's voice remain in my ears
with such resonance that only on the fourth or fifth day do I recollect
myself and feel where on earth I am. Until then I think I'm living
on the Isles of the Blessed. 12
As Bronwen Wickkiser points out , this opening salute to funeral rhetoric
establishes the theme that Socrates will take up again in his speech's first
sentence , the power of logos.13 A speech at the funeral does more than the
funeral rite can by itself to bridge the gulf between living and dead. The
worship leaves Socrates where he is; the speech sends him to the heroes'
heaven.
Wickkiser argues valuably that it would be a mistake to shrug Socrates'
words away as no better than a joke. Consider how closely this paean to
rhetoric anticipates the reorganization of logos and ergon within the
Menexenus's funeral speech. Socrates follows Pericles in casting the funeral
rite itself as ergon. He says the soldiers received the right tribute in deeds and
now the no mos calls for a speech. "For when actions have been well done
[erg6n ... eu prachthent6n] it is in a speech finely spoken [log6i kal6s rhethentz]
that remembrance and tribute come to be among the hearers towards those
who have acted [tois praxasz]" .14 Socrates sets up the same vocabulary Pericles
used - the soldiers' deeds, the funeral to honour them , the law requiring a
speech - but welcomes the logos that Pericles viewed with suspicion. 15 The
Greek of Socrates' speech makes word accompany deed in a grammatical
parallel, noun-adverb-participle: actions well done , then speech finely
spoken. 16 Where Pericles alienated logos from the cycle of Athenian death
and tribute, the Menexenus envisions ergon and logos working in tandem to
bring the dead the honours they deserve.
Wickkiser concludes from these opening sentences of the speech that one
hierarchy inverts the other. "Socrates has established the primacy and potency
of words (logoi) over deeds and actions (erga)". 17 But while it is essential to
recognize, as she does, the power that words have for Socrates as a rejection
of what amounts to their exile from the Periclean city, that word "primacy"
burdens the Socratic speech with impossible expectations. The primacy of
words over deeds promises that soldiers' actions will no longer matter to the
city, even possibly that the coming history will downplay Athenian actions
on the international stage. The Menexenus speech does not make either of
those claims. It is both truer to the speech and more reasonable for Socrates
to be returning fine logos to Athenian politics without expelling or demoting
action. As far as funeral speeches themselves go, he does not need to claim
that the right kind of rhetoric counts for more than anything else; only that
now, with a philosopher writing it, an epitaphios logos can find its proper
place in the city.
The correction is gentler than if the speech in Plato had reversed the
priorities of the speech in Thucydides. The more moderate correction also
120
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
fits better with Plato's conceit that both speeches came from Aspasia , one of
them in her youth and the other the work of maturity ( or even the enhanced
maturity of afterlife); the first speech jagged with excisions , whether because
Pericles forgot certain passages or wilfully omitted them, the second speech
delivered whole by a faithful student with a good memory. If Aspasia speaks
through these two very different spokesmen at different times of her life, you
might expect one speech to turn a balanced pair of concepts into a stark
opposition and ranking while the next speech realigns them.
Even without the fiction of Aspasia's authorship to justify the realignment ,
it illustrates what becomes of rhetoric when philosophers practice it instead of
politicians. A democratically selected leader or public representative speaks
modestly about his own act of speaking in order not to elevate himself either
above the deeds of the dead or the capacity for deeds in the living. The dead do
not really need his praise; the living really do not need his counsel. The philosopher
is free from having to pretend that logos is empty and education is otiose.
And finally this change from the politician's weighting of logos and ergon,
to the weighting a philosopher gives, works better as amelioration of the
original speech than as a mocking exaggeration of its faults. There is nothing
parodic about turning an opposition that privileges action into a pairing of
the same words that refuses to. It makes no sense as a joke, not even as an
intended joke that fell flat. But as an improvement , it does very well.
Praise
There are three explicit allusions to the speech of Pericles in the opening
paragraph from the speech of Socrates. 18 Besides the play of ergon against
logos there is Socrates' first mention of education , as noted in Chapter 5.
Pericles had spoken as if the function of a funeral speech were solely to
praise the dead, but Socrates also identifies the speech's effects on the living
(to console the dead soldiers' parents and inspire their sons and brothers). 19
Third is the matter of praise, this time not as an obvious feature of the funeral
speech but as a problem needing to be resolved.
Pericles finds the praising function of funeral speeches discouraging. "It is
hard to speak measuredly [metri6s]" on such an occasion. Praise resists
measure. It will sound like too much or too little , and very often both. Those
who know the people being spoken of will wish more had been said , but the
same amount will seem excessive to others , whose envy makes them resent
and disbelieve any claims about accomplishments that they couldn 't match.
"But I will have to try as well as I can to chance upon [tuchein] the will and
opinion of each of you" - a lost cause, but his duty under the law. 20
The thought that too much praise is dangerous reappeared two years later
in a tragedy by Euripides. The idea must have resonated with its original
audience. The Heracleidae was produced in 429, the year Pericles died, and
contains a speech by Iolaus who interrupts his own address to Athens.
121
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
"That 's enough to the city. Praising too much [lian epainein] makes one
prone to be envied [epiphthonon, from phthono s]".21 For Iolaus the danger
threatens from one side, excessive praise. It is the excess that Pericles harps
on too , with only a nod at the danger of not praising enough.
When Socrates pref aces his speech in the M enexenus by stating the purpose
of all such speeches - to praise , exhort , console - he stops to question himself.
"Who of us could discover such a logos? Or rather where would we begin to
praise [epainountes] good men?" He is not insinuating that such praise is
impossible , as Pericles had found it to be. For Socrates the question he poses
has an answer . Begin at the beginning. Since they were good these men should
be praised as good ; but they were good by having been born of the good.
"Therefore let us first praise [ egk6miaz6men] their good birth , second their care
and education fpaideian]", after which the speech can expound on ten ton ergon
praxin "the doing of their actions ". 22 Pericles saw a reason not to speak at all, and
contented himself with telling the public he would pander to their beliefs and
desires. Socrates sees a plan for a speech that aims at the audience to improve the
young hearers ' courage and reawaken the old ones ' patriotism and fortitude.
Indeed , if Socrates ' question about how to proceed did envision a problem
with speaking , it would be the problem of not saying enough in a tribute to the
dead. The introduction to the Menexenus speech ignores the possibility of
excess praise that Pericles had posed as the great problem. This is an argument
from silence, but it finds support in the framing conversation , where Socrates
dwells on the high praise that everyone hears at a public funeral , clearly
describing superlative compliments , the speakers "praising [egk6miazontes]
the city in all ways " . The audience loves this high praise , and even the xenoi
"foreigners" present look at Socrates as a more distinguished being than
before . As an Athenian being honoured , Socrates likes what he hears ; the
strangers seem to be moved by the rhetoric too , neither envious nor incredulous
but rather inclined to consider the city thaumasi6teran "more marvellous " than
they had before . 23
Socrates does say later in this conversation that speaking well of Athenians
amid Peloponnesians , or vice versa , would take the skills of a good orator. 24
But this does not make high praise perilous. In some ways praise for the Spartans
before an Athenian crowd would have to reach even higher than local praise for
locals, if that praise hopes to win the Athenians over. This kind of speech might
also need to rely on indirection and special pleading ; but Socrates is not
claiming that it would have to be an attenuated praise. When praise is very high
he imagines strangers admiring the object of praise , not attacking it.
Praise in Plato
Because the glowing words with which Socrates is about to speak of Athens
strike some readers as proof that this is a parody, it will help to ask what
other Platonic works say about praise.
122
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
Andrea Nightingale uses the Lysis and Symposium, Plato's two major
comments on praise outside the Menexenus, to argue that Plato finds the
encomium as such philosophically wanting. 25 If her reading is right it would
be incoherent for Plato to endorse the Menexenus's effulgent praise of
Athens: a telling consideration even if not decisive (for his dialogues often
contradict one another). In any event the evidence in favour of Nightingale's
reading is more limited than it first appears. The Lysis and the Symposium
are special cases, containing encomia from (respectively) Hippothales and
Alcibiades, non-philosophers speaking under the pressure of erotic desire.
Hippothales has been chasing Lysis, to everyone's amusement, and Alcibiades
still pines for homely Socrates. The two deliver encomia gone awry, as
Nightingale is right to say; but their failures as encomiasts have more to do with
what they choose to praise, and with how unphilosophical they were before
setting out to praise, than with any tendency towards harmful overstatement
that Plato is claiming to inhere in the encomium as such.
Nightingale reaches for broader statements. "Alcibiades' eulogy for
Socrates ... beautifully evinces the folly of praise". 26 An unforgettable phrase ,
"the folly of praise", but it misfires as a generalization about Plato. Whether as
a genre of writing or as a form of speech depicted within Platonic writings , praise
carries positive associations in the dialogues. Works of praise are permitted even
under censorious conditions. Egk6mia "encomia" directed towards gods ,
spirits and heroes are prepousi "fitting". Republic l O ejects every kind of
poetry from the city except religious hymns and encomia to good men. And
in general the encomium is an acknowledged poetic genre in Plato's work. 27
The dialogues do not exempt praise from criticism. Some kinds of praise
are misguided or morally suspect, and Socrates or another lead character
condemns that praise explicitly. 28 At other times the criticism is muted or
indirect. 29 On occasion Plato's characters cite actual and hypothetical encomia
whose objects could not possibly deserve praise. 30 Praise for salt and asses is
doing something wrong whether it understates or overreaches.
But in all these instances the praising goes wrong because the object
deserves no praise of any kind. The passages critical of praise do not imply
that tyranny, sophistry and musical innovation have received excessive praise ,
more than the correct amount (where there is some correct amount). Indeed,
of the forty or more passages in Plato that find some fault with praise ,31 not
one condemns an act of praise on the grounds that it is excessive. That is, no
passage concedes that the object in question deserves some praise but ought
to have received less than it did. Pericles saw excessive praise to praiseworthy
objects as the constant danger threatening public speakers, but Socrates
ignores that possibility in the Menexenus as Plato's characters regularly
ignore it.
In this respect Plato agrees with the orator Isocrates. According to the
Encomium to Helen , the risk for the encomiast is that of not speaking
strongly enough about "what is commonly called good or fine, or exceeding
123
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
virtuous [diapherontan ep'aretei]". In the same work Isocrates writes , "I am
being reasonable [eulogos] in using such hyperboles [telikautais huperbolais]"
about Helen. 32 "Reasonable hyperbole" sounds like an oxymoron , but the
phrase does attest to a willingness to sound excessive in one's praise. The
oxymoron points to something paradoxical in praise as such , that it hits
the right note when it has gone too far.
Indeed hyperbolic praise is honoured and even courted in the dialogues , as
when Lysimachus says that the young speak the highest praise for Socrates ,
or when Socrates says that he never heard his friend Theodorus praise
anyone as much as he praises Theaetetus. In another case Socrates promises
to praise Euthyphro 's wisdom "forever" if Euthyphro can prove a certain
point about piety. Socrates no doubt expects he will never have to deliver
on that pledge, but that does not deny the worthiness of effulgent praise when
circumstances are right. 33
When it comes to eras "love, desirous love", Socrates says in the Symposium
that he will aei "always" praise that god. 34 But Plato's other great dialogue
about eras, the Phaedrus, has more to say about praise and its limits than the
passages that Nightingale finds in Symposium and Lysis. The Phaedrus contains
three speeches on eras, one by Lysias, one in the mode of Lysias' rhetoric by
Socrates, and the final speech , again by Socrates, that repudiates the other
two. Whatever the merits of the second speech may be - better than Lysias,
but still problematic? As misguided as the speech of Lysias? - it is agreed that
the last of the three is put forward as superior to the other two. The Phaedru s
is also very much a dialogue about rhetoric , and this final speech is supposed
to show what a philosopher can accomplish in a speech- how the philosopher
outdoes the professional speechwriter. (Not coincidentally the Phaedrus sets
up the closest parallel situation to the Menexenus , with Socrates improving
on an existing speech for the benefit of a young man listening.)
The first of the three, the speech by Lysias, urges the young man who is its
audience to give himself to the non-lover. Lovers treat their boys badly,
among their faults being excessive praise of the one they love. The answering
speech by Socrates, put forward as an improved version of that same misplaced
anti-eroticism , amplifies the horror of the lover 's excessive praise. 35
While the final speech does not address the lover's tendency to praise , it
stands as a rebuke to the portrayal of lovers developed in the first two speeches.
As such it condemns the inferior rhetoric that disrespects praise. And when
Socrates comes to sum up the two speeches he made, their willingness or
unwillingness to praise is what distinguishes them. Twice he looks back on
his own rhetorical experiment (unworthy speech followed by worthy one) as
the movement from censure to praise. 36 He did wrong when speaking ill of
praise and the impulse to praise, right when he praised . In this dialogue
about philosophers making rhetoric , the best rhetoric turns out to be the
kind that praises - and , it seems, that praises the (philosophical) inclination
to praise.
124
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
In a way that Pericles seems unable to imagine , too much praise can be the
right amount. It is too much compared with a factual description of the
object and for that very reason the right amount as a register of value. So if
the other dialogues are trustworthy guides , hyperbole in the Menexenus will
not necessarily show that something has gone wrong with praise. Socrates'
question of how to calibrate praise is not haunted , as Pericles' question had
been , by the threat of too much praise.
Socrates has changed the terms for measuring praise in another respect
too , which partly explains why he does not worry about praising too much.
Pericles appealed to the people in the audience as the standard by which to
measure praise. Praise could say too much or too little compared with what
his audience wanted to hear. His promise to aim at what people want and
believe reinforces his sense of the audience as the standard. When Socrates
asks how to calibrate praise in his speech he makes no reference to the
audience. Praise for these dead Athenians needs to do justice to their qualities.
The assumption is that praise can do justice to its object , or fail to,
independently of whether it pleases or rather overwhelms its listeners. 37
The quality of praise
Given that Pericles accedes to the demand that he praise the Athenians
despite his stated qualms , the Platonic speech will not differ from its predecessor
by praising where the other refused to. So how can the two acts of
praise best be distinguished? Does one of the speeches praise Athens more
enthusiastically than the other? With greater consistency? It may not be
possible to answer such questions without unverifiable appeals to one's
"sense" of the two speeches. And there are differences in the way the two
praise that can be set out more clearly than such perceptions of strength and
weakness in a speech's compliments.
Beginning with his question how to praise the good soldiers , and continuing
for about one Stephan us page of the speech, Socrates harps on the nature of
praise , the grounds for praising , and the terms in which one registers praise.
At least eleven remarks in this one page can be called observations about praise:
i "How could we correctly [orthos] begin praising [epainountes] good
men?" (237a)
ii "It seems to me that by nature [kata phusin], as they were good , so too
we should praise [ epainein] them " . (23 7 a)
111 "But they became [egenonto] good by growing [phunai] from those who
are good [ex agathon]. So let us first praise [egk6miaz6men] their good
birth [eugeneian]". (237a)
iv "Their good birth first began [huperxe] with their ancestors' origin not
being arrivals ... They were autochthonous [autochthonas], residing
and living in their fatherland". (23 7b)
125
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
v "[The Athenians' ancestors] were nurtured not by a stepmother
[metruias] as others are but by a mother , the land [choras] in which they
lived " . (23 7b-c)
vi "It is most just to pay tribute to [kosmesai] their mother herself [ten
metera auten]". (237c)
vii "The country [chora] is worthy [axia] of being praised even by all
humans , not only by us . . . first because she is loved by the gods
[theophi/6s]". (237c)
v111 "How could it not be right for all humans to praise [ epainesthai] the
one whom the gods praised [epeinesan]?" (237d)
ix "Second , praise [epainos] is justly hers because ... she chose and gave
birth to humans out of all the animals , humans who alone are aware of
justice and the gods". (23 7 d)
x "Our earth and mother presents sufficient proof that she gave birth to
humans ; for she produced wheat and barley" (food for humans , hence
the food a mother would give). (237e-238a)
xi "One should accept tokens [of motherhood] more [mallon] with respect to
the earth than with respect to a woman; for the earth [ge] has not imitated
[memimetai] the woman in conceiving and giving birth but rather the
woman the earth". (238a)
As noted , one judges the rightness of praise relative to its object (i) not
relative to the audience's expectations. The good men who fell in battle were
good by nature and therefore deserve a praise that speaks to their natural
traits (ii). The men's natural goodness moreover begins with their eugeneia
"good birth" and the "good ones" they grew from (iii, iv). In other contexts
eugeneia can refer to aristocratic birth; here it is revealed to mean that these
Athenians' ancestors were born of the Athenian land or chora.38
Autochthonous birth turns up in Athenian funeral speeches, 39 and no
wonder. Athenians would have found it natural for a funeral speech to recall
their collective birth out of the Attic soil on the occasion of the collective
return into that soil by a group of their fell ow citizens. 40
Autochthony trumps all other comparisons among cities by grounding the
superiority of Athenians in nature, all the more dramatic considering that
this nature is a divine earth capable of yielding up living human beings and
domesticated crops. Supernatural autonomy supplies a superhuman basis for
calling Athenians praiseworthy, and it sets them beyond comparison with
other Greeks. Socrates appears ready to take his praise to extremes.
Autochthony silences comparisons with other cities inasmuch as the major
other cities in Greece claimed to have been founded by foreigners. Socrates
exploits this difference by reserving the trope of the parental city, the mother- or
fatherland , for Athens 's use alone. Only Athenians still live with their
mother. Other Greeks are in a stepmother city, someone they live with who
feeds them but did not give birth to them (v).
126
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
It should be obvious that the distinction does not accomplish everything
that the speech wants to . Having been born of a place really only makes one
praiseworthy if the motherland is also worth praising (vi). So Socrates
redirects his attention to the land that mythically produced Athenians. Here
too the praise begins by setting its object apart from all possible competitors
as well as alleging a non-human basis for the praise . Poseidon and Athena
quarrelled over which of them the city would be dedicated to (vii). Athens is
"god-loved " and "praised by the gods " as no other city is (viii). What the
gods praise deserves praise from "all human beings " too (viii).
Then in a surprising return to mundane fact Socrates sets myth aside and
presents an argument for the surpassing praiseworthiness of Athens. Athens
gave birth to human beings when every other place was issuing animals (ix).
Like a true mother the land provided exactly the trophe "nourishment " that her
newborns needed , not milk but wheat and barley and olives (x). As a matter of
fact the land is the truest mother of all. Human mothers imitate the great
mother earth and not the other way around (xi).
The strategy of praise becomes more oblique. Each argument in this passage
reverses or undermines something that Socrates said a few sentences earlier. For
example he commends Athens (ix) for having produced the autochthonous
Athenians where other stretches of land gave only brutes to the world . And
yet he has just commended Athenians as "well-born " by virtue of their origins
in the Athenian ground (iii, iv, v). The result is circularity. The exceptional
Athenians unlike all other people originated in the ground , and the ground
they grew up in was exceptional , as witness its producing them.
Another reversal or undermining comes in (x). Socrates already called the
people of other cities trephomenous "nourished " by their home countries , fed
by the homeland as if by a stepmother (v). Now he claims that because the
earth trephetai "nourishes " her people she shows herself to be a true mother.
The verb is the same in both passages. The consolation that non-Athenians
had had to satisfy themselves with - food alone , the token of living in one 's
step-motherland - now guarantees that Athenians reside in their true
mother 's bosom. To put it conversely , the food that the earth brings forth
demonstrating her motherhood of Athenians runs the risk of showing that she
is one more stepmother. How can he adduce the same act off eeding as evidence
of legitimacy in one instance and evidence against legitimacy in the other?
The matter of the true mother becomes more vexed in (xi), which reads as
a multiple improvisation on themes in Pericles. Pericles alluded to Athenian
autochthony in his speech but also cast the superiority of Athens in the
vocabulary of original and copy. "We are rather [mallon] a model fparadeigma]
for some than imitators [mimoumenoz] of others ".41 Socrates incorporates that
appeal to mimesis or imitation , and the emphatic comparison , into his praise
for the motherland. Human mothers have mimicked the homeland rather than
the reverse. Proofs of true motherhood apply to the land mallon "rather than "
to human mothers.
127
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
Socrates' differentiation between mother and stepmother distorts the Periclean
praise of Athens to the brink of contradiction. When the Menexenus distinguished
Athens from other Greek cities, it made Athens the mother to their
stepmother; the present distinction between model and copy demotes the
human mother who had metaphorically been the image of Athenian preeminence.
That is: Athens is like a mother and nothing could be better than
that. On the other hand Athens is something incomparably better than a
mother. Mothers derive their excellence from their capacity to bear and also
nourish their young. Socrates then acknowledges that capacity only to the
degree that it derives from the earth's far superior virtue in those functions. The
origin or cause of the Athenians' excellence is the great mother that it is only by
exceeding (being as it is the model to be copied by) Athenian mothers.
Socrates' impossible overemphasis communicates the drive at work behind
an unarticulable statement. But what is that statement that is incapable of
being made? Why should it prove so difficult to adduce reasons for the
splendour of Athens that the arguments fall into circularity and begged
questions? It is as if Socrates courted failure by trying to supply earthly
arguments for the high status that Athens enjoyed mythically. An argument
of such ambition should not be surprised if it finds itself without an available
vocabulary for comparison. The impossibilities in the rhetoric imply that the
human beings made by Athens cannot suffice to prove the worth of the land
(contra ix) when even the best humans derive their worth from having been
land-made (iv). The nourishment that the land provides is impressive but
(contra x) falls short of proving that Athens is the great mother , given that
this same act of nourishing also defines stepmothering cities (v).
Socrates is putting more pressure on his arguments than they can bear, and
they collapse. There is nothing degraded about the earthborn humans or about
Attic crops. They only will not testify to the surpassing excellence of Athens
when they belong to a more ordinary world that they lack the ability to surpass.
If (ix) and (x) fail by appealing to inadequate bases for demonstrating the
city's excellence, (xi) specifies what makes these grounds inadequate. If the
Athenian land is the true mother that human mothers imitate, no terms taken
from the human realm could do justice to the city. It is no compliment to an
original to compare it to its copy. "You look as nice as your reflection"
sounds like a weak joke directed at someone primping in front of the mirror. As
compliments go it only praises the mirror; likewise the effort to make Athens
the true mother and all human mothers its copies. Athens now belongs to a
different order of things from Athenian people , their food and their human
mothers, and Socrates' arguments cannot achieve what he wants from them.
Any comparison with the objects of ordinary experience would have to set
the city impossibly above those objects , diminishing the tokens of Athenian
superiority in the very act of basing an encomium to Athens on those tokens.
The praise that Socrates has in mind for his city is excessive by nature:
it exceeds what words of praise are capable of saying.
128
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
Crito
It is hardly surprising to say that other Platonic works also transfer affective
responses away from an object of experience to an entity posited as that
object's truer version and something that the object of experience imitates.
But the specific ontological priority of Athens over Athenians, according to
which a human mother becomes the likeness of the earth mother, finds a
parallel in Plato's Crito that is close enough to be worth describing , given
that Socrates rests his defence of his actions to Crito on an analogy in which
the Athenian laws function as every citizen's parents.
Early in the dialogue, Crito is urging Socrates to cooperate with his
friends and escape from jail. Among other considerations Crito points out
that Socrates has young sons. If he escapes he can provide for the boys, who
otherwise will have to fend for themselves. Socrates replies at length to
Crito's arguments but not to that one. He almost completely ignores the
father-son relation that Crito thought would carry the day, not even touching
on this point until close to the end of the dialogue and then with a cursory
reply. Socrates' role as the father to young boys appears not to carry emotional
associations or imply any extraordinary duties. 42
Strangely, therefore, when Socrates invokes the personified laws of Athens in
the same dialogue, he makes them claim that they fulfil a parental role. In fact
this is the most genuine parental role of all. Only thanks to the laws does Socrates
enjoy the privilege of a free citizen's birth, a status for which one might vulgarly
thank biological parents. The laws provided for young Socrates' education , as
one expects parents to do. Athens 's laws are like the Athenians' parents; in fact
they are more completely parents to individual citizens than those citizens'
parents are. Human parents account for the easy part of an Athenian's birth,
what you could call a mere semblance of birth , considering that human babies
turn up everywhere while Athenian citizens are the exception even within
Athens and almost non-existent elsewhere. For real births you need city laws.43
The human parents' contribution becomes ancillary to the parental work
done by the laws. Human parents are practically imitations of the laws.
Socrates' refusal to leave Athens for his own sons' sake, in other words, does
not follow from his rejecting the value of being a parent. The personified laws
make the case for a citizen's obedience to them precisely by virtue of being a
citizen's parents. Far from slighting fatherhood Socrates depends on it - not
as it applies to human parents though, only in this higher sense.
The Crito's readers debate how far Socrates wants to take his own argument.
Does he endorse every claim the laws make in this argument, or is there some
difference between the loyalty they demand and the loyalty that he thinks is
justified? Depending on how interpreters answer this question, they will find the
parallel to the Menexenus either more or less exact. 44 Nevertheless both dialogues
do present this striking Platonic innovation of the city as a metaphorical
parent that supersedes the literal parent as more perfectly parental.
129
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
Excess in praise
The Crito 's transfer of parental relations from literal parents to what may
have seemed to be a derivative metaphorical kind, who are the ones
then said to be the primary parents , is only one example of an argumentative
step that Plato's readers can find in many dialogues. In the Symposium
beauty as such is supposed to work as an ultimate object of desire, individual
human bodies becoming poor substitutes for that true eras, no better than an
early way station on the path towards beauty. Other examples will spring
to mind.
The reason for bringing such examples up is not to review Plato's ontology
or epistemology, only to take note of how his dialogues often see objects
of praise , and how they address such objects. The transfer of loyalties to a
new and truer object in the Crito, Symposium and other works testifies not
to a uniform status for the higher objects of praise - no reason to equate
Athenian laws with beauty as such, nor to put the Athens of the Menexenus
into the same ontological heaven occupied by the Forms - but to a
pattern in the activity of Platonic praising , whatever object that praise may
choose on a given occasion. An excess in praise understood simply as
excess, as "more praise than the thing warrants" or "more praise than the
person praising really feels" , might not lend itself to further description. If
that excess follows a consistent pattern , that pattern will be worth
spelling out.
Excessive praise cannot entirely follow a formula , for then it would lose
the sense that it communicates of sailing into new waters. Nevertheless some
classical samples of praise do suggest a general form.
Some time near the end of the fifth century Gorgias wrote his Encomium
to Helen , a work that created a rhetorical genre, or added a new twist to a
standing genre, characterized by the speaker's heaping praise on an object
that had been abused or ignored until then. We have noted the examples of
praise for the trivial referred to by Plato and Isocrates: tributes to salt ,
bumblebees, goats. Those encomia are merely unseemly in the way they
squander resources on unworthy objects. Gorgias' Helen , the more perverse
act of praise , sets out to exonerate Helen from blame for running away with
Paris and triggering the Trojan War. If Plato looked to the Encomium to
Helen as a springboard to his own praise-lavishing ,45 he would have found
Gorgias saying that Helen "did no wrong " despite her bad reputation ; was
"the foremost of the foremost men and women", beyond compare in beauty ;
had inspired "the greatest erotic desires"; and owed her incomparable beauty
to her divine parentage by Zeus, "tyrant over all" .46 In the Encomium to
Helen excessive praise is (along with other things):
• one-sided, suppressing all negative traits of the object being praised , as
when Helen is said to have done no wrong;
130
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
• deny ing comparison , declaring any other models faulty and unworthy of
being compared with the object of praise , as when Gorgias calls Helen
"foremost " and the inspiration to the greatest desires; 47 and
• transcendentalizing, appealing to nature or divinity to ground the praise
in a source beyond the human , as in Helen's divine parentage .
When Plato 's contemporary Isocrates wrote his own speech about Helen ,
forty or fifty years after Gorgias and some years after Plato 's Menexenu s,48
he praised Helen according to the same principles. His praise is one-sided in that
when Isocrates defends Paris at length for wanting to possess Helen , he only
glances at the fact of her willing elopement . His encomium denies comparison
in attributing "the greatest share of beauty " to Helen ; he approves of
Gorgias for claiming that Helen " surpassed all others " . For Isocrates beauty
itself is divine, so Helen 's divine standing does not need mythic testimony.
She warrants the exceeding praise she receives by virtue of being so beautiful ,
even though Isocrates does take note of her parentage. 49
Isocrates is not the only inheritor of the encomiastic tradition , and not the
only Athenian author one could look in for high praise. But unlike other
authors of praise in Plato 's time he defends the rhetoric of praise as well as
exemplifying it. The Encomium to Helen announces its own excessiveness ,
saying that the true encomium is the one that exerts and extends itself to be
worthy of its subject. Giving salt its due is no great achievement. But "all
those who attempt to speak of such things as are admitted to be good and
honourable .. . have fallen far short of the truth ". And: "It is difficult to rise
to the importance of such things as deserve it " . 50 As both an apology and a
putative example , the Encomium invites its reader to take the one-sidedness
and other such characteristics as paradigmatic attributes of its excessive
.
praise.
The details about praise in the Mene xenus should have already shown that
its praise of Athens possesses the same characteristics . The funeral speech
transcendentalizes by tracing the superiority of Athenians to their ancestors '
divinely caused birth and divine first training. It interprets the myth of
autochthony in a way that removes Athens from comparison with any other
Greek city, those others (thanks to their barbarian founders) becoming no
better than half-Greek. As for presenting its object as one-sided , if that is not
obvious from the way Socrates talks about Athens during the first page of
the speech , it cannot be doubted by the end of his historical summary.
These features of high praise that take the excess beyond mere exaggeration
again resonate with other passages in Plato 's dialogues. At the risk of
generality , praise that possesses the characteristics listed above can be seen at
work in many descriptions of the Forms . The Forms possess their properties
one-sidedly ; one has to omit negative traits in speaking of such entities , just
as the orators omit Helen 's misdeeds. Where beautiful individual things are
both beautiful and ugly, "beauty itself' is only, and can only be, beautiful. 51
131
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
This purified condition of the Forms constitutes part of what is called their
self-predication.
Meanwhile that feature of the Forms that is sometimes called their nonidentity,
their distinctness from every particular visible being , posits a difference
between each intelligible being and those objects of experience with which it
shares its name. Justice as such is not identical with any individual just law,
state or person . That is to say that the Form cannot be compared with the
particular thing , better still that the Form cannot be confined to any such
comparison. It stands apart from the many particulars as beautiful Helen
stood apart from the many beautiful women of ordinary life.
Trying to decide how literally Plato means his references to the Forms as
divine 52 would take this discussion of his rhetoric even further afield. But
whether the Forms line up more truly among supernatural items or within a
suitably expansive conception of nature , they are not part of the human
order.
All this is to say that calling the Forms self-predicating , non-identical and
either natural or divine is to speak of them in the language that praise
rhetoric marks as hyperbolic or extreme. That is to say that the Forms have
to be spoken of in praise that is inventive enough to overcome the pedestrian
limitations inherent in language . One example might be uncharacteristic, but
it makes the point. In Republic Book 6 Socrates praises the good , known to
many English readers as the Form of the Good. "The good is not being
[ousia] but exceeds being in power and dignity" - and Glaucon responds by
calling this praise "divine hyperbole [daimonias huperboles]".53 The right
language for the Forms is too much language , or rather too much for a
language. The right language is experienced as more than the language can
handle. In that case praise might have a useful role to play in philosophy as a
deployment of language that evokes higher beings than those to be met in
ordinary experience .
Improvisation
Either excess, or some other way of escaping formulaic language , might be a
feature of praise in general. The proverbial damning with faint praise is
grounded in the sense that praise that works , praise that does not damn , will
threaten to be too much praise. Faint praise fails - it resembles a damning - if
praising calls for some kind of enthusiasm to the point of invention.
The point may be put in J. L. Austin 's terms , extending some of his
observations about the formulas he called performatives; which is to say that
Austin's analysis, however far from Plato in origin and purpose, provides
modern terminology for understanding Plato's treatment of praise. In Austin
the formulas "I congratulate you" and "I apologize " perform the tasks they
name , respectively congratulating and apologizing , 54 but no such formula
exists for insults. One can thank with the words "I thank you" (indeed that is
132
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
often the best way), but to say "I insult you" is not to insult you. The words
"I insult you" do often promise that something else will soon be said that
does insult you, but the mention of insult will not do the job.
Similarly, although Austin does not discuss this case, "I praise you" alone does
not make itself true. It does not accomplish the work of praising as "I apologize"
does the work of apologizing. "I praise you" is a more natural-sounding
sentence than "I insult you" , as are such locutions as "I want to praise you"
and "Let us now praise . . . ". Such locutions tend to be followed by the
praise, as in a reminder that speaking of the praise does not constitute
praising in the same way that speaking of a promise is a promise. Said by itself,
the formula "I praise you" threatens to be grudging praise and effectively no
praise at all. Successful praising takes place with an openness not called for
in its putative opposite, blaming.
In fact, and despite the common linking of praise with blame , the two are
not quite opposites. Blaming is the opposite of crediting; the truest opposites
to praise are probably abuse and insult; and they call for openness in
expression as praise does. Such "openness" does not imply that any words at
all can work as words of praise, nor that every act of praise calls for pure
invention. One finds openness in the act of insulting in spite of the associations
between insult and ritual phrases, or standard tropes. Insult and praise
both pose the challenge , which never goes away, of finding the right degree.
Say too little and there is no insult in one case, no praise in the other; say
enough and you risk having gone too far. In the absence of a perf ormative
formula, the question "Did you praise or didn't you?" calls for an act of
judgement of a sort that is not required for "Did you promise?" or "Did you
apologize?" - these latter being questions that can be answered with appeals
to fact and not interpretations of fact.
Where success is not assured by use of a formula, one finds the act of
trying. Rarely does one have to try to promise. But Socrates is trying to
praise Athens and its people.
One also finds improvisation where there are no formulas. Compare
apologies and promises , both of which are better when not improvised. This
may be because words that are merely tantamount to a promise , words that
are practically a promise, are used by someone who wants to improvise not
keeping the promise; and apologetic-sounding words that do not include
"apologize" can be used to evade actual apologizing. 55
In spite of giving the subject only passing treatment, the Menexenus
nevertheless says more about improvisation than anything else Plato wrote, and
connects improvisation with praise. The Greek verb that translates as "to
improvise" is autoschediazein, which occurs only rarely in Plato and tends to be
used pejoratively by him , as it is used by authors before Aristotle. 56 Plato too
normally uses autoschedia zein for the act off abrication. "Tell us [ about your
motivations] so that we don't make something up", Socrates on trial imagines
people asking him. Elsewhere "I had hoped to be able to tell Meletus that
133
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
I no longer had to make things up out of my ignorance "; and Hermogenes
says to Socrates in the Cratylu s, "I think you didn't make this up but heard it
somewhere". 57
But declaring that autoschedia zein never means improvisation in the neutral
sense that it carries today requires forcing the natural sense of some passages.
It may prove to have been too hasty to see improvisation appearing for the
first time only in Aristotle. In Plato 's Euth y demus, for instance , Socrates
speaks of putting forward a rough version of his argument. Tolm es6 apautoschedia
sai "I will dare to improvise ". Socrates is not demeaning what he
says but indicating the high stakes of the conversation. He braves the dangers
of making up an argument because the argument needs to be given. In the
Phaedru s Socrates introduces his first speech on love: "I will be ridiculous if
I improvise something on the same topic as a professional poet " . Again
improvisation sounds like the clumsy result of ignorance , but the opprobrium
attaches to Socrates the non-rhetorician rather than to the ad lib as such . 58
What Socrates fears will make him ridiculous is not that he improvi sed, but
that he improvised. In such passages there is conceptual room permitting
Plato to use autoschediazein to denote a respectable mode of composition.
In the Mene x enus, it is Menexenus who first uses auto schediaze in. He says
that whoever is chosen to speak at the funeral will have to "make something
up " on short notice . Socrates answers him that the potential speakers have
their speeches par eskeua smenoi "prepared ", even though it is not hard to
autoschediazein such talks either, if need be. He tells Menexenus how Aspasia
made the speech he is about to recite, going through some parts ek tau
pa rachrema "on the spur of the moment " and attaching together other parts
left over from the speech she had written for Pericles. 59 Socrates is appar ently
describing a technique of oratorical improvisation in which the speaker adds
new remarks to prepared elements. This is what it means to invent a speech ,
that a general model is tailored to fit a particular occasion. On this view
improvisation consists in adding details to the model , not in making something
up out of whole cloth . 60 And not only poor orators put their speeches
together this way, for Aspasia herself combined the ready-made and the
newly invented in composing this funeral speech ; this is what Socrates also
describes as gluing additional parts into the existing speech , and it seems to
be standard compositional practice .
The passage that inspired this consideration of rhetorical excess, the
opening to the Menexe nus speech , is itself improvisatory in the way that
Socrates describes autoschediaz ein. The speech from 237d to 238a has been
constructed out of elements taken over from Thucydides. The superiority of
Athens and the long-running continuity of its population , for example , both
come straight from the funeral speech of Pericles. 61
Another improvisation takes up Pericles ' personification of Athens , when
he called on the men in his audience to be in love with the city.62 The
Menexe nus speech de-eroticizes the attachment , making it a son's devotion ,
134
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
and turning the mistress into a mother. As Athens had been a deserving
mistress for Pericles - presumably one who is true - so too Socrates feels the
need to stress that he means a true mother and not a simulation.
Speaking of mistresses and mothers reminds us that Plato is presenting this
speech as Aspasia's composition not Socrates' own. And in this instance her
alleged authorship adds to the import of the improvisation at work. For if
Plutarch is a reliable source , Pericles fell in love with Aspasia to a degree
that Athenians found worthy of gossip. She was his beloved mistress. 63 Upon
marrying Pericles she became his sons' stepmother , then soon the mother of his
younger son Pericles. As someone who could move from one of these relations
to the other and sometimes insisting on one role rather than another , Aspasia
has the ability to picture the city of Athens as not just one of the three but
interchangeably mistress , stepmother or mother. And passing from one
available metaphor to another is a standard move in verbal improvisation. 64
In yet another case, Plato responds improvisatorily to Pericles' mention of
mimesis. Pericles found words for elevating Athenian governance over the forms
of government in other cities by making Athens the original , and turning
those other cities' constitutions into its copies or imitations. 65 Socrates clinches
his point with an appeal to mimesis and , like Pericles, establishes the city 's
superiority by reason of its status as the mimicked object - though he uses the
occasion of this speech to say more about how mimesis can function within
moral education , improvising on the theme of city and imitation to account
for the citizens' moral improvement.
The impromptu variations are not limited to topics that Thucydides
attributed to Pericles. The soil that Socrates apotheosizes (237e-238a)
appeared in the History of the Peloponnesian War, though not in the funeral
speech. Thucydides asks in his own disenchanted voice why a single population
should have lived continuously in Attica. Other cities went through migrations
and upheavals. The Spartan invasion of Laconia was a notorious case that
made Athenians wonder why they had been spared such population movements;
Athens luckily has always had the same people living in it. But what
accounts for this good luck? Knowing that Athenians used autochthony to
account for the difference , Thucydides proposes a different explanation. The
thin soil of Attica cannot feed many people; therefore the land never attracted
foreign plunderers. 66
It is perverse of Thucydides to focus on the same earth that autochthony
stories celebrated and to call the soil preternaturally barren where the myth
made it impossibly fecund. But then - and here is the improvisation - Socrates
perversely alludes back to Thucydides when he speaks of an Attica so fertile
that it not only sprouted menfolk but even greeted them with divinely
domesticated barley and wheat. He makes the rich farmland 's yield the telling
criterion by which Athens shows itself to be its people 's true mother.
Incidentally Plato is improvising regardless of whether the Menexenus
speech turns out to be playful or deadly earnest. With the speech of Pericles
135
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
in hand Socrates extemporizes his patriotic praise , sometimes inverting or
overstating elements of the original but consistently sorting those elements into
a coherent new whole. This is how orators make something up, autoschediazein.
The magic of rhetoric
Socratic improvisation might be directed entirely against Pericles. If Pericles
was a speaker who did not improvise, a more capable speechwriter who begins
with philosophical insight may be one who can put speeches together in a
new way.
That report from the Suda that Pericles spoke in public from prepared
texts, where everyone before him had been known to schediazein, needs to be
treated with suspicion. But even if the Suda is only repeating gossip, it invites the
question of why anyone should have circulated such claims about Pericles.
The positive assertion in Plutarch that Pericles wrote nothing but legislation
implies a history of gossip and speculation to the contrary, concerning his
preparing texts to speak from in public.
If Pericles did not improvise, and if by his own statement in Thucydides he
pref erred not to praise , this is one reason to see improvisation and open or
potentially excessive praise in tandem. Both by improvising and by praising
freely Socrates moves philosophical rhetoric away from the Periclean model.
But improvisation might also lead back to praise by another route , if it
represents the negation of a kind of utterance that is not supposed to be
improvised , namely the formula of magical ritual. This thought has to be put
without insistence, if for no other reason than because the religious vision in
Plato remains neglected by his contemporary readers.
When the M enexenus begins and Socrates first describes the preternatural
effects of funeral rhetoric , he calls the speeches that so move the crowd ek
pollou chronou paraskeuasmen6n "prepared a long time before" , the speakers
not praising eikei "at random , without a plan". This speech contains vocabulary
of magic. The orators goeteuousin "perform sorcery". Socrates is keloumenos
"charmed, bewitched" , and seems semnoteros "more revered, more august"
to the foreigners present. 67
Spells, potions and other magical operations have to be prepared, often
long in advance, and normally according to formulas. Modern information
about Greek magic is limited - Plato himself is one of the earliest sources 68
about its practices - with much of what is known dating from Hellenistic
Egypt a century or more after Plato's death. But curse tablets , those small
sheets of thin lead inscribed with spells and buried where chthonic powers
will get the message, appear in most parts of the Greek world and date from
pre-Hellenistic antiquity. And the inscriptions on curse tablets fall into patterns
that make it plausible to call their spells formulas or stock phrases. 69
The point is not true of ancient Greece alone. However it is that magic is
related to ritual in human culture, the two share a compunction for
136
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
reiterating a practice in the same way on each occasion. But the iterability of
magic puts a certain weight on Socrates' reference to funeral speeches'
having been prepared. These speeches that send him flying to the Isles of the
Blessed, speeches that control the movements to disembodied souls - in
other words spells - are speeches prepared in advance and not delivered
eikei, without a plan, or freely.
The closing movement of the Menexenus speech, when the lessons of history
are done, brings the voices of the dead to speak to Athens. 7° Call this the
necromantic part of the speech, the part that can control the movements of
dead souls. Therefore, it must be the part already long prepared, because it
has to be delivered in exactly the same way each time. In that case the
improvisations in the speech must occur in the sections that precede these
closing words from the dead. Those improvised parts include the introduction
to the speech, the mythical prehistory of Athens and the long account of
Athenian history - all the parts of the speech that are involved in praising.
If the speech both praises and conjures, it conjures insofar as it contains
formulaic sections written long ago; but it praises, verging on over-praising,
insofar as it leaves itself free to invent on the fly.
Notes
1 This characterization of the double sense of ergon is made elegantly by Wickkiser
(1999: 66).
2 Compare a passage in the Gettysburg Address (e.g. at www.ourdocuments.gov/
doc.php?flash=false&doc=36) , here apparently appropriating Pericles: "In a
larger sense, we cannot dedicate - we cannot consecrate - we cannot hallow -
this ground .... The world will little note , nor long remember what we say here,
but it can never forget what they did here ".
3 Thucydides Histor y 2.35.2 .
4 Ibid.: philosophize without softness , 2.40.1; judge issues, 2.40.2.
5 Ibid.: 2.40 .3.
6 Compare a hypothetical statement of New York City 's exceptionalism that could
run like this: "Most people like to get a good night 's sleep before going to work .
We New Yorkers stay up doing our preparatory research for the next day's work ,
because we are able to work well without sleeping ". Someone who argued this
way would believe that skipping sleep is harmful to work in general , but that
New Yorkers are exceptional in being able to do without it. Likewise Pericles
thinks that deliberation is harmful to action as a rule .
7 Thucydides History 2.39.1.
8 Ibid.: boasting enemies of Athens , 2.39.3 ; talk and money , 2.40.1.
9 Ibid.: 2.40.4.
10 On poets teaching the Greeks see Herodotus Histories 2.53.2; Aeschines Against
Timarchus 142; cf. the treatment of Homer as (problematic) informant about the
Trojan War, Thucydides History 1.3.
11 Thucydides History: nomos that established funeral speeches, 2.35 .1; Spartan
courage the product of laws, 2.39.4.
12 Menexenus 235b-c.
13 Wickkiser (1999: 68-69) .
137
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
14 Menexenu s 236e.
15 Pericles is not alone . As a rule the surviving funeral speeches begin by depreciating
themsel ves by comparison with the soldiers ' actions: Lysias 2.1; Demosthenes
60.1; Hyperides 6.1-2 .
16 Wickkiser (1999 : 67).
17 Ibid. : 68.
18 Classical authors of course did not write paragraphs . Less anachronistically this
paragraph may be called the first five Greek sentences , more or less M enexenus
236d- 237a .
19 Pericles mentions praise alone , Thucydides Histor y 2.35.1-2 ; Socrates adds
consolation and exhortation , Mene xe nus 236e. Socrates names two functions of
the speech before subdividing the second , which is aimed at the living auditors ,
into two purposes in turn. The speech should "praise [epainesetai] the dead and
benevolently exhort [parainesetai] the living " . These two verbs rhyme , both of
them deriving from the root aine6 "praise , recommend ". The word play suggests
that praise already contains a wider range of rhetorical actions than Pericles
imagined .
20 Thucydides History: praise too little or too much , 2.35.2 ; Pericles appeals to
wishes and desires of all, 2.35.3.
21 Euripides Heracleidae 202-3 . Also see lines 303-6 , 329-30 , which echo the funeral
speech's remark about laws to protect the oppressed (Thucydides Histor y
2.37.3) . For that matter the Menexenus alludes to the Heracleidae in turn , as if
these three works were carrying on a political discussion among themselves (Aty
1982: 1 0nn.52-53) .
22 Menexenus: the question how to praise , 237a ; the answering plan for a speech ,
237a-b. In what follows we will treat both the verbs epainein and egk6miazein as
meaning "to praise ", and their related nouns epainos and egk6mion as corresponding
acts of praise . Sometimes it will prove more appropriate to treat the
last of these terms as literally ref erring to an encomium , a formal speech of
praise . Similarly epainos literally can mean a poem or hymn of praise .
23 Ibid.: speakers praising Athens , 235a ; foreigners present regarding the city as
marvellous, 235b. The word xe nos has both broad and narrow applications , but
here it naturally reads as "non-Athenian " . In all likelihood Socrates is referring
to Greek non-Athenians , as Plato would (and this dialogue does) use the more
pointed barbaro s to refer to non-Greeks ; but if xen oi at 235b were to include
barbarians , that would change the sense of the sentence .
24 Ibid .: 235e. That Aristotle quotes this phrase twice but never engages with the
Menexenus otherwise suggests that it became a free-floating proverb , again not
tied specifically to any views about envy in the audience.
25 Nightingale (1993) .
26 Ibid.: 127.
27 Plato: "encomia " are "fitting ", La ws 7.80ld-e and cf. 8.829e ; poetry ejected
except for hymns and encomia , Republic 10.607a (a position consistent with
3.397c-d , 5.459e, 5.468d); encomium an acknowledged genre , Ion 534c, La ws
12.957c, Protagoras 326a .
28 Plato: Callicles praises the wrong people , Gorgias 5 l 8e; praise from those who
lack experience not valued, Laws 1.639c, and cf. Crito 518e; people should not
praise innovations in music , Republic 4.424 ; wrongheaded praise that tragedy
receives, Republic 10.605d- 10.606b; the philosopher scornful of the praise that
goes to kings and to a heroic genealogy , Theaetetus l 74d-l 75a. See also Gorgias
519a ; Law s 4. 706c- d, 4. 711 b- c; Phaedrus 260c; Protagora s 346b; Republi c
6.488c-d , 7.528e, 8.562d ; Symposium 198d-e.
138
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
29 Plato: Sophists praised, Euthydemus 303b-c; victims of bad diet praise the
people who made them ill, Gorgias 518d-e; Euripides and other poets praise
tyranny , Republic 8.568b; cf. Protagoras 346b on Simonides and tyrants. Also
see Laws 3.700c, Phaedrus 257e.
30 Someone has written an encomium to salt , Eryximachus says at Symposium
177b. This seems to be a historical statement , as Isocrates refers disparagingly to
encomia to salt and bumblebees, Encomium to Helen 12. Phaedrus 260b imagines
a praise-speech about an ass; the counterpart at Laws 1.639 is praise for a goat .
31 Because praise can be a vague phenomenon , vague enough to be talked about
without using the word for it (in Greek , without using epainein or egkomiazein
or related nouns) , an exact count is impossible. Unscientifically it is possible to
tally up at least 130 references to praise in the dialogues , of which forty are
disapproving.
32 Isocrates Encomium to Helen 12, 54.
33 Plato: Lysimachus on the young , Laches 180e; Socrates on Theodorus , Theaetetus
145b; Socrates on Euthyphro's wisdom, Euthyphro 9b. See Laws 6.775b
commending universal praise for obedience to wedding laws, Timaeus on the
praise owed to Athens and Athenians ("I 'll never be able to praise the city and
its men adequately", 19d).
34 Plato Symposium 212b.
35 Plato Phaedrus: Lysias against excessive praise , 233a-b ; Socrates against it, 240e.
36 Ibid.: 265c, 266b.
37 Isocrates again offers an apposite comparison. See Panathenaecus 36: "It is difficult
for praise speeches [epainous] to equal actions of hyperbolic [huperballousi]
greatness and beauty". For Isocrates , the desire to measure out praise properly
becomes the desire to make the praise match its object .
38 Later in the fourth century, probably in the 340s, the speaker in the courtroom
speech Against Neaera introduces Theogenes as eugenes, meaning that the man
was a native Athenian , 59.72. Ober (2005: 11-12) .
39 See Loraux (1986: 19, 90- 91, 203- 4, 210- 11, 244- 46). Direct references to
autochthony in other funeral speeches include Demosthenes 60.4, Hyperides 7;
an oblique reference in Thucydides History 2.36. l.
40 Socrates draws the connection between birth from the land and return to the
land in death, Plato Menexenus 237b-c. The remark is a jab at Pericles for
having denied that it matters where Athenians are buried, Thucydides History
2.43 .2-3.
41 Ibid .: allusion to autochthony , "The same people have always dwelled in our
land", 2.36.1; more a model than imitators, 2.37.1.
42 Plato Crito: Crito 's argument about sons of Socrates, 45c-d; cursory reply from
Socrates, 54a .
43 Ibid.: laws and education , 50d; laws like Athenians' parents, 50e; laws more
parental than biological parents , see especially 51a-d, where Socrates makes his
revaluation of filial values explicit.
44 For one take on this point of contact between the Menexenus and the Crito see
Berges (2007).
45 Wickkiser compares Helen to the Menexenus speech along different lines.
Wickkiser (1999: 67).
46 Gorgias, Encomium: Helen did no wrong , 15; was foremost of the foremost, 3;
inspired greatest desires, 4; was daughter of Zeus the tyrant , 3.
47 Praise that denies comparisons appears in the Symposium, when Alcibiades is
honouring Socrates. He says he knows of no model to compare the man with.
For other Athenians , Homeric figures come to mind. The encomiast might
139
PHILOSOPHICAL RHETORIC
compare Pericles to Antenor the Trojan elder or Nestor the wise old Greek:
Plato Symposium 221c. (Homer singles Antenor out as wise: Iliad 3.203, 7.347.)
Socrates has no forebear.
48 The opening sections of the Encomium to Helen seem to represent certain followers
of Socrates as still alive and Gorgias as dead. Such clues have led to a date of
around 370 being assigned to the speech. If Plato wrote the Menexenus not long
after 386, then it comes a decade and a half before the Isocratic Encomium.
49 Isocrates Encomium to Helen: on elopement with Paris , 49; greatest share of
beauty, 54; Gorgias spoke rightly , 14; the divinity of beauty , 54; Helen's
parentage , 16.
50 Ibid.: f alien short of truth, 12; difficult to rise, 13.
51 Plato Symposium 211 a.
52 A striking passage occurs in Republic 10.597b: Socrates says there are three couches ,
"the one being the one in nature [en tei phusez], which we would say, I believe, that a
god made [theon ergasasthaz]" . How seriously he meant such a claim has been disputed
since antiquity , though there is a good argument to be made that this entire
stretch of Book 10 is a religious condemnation of artistic representation.
53 Plato Republic 6.509b-c.
54 Austin (1962: 30- 31 ).
55 Such words do give the impression of being used for the purpose of evading a real
apology. "I 'm sorry you feel that way" , says the telephone voice of the corporate
representative in an improvised surrogate for apology designed to assuage in the
way that apology does, but without apology's moral commitment.
56 Much of the material on improvisation in this section is indebted to Tobyn
DeMarco 's work on improvisation.
57 Plato: "Tell us ", Apology 20d; "I had hoped ", Euthyphro 16a; "I think you
didn 't", Cratylus 278c.
58 Plato: Euthydemus 278d , Phaedrus 236d.
59 Menexenus: to make something up , 235c; they have speeches prepared and make
up the rest , 235d; Aspasia's composition method , 236b.
60 The dominant improvisatory art form today is jazz; and jazz soloists frequently
describe improvisation along the same lines. If they do not write out and memorize
a piece and play it back during a performance, they also do not invent blindly
without much-practised phrases.
61 See Thucydides History 2.36.1 , 2.41 .1.
62 Ibid. : 2.43 .1.
63 Plutarch Pericles 24; see Athenaeus Deipnosophistai 12.533.
64 Thus in the Theaetetus , the interlocutor Theodorus moves from one metaphor
for philosophizing to another. Socrates compares their conversation to wrestling
in Sparta , 162b; Theodorus later remarks that Socratic conversation is rather
like the deadly wrestling practised by Antaeus and Skiron , 169a- b. Either could
be the kind of grappling that takes place in philosophy, so Theodorus supplants
one metaphor with the other.
65 Thucydides History 2.37.1.
66 Ibid .: 1.25.
67 Menexenus: speeches prepared , not at random , 234c; sorcery, Socrates bewitched ,
seeming more august , 235b.
68 Plato on sorcery: Meno 80b, Republic 2.364b, Symposium 202e. Laws speaks
strongly against permitting sorcery in the good city, 10.909b. See Gellrich
(1994). On magic in Greek and Roman antiquity see Graf (1997).
69 Graf (1997: 118- 74).
70 Menexenus 246c-248d.
140
Part III
MYTH AND HISTORY
Page Intentionally Left Blank
7
MYTH
Stories of Athens
Together , the Menexenus's mythical prehistory of Athens and the chronicle
that follows take up two-thirds of the funeral speech , over nine Stephanus
pages out of the speech 's thirteen. 1 More than it does anything else, the
Mene xenus tells a story of Athens that sets Athens above other Greek cities
and far above the non-Greeks. 2
But it distorts this stretch of text to categorize it all generically as
"narrative that boasts about Athens". Such a description is insensitive to the
difference between Plato's uses of myth and of history. By his time the two
were seen as distinct. Historians differentiated between myth and history
before the death of Socrates , even making "myth" an insult, as both
Herodotus and Thucydides do. 3
The Menexenus does not belittle the mythic, but it does use myth and
history for different even opposed purposes; so this chapter and the next will
look separately at the two narratives. The myth of autochthony shows
Athens uplifted , established as "the good city" or as good enough, very
possibly the best this world can hope to see. The subsequent history watches
Athens disintegrate , consistently better than all the other places to live in the
world but finally only the best of a bad bunch.
Maybe Plato thinks that it takes divine intrusion into the natural order to
show how a city ever came into existence that stood so tall among other
cities. Historical time on the other hand might run entropically from bad to
worse, perhaps because natural psychological principles tend towards
degeneration. In that case decline would be the natural subject for every
historical narrative.
With both types of narrative Plato departs from the task of writing a
speech that answers the speech of Pericles. Pericles could not have been less
interested in charting Athens's decline, not even a decline in which the city's
nobility gleams through the darkness. When he gave his speech the city had
not yet experienced anything he would call decline, such as a significant loss in
wealth or in number of allies, even if some Platonic dialogues see Periclean
143
MYTH
democracy itself as the city's moral decline. As for praising his city: Pericles
makes a case for Athenian exceptionalism as the mythic parts of the
Menexenus do , but grounding the city's superiority in myth seems as alien to
his own sensibilities as it does to those of Thucydides.
Indeed, all that Pericles says about the past comes in one brief passage. A
funeral speech needs to recognize the original ancestors of today 's Athenians ,
who occupied Attica and bequeathed it as a free home to later generations;
then the "fathers" of today's audience, those immediate ancestors who founded
the Athenian empire; finally the adults of the present day living and dead ,
both the soldiers being buried and their surviving peers. These last-named troops
enlarged the city's holdings and tightened its rule over them. The founding of
Athens and expansion of its empire are subjects for a mythic prehistory
of the city followed by historical narrative. But rather than relate either kind
of story Pericles contents himself with identifying the topics that those stories
would cover if someone did tell them. He will skip the details; everyone
listening knows them. The Athenian past, although the first order of business
for a speech like this one, does not need to be recalled. 4
So in one sense the Menexenus rebukes Pericles by the mere fact of telling
stories about Athens. It already surpasses its predecessor when it supplies
information about the city that Pericles calls important but that he does not
give his listeners. His omission is another missed educational opportunity
that Plato will make up for. Good teachers err on the side of saying what
goes without saying.
Recall that another feature of the M enexenus speech is its audacious, even
excessive praise; and that strong praise is another feature of funeral speeches
that Pericles leaves out of his own. The powerful praise, the myth of Athenians'
origins and the history of Athens may all be seen as the parts that Pericles left
out of the speech Aspasia wrote for him - the leftovers she glued together to
produce this speech. The idea that "gluing together those leftover parts" is
self-evidently an insulting description of the speech5 does not survive a serious
look at what those leftover parts are.
But beyond noting the fact of a rebuke there is not much to say about the
M enexenus's reply to Pericles about myth and history. A few passages read
as specific replies, such as Socrates' mention of how well poets have treated
the legendary past of Athens , against the line in Pericles that dismisses
Homer and other poets as irrelevant to Athens ( discussed in the next section
of this chapter). Otherwise the idea of a reply to Pericles is too general to
inform a reading of the M enexenus. Any words at all can contradict silence.
Why should Plato have chosen these particular words when he wanted to tell
Athens's story? Pericles does not provide the counter-text for the Menexenus
to be read against. 6
Clavaud makes much of the fact, a fact no one could deny, that nothing in
Pericles corresponds to the Menexenus's myth and history of Athens. For
Clavaud these Periclean silences confirm what is implied by his book 's title
144
MYTH
(in English: "The Menexenus of Plato and the rhetoric of his time"), namely
that Plato's funeral speech is a sustained parody of Athenian oratory, especially
the oratory found in funeral speeches. Not Thucydides , the real author at
work behind Pericles , but Lysias and the later orators are the targets of
Plato's criticism. 7
What most weakens Clavaud's claim in connection with the Menexenus's
historical narrative is his tendency to equate Pericles with Thucydides. As a
matter of scholarly caution he refers to the Periclean funeral speech in connection
with Thucydides , not Pericles. It is true that the speech comes from
Thucydides, whether lightly or heavily edited by him; but even if all the speech
of Pericles is Thucydides , not all the relevant Thucydides is in the speech of
Pericles. Plato may well have expanded his sights, in the historical section of the
Menexenus - seeing Thucydides as his real target - to outdo the historian's
version of history-writing in addition to his version of speech-writing.
Aspasia the tutor of Socrates is responding on a grand level to Antiphon the
tutor of Thucydides.
The next chapter will spell out this hypothesis as a plausible and concrete
rival reading. Plato's version of how Athens spent the preceding century will
emerge not as a response to Pericles but as an alternative to history-writing
as Thucydides had redefined that practice.
As for Athenians' birth from the earth , the problem with Clavaud's
approach is that aside from Pericles only Lysias has written a funeral speech
dating to a time before the Menexenus - nowhere near enough to define the
genre 's treatment of autochthony. 8 Although the later speeches by Demosthenes
and Hyperides might join with the speech of Lysias to define the parameters
of a genre that the Mene x enus parodies, it is at least as plausible (as we have
said) that the Menexenus speaks without parody , and thereby helped to
define the genre within which Demosthenes and Hyperides place themselves.
Their speeches would then attest not to the causes of how Plato wrote a
funeral speech but to the effects of his speech, the Mene xenus contributing to
the genre as moderns know it rather than responding to a genre that moderns
can reconstruct independently of the Mene xe nus.9
Take away Hyperides and Demosthenes , and the so-called tradition of
autochthony in the known funeral speech genre comes down to Lysias saying
that Athenians have the land of Attica as both metera kai patrida "mother
and fatherland". This phrase supports Loraux 's reading of a degradation of
the mother in Athenian rhetoric; but it is so far from being a story, and with its
emphasis in such a different place from the Menexenus's , that it cannot be taken
to establish oratorical autochthony, or to define the limits within which Plato
writes. (This is not to comment on the problem that Lysias was a non-citizen,
one whose citizen status was much contested and widely known. Surely talk
of a mother-fatherland from him cannot be taken at face value.)
None of this means that the myth in Plato bursts into existence out of
nowhere. It means that the reader needs to look elsewhere for a context that
145
MYTH
explains what Plato's prehistory of Athens does assert , and also what it does
not assert. Part of that context appears in other dialogues' mentions of
Athenian birth from earth - the Republic and Laws indirectly, Timaeus and
Critias positively . Without yielding a univocal meaning of the myth for
Plato , these passages show its continuities with the traditional myth as
Athenians knew it, and (to the extent that historians can establish such a
thing) as they practised it. This is what Nicole Loraux calls the "autochthony
of the Acropolis ", a story or belief not nearly as far from the
Mene x enus as her categorization implies it to be.10
Showing Plato to be speaking with and about the religious tradition , not
just speaking to the rhetorical tradition , permits a close look at the story that
the Athenians told themselves about their origins. For all the importance of
that story 's play with femininities, it also problematizes its masculine element in
ways that modern readings underestimate . Entering the traditional story through
Hephaestus , whom contemporary interpretations equate with the masculine or
the patriarchal , reveals a contradiction of attributes - especially a difficult set
of attributes to accept in one 's first forebear - that the story of Athenian
beginnings seeks to resolve. But seeing the traditional story as resolving one
question about Athenian culture will show how the Platonic story brings a
new question to the myth and finds a new way to answer it.
Mythic passages in the Menexenus
Autochthony is one of several traditional stories , all of them glorifying
Athens, that Socrates brings into the first part of his speech.
Gods competed over Athens , he says by way of proof that the city is worth
praising . Socrates mentions no names , but he must mean the competition
between Athena and Poseidon. Perhaps Kekrops ruled Athens then , for the
dynasty of Erichthonius had not come to the throne. In one version of this
story Athena narrowly won a plebiscite in which all the women voted for her.
The men wanted Poseidon for their local god but were outnumbered by the
women , and after losing the plebiscite they retaliated by depriving women of
the vote. Gifts were at stake, according to the ancient sources. Poseidon made
seawater burst magnificently into the heart of the city; Athena gave a humble
but practical olive tree, the start of Athens 's plentiful groves and oil .11
In this form the story belongs among those myths that Plato 's dialogues are
forever trying to silence. If Plato does not advocate monotheism he moves
towards it by seeking to remove all mention of disagreement between gods.
(The difference between a polytheism of like-minded gods and monotheism
is theologically subtle and often invisible .) The Republic 's critique of myth
takes any stories of divine quarrels out of the young guardians ' earshot ; in
the Euth yphro Socrates declares those stories impossible to believe. In Plato 's
Critias this objection is explicit. Gods could not distribute their holdings
with fights or disagreements. Athena must have been assigned to her city.12
146
MYTH
Why does the M enexenus allude to the story without mentioning the gods'
names? It may be that a taboo prohibited Athenians from calling upon the
heavenly gods on an occasion of death; and Socrates is reciting a funeral
speech, or purporting to. (He is not exactly pretending to recite one; but he
is pretending to be reciting.13) Does Plato leave the gods unnamed in the
interests of verisimilitude? He does not always hew to the fictional strictures
of his dialogues that scrupulously, but the taboo might have been so powerful
that no Athenian even pretended to be giving a funeral speech without
omitting the gods' names.
Even so the omission could be over-determined. It is possible that Plato
has other motives operating. He may well want to bowdlerize the patriotic
myth whose full version would offend him. Socrates softens the image of a
quarrel between gods by redescribing the event as their "praise" for Athens,
as if what Poseidon and Athena had really wanted to do was pay the city a
compliment; then softens the image further by leaving out the divine names
that might call the unseemly scene to mind.
And Socrates could have another reason not to mention Athena 's name. This
suggestion will have to wait until later in the present chapter and the Menexenus's
myth of autochthony, which seems bent on excluding Athena from what
had been her story. If the dialogue's myths are excluding her in particular, they
will have to pass over the details of her competition against Poseidon.
Another reference to mythic matters, if more direct than this allusion to
Athena and Poseidon, might puzzle the reader. Socrates says that legend
attributes noble wars to Athens. The city fought against Amazons and
Eumolphus of Eleusis, and against some Greek cities on behalf of others.
The city's only cause for war has been pan-Hellenism. Socrates draws the
customary moral from these stories but begs off elaborating. Poets told these
tales much better already en mousikei humnesantes "celebrating [them] in
music". Instead of repeating them, he will speak of things as no poet has. With
that remark the myths give way to history and Socrates explains the beginnings
of the Persian wars. 14
This last remark is surprising both for what is true in it and for what is
false. Poets had indeed told of the mythic wars in which Athenians drove off
the Amazons, but Plato rarely takes the trouble to give due credit to poets. And
then on the other hand, the contrast between mythic subjects the poets treated
well already and the historical accomplishments left unsung , disregards the
attention that Athenian literature paid to Marathon and other battles against
Persia. 15 Poets did not do anything like neglect the Persian War. Most famously
from today's perspective, and no doubt quite famously then, Aeschylus'
Persians details the battle of Salamis, widely seen then and now as the decisive
Greek victory.
Plato's dialogues usually find him both knowledgeable about the poets and
contemptuous of their achievements. In this passage the funeral speech
manages to sound neither knowledgeable nor scornful.
147
MYTH
The next chapter ought to inform the question of poets' having told of battles
against Persia. The shape that the Menexenus imparts to Athenian history will
appear in that chapter as an unprecedented approach to historical narrative ;
in this sense what Socrates says in apparent ignorance will prove to be true. No
one else has told the story in these terms, which are the right terms to tell it in.
The next chapter ought to show that , far from ignoring Persians, the historical
narrative in the Menexenus replies to it. For if, as we have already
suggested, the Menexenus stages a philosophical rejoinder to the Persians
(perhaps even on the occasion of the play's revival), it is fitting that Plato
should dismiss Aeschylus' account of the battle at Salamis as failing even to
begin telling the history of Athens.
In any case, what the poets have already said covers a minor part of the
past. The Menexenus's history extends beyond the battles against Persia to
events that poets truly did not tell 0£ As for the uncharacteristic respect being
paid towards poetry about Athens and its legends, what seems surprising there
contradicts not the actual Plato but a caricature of his arguments against the
poets. The Phaedrus and Republic both approve of poetry that records and
honours great achievements; and when they do, it barely comes up that such
works were written in verse. 16
There might be a rejoinder to Pericles buried in this acknowledgement of
poetry's value to the city. Pericles sneered at the honour that a poet might
bequeath upon Athens. The Athenians have no need for Homer nor for any
other epainetou "admirer, one who praises", whose words bring passing
enjoyment but "whose interpretation of our deeds [erg6n] the truth of the
matter will outdo [blapsei]". This dismissal goes together with Pericles'
devaluation of words compared with action, and with the warning about
praise that begins his speech. It brings to mind what Thucydides the narrator
says about his chronicle's superiority to fanciful tales that please for a
moment. 17
On the other hand Thucydides speaks of Homer with respect even when
expressing scepticism about specific elements in the epics. 18 So the contrast
between Athenian accomplishments and Homeric praise might have a more
pointed reference. It is hard to say too much about the specifics of events
dating back a century before Pericles, but (1) it is obvious to readers today
and was noted in antiquity that Athens played a small role in the Iliad and
Odyssey; (2) the Athenian tyrant Peisistratus and his dynasty were associated
with some standardization of Homer's poems in the sixth century; and
(3) also in the sixth century, probably during one of the Peisistratids' reigns ,
Athens quoted Iliad 2.558 to substantiate its right to the nearby island of
Salamis. This last datum comes from Aristotle and sounds credible; 19 the
diminutive place for Athens in Homer is immediately visible; and (1) and
(3) together are enough to show that Homeric authority mattered concretely
in the Greek world and Athens lacked the status that Athenians would have
thought they deserved.
148
MYTH
As for (2), the ancient testimony speaks confusingly about what Peisistratus
and his sons did with Homer. The pseudo-Platonic dialogue Hipparchus,
written in the fourth century , claims that this Hipparchus (son of Peisistratus ,
the most popular of his successors) both ekomisen "provided" the Iliad and
Ody ssey to Athens and established the rules for Athenian rhapsodes reciting
the epics. Together with other evidence this passage has been taken to show
that the clan of Peisistratus , the Peisistratids , established a "Panathenaic
rule " that the rhapsodes must follow in adherence to a strictly ordered
Homeric text. At the very least the Peisistratids encouraged the belief that
they sponsored and controlled performances of Homer , as they were credited
with having made tragedy available .20
According to later and less reliable sources , the family of Peisistratus
accounted for more than the sequence in which to read Homer 's epics.
Strabo and Plutarch pass along the report of an interpolation: Athenians in
the sixth century inserted the lines that made Salamis a long-time possession
of their city. Strabo says that either Peisistratus or Solon inserted the lines,
Plutarch and Diogenes insisting it was Solon and not Peisistratus, an insistence
that implies an older tradition crediting Peisistratus . Other late authors
speak of a complete "Homeric recension ", again the work of Peisistratid
Athens , that collected the fragments that were being recited in a hodgepodge
by rhapsodes into a standard edition of Homer .21
Whichever story is closest to the truth , and whatever the Athenians believed ,
the story associates an appropriation of Homer , for patriotic purposes , with the
tyranny that many in Athens looked back on as a golden age. Homer may
have been the legacy of all Greeks but he also belonged to Peisistratus. 22
"We" however (Pericles is saying) , Athenians living under democracy , no
longer need the tyrants ' subterfuge . The Athenians may have won territor y
on paper in the days of the Peisistratids ; in the time of Pericles they won on
land and sea.
If Pericles did cast Homer off not only because actions count for more
than fancy words , but also because "Homer " signified an outmoded tyranny ,
then a rival funeral speaker who defers to the storytelling poets of old
appears to be a speaker wedded to the city's traditions , and less committed
to its democratic present. Then the M enexenus acknowledges the poets '
testimony as a way of honouring the longstanding city of Athens , independent
of its recent incarnation as a democracy.
There is a question at work here of whether to equate a state with its form
of government. An Athens identified with its democratic constitution might
feel the need to reject any tradition tainted by its association with tyrants.
But Athens seen as a place and a legacy can embrace what Peisistratus
accomplished on the city 's behalf , for that city is only contingently - maybe
only transitorily - a democracy. The Menexe nus itself says that despite going
by the name of "democracy " Athens is an aristocracy in vital respects , as if
to keep the city distinct from its present form of government. 23
149
MYTH
It is fitting for another reason that Athenian identity should be at stake in
Socrates ' remark about poet-chroniclers. This theme - what mak es Athen s
the thing it is now - runs through the sequence of mythic passages , from
Athena 's competition with Poseidon down to the military history ; and ,
between these two, the main myth recounted in the Mene x enus, the one this
chapter is focusing on , this dialogue 's version of the story that the first
Athenians were first born from the Athenian earth.
In other ways the passage is a motley one. The opening and closing myths
are spoken of, not told. They generate their lessons quickly and directly -
they exist only in order to lead to those lessons. The competition between the
gods proves the city 's merit ; its mythical military history demonstrates the
altruistic pan-Hellenism of Athens . These are the morals that Athenians
regularly drew from these stories . Indeed Socrates can cite the myths and
their morals in such shorthand fashion exactly because they are customary
tales and he takes them in the customary way. Neither content nor import
needs revisiting.
But between the beginning and end of this myth-passage Socrates recounts
a myth rather than just ref erring to it, and when he does he makes that myth
a new story with new meaning. Ge (earth) brought forth the first people of
Attica , ancestors of all subsequent Athenians .24 True mother that she was,
Ge nursed the babies she had borne. She fed them with spontaneous growths
of wheat , barley and olives; then she saw to the first Athenians ' education
under the care of gods who taught them the technai "professions , skills"
necessary for war and peace.
Some version of autochthony , as birth from the native land is commonl y
known , had been told in Ath ens before the birth of Socrates . Neverth eless
the Menexenus does not draw a single familiar moral from autochthony but
finds several implications in the story about Athens 's place in the larger
world. This speech does not even tell the old story in the old way. This
alleged spoof that allegedly recycles cliches of previous speeches in fact
departs from the tradition of Athenian autochthony. Who the Athenians '
parents are, the circumstances under which they make their babies , and who
cares for the first local people , are all transformed in this telling . The
M enex enus puts autochthony to new work. This is the dialogue 's true mythic
subject. And together with the history of Athens that follows, this myth tells
a new story about the city.
Plato's myths
This myth of autochthony operates within the context of the Menexe nus but
also against the backdrop of Platonic myths as a whole . Mythic passages
occur in Plato 's dialogues with enough regularit y that the reader of any one
of them needs to have some sense of the myths as a whole , with repe ating
features and certain persisting goals . 25
150
MYTH
The pages ahead might seem to interrupt this chapter's treatment of the
Mene x enus's myth , but general comments about myth-writing in Plato are not
gratuitous . There are numerous theories and pictures of the Platonic myths
afield among his readers ; it is surprising how many theories ignore the religion
in the myths , which is to say ignore the lives and the import that a given
myth had before Plato appropriated it for his own purposes. What follows is
an attempt to reorient the discussion of Plato 's myths before addressing the
Men ex enus, so that it becomes clear why we frame its autochthony strategy
in the way we do , against the backdrop of autochthony myths in Athens.
There is no other way to say it. The myths make trouble . From observations
about shoemaking or a geometrical proof , a dialogue swerves to tell what
Zeus decided to do about virtue . Plato 's dialogues labour at teaching their
readers how to reason , then conversation gives way to mythologizing as if to
throw that hard-won rationality to the wind . Should the reader swerve too
and replace rational inquiry with pious appreciation ? What becomes of
reading when Platonic writing becomes something so different?
Earlier generations emphasized the difference between philosophy and myth
in Plato's works. This is sometimes spoken of, in the dialogues ' vocabulary , as
the difference between logos "reason , speech, account , argument " and mutho s
"myth , tale , story ". And an interpreter might say, as interpreters did say, that
the myths in his dialogues let Plato explain what he could not know by other
means or what he could not say by other means. The philosophical logos
with its precision and logic suits one kind of truth but it cannot either grasp
or communicate those other truths , possibly higher truths , that the myths
concern themselves with: death and the afterlife , the origin of human beings
or of organized society, or of the physical univ erse.
Such a scholarly approach has piety on its side, but it lends itself to
excesses that obstruct interpretation . To say "These truths are ineffable " is a
conclusion , not a guide. And most philosophers today avoid discussions of
mystic insight and higher ways of knowing. It is not surprising that the philosophers
who read Plato should want to avoid dwelling on the myths ' mystic
natures. Instead , the consensus today emphasizes the closeness between myth
and philosophy for Plato. In the recent anthology that appears to have
defined this consensus, the editor 's introduction speaks of the philosophy and
myth in the dialogues being "interwoven " . One contributor , who explicitly
denies old commonplaces about Platonic myth and the unsayable or the
irrational , instead calls the myths "extended similes " , no more "outside "
the philosophical in the dialogues than any other simile is. Another author in
the volume reads the Tim aeus's story of creation in a way that shows how -
for that myth , anyway - an appropriate mutho s becomes indistinguishable
from appropriate logos.26
On this approach , the myths persuade and teach their readers. 27 This
function explains why interpreters do not need to classify Platonic myth as
radicall y different from Platonic argument. Not only do the myths continue
151
MYTH
the project of the arguments , this purpose that they have undercuts images of
Plato the mystic seer, possessed by Muses as he releases some radically other
type of discourse. Plato can always state his point in clear philosophical
language , even if he sometimes chooses to state it in mythical language to
reach audiences for whom philosophy 's vocabulary is unattractive or foreign .
This way of understanding the myths in Plato makes them resemble the
Republic 's noble lie, that falsehood to be promulgated inside the good city as
religious propaganda. But reading the myths as persuasive does not commit
you to the view that they aim down wards, whether towards the ignorant or
just towards the chronically ill-behaved. And some adherents to this general
theory of the myths distance themselves from condescending pictures of the
persuasion they bring about. Christopher Rowe calls the myths a "bridge "
connecting the dialogues ' arguments with the concerns and values that
Plato's non-philosopher readers might have. This horizontal metaphor (there
may be a ladder from heaven to earth but never a bridge) reinforces what
Rowe says in literal terms , that the myths may well bring equals to understand
one another , not necessarily inferiors to understand their superior. 28
David Sedley goes further. He interprets the myth of the afterlife that
concludes the Gorgias as an allegory restating symbolically what that dialogue
argued for with premises and logic. Certainly as allegory was practised in
ancient Greece it was directed towards an audience of insiders. An allegory
bypassed the ignorant , as riddles did, to inform the enlightened or the initiates.
Now the myths seem to aim at equals , not at the unwashed crowd that is
most often imagined as the audience for propaganda. 29
But if the "persuasion and pedagogy" view of Plato 's myths avoids the
simplistic sense of them as propaganda , in another way the question "What
does Plato mean to do with his myths? " still simplifies the reader 's task . The
question makes Plato 's intention when writing myths the end of the inquiry .
But one of the compelling features of most of the myths , as well as what
makes them such trouble for Plato 's readers , is that they lived a full existence
outside his dialogues.
This point leads to the second way in which the noble lie differs from most
mythic passages in Plato , which may matter more than the lie's being consciously
designed propaganda. The audience for the noble lie, unlike Plato 's
readers and unlike Plato himself and every other Greek of antiquity , knows
only a moralistically edited mythology. Growing up in the good city, children
hear no stories about the gods ' lusts , lies, form-changes or capricious infliction
of misfortune on mortals . Because their acquaintance with the myths
has been so restricted , when these people hear the noble lie it will say only
and definitely what their elders mean it to say. In fact the lie's meaning will
be all that the city 's rulers can mean when they repeat it, because the rulers
grew up learning the same expurgated mythology . It is as if the city 's young
people first learned an artificial language and then received instruction in
that language , from teachers who knew only the same language. Under such
152
MYTH
circumstances words can indeed take their meaning from the intent with
which they are spoken.
These audiences' condition contrasts with the condition of the audience that
hears the other myths in the dialogues - the audience that hears those myths
as opposed to overhearing them, as Plato's readers overhear the noble lie. As a
rule the myths go out to characters inside the dialogues, and to readers outside
them , who know a wealth of myths in excess of the catechism that Plato would
have pref erred people to have received. In just about every case except the
noble lie, Plato has to use a mythic language he did not create or prune
into shape.
Plato's scholarly commentators recognize the mythic raw material he works
into "his" myths. In the same recent collection, Charles Kahn identifies the
traditional antecedents to the Statesman's myth of the age of Cronus; Malcolm
Schofield shows what became of the mythic ingredients to the noble lie; for
Catalin Partenie's overview of the volume it is essential to begin a general
description with the traditional stories that Plato himself calls by the name
muthoi. To similar effect G. R. F. Ferrari distinguishes the contrived stories
that the Sophists used to illustrate their themes from the genuinely "religious"
mythopoeia in Plato. 30 And yet acknowledging that traditional myths exist
beneath the myths in Plato is only the first step in charting how the Platonic
stories arose from the traditional ones, where they changed or did not change in
the process , and to what effect. Because Plato's readers did not grow up in the
Republic's city, the stories and mythical characters they find in his dialogues will
carry surpluses of associations. It is an open question , needing separate inquiry
in each case, how these additional meanings amplify and deepen - or where they
reverse, negate and pervert - the Platonically intended meanings of the myths.
In the Phaedo Socrates associates himself with Apollo, saying he composed
a hymn to that god. Apollo brought lucid dreams like Socrates' own , and
health and wise counsel. But Aeschylus ' Agamemnon shows him to be a
distant god unmoved by tears, and the Iliad begins with his plagues and help
to the enemy. 31 As a figure devoted to Apollo Socrates offers insights worthy
of an oracle and shows friends how they can heal their souls; but his peers
might also find him Apollonian in his scorn for the tears of intimates , his
fondness for the city's enemy Sparta, or the plague of anti-democratic sentiment
he was suspected of having brought to Athens. As long as Apollo remains a
complex character, which will remain the case for as long as Greek religion
resists Plato's efforts to reform it, linking Socrates to him will potentially
mean more than the comparison was intended to mean.
Something similar occurs in connection with David Sedley's reading of the
myth in Gorgias, according to which that myth recapitulates the dialogue's
ethical argument. Sedley proposes that Zeus represents Socrates; which
means that Socrates is bringing a new soul-examining morality to Athens, as
Zeus (in this myth) brought soul-examination to the last judgement that
assigns human beings to eternal reward or punishment. Socrates as Zeus the
153
MYTH
Saviour and guarantor of the moral order: all very well. But this myth refers to
Zeus' "inheriting" his power from Cronus. The old stories make clear it was
a sons' revolt against their fathers that brought the new order. Is Socrates
another Zeus in this respect too? Meletus and Anytus could not have put
their charges more strongly than if they too had called Socrates morality 's
"Zeus the upstart " . 32
To return to Rowe's description of Platonic myths as "extended similes":
the difference between simile and metaphor nicely captures the difference
between how the Platonic myths tend to be read , as if (simile-like) commanding
the traditional materials that they invoke , and on the other hand an
approach to reading them that finds indefinitely more suggestions for an
interpretation in those traditional materials , as one can say indefinitely more
in explicating metaphors.
The work of a simile comes to an end when you give the point of it; for this
reason similes often appear together with a statement of their point. A new
car is like a ticket to the moon. You will travel 250,000 miles but at an outlandish
price. In a metaphor however one finds unspecifiably many resemblances. As
Stanley Cavell says, paraphrases of metaphors imply "and so on", 33 the
paraphrases having no definable conclusion. A car's front window is a shield
(whence its name "windshield") in that you drive holding it out in front of
you; and it protects you; and its forward face is convex ; and cars resemble
armoured soldiers; and they move in a phalanx; and so on. Even without
rhapsodizing over the power of metaphor one can see metaphor and simile
as two different figures that call for distinct ways of interpreting.
For Plato's reader , seeing the myth as a simile precises and constrains
interpretation. There are many reasons to pref er interpretation under such
conditions. But Greek myths make better metaphors than similes. The divine
characters in them possess tangled and conflicting attributes , and the divine
actions in the myths tend to be imbedded in larger complexes of story.
Plato's dialogues themselves seem to see myths this way, resisting exact
interpretation rather than yielding to it. This point needs to be made in specific
terms ; as a general description of all the myth-filled passages in the dialogues it
fails. The allegory of the cave, for one, loses nothing when it is translated into a
ranking of cognitive states and their objects . There is nothing supernatural in
this story. It is an extended simile as other Platonic inventions also are,
comparable with the Sophists ' stories that Ferrari speaks of. Again , in the
Symposium Socrates says that penia "Poverty" seduced poros "Resourcefulness "
and bore him the love-child Love. Entirely unlike the many-faceted particularities
who inhabit traditional myths , these divine parents amount to a
single abstract trait apiece; their Love is a two-splendoured thing. If penia
and poros were anything but need and capability, the story would fail , which
shows how barely it resembles a story to begin with. 34
Stripping a myth off to see the assertion inside is easier when Plato stitched
together the myth in the first place to fit that assertion. The dialogues also
154
MYTH
treat some traditional myths as no more than the lessons they can be translated
into. Thus the eschatological myths cited in the Laws, familiar tales of
afterlife reward and punishment that the characters acknowledge and do not
tell; 35 also the myths that Socrates cites in the Menexenus that prove how
good Athens is. Such stories become extended similes by virtue of being
treated that way.
A different treatment is evident in the Statesman. The Stranger in that
dialogue tells a story about alternating epochs, one in which a great providence
governs the universe and the contrary type - of which the present age is an
example - without divine rule, in which humans have to take care of themselves.
Depending which way the universe spins, the world experiences either a
golden age or the familiar circumstances of scarcity, labour and force. 36
The story aims at a moral. An imperfect time like the present calls for
pragmatic politics. There is no point in arriving at an idealized definition of
a statesman when the world in which statesmen must operate is itself so far
from ideal. But the Stranger's own remarks warn against over-emphasizing this
assessment of the story. He reflects that he hoisted a thaumaston ogkon tau
muthou "wondrous bulk of myth" and then used meizoni "a larger amount" of
it than would have been necessary for making the point. 37 To rule out utopian
thinking it would have sufficed to say that the people of the present do not live
in a golden age. But to explain the present age one therefore has to explain
golden ages, to make clear what is missing from this one. So the Stranger
drew on an old story about Cronus to create a contrast with the present era,
and under the spell of that story he shifted his attention from the known
world to this unknowable one that lies both behind the present and ahead of
it. The myth , meant to show up the imperfections of this age, created an age
that purported to be something positive and more than "not now". The
myth exceeded the purpose it was put to.
For example, the people in the golden age grow younger each year, and
they may or may not spend their time philosophizing. 38 We do not know, the
Stranger says. It is impossible to tell whether one philosophizes without
aging, whether a youthful creature facing no decrepitude ahead would make
the effort to practise dialectic. This is a deadly addendum to the myth's
stated purpose, which had been to proscribe those quests for definitions that
are suited to an ideal world. For it now seems possible that philosophy in
some guises has no home anywhere , neither in the present godforsaken world
where one should not seek the true (divine) statesman nor in the world that
has god at the helm , where one could live contentedly without bothering to.
The myth gives more than a statement about philosophy's limits. It reveals
a vision of the universe that yields up more than it might have been meant
to. The myth can be elaborated or paraphrased indefinitely further.
When some dialogues advise against the allegorical interpretation of
myths, it seems again that myths will not boil down into non-mythical
statements. One famous example occurs early in the Phaedrus, when Socrates
155
MYTH
demurs from giving a naturalistic explanation for the myth about Boreas and
Orethyia. Is this myth about the north-wind god's kidnapping a maiden just
a way of saying - is it an extended simile that says - that a gust of wind blew
the girl off a cliff? Socrates would rather examine his own soul than embark
on speculations about myths. This contrast that he draws makes myth the
domain of symbols that resist translation. 39
The warning in Republic 2 is more direct. Socrates is reviewing the myths
that attribute immoral behaviour to the gods. He recognizes that some
people interpret these stories so that they say something quite different from
what they seem to mean. Without denying the merits of such interpretations ,
without denying that they might say true things about the myths , Socrates
says they do not offer enough protection. Young people won't know which
part is the huponoia "hidden meaning". They will retain only the surf ace
meaning that Hephaestus bound Hera to her throne and was thrown down
by his father. 40 This caution begins with the thought that the myths do not
disappear when they have been unriddled. Something in their stories persists
despite having been interpreted.
A less attended-to passage from the Theaetetus returns to these issues.
In the Iliad the god Ocean is called "the origin of all" and Socrates equates
this claim with the Heraclitean doctrine of flux. Homer conceals the Ephesian
philosophy in myth , apparently to his credit , because Socrates criticizes the
Ephesians for delivering the same doctrine in open literal terms. On the view
that Plato's myths are propaganda , the mythic form ought to popularize the
doctrine , but here Socrates is saying the opposite. 41 Philosophers who tell
their doctrine straight let every passer-by take it in. Mythic form resists
widespread comprehension ; something is lost when you render a myth in
literal terms; the mythic form must contain something not accounted for in a
non-mythic version of the same doctrine.
Philosophers have to become passive about myths. This seems to be the
import of the passage in the Phaedo concerning Socrates and the command he
dreamt of "practice music " . Socrates thought the philosophical conversations
that he fell or jumped into were music enough . Awaiting execution he decides to
play it safe and write poetry; but a poem needs a muthos , and being incapable
of inventing stories Socrates takes some from Aesop. 42
This episode lets Plato put a contrast in Socrates ' mouth that illuminates his
own writing , between writing that begins by taking over known muthoi and
the music that Socrates naturally composed, or Plato 's variation on that tune ,
namely (spoken or written) philosophical conversation. If the purpose of
philosophical exchange is saying what you mean just as you want it said ,
then adopting muthoi departs from that practice by relinquishing control
over what is being said. Where writers draw their material from existing
sources they cannot control what the mutho s says and means.
What Plato means his myths to say is an inescapable question about them ,
but not the only question to ask. There is also: what would this myth be
156
MYTH
saying otherwise? What does it mean but for Plato? Like the Demiurge
forced to make the world out of recalcitrant matter, Plato must begin with
the wondrous bulks of myths that are already there before him. No doubt
the persuasive power of myth recommends myth to him , but he remains
wary of the mythic elements his readers have already learned , that he would
have pref erred them not to know.
So the myths , and certainly such stories as autochthony in the Menexenus ,
call for exploratory looking, first at traditional versions of the story being
told and then at any variations that appear in other dialogues. Autochthony
permits both kinds of exploration, for other versions of that story are known
from sources independent of Plato , and Plato also speaks of autochthony
elsewhere in his corpus. The Republic's noble lie in part retells an autochthony
story , and three other dialogues allude to it. Those passages are a
natural second stop on the path back to the Menexenus and its story about
where Athens came from.
Autochthony in Athens
It is tempting to analyse the autochthony tradition into distinct versions , for
all the reasons one usually has for dividing a large field of data into smaller
subjects. Readers have not resisted this temptation enough. Loraux identifies
two genres of the story; she labels them "Acropolis" and "Kerameikos" to
signify respectively autochthony as it was known in Athenian tragedies
staged in the shadow of the Acropolis - the Ion of Euripides the pre-eminent
example - and the kind that was promulgated by the Athenian funeral
orations , whose speakers delivered them in the Kerameikos quarter , the area
for graves and burials. 43
Separating the myth into two varieties leaves the Menexenus commenting
not on Athenian autochthony as such but only on a restricted variety of
autochthony proper to the funeral speeches. The speech of Socrates speaks
to the autochthony of the Kerameikos not to Acropolis autochthony.
Socrates is addressing Athenian rhetoric and not broader manifestations of
the belief in autochthony.
This restriction is already false. Other passages in Plato testify to the
importance he attaches to autochthony as part of the civic religion, not just
a feature of local speechmaking. The dialogues covered in the next section
equate autochthony with the origin of all people, but nothing in those
passages connects them with Athenian funeral rhetoric , as they would have
to be connected if a robust Kerameikos tradition governed such stories of
autochthony.
In any case, the taxonomy rests on slim evidence. To say that autochthony
takes a particular form in the funeral speeches, a form that then explains the
version of autochthony found in the Menexenus , one would need to cite
references to autochthony found in the speeches before Plato's. This rules out
157
MYTH
Hyperides and Demosthenes , whose funeral orations respond to a genre to
which the Mene x enus has contributed. For another reason it rules out Pericles,
who is silent about the subject . Indeed the word autochth6n only appears in
the Hi story of the Peloponnesian War "to refer to the claim of the Sicilian
Sicans to be autochthonous ", and Thucydides denies that claim. 44
The oratorical tradition of autochthony before the Menex enus therefore
consists of one sentence . Lysias says that the Athenians , "unlike most people ,
were not gathered together from everywhere to inherit a strange land after
having driven other people out ; but , being autochthonous [ auto chtho nes
onte s] held the same place as both mother and fatherland [metera kai
patrida] " .45 This sentence is consistent with autochthony as the Men exe nus
presents it, but also consistent with any number of other stories. Athenians
belong in Athens and the earth is their mother - this is not exactly going out
on a limb or spinning a yarn. And recall that as a non-citizen Lysias would
never have been allowed to deliver a funeral speech , nor encouraged to write
a patriotic speech like this one for someone else to recite . His oration must
have been a display-piece ; and to the degree that Plato is indeed commenting
on the tradition of public speeches that have been given in Athens , he will
not be referring to Lysias. 46
The allegedly sharp distinction between two great varieties of autochthony
thus comes down to one variation that occurs within the tradition , that the
stories sometimes credit Athenians en masse with having been born from Ge,
and sometimes attribute autochthonous birth only to one or two members of
the city 's ruling family . The tradition includes stories about a first king
Erechtheus ; sometimes he is called Erichthonius , but elsewhere Erichthonius
is the earth born figure and is the father of Erechtheus . Yet other stories
identify an even earlier king , Kekrops , also born from the earth . Euripides ' Ion
alludes to an autochthonous king , as the Iliad also does. But by Plato 's time,
and not just in Lysias , the earth had been claimed as the place of origin
for all Athenians. This seems to be the implication of a line in Aristophanes '
Wasps, for instance , a play from Plato 's childhood whose chorus of old
Athenian men claims to be autochthonous. 47
In fact the two kinds of stories work in tandem and the difference between
them is minor . In order to go from an ancient king 's earthly origin to their
own origin , people who tell these stories only need one additional premise ,
that they are descended from their founding king. And this is not a rare
belief. When the first king blurs into the first ancestor , what makes the king
also makes the king 's people.
The best proof of this point may be found in the premier representative of
the so-called "Acropolis tradition ", the Ion of Euripides. This play explains
the legitimacy of its title character Ion by fitting him into the family of
Erichthonius. The political consequences of his genealogy are widely recognized ;
for the Athenians with their Attic dialect , so close to the Ionian version of Greek ,
often reinforced their closeness with the Ionians of the eastern Aege an
158
MYTH
islands and the coast of Asia Minor. After the events in this play, Ion - now
established as part of the Athenian family - will go on to sire the Ionian
people. But in order for this play to be commenting about Athenians as an
ethnicity and Ionians as a related ethnicity, it must be assuming that the
origin of a people is the origin of their primordial king. It could not fulfil its
political purpose otherwise. So why the make-believe about crossing town to
hear a completely different version of autochthony? Stories about the birth
of the first king are one way of telling the beginning of the ethnicity. In
Adam's birth we all share earth.
The main source available today for the complete story of Athenian
autochthony dates to some centuries after Plato. The work by Apollodorus
called Library multiplies the unique first Athenian births: Apollodorus calls
Kekrops the first king and an autochthon, and then tells how the later figure
Erichthonius was also born from the earth. This latter story also contains
elements not found in Euripides, beginning with the god Hephaestus. According
to Apollodorus, Athena visited the workshop of Hephaestus seeking armour
and he tried to rape her. She eluded his advances - evidently ardent advances,
because Hephaestus apespermenen "ejaculated" onto Athena's thigh. She
used a wad of wool to wipe the semen to the ground. Once on the ground,
and possessed of the efficacy that the gods ' seed had in Greek mythology , it
impregnated Ge. After having given birth to the baby Erichthonius , Ge
turned him over to Athena , who kept him in a basket. 48
Despite the late date for the version in Apollodorus, many parts of this story
are attested from an early time. Athenian vase paintings depict Erichthonius
reaching up to Athena. The ritual re-enactment of this story at the annual
festival the Panathenaea involved a basket commemorating the one that
Athena kept the baby in, a container Euripides invokes in the Ion, which
tells of Ion as an infant cradled in the style of Erichthonius. 49
Given the antiquity of the tradition, it is noteworthy that the Ion fails to
mention the part that Hephaestus plays. Ge and Athena bear and rear
Erichthonius regardless of who his father must have been. The story seems
fully capable of going on as it was without him. And that is odd in turn because
the Athenian variety of autochthony has been interpreted as degrading women.
Hephaestus the phallic patriarch creates a son through his efforts alone. "The
first Athenian was not born from the union of the sexes, but from their disjunction".
In this ultimate rape fantasy , male wilfulness suffices to make
babies. Male babies suffice too, for that matter. There was no tradition in
Athens of autochthonous women. 50
The Ion's use of autochthony suggests that the story moves along well
without Hephaestus. Indeed something stronger is the case. The traditional
myth itself removes and replaces him. The myth is about his removal and
replacement. Hephaestus leaves his semen and the story never mentions him
again. The real action concerns two goddesses and the child who passes from
one to the other. This early king and founding father comes from Ge but
159
MYTH
learns from Athena , while the variation in the part that Hephaestus plays
suggests some awkwardness about him as the king 's father. If autochthony
excludes the species woman , this myth also excludes a species of man.
This is not to pretend that the myth is denying or supplanting patriarchy , as if
grounding Athens in proto-feminism. Quite the contrary , this myth poses no
threat to Greek patriarchy , inasmuch as its father figure does not belong clearly
in any category of idealized divine fatherhood. Zeus defines sky-god patriarchy ,
and other Olympians (Apollo , Hermes , Ares) resemble Zeus enough to count
as model father-gods. Poseidon and Hades are genuine patriarchs , even if
they draw their strength from the earth or the underworld. Hephaestus
stands alone. For one thing he possesses none of the other gods ' attractiveness.
Despised by his mother Hera , cuckolded by his wife Aphrodite , and (in the
autochthony story) refused by Athena , he stands at the opposite extreme from
Paris , the exemplar of desirability whose approving judgement those three
goddesses courted. The mythic tradition makes Hephaestus an outsider to the
Olympians ' company , ugly and lame where they are beautiful , hard-working
(they would never dream of labour) , a cuckold, and the one god the others
all laugh at.
Not just a literalization of his otherness - though it is that too - but a fact
presented to explain that otherness , is Hephaestus ' repeated departure from
Olympus. He does not have a stable place in the heavenly home of the sky
gods but is the only one of them who gets thrown off Olympus and stays
away in a pique. The Iliad recalls when Zeus hurled Hephaestus to earth , then
adds a story of Hera 's having done the same to him , perhaps as a consequence
of the first hurling (for she is ashamed to have a disabled son). "Hephaestus
is expelled from Olympus as if he did not really belong there" , one commentator
says. In a tradition outside Homer Hephaestus sends Hera a
beautiful throne from down on earth; she sits down and it magically binds
her. The gods plead with Hephaestus to return and release her from the
throne but he refuses. Finally Dionysus , the only god that Hephaestus trusts ,
gets him drunk and puts him on a donkey to lead him back up to Mount
Olympus. 51
Hephaestus ' distance from Olympus can be restated as his closeness to
earth. He trusts the vegetation god Dionysus . As the lame god he hobbles
bent to the ground ; as god of the forge he works in cave-like smithies with
metals taken from deep inside the earth. His original association may have
been with fire and especially the volcanic (geothermic) kind.
Sources outside Homer make Hephaestus the son of Hera alone , therefore
a counterpart to Athena the daughter of Zeus alone. As the product of Zeus
and notably of his head , Athena enters life untouched by the feminine
unpleasantries of reproduction. She belongs only in the sky. The origin of
Hephaestus is nothing but parturition , feminine unpleasantry unrelieved by a
masculine contribution. He even absorbs some of his mother 's duties in
connection with marriage and birth , and it is as a male god of childbirth
160
MYTH
rather than as the male Athena that Hephaestus splits Zeus' skull open so
that she can be born. 52
The other child that Hera produces alone is Typhone or Tuphaeon , himself
practically a son of Ge and certainly a monster. If deformed Hephaestus is
the cause of Hera's greatest rage against Zeus, the mighty effect of that rage
is Typhon. Hera prays to Ge and to the Titans imprisoned inside the earth.
She strikes the chthona "ground" and makes the new monster. 53 The nearest
kin to Hephaestus is non-Olympian and all-earth, even if it is one who
stands even further removed from the heavenly order.
In the Odyssey the physical distance between Hephaestus and Mount
Olympus is linked to his wife's unfaithfulness. Ares slips into Hephaestus'
bed telling Aphrodite that her husband has gone to the island of Lemnos to
be with Sintias agrioph6nous "wild-talking Sintians". This adjective recalls
the Iliad's barbaroph6nos "foreign-tongued ", said of the non-Greek Carians.
The Sintians are not only uncouth but probably also foreign. Lemnos was a
cultic centre for Hephaestus, another one being the nearby Samothrace , and
both islands were said to have been settled by the Pelasgians of Attica.
Herodotus says that when the Athenians drove these indigenous non-Greeks
out of Attica they settled Lemnos and Samothrace , the ones in Samothrace
introducing the cult of the hobbling Kabeiroi who might have been known as
sons of Hephaestus. 54
In other words, even among humans Hephaestus trafficks with outsiders.
That movement no doubt explains his frequent border crossing among gods.
Along with his faults, Hephaestus possesses a keen intelligence and skilled
hands. He makes beautiful objects, including emblems of civilization: the
shield of Achilles, but also Zeus' sceptre and aegis and Hera's bedchamber. 55
Homer calls him klutotechnes "glorious craftsman ", polumetis "of much
wisdom", poluphr6n "of much intelligence", and (in the Homeric Hymn to
Hephaestus) klutometis "of glorious wisdom" .56
Ancient creation stories could differ widely in the genus of creative power
they attributed to gods. Some create by giving birth , as when Ge spawned
Uran us, others by manufacturing. Hephaestus is fecund and earthy, bent on
reproducing , but also intelligently productive , thereby combining both ways
of creation in his person. Reproductive creation is aristocratic and natural,
more characteristically Greek. Manufacture is intelligent but it can suggest
servility; in any case the Greeks kept it segregated from reproductive creation.
Besides Hephaestus the deity most associated with skilful production is the
virgin Athena. The single name Hephaestus now represents a concatenation
of traits that the Greeks would have seen in tension with one another or even
contradictory.
Athenian autochthony as traditionally understood works to resolve the
contradiction embodied in Hephaestus. (You do not have to read this as a
problem with his non-Greek allegiances, but seeing Hephaestus as foreign
does imply that autochthony tried to constitute Hellenic ethnicity even
161
MYTH
before Plato.) The story begins with the contradiction brought to the fore:
Athena visits her brother 's workshop in search of weapons, one skilled expert
to another. His sexual arousal reasserts his phallic identity. Now he is both
an intelligent artisan and a man of earth , and now the narrative sets about
removing him from its action.
First is Athena's refusal. She will not touch the ejaculate , which does not
belong on her. She wipes it off with wool , because Athena 's defining technology
is weaving, and she interposes that technology between herself and her brother's
fertility. Her gesture says to his advance "I am a god of intelligence "; and the
next move , throwing the bespermed wool to the ground , says "This part of
you belongs with Ge".
Having issued his semen , Hephaestus disappears from the story, even
before his son is conceived. Ge and Athena together take the father 's place.
Ge is fertile and magical ; she contains ores and dark places and makes
volcanic fires. Athena belongs on Olympus just as decidedly as the earth
could not go up a mountain. Besides weaving she gave bridles and flutes to
mortals. Thus , she and Ge can divide Hephaestus ' attributes between them.
As a god of skilled activity he resembles Athena , while as a chthonic god he
is more like Ge.
The myth therefore separates techne from earthy fertility and magic , and
continues to distinguish the two. The baby Erichthonius leaves Ge to go to
Athena , and this move makes him Athenian. The vase paintings alluding to
this myth focus on his movement from mother to nurse because the myth
exists to mark the difference between those two, and the Athenians ' progress
from one to the other.
Once with Athena , Erichthonius lies in a basket . The basket is the closest
thing to a uterus Athena uses, as the wool she wiped Hephaestus ' semen with
was the closest she would come to touching it. Basket and wool belong to
her technology of weaving. The founding of Athens , and perhaps what
makes Athens Greek rather than Pelasgian , depends on separating conscious
intelligence from nature's magic . Speaking non-mythically: did those Pelasgian
natives represented by Hephaestus actually father the first Athenians? It does
not matter , because the Athenians ' mothers define them now. They began in
the magically nourishing earth, but then supplanted it with the powers of
human intelligence. The Athenian dynasty can begin once governing intelligence
separates from the land to be governed.
Autochthony in Plato
In the autochthony myths before Plato , variations in the roles that
Hephaestus played served as a clue that his role was at issue for those myths ;
that their task consisted in ferrying Hephaestus away from the Athenian
dynasty. For often enough what varies from one version of a tale to another
is that tale 's special concern.
162
MYTH
Within Plato's dialogues there is no articulated genre of autochthony
stories comparable with the genre of myths he tells about the afterlife, but
multiple substantive references to autochthony still appear in his writings.
The variations among these references suggest at least two points of Platonic
interest in autochthony. His stories differ according to which ethnicity they
take autochthony to account for, and also in the roles they assign to Athena.
Both points of interest will turn out to matter to autochthony in the
Menexenus. Looking for Athena in the Menexenus reveals something radical
in this dialogue's portrayal of (Athenian) culture , while focusing on ethnicity
leads us to a peculiarity in the way that the Menexenus sorts humanity; that
peculiarity grounds the historical narrative and shows something about the
Platonic structure beneath that narrative.
Besides references to autochthony in Critias, Laws , Republic and
Timaeus , 57 there is a passage worth touching on in Plato's Sophist. That
dialogue refers to materialist philosophers as both autochthones and gegeneis
"earthborn". This is not a joke about the philosophers of Athens. The clear
example of local materialism would have been Anaxagoras, and he only
lived in the city, having been born in Asia Minor , and did not have autochthonous
ancestors. 58 Materialist philosophers come from earth in a bad
metaphysical sense, being connected to the earthly domain rather than to that
heavenly order that knows the Forms. They are earthborn in the same way that
matter is, which explains why they study matter as assiduously as they do.
By interchanging the words autochth6n and gegeneis in the Sophist , Plato
equates the Greek word for autochthony with what "autochthony" means
now, namely birth out of the earth. Etymologically the Greek word only
means that one hails from the auto "same " chth6n "land , ground ", always
having lived in this place ; being indigenous. It seems that Athenians believed
themselves to have always been in Attica before they claimed to have sprung
from its soil. Plato is therefore assuming the full-blown version of the
myth. Athenians come from the land because out of the ground. And this
means all Athenians, evidently committing Plato to the Kerameikos version
of autochthony - but really it ought to provide a reason for rejecting that
taxonomy , a taxonomy that would put Plato in a role he is not often accused
of, as propagandist to the Athenian folk. 59
Of the presentations of autochthony stories in other dialogues , two sound
cynical about the stories' political uses, sceptical that birth from earth ever
happened. These presentations occur in the Republic and Laws , where such
stories are assessed as political discourse. The Republic has the noble lie,
which Socrates calls "nothing new" and "something Phoenician-like " . In the
good city the elders of every generation will tell the young adults that their
childhood had been a dream. Not only hatched underground , they grew to
adulthood there too , dreaming of walking around in the open air and being
educated, when in fact everything they learned was implanted in their souls
through the earth. Because the earth put different metals in them the citizens
163
MYTH
belong to different classes of society. So the noble lie underwrites
patriotism - the land is everyone's mother - but not egalitarian citizenship. 60
As Malcolm Schofield observes , the Republic makes more of the lie's
differentiation between citizens than of its implications for civic unity. What
matters about this myth is that people have different metals in their souls,
which is not part of traditional autochthony. It does not even require that
far-fetched tale, which Glaucon tells Socrates he should be ashamed of
proposing to tell. A wild tale about earthly gestation is tolerated because it
helps to justify what Plato considers a metaphorical truth about social
stratification. 61
In calling his story "Phoenician" , Socrates evokes the founding of Thebes
by Cadmus, who came to mainland Greece from Phoenicia and sowed the
ground with a dragon's teeth . The first generation of Thebans grew from this
planting. The Athenian Stranger in Plato's La ws has the same story in mind
when he says people are credulous . See how many believe the Sid6niou
muthologema "Sidonian fairy tale" about armed men emerging from the soil
and founding a city. This must be the Theban tale: Sidon was a Phoenician
city and home to Cadmus. The Stranger says people accepted the story
"however implausible it is" , not sharing the public 's credulity though not
lamenting it either, any more than Socrates in the Republic laments his
future townspeople's willingness to believe the noble lie. 62
The cynicism in these passages, if that is the best word regarding a story
Plato wished were true , would account for the stories' being overheard in the
La ws and Republic rather than told. Socrates does not recount the noble lie
but describes the future telling of it; the Athenian Stranger in the La ws
observes how willing audiences behave rather than addressing such an
audience. The Theban origin of this story might account for the distancing. The
autochthony in question is the Theban variety. The speakers in these passages
might even use "Phoenician " as a euphemism that spares them from saying
"Thebes". Thebes has been called the anti-Athens of tragic theatre , 63 and
Theban autochthony could sound implausible to Athenians even if they
believed something nearly identical about themselves. Thus when Plato
shrinks from endorsing the truth of Theban autochthony he is more a loyal
Athenian scoffing at an enemy city than a subversive scoffing at religious
tales of origin.
As the version in the Mene xenus does, autochthony in Plato 's Critias and
Timaeus evokes the Athenian tradition. Those two dialogues are so closely
linked that the Critias takes up where the Timaeus ends. Socrates barely
speaks in either dialogue , but the Athenian Critias plays a significant role in
both , and in both he is the one who mentions autochthony.
In the second of the two dialogues , which Critias dominates , he identifies
Athena and Hephaestus as parents of all Athenians . Besides having a father
in common , these gods are united by their philote chnia "love of expertise "
and philosophia. How natural that they should have cooperated to make the
164
MYTH
andras ... agathous ... autochthonas "good autochthonous men" of Athens ,
and then to establish the city's constitutional order epi noun "in their
thought" , in the minds of those good Athenians. 64
Exactly how did Athena and Hephaestus make these good men? Plato
generally prefers not to repeat ribald stories, and the Critias restrains itself even
more than other dialogues do. Critias denies that Athena and Poseidon ever
quarrelled over Athens ; his pairing of the man-making siblings intellectualizes
them beyond all personality. So it is not surprising to find him using
vague verbs about the two gods ' pephukuian "having grown , having brought
about the birth of' and empoi esantes "making " or possibly "inserting " the
Athenians (inserting them into the soil). 65 The like-mindedness between
Hephaestus and Athena rules out rape as the cause of Athenians , but then
Plato replaces that explanation with one verb that says the men were made
(as the reference to the gods ' philot echnia also implies) and a second saying
they grew or were grown.
It could be that the two verbs specify what the two gods did separately ,
combining their actions in one sentence to emphasize the concord between the
siblings. Maybe Hephaestus made the first people and Athena tended them as
they grew. Such specialization fits with what Critias said in the Timaeus, in
his long story about Solon 's visit to Egypt. An Egyptian priest tells Solon
about Athena , who nurtured and educated "your land and ours " . This priest
makes the Egyptian city Sais a second Athens , perhaps in reply to Herodotus '
Historie s (which the Timaeus alludes to elsewhere). According to Herodotus
the Egyptians identified all the gods , the worship of whom then spread to
Greece; Plato reverses the order so that Athena cares for Athens first and
Sais a thousand years later , having received to sp erma . .. human "the seed of
you ", and subsequently the seed for Sais, ek Ges te kai Hephai stou "from Ge
and Hephaestus together ". 66
In this context sp erma cannot ref er to sperm or semen , even though the
word has that sense elsewhere . Ge and Hephaestus together did not make
semen. "Your seed" must mean "the beginnings of you ", something that
flowered into the Athenian people . This could amount to the old story about
autochthony with the improper first part cut out , as well as explaining what
the Critias means by "making " . Hephaestus and Ge produced Athenians
and Athena grew them with a nurse and tutor 's care.
One discrepancy remains between the Critias and Tima eus, that in one
story these gods make only Athenians and the other extends autochthony
to Egyptians too . In general Plato 's dialogues vary in their answers to
"Who comes out of the earth? " Egyptians do it, Phoenicians do it (which
also means , the Thebans) , and sometimes the barbarians together with
Athenians ; in other places only Athenians . 67 Autochthony stories seem to
be able to move anywhere on earth. This variation implies that for Plato
a main task for these stories is that of endorsing a particular ethnicity 's
status .
165
MYTH
One other variation involves Athena. In the noble lie she does nothing ,
while the Timaeus has her stepmothering the first Athenians, and the Critias
somehow credits her with having brought the Athenian population into
existence. Plato has put his finger on a puzzling aspect of Athenian autochthony.
The patron deities of Greek cities tended to be female, and citizens
might want their patroness to play the part of a mother. What to do when
she was an avowed virgin? Whether the worry is widely Greek or only
Plato's, it expresses itself in this variation among his versions of autochthony.
To bring citizens out from the soil is to force the question of what role a
protecting virgin warrior can play in mothering a city.
Autochthony in the Menexenus will comment on ethnicity. In fact the
Menexenus strains the myth so much, in the interests of making it yield a
ranking among nations, as to give away an important part of Plato's agenda for
this dialogue. Athena is crucial too. The funeral speech offers an astonishing
answer to the perennial worry about Athena and autochthony. This answer is
worth looking at closely, because it lets Plato do nothing less than reverse
the traditional logic of autochthony , a logic that had equated Athens with
intelligent consciousness as opposed to - standing apart from; supplanting - a
magical nature.
Autochthony and nature in the Menexenus
In his versions of autochthony Plato appears to be sensitive to the tradition
that distinguished Ge from Athena , not because he follows the old pattern
but in his focus on Athena. What is her place in autochthony stories, and
what work does she do? And so looking for Athena in the Menexenus's
version of the myth is the quickest way to see a new moral Plato wants to draw
from autochthony. It is still true that the Menexenus makes education come
before human culture. But that conclusion now has something provisional
about it, open to improvement in light of a deeper reading of the myth.
The place to begin is the most closely examined spot in the myth, where it
praises the earth's maternity. The earth of Athens abounds in crops to feed
Athenians. This proves what a mother she is. Women's bodies make food for
babies only when they bore the children themselves, not when they take
another mother's child. 68 Socrates uses the verb hupoballomai to describe the
actions of non-mothers; this verb emphasizes not the taking-in or adopting
that a foster mother or stepmother does, but rather the act of putting something
forward, presenting something , as an imposter mother does when she
announces that the babe in her arms is her own. As Loraux observes, hupoballomai
"suggests substitution or deceit". What other cities do for their
citizens is fraudulent. Specifically, it perpetrates the fraud that Athenian men
feared most in their homes. A woman procures someone else's baby and
presents it to her husband as hers (and his). Every Greek city other than
Athens becomes not just the non-mother but a vivid species of bad mother.
166
MYTH
Ion, in the play by Euripides named after him , remarks that "we suffer badly"
from a metruia "stepmother", as if the ideal of autochthony required belittling
every other kind of parental care. The Menexenus participates in this same
differentiation between mothers. 69
Surprisingly, the readers sensitive to gender politics have failed to remark
on another implication of the passage. Separating good mother from bad
against the backdrop of Athenian autochthony amounts to attaching this
verb hupoballomai to Athena. The story had Athena substituting Ge's baby
for her own; she becomes a pretender to motherhood , not despite her role as
patron of Athens but in the act of fulfilling that role. The move from Ge to
Athena would put all Athenians into the place of those unenvied other
Greeks who live with stepmothers.
Whether for that reason or another , Ge takes over Athena's place in this
version of the myth. She becomes first nurse and teacher to Athenians and
Athena moves into a secondary role. Ge nurtures her new babes pros heben
"until youthful prime; until puberty" .70 What would Plato consider that age
to be? Eighteen? Fourteen? But even a twelve-year-old is too big to be laid in
a basket and carried by girls. So Athena will not simulate a mother's early
care in this story; that care reverts to Ge. Earth bears and also rears. Athena
must content herself with educating adults.
When the education does begin , Ge has a group of gods available.
Socrates refuses to name the gods whom Ge entrusts with teaching the first
Athenians, but they must be more than one. Does Athena go from lone
instructor to one of a pair? These unnamed deities impart both technai andsomething
different from technai - training in the ktesin "manufacture" and
chresin "use" of weapons. 71 This rhyming phrase probably includes Athena
as warrior , though making weaponry was the domain of Hephaestus. As for the
peacetime technai, Athena is one of those teachers , but essential skills were also
credited to Apollo , Artemis and Hermes. Add in viticulture and agriculture,
and Dionysus and Demeter go on the list. Athena might be one out of six or
seven divine tutors, where once she had done all the teaching alone.
Ge claims other aspects of what had been Athena's cult. With Hephaestus
gone she turns into a virgin mother. Plato does not even have to amend the
tradition in this respect, for already in Hesiod's Theogony, early in that story
of the world , the earth reproduced both sexually and parthenogenetically.
She delivered Pontus and Uranus by herself , only later bred with Uranus. 72
The last example of Ge's supplanting Athena might be the most convincing
one just by being precise and small. In the contest between Athena and
Poseidon that Socrates alludes to , the tradition attributes Athena 's victory to
the olive tree she gave the city. In the Menexenus , describing the care that Ge
lavished on those first Athenians , Socrates tells of the wheat and barley that
grew from the Attic earth - and the olive tree too. The great gift from Athena
that had made Athens her city becomes one more gift from Ge. 73 The earth
has absorbed Athena.
167
MYTH
By assigning Athena's defining characteristics to Ge, the Menexenus
recombines the female figures that the old autochthony story separated.
Human civilization and its technologies no longer stand at a remove from
the fertility and magic of nature , and potentially in opposition to it; now
nature does the work of culture. For Athenians nature domesticates itself,
bringing forth wheat and barley without any prior work by farmers, and
providing for the first Athenians' education.
We observed that the Menexenus depicts education as a cultural process
founded by an originally natural event. This significant feature of Ge's early
care for humans shares a feature with other notable Platonic depictions of
learning: for learning to be possible in ordinary life, some extraordinary
learning must have taken place first. Some dialogues argue for recollection ,
according to which exposure to the Forms before birth lets you grasp them
again in embodied life. The Republic offers a mythical interpretation of "first
learning" in the noble lie, but also proposes the first educational act for
revolutionary politics , in which the philosophers establishing their new
regime cast adults out of the city walls and train the first batch of children. 74
It is in this spirit that the Menexenus depicts a team of gods teaching the skills
of civilization to the new people of Athens. All later Athenians providing for
their children's education are following Ge's example. Ordinary education
takes place now because a miraculous first act of learning once took place.
Human society began in the state of nurture.
Greek myths had spoken of divine education long before Plato. But the
disputatiousness among gods that Plato finds objectionable infected this
domain as well. Prometheus stands out as the figure who taught human beings
to make fire and how to sacrifice to the gods. His willingness to subvert
the divine order and deceive Zeus made this first education a trauma , and
the cause of humans' estrangement from their first fellowship with the gods.
Even what gods teach can separate human beings from their natural first
condition , as the differentiation between Athena and Ge symbolically indicates
in traditional Athenian autochthony. Human nature traces back to Ge and
human culture to Athena .
The final significance of this new Platonic autochthony is therefore its
optimism about education. Now nature generates the technai of nature: the
metals on the ground and also the skill at working metal; wool on the
sheep's back and the craft that turns it into clothing on human backs.
Loraux comments, on this aspect of the funeral speech, that Platonic
autochthony blurs the line between nature and intelligent conscious activity.
"The confusion between physis and techne is a systematic one in Plato". As an
example Loraux cites the noble lie, in which "autochthony is accommodated
to the artisanal production of the citizens". 75 Only the word "confusion" mars
this description , which otherwise acknowledges the remarkable implication
of autochthony as Plato reconceives it. Production (via human skill) does
merge with (natural) reproduction, as Loraux says. But Plato is not making
168
MYTH
the earth do the work of human technicians. That description implies that
the work of those technicians arises independently of nature. Plato sees the
human work in the technai as the fruit of nature: he is restoring that work's
natural status. Artisanal production too manifests nature's magic.
Autochthony and human difference in the Menexenus
The new myth's account of education will imply some things about Athenians
that are relevant to the historical narrative that follows, for it makes Athens
both naturally inclined towards learning and preternaturally situated to
receive it. Pericles bragged that Athenians teach the world never explaining
how they could have learned what they know. This myth fills in the gap:
Athenians are both the world's finest minds and its luckiest students.
But the autochthony myth matters more to the coming history of Athens
than as a description of Athenians considered by themselves. It participates
in the speech's distinction among kinds of people, Greek and otherwise. The
trouble here is that some of what Socrates claims to be shown by Athenian
autochthony actually undermines autochthony.
By comparison with the noble lie, the autochthony myth in the Menexenus
seems dedicated to human equality. Both stories make earthly birth a basis for
patriotism. The city is the citizens' mother, and as brothers and sisters they are
a unified group. But the noble lie distinguishes between unity and equality,
insisting on the people's mutual loyalty even as it inscribes class structure
into their souls. Civic unity for the silver-souled auxiliaries means obedience
towards their golden siblings the rulers, not equal authority with them. 76
Pericles had already spoken to the possibility of authority in democratic
Athens. Democratic culture was one thing, democratized governance something
else. The Athenians' equality in their private lives did not open public
offices to all citizens indiscriminately. All Athenians received equal treatment
under the law and yet those recognized for their merits had greater political
authority assigned to them. Pericles does not argue for this paradoxical
characteristic of Athenian society. He asserts that his city can enjoy all private
benefits of equality without risking incompetent leadership. 77
Here again the M enexenus makes more sense as improvement than as
mockery. For in a clear allusion to the speech of Pericles, meditating on the
city's being called a democracy, the Menexenus speech endorses a similar
claim to the one by Thucydides but also argues for it. What Pericles asserted
as fact, Socrates derives (if by somewhat perverse logic) from the Athenians '
collective birth. Despite going by the name demokratia the constitution of
Athens is an aristokratia "rule by the best". For example the city has always
had a king, though that position is based on merit.
Pericles would not have dared to speak of aristokratia however one took
that word, although the two speeches agree in contrasting the constitution's
name with the fact of rule by the best citizens. But in the Menexenus , rule by
169
MYTH
the best takes place because of the citizens ' equality rather than in spite of it.
The Athenians ' isogonia "equality of birth " causes them to honour isonomia
"equality before the law", to such a degree that they are able to install their
finest peers in office without courting tyranny. Their natural equality makes
stratification possible because Athenians know it will not deliver them into
slavery. What Pericles had boasted of the new speech accounts for. 78
In their private lives, in a parallel to being free from even the threat of
tyranny , the Athenians never fear slavery between citizens. Another motor of
world history fails to operate inside the city. No slaves or masters when they
all come from the same mother. 79
Still, it would take a blinkered interpretation of the two passages to call
the Mene x enus egalitarian . Rather than deny differences among humans this
passage projects them onto the world outside Athens , where the noble lie had
collected human difference within the city. This is not hypocrisy. Egalitarianism
tends to begin under conditions of inequality and at least at first it fosters
those conditions. Equality within a group becomes possible when that group
stands apart from another one, this internal equality heightening the difference
in rank between that group 's members and the outsiders. Sparta 's land-owning
citizens the Spartiates called themselves homoio i "equals , peers" while reducing
the Helots to subhuman status , and for the purpose of uniting their members
in endless war against their serfs. 80 (The English word "peer " makes this
doubleness of meaning clear: parity within the group , disparity between it and
others .) The Mene x enus similarly denies differences among Athenians , but
only in the context of enhancing differences between Athens and everyone
else. It will transplant the Republic 's three classes from one city 's interior to
humanity at large.
Because egalitarianism in general is ambiguous , this stratification of
humanity does not make conceptual trouble for the Menexe nus's use of
autochthony. Autochthony signified Athenian superiority before Plato. The
conceptual trouble comes in another way, when the funeral speech uses
autochthony both to set Athens apart from Greece 's other cities, and also to
bind all the Greek cities together. This double implication will prove productive ,
permitting the Mene x enus to find order in the events of international history.
And inasmuch as autochthony has come to mean Ge 's reabsorbing the role
of Athena , so that the city's place among the peoples of the world is guaranteed
by earthly nature rather than being imposed upon that nature , the history that
Socrates tells will follow natural law. But the analysis depends on forcing
autochthony into contradictory consequences. This is a measure of how
powerfully Plato wants both implications of autochthony , that he insists on
both despite their sitting uneasily with each other.
On one side is the superiority of Athens. This point appears early in the
speech , as soon as Socrates mentions autochthon y. These dead soldiers being
honoured at the funeral began their lives with a good birth. Their ancestors '
genesis "origin " was not epelus "immigrant ". Other Greek cities told stories
170
MYTH
of having been founded by heroes who came to their land from elsewhere, often
enough from a place outside Greece. Cadmus the Phoenician founded Thebes;
the Menexenus also mentions Danaus the Egyptian founder of Argos , and
Pelops (after whom the Peloponnesus was named) who came from either
Phrygia or Lydia. 81
Both legend and recent memory also told of Greeks ' peregrinations within
Greek territory. Many Peloponnesian Greeks, very much including the Spartans ,
represented their ancestral arrival on that peninsula as the "return" of the
descendants of Heracles. Socrates alludes to that legend of return in this very
speech. Athens aided the descendants of Heracles when the people of Argos
tried to stop them from settling nearby. 82
Within the retrievable past many Greek cities had sent out citizens to
found new cities. It is a distortion to call these cities "colonies" in the
modern sense, but they were subordinate in rank and esteem and expected to
defer to the mother city. Thucydides marks the beginning of the Peloponnesian
War with a fight between Corinth and Corcyra , a polis that Corinth had
founded and from which the Corinthians still demanded a subordinate's
deference. This difference in prestige sometimes expressed itself in stories that
embroiled the founders of the later cities in criminal violence , as it were
compromising the cities before they came into existence. 83
Socrates casts the difference among Greeks in terms that this chapter has
already examined. Non-Athenians live with their metruia "stepmother" in a
house other than the one they started out in. The lower status of cities
founded in the archaic centuries transfers to the cities founded by non-Greek
heroes. They all may as well be "colonies"; they all rank below Athenians
with their good birth. 84
But then Socrates lumps the Greek settlements together with cities founded
by non-Greeks. A passage only a few lines long harangues the non-Athenian
cities of Greece as not truly Greek. Athenians are eilikrinos "purely" Greek
and amigeis "not having been mixed " with barbarians. Other Greeks are
phusei men barbaroi ... nomoi de Hellenes "barbarians by nature, Greeks by
convention" , attacking non-Athenians ' ethnic identity with the Sophists'
opposition between nature and custom. Finally , switching to the vocabulary
of Platonic metaphysics, the speech says Athenians are autoi Hellene s
"Greeks themselves , Greeks as such " . Plato calls the Form of Beauty auto to
kalon "beauty itself ' using the same formula; and just as the dialogues contrast
the beauty of beauty itself with visible objects that are both beautiful and ugly,
so too the Athenians' being Greeks as such is a matter of their not being
meixobarbaroi "part-barbarian ", which is to say not being both Greek and not. 85
Despite falsifying other cities ' traditions , even falsifying traditions that this
same speech acknowledges , at least it is consistent as a gesture of patriotism.
Athens is the real thing as Greek cities go, hence the most Greek. The
sentiment is not far from the audacious claim that Thucydides attributes to
Pericles, "Athens is the school of Greece" , picturing a Greece whose other
171
MYTH
cities have to learn how to be Greek cities from this defining example of the
species. 86
This high rank for Athens also appears in an epigram that has been
attributed to Thucydides. According to a later source , he commemorated
Euripides saying patris d'Hellados Hellas Athenai "his fatherland was the
Greece of Greece , Athens". Simon Hornblower calls the verse "a fine four-line
epigram ... which I see no reason to deny him [i.e. Thucydides]"; but if
Thucydides did write these lines, he is saying in his own voice what Pericles
says obliquely , that by virtue of being something less than Athens the other
cities are thereby less Greek. 87
Modern analyses of tribalism and nationalism will find the disenfranchisement
of non-Athenian cities a familiar trope, the strange assimilated to the absolutely
strange . Plato takes up a Thucydidean theme and outdoes it, either in order
to improve on the speech of Pericles with a more thorough statement of
Athenian superiority, or to mock Pericles with an untenable patriotism that
implicitly rebukes patriotism as such.
Unfortunately for the familiarity of such a reading , the Mene x enus also uses
autochthony in a way that requires the other cities to be Greek. This contrary
implication of autochthony - unlike Athenian democracy , unlike Athenian
superiority - does not correspond to anything Pericles says. It feels inserted
into the funeral speech to serve a purpose. Socrates says that Athens acts on
behalf of Greece as a whole. The Greeks ought to stand together against
Persia , and sometimes they do, and when they unite against this common
enemy they can count on the altruistic pan-Hellenism of Athens. The reason
proffered is Athenian autochthony. Being born from native soil makes
Athenians love Greece as such. It led them to fight on behalf of Boeotians ,
to war more gently against fell ow Greeks than against foreigners , to release
Greeks from slavery.
The core argument is reasonable , assuming the premises. Autochthonous
birth means an origin free from external contributions , so the people of
Athens must be full-blooded Greeks. Being purely Greek they would be the
Greeks most concerned about the bloodline. But why should this concern
make them behave altruistically towards cities that have adulterated the
bloodline that Athenians love? Helping those cities only pollutes Hellenism
further. Athenian superiority had just mandated that non-Athenians not
count as truly Greek , but for the purpose of motivating Athenian foreign
policy they now seem to be quite Greek enough , even fully Greek, and all of
them as Greek as one another. 88
Trying to defend pan-Hellenism , the speech appeals to both of the customary
criteria for shared ethnicity, namely language and descent. Socrates says that
Athenians endured their wars against Persia on behalf of themselves and ton
all6n homoph6n6n "the others speaking the same language". Less than a
page later he urges that Greeks battle other Greeks with more restraint than
they show against barbarians, calling the fellow Greek homophulon "one
172
MYTH
from the same tribe". The non-Athenians who had been marked for panHellenist
treatment for using the same language as Athenians now belong to
the same tribe. 89
Plato is not the only person to appeal to more than one criterion for
ethnic identity . Birth and language both served that purpose. The word p hule
"tribe " may have connoted something more conventional by Plato 's day than
it meant archaically ; nevertheless membership in a phul e seems to have been
a matter of birth alone. To be homophulos with someone else is to share
ancestry with that person .9° Kinship could transcend political differences
even without uniting all Greece , as when Thucydides has the Ionians appeal
to their near-relatives the Athenians for help against Persia. 91
Meanwhile language is relevant to grounding ethnic identity perhaps as
early as the Iliad, which calls the Carians barbaroph6noi "foreign-tongued ",
the contradictory of homoph 6nos. In Herodotus , the Athenians equate to
Hell enikon "Greekness " with the combination of being homaimon "having
the same blood ", homoglo sson "same tongue ", and shared religious and
other customs . Jonathan Hall argues that Isocrates , around the time of
Plato 's death , articulated the shift from a genealogical basis for descent to a
"cultural " one in which language played a major role; Hall argues that this
shift fallowed after a time during which culture and descent had been
appealed to together . The M enexe nus is the ref ore drawing on the signifiers of
ethnic identity from its own time to construct a pan-Hellenic identity. 92
But however compatible the two criteria for identity are, or were treated as
being in Plato 's time , neither one can justify the altruism of autochthonous
Athenians . Sameness of language makes all Greeks equal to Athenians , or at
least - what matters to this argument - equally Greek . Athens might still be
the one city that nurses at its mother 's bosom while the rest eat substitute
food , but this difference cannot make Athens more Greek than the others if
Greekness is linguistic.
If Greek identity as sameness of language renders autochthony irrelevant ,
speaking of tribal kinship with the other Greek cities makes it false. Kinship
with other cities denies what the autochthony myth insisted on , that Athenians
and other Greeks come from different stock. The flat-out contradiction
becomes explicit when Socrates repeats this word homophul os later in his
speech. First , pan-Hellenically , the word meant other Greek cities; then the
historical narrative arrives at the Athenian battle between oligarchs and
democrat s and the gentle resolution the city made to that quarrel , the
Athenian population being indisposed to civil war because (after all;
remember autochthony!) the populace is homophul os.93 Whatever sameness
of tribe means , it cannot both unite Athenians with one another as joint
descendants of the earth and also unite them with non-Athenian migrator y
Greeks elsewhere.
What follows is that the funeral speech can call those residents of other
Greek cities fellow tribesmen or fellow Greek speakers , or both. What it
173
MYTH
cannot do is assert both Athenian superiority and Athenian pan-Hellenism.
Pan-Hellenism must deny what autochthonous birth , the basis for Athenian
superiority , asserts. For that matter , the speech's tripartition of humanity into
Greek Athenians , non-Athenian near-Greeks , and barbarians fails together
with its explanation for Athenian altruism. If autochthony determines ethnicity,
then Athens alone counts as Greek in a world that is otherwise barbarian.
There are two kinds of people in the world , not three: Athenians and others.
And if autochthony does not imply ethnicity , the word "Greek " means what
it had meant , but again the world has two groups in it, the Persian and other
non-Greeks on one side and all Greeks on the other , Argive and Athenian
alike. Whatever makes the Athenians Greek should produce a world with
two ethnicities in it, and yet Plato demands three .
The meanings of autochthony
Even if Plato included talk of autochthony only because all funeral speeches
did , he did not set the traditional story into his speech unaltered. The
Menexenus resists the myth in its given form , not simply moralizing with the
help of the story but rewriting the story, working against its traditional
narrative, so as to be able to moralize in particular ways:
1 The traditional myth foregrounded Athena to celebrate the triumph of
consciousness and techne over chthonic forces. Plato 's version reabsorbs
Athena into Ge, to suggest that Athenian culture is not a force distinct
from nature but is nature itself.
2 The myth set Athens apart from all other Greek cities, which lack the
same descent from local earth. Plato's version retains Athenian exceptionalism
but reinterprets the city 's superiority as the difference between
Greek and barbarian.
3 The myth said nothing about the city's relations with other Greek cities.
On Plato's version , Athenians ' pure birth makes them solicitous of the
welfare of other Greek cities, which are now understood as Athens 's
Greek peers.
The third change differs from the first two in that subverting the myth goes
so far as to violate its basic assumptions . What does it mean to find a moral
in the autochthony story that contradicts autochthony? Autochthony had
meant an absolute distinction between locals and others but Plato wants to
force it into pan-Hellenic duty. The conflict indicates the power of this
intention, that it seeks to establish the Greek status of non-Athenian cities
despite the doctrine of autochthony.
More specifically Plato 's funeral speech seeks to divide the world into
three populations . To discriminate among the three groups the speech puts
pressure on the myth of autochthony that that myth cannot bear.
174
MYTH
Of course the world has changed for Plato since Pericles spoke , when the
Persian wars and subsequent battles against the empire were receding into the
past. Periclean Athens could define itself as the Athens that was not at war
with Persia , for Pericles justified the great building project on the Acropolis ,
which would include the Parthenon , on the grounds that Athens no longer
had a quarrel with Persia. 94 Freed from focusing on the great non-Greek
enemy , Pericles comprehends the world in Greek terms: Delian League and
Peloponnesian League, Athens contra Sparta. His organizing pair of words
logos and ergon suits that world: Athens does the work of winning wars
while its enemies talk mere logos. There are two camps; perhaps attributing
articulate speech to the other camp, even if that is empty verbiage , requires
that the enemy be speaking Greek.
A generation and a half later , the Menexenus reflects a world in which
Persia wielded increasing influence , having set the terms of the peace with which
the M enexenus's historiography concludes. The next chapter will consider this
history at length; but already that much information suffices to show how
differently the two funeral speeches conceptualized the world's great powers.
Observers in Athens at the time of the Menexenus, who could not have
fore seen Macedonia's rise to power , may be forgiven for organizing history
around Persia and the Greek enemies of Athens. In retrospect Pericles would
have struck them as parochial for imagining a world politics with only two
players in the game. A sophisticated strategy for relating history now
appears to need at least three elements.
If the three elements arise naturally , which is to say that natural forces can
explain their existence , so much the better , for then history does not have to
be seen as chancy. A historical narrative can follow a clear trajectory , even if
the trajectory is the gloomy falling action that goes from Athenian triumph
over Persia to Persian triumph over all Greece. The myth of autochthony as
the Menexenus tells it (1) makes intelligence and education natural to
Athens , so natural that the Attic earth created them ; then (2) raises Athenians
(naturally, again) so high above other Greeks as to put those others into a
separate class of human beings; and then (3) establishes a bond (also natural)
among all Greeks against their common barbarous enemy.
The desired implication of the myth is a reorganization of humanity , along
natural lines, into three groups , in the interests of describing historical events.
If the myth cannot ultimately deliver this combined implication , it is not for
lack of effort on Plato's part. He inherited the story that his speech must tell
and there is only so much he can force it to say.
Notes
1 Portions of this chapter previously appeared as Pappas (2011 a, 2011 b ).
2 Men exenus: over nine pages of myth and history, 237b-246a; thirteen pages of
speech, 236d-249d .
175
MYTH
3 The only appearances of muthos "myth" as a word or root in Herodotus are
pejorative: Histories 2.23, 2.45. Compare Thucydides History 1.22.4: Thucydides
compares his own work to that of other historians granting that audience
members might not enjoy his history because of to me muth6des "the non-fabulous
quality " .
4 Thucydides History: Pericles on recognizing ancestors , 2.36.1; fathers , 2.36.2;
adults of the present , 2.36.3; omitting details , 2.36.4.
5 Clavaud (1980: 97).
6 In fairness to Pericles, there might be a simple reason why his speech omits the
past. The events that Pericles skips over belong to the Pentekontaetia , the fifty
years between the end of the Persian War and the start of all-out war against
Sparta . Only a bit earlier in his History (1.89-1 .118) Thucydides set out to detail
what took place during those years. Given that special effort to account for the
generation before the war against Sparta , it might not be surprising that Pericles
says as little as he does .
7 The denial that Plato is criticizing Thucydides constitutes a running theme .
Clavaud (1980): the alleged absence of references to Thucydides in Menexenus ,
146-47; no mention of Thucydides in connection with Sicily, 150; the entire
history a caricature of other orators , 166. "One will not be surprised that
Plato ... parodies Thucydides much less than you would expect .. . He was parodying
other , more typical orations " (ibid .: 171; our translation) .
8 Loraux falls into similar methodological problems in her treatments of autochthony
, especially Loraux (1993) with its sweeping assertions about autochthony
as portrayed "in the Kerameikos" , the version of the myth found in Athenian
funeral orations , which were delivered in the part of Athens called the Kerameikos
(on this classification see "Autochthony in Athens " below) . In her epilogue Loraux
admits to one major regret about her book 's argument : "As for my regret - its
name is Plato " (ibid.: 240). But her return to the subject in Loraux (2000), while
it may have assuaged her regret , does not undo the methodological problems
with her argument.
9 Another possibility would be that Plato meant his speech as a parody , but all his
original audience took it seriously; see Clavaud (1980: 34-35) . Aside from its
historical arrogance , this proposal defeats itself by admitting that orators after
Plato destroyed the evidence for his parody by altering the genre he had putati vely
pilloried . If they thought Plato wanted to write a serious speech and fallowed his
lead , then they turned the genre into a setting in which the Mene xe nus speech
looks serious. This possibility leaves the Mene xenus's status as parody unknowable
in principle.
10 Loraux (1993: 8).
11 Competition between gods , Menexenus 237c4- d2 . The quarrel is depicted on the
western pediment of the Parthenon. Athenian women voting for Athena and
losing their vote: Augustine attributes this version to Varro, City of God 18.9.
This version seems designed to explain something, such as the tightened criteria
for Athenian citizenship that Pericles supported in 451/0.
12 Plato : against stories that tell of gods ' quarrels , Republi c 2.378b-d; quarrels and
peplos , Euth yp hro 6a- c; Critias on Athena and Athens , Critias 109b.
13 On this distinction see Austin (1958: 271).
14 Menexenus: mythical wars, 239b; poets ' singing stories already, 239b; what no
poet has spoken of, 239c.
15 Clavaud (1980: 137-38) presses this point.
16 See Phaedrus 245a; Republic 10.607a. The Republic speaks of humnous "so ngs,
hymns ", which accords well with the verb humne6 at Mene xenus 239b.
176
MYTH
17 Thucydides History: Pericles on not needing poets, 2.41.4; rival histories with
fanciful tales , 1.22.
18 Ibid.: speaking of Homer with respect , 1.3; scepticism regarding the epics, 1.11.
19 Aristotle Rhetoric 1.15, l 375b30.
20 "Plato" Hipparchus 228b. On evidence for a Panathenaic rule Davison (1955: 7);
Isocrates Panegyricus 159, Lycurgus In Leocratem 102; Plutarch Pericles 13.6,
Diogenes Laertius Lives of the Eminent Philosophers 1.57. Boyd (1995) is sceptical ,
but Nagy (1992: 50) finds it plausible that some rule of performance existed
consistent with the Hipparchus's testimony .
21 Interpolation: Diogenes Laertius Lives of the Eminent Philosophers 1.57; Plutarch
Solon 10.1; Strabo Geography 9.394. See Davison (1955: 16). Recension: Cicero
de Oratore 3.137; Palatine Anthology 11.442. On this evidence and how to
appraise it see Boyd (1995: 35-36); Nagy (1992: 47--48). Boyd (1995: 42) calls
the grounds for believing in a recension "shaky ancient evidence "; Nagy (1992:
42-52) implies as much when he reads the tradition as the metaphorical
expression of a truth about epics' reaching fixed form . Parallel stories from
Sparta attribute the Homeric texts to Lycurgus: Aelian Varia Historia 13.14;
Plutarch Lycurgus 4.4; see Boyd (1995: 36n.3).
22 Zatta (2010) on Peisistratus and the golden age; see "Aristotle" Constitution of
Athens chapter 16, "Plato" Hipparchus 229b.
23 Menexenus 238c-d.
24 The Greek he ge translates as "Earth " the name of a personified being and also
as the neutral physical object "the earth " . Here the capitalized "Ge" will be used
as a personified being 's name.
25 For a synopsis of scholarly materials before 1986, see Smith (1986: 20n. l ).
Frutiger (1930) is still required reading . On the dominant genre - myths about
reward and punishment after death - see Annas (1982), more recently Fussi
(2001). But Partenie (2009a) promises to become the work standardly consulted ,
and this section will make special reference to some of the papers in that
collection.
26 Partenie (2009c: 19); "extended simile ", Rowe (2009: 135); muthos and logos in
Timaeus , Burnyeat (2009: 178-80) .
27 Also see Partenie (2009b ), which advances this point more explicitly than any of
the contributions to Partenie (2009a).
28 Rowe (2009: 144). See also Pappas (2011b) .
29 Sedley (2009).
30 Platonic myths and traditional antecedents: Kahn (2009: 150-51); Schofield
(2009: 106- 9); Partenie (2009c: 2); Ferrari (2009: 128).
31 Apollo: Socrates and , Plato Phaedo 6la-b (cf. Apolog y 21 b); distant god ,
Aeschylus Agamemnon 1075, 1079; plague and aid to enemy, Homer Iliad 1.43- 52.
32 Sedley (2009).
33 Cavell (1969: 74-81).
34 Allegory of cave not supernatural, Kahn (2009: 148); birth of Love, Symposium
203b-c .
35 Plato Laws 10.903b-905d . See Stalley (2009).
36 Plato Statesman 269c- 274d.
37 Ibid .: 277b.
38 Ibid .: growing younger, 270e; not known whether they philosophized, 272c- d.
39 Plato Phaedrus 229c- 230a.
40 Plato Republic 2.378d.
41 Plato Theaetetus: Ocean origin of all, 152e (Homer Iliad 14.201); Ephesian
philosophers reporting this doctrine openly , 180d.
177
MYTH
42 Plato Phaedo: dream command to work at music, 60e; poetry needs muthoi and
Socrates takes his from Aesop, 61 b. Betegh (2009) comments on Socrates '
putative inability to invent muthoi.
43 Loraux (1993: 8).
44 The word autochthon in Thucydides , History 6.2.2; "the claim of the Sicilian
Sicans ", Pelling (2009: 4 71 ).
45 Lysias 17.
46 On Lysias and performance , Herrman (2004: 27).
47 Autochthony for Erechtheus , Iliad 2.547-48; for Erichthonius, Euripides Ion
267-68 ; for Kekrops , Apollodorus Library (below); for all Athenians , Aristophanes
Wasps 1075-76. It should go without saying that comedy belongs as
close to the Acropolis as tragedy does; but Loraux (1993), which contains a
chapter titled "The Comic Acropolis ", never mentions Wasps.
48 Apollodorus Library: Kekrops , 3 .14.1; Erichthonius , 3 .14.6. Guaranteed efficacy:
no Greek myth reports a male god 's sexual act without an ensuing pregnancy.
The Greek gods were perfect in some respects, if not morally .
49 Thucydides History 6.56.1 speaks of a basket to be carried by a maiden en
pompei tini "in some procession ", though this is not necessarily the Panathenaea.
Euripides Ion: Ion had been placed in an aggos "vessel", 1398; covered with
mimemata "imitations " of Erichthonius , 1429.
50 Autochthony degrading women , Saxonhouse (1986: 258); Hephaestus makes a
son, Loraux (1993: 128); "first Athenian ", Loraux (2000: 24); no autochthonous
women in Athens , Loraux (1993: 78-79 , 115n.17). See Hesiod Works and
Days 90 about the lives of human beings prin "before" the appearance of a
woman.
51 Hephaestus: lame, Iliad 18.397, Odyssey 8.308; traps Ares and Aphrodite in his
bed , Odyssey 8.266- 366; thrown to earth by Zeus, Iliad 1.586- 94; again by
Hera , Iliad 18.395-405 ; "Hephaestus is expelled ", Rinon (2006: 6). Rinon
develops this picture of a suffering Hephaestus with human characteristics , though
extrapolations to the god as "tragic" are less convincing. On visual evidence for
Hephaestus ' return to Olympus , see Pausanias Description of Greece 1.20.3; one
literary allusion occurs in Pindar , fragment 283. Delcourt (1957: 78-79); also
Hedreen (2004); Seeberg (1965).
52 Hera the only parent for Hephaestus , Hesiod Theogon y 927, Homeric Hymn 3
to Pythian Apollo 317- 18, Apollodorus Librar y 1.3.5. See Loraux (1993: 128);
but she is too attracted to the parallelism between Athena and Hephaestus (ibid.:
25). Hephaestus and birth and marriage: Naxos and Samos both associated his
birth "with rights of marriage or of progamia ", Walton (1960: 287).
53 Typhon child of Ge, Hesiod Theogon y 820-22. Homeric Hymn 3 to Pythian
Apollo: Hera and Typhon , 307- 55; Hera bears Typhon alone, 307; her anger
toward Hephaestus, 317- 18; prayer to Ge et al., 335- 37; chthona , 340.
54 Ares about the Sintians , Homer Odyssey 8.294; barbarophonos, Iliad 2.867.
Herodotus Hi stories: Pelasgians settling Lemnos , 6.137-40; settling Samothrace
with Kabeiroi , 2.512. On Kabeiroi see Detienne and Vernant (1978: 269-72) ;
Levin (1959: 332).
55 Homer Iliad : shield of Achilles, 8.469- 613; sceptre of Zeus, 2.100- 102; aegis of
Zeus, 15.307-10; Hera 's chambers , 14.166-67. Also see Hesiod : Pandora ,
Theogony 571- 72, Works and Days 60- 71; her head-dress decorated with lifelike
animals , Theogony 584. See Rinon (2006: l0n.34). Rinon oversimplifies in
saying "Hephaestus ' artistic activity is . . . deeply connected to his fall" (ibid.:
19). The idea of redemption through fine artmaking eases the contradiction that
Hephaestus represents , and which the myth of autochthony is wrestling with.
178
MYTH
56 Homer: klutotechnes , Iliad 1.571, 18.143, Odyssey 8.286; polumetis, Iliad 21.355;
poluphr6n, Iliad 21.367, Odyssey 8.297; klutometis, Homeric Hymn 20, 1. For
these epithets and for the god 's cleverness of technique that extends beyond
beautiful objects to technological marvels , see Holmberg (2003: 7).
57 Loraux comes to different conclusions about these passages: Loraux (2000: 116--21).
58 Anaxagoras from Clazomenae: Diogenes Laertius Lives of the Eminent Philosophers
2.6, Plutarch Pericles 4.4.
59 Plato Sophist: matter-lovers autochthones , 247c; gegeneis , 248c . On the changing
meaning of autochth6n in Athens see Rosivach (1987). See Plato Statesman
27la-b , which speaks of all human beings in the age of Cronus being gegeneis
"earthborn " . We pass over that passage here because (1) it does not mention
"autochthony ", (2) it removes birth from earth to an era radically separate from
the present , and (3) within that other time all humans are born from earth , not
just one city 's people. But note the Stranger's comment that one should not
disbelieve such stories (ibid.: 271 b ).
60 Plato Republic: the lie meden koinon "nothing new" and Phoinikikon ti "something
in the Phoenician manner ", 3.414c; citizens grown in earth , 3.414d- 415c.
61 The noble lie and its politics , Schofield (2009). Glaucon chides Socrates ,
Republic 3.414e.
62 Plato Laws 2.663e . The word muthologema implies the speaker's disbelief as its
root muthos does not have to.
63 Zeitlin (1990).
64 Plato Critias: Hephaestus and Athena having koinen phusin "shared nature ",
unified by philotechnia and philosophia as well as parentage , 109c; good autochthonous
men, 109d. Note that andras refers to men in the gender-specific
sense. These are male human beings Critias pictures having come out of the soil.
65 Plato Critias: no quarrels among gods, 109b; gods making and growing humans ,
109d.
66 Plato Timaeus : Solon and Egyptian priest , 23d-e ; ethrepsen kai epaideusen "she
nurtured and educated " Athens and Sais, 23d; sperma from Ge and Hephaestus ,
23e. On overtones of Herodotus in Timaeus see Herodotus on sameness of religion.
Almost all the names of the gods went from Egypt to Greece , Histories 2.50 .
Other echoes include erga ... mega/a kai thaumasta " great and wondrous deeds ",
Timaeus 20e; cf. Histories 1.1. W~cowski (2004: l 46n.22). The motif of Egyptian
priests ' educating the recently ascendant Greeks is also common to the two
works: Histories 2.143, Timaeus 22b-23b.
67 Again Plato Statesman 27la-b , which posits all people of the golden age as
earthborn , is relevant .
68 Menexenus 238a.
69 Loraux (2000: 90). Ion on stepmothers: Euripides Ion 1330.
70 Menexenus 238b.
71 Ibid.
72 Hesiod Theogon y : Ge bearing Uranus alone , 126; making Pontus without
philotetes "love, friendship ", 132; breeding with Uranus , 133.
73 Mene x enus 238a .
74 Plato: recollection , see esp. Phaedo 72e- 73a; revolutionary education , Republic
7.540e-7 .54la.
75 Loraux (1993: 127n.76).
76 See especially Schofield (2009).
77 Thucydides History 2.37.1.
78 Menexenus: aristokratia, 238c- d; Athenian kings , 238d; isogonia and
isonomia , 239a.
179
MYTH
79 Menexenus 239a. The narrative ahead will associate several events with real or
threatened enslavement.
80 Spartan homoioi: Xenophon , Constitution of the Lacedaimonians 10.7; cf. the
implicit appeal to similarity among citizens in Herodotus Histories 3.55.1.
81 Menexenus: ancestors ' genesis, 237b; Danaus and other city fathers , 245d . Some
cities did claim to have also begun autochthonously. Herodotus calls Arcadians
and Cynurians autochthonous , Histories 8. 73; but they were no political
competition for Athens. See Loraux (2000: 14-16).
82 Menexenus 239b. Lysias' funeral speech elaborates on this early Athenian
contribution to Greeks ' finding homelands: Lysias 2.11-16.
83 Thucydides, History: what started the war, 1.23.6; Corcyra and its own "colony "
Epidamnus , 1.24; Corinth hating Corcyra for being disrespectful , 1.25.3-4;
Corinthians saying "We did not establish [Corcyra] in order to be insulted ",
1.38.2. Murderous city founders: Tlepolemus and Rhodes , Iliad 2.661- 69,
Pindar Olympian Ode 7.27-33; matricidal Alkmeon and Akarnania , Thucydides
History 2.102.5-6 , Plutarch Moralia 7723-73b , Pausanias Description of Greece
1.43.7. These citations all appear in Dougherty (1998).
84 Menexenus 237b.
85 Ibid.: 245d: Athenians eilikrin6s Greek and amigeis; other Greeks barbarians by
nature ; Athenians autoi Hellenes and not meixobarbaroi. On this eilikrin6s see
Loraux (2000: 118-19) . For this vocabulary in Plato 's metaphysics see Republi c
5.479a - b, Symposium 21 la - b.
86 Thucydides History 2.41.1.
87 Thucydides on Euripides , Page (1981: 307); "a fine four-line epigram ", Hornblower
(2004: 24). Thanks go to Tad Brennan for this reference.
88 Perhaps to keep the number of categories at three , the Menexenus says
nothing about ethnic divisions within Greek ethnicity . The Athenians sometimes
played up their Ionian ethnicity , casting Ionians as the antipodes to the
Peloponnesian Dorians. See Connor (1993) . But Plato does not even nod at
those concerns .
89 Menexenus: homoph6nos , 241e-242a; homophulos , 242d.
90 Many cities subdivided their population into phulai. Several names for phulai in
Peloponnesian cities are the same from city to city, prompting speculations that
these tribes represent archaic ethnic subdivisions ; but the evidence about phulai
is mostly classical, making such proposals hard to defend (Hall 2007: 47-48).
Cleisthenes created the phulai of Athens , Herodotus Histories 6.131.1 ; this
probably means that he replaced the traditional basis for membership with a
new arbitrary one, and Athenians would not subsequently have seen their phulai
as an age-old inheritance . Nevertheless , within the new tradition membership
continued to be based on birth .
91 Thucydides History 1.95.1. The Ionians ask Athenians to lead the anti-Persian
fight kata to x ungenes "because of our kinship " . On political uses of "kinship"
(though many examples have to do with an individual 's ties to another political
entity), see Jones (1999).
92 Carians , Homer Iliad 2.867; to Hellenikon , Herodotus Histories 8.144;
fourth-century shift , Hall (2002: 172- 211; cf. Hall 1997: xiii).
93 Menexenus: other cities homophuloi , 242d (already cited) ; Athenian populace
homophulon, 244a .
94 The story is ancient but has also been disputed since antiquity. The Greeks
allegedly swore, before the battle of Plataea in 479, not to rebuild the temples
that the Persians had destroyed on the Acropolis of Athens. These would make
a more fitting memorial to Persian aggression in their ruined state. Then in
180
MYTH
mid-century, more than a decade before the war with Sparta , Pericles convinced
the Athenians to approve the ambitious building project that would include the
Parthenon and Propylaea , partly on the grounds that the oath no longer applied
now that Athens and Persia had agreed to cease their hostilities. See Boedeker
(2007: 53); Rhodes (2010: 17).
181
8
HISTORY
Philosophical history
As short as it is, the Menexenus would shrink to nothing without the historical
section of the funeral speech .1 The dialogue would also be livelier without
this report on a century of Athenian history that has the dryness of a bad
caricature of history teaching. Battle follows battle with sparse detail . Some
events go together , but in many cases cause and effect are hard to make out
amid improbably splendid Athenian motives on one side and inexplicable
bad luck on the other.
Remarkably , the history manages to have a tedious "factual " tone without
being factual. No one would call it objective. Socrates ' narrative excuses
Athenian actions while putting other states ' actions in the worst light. The
partisanship is ponderous. And yet readers are more likely to attribute playfulness
to the Menexenu s's historiography than any other trait .2 Sometimes they take the
distortions of history to be satirizing Athenian patriotism , deflating its public
rhetoric , or lampooning the very idea of historical inquiry. Plato cannot
think that this garbled log of wars and the entities that fought them is a
fruitful way to recount the Athenian role in the preceding century 's events . 3
The only sequencing principle , to those readers ' eyes, is the steady dissolution
of the Greek world. 4
Assessing the history in the narrative calls for consulting other historical
writings of this time. If Plato is distorting the facts , the rival sources will best
reveal his distortions. But Plato 's readers need to examine his history from
an internal perspective as well, seeing how it fits among his other dialogues
and therefore how it represents Plato. This second approach , rare among
commentators , may free Plato 's history from a purely reactive interpretation
that reads every phrase in the Menex enus as either denying Thucydides , or
agreeing with him or parodying him. Such approaches risk turning Plato 's
narrative into a series of tangents to other historians ' narratives. 5 A reactive
interpretation tends not to seek an ordering principle within Plato 's narrative
or corpus , inasmuch as the ordering principle lies outside the Menex enus or
the Platonic dialogues ;6 but this chapter will consider the historical order
182
HISTORY
belonging to the world outside the Menexenus alongside the specifically
Platonic order that turns up inside it.
Omissions and other distortions of history
Many commentators have pointed out omissions , rearrangements, distortions
and errors in the historical section of the funeral speech. More than a century
ago C. E. Graves gently noted the "veil" that Plato cast over "the weak
places of Athenian history", as when the speech portrayed the Boeotian war
as an act of liberation, or the Athenians' return of the Spartans at Sphacteria
as a kindness. 7 Thanks to these many responses , the factual errors in the
funeral speech have become familiar to all readers, even if the patterns
behind those errors have been left under-examined.
The facts are least at issue when Socrates begins his history. After all he
begins at the moment of greatest Athenian glory, when the city took the lead
in rebuffing Persian invasions into Greece. There is nothing to deny here.
Still the emphases , sometimes at odds with other accounts of the war, seem
to aim at a particular purpose.
Socrates starts with the growth of Persia, which he casts in the role of an
enslaving power. In the span of a few sentences the Persian throne is said to
have enslaved ( or to be enslaving) Europe , Asia, the Medes , the gnomai
"thoughts" of all human beings, and many great and warlike peoples. 8
History begins with enslavement, and is kept moving along by the occasional
countervailing noble force that liberates - here Athens.
Following Herodotus, Socrates traces the Persian invasion of Greece back
to the support that Eretria and Athens provided to the Ionian rebels, those
Greek-speaking cities along the coast of Asia Minor that revolted against
Persian rule. To pay back the intruders Darius invaded Greece in 490, conquering
Eretria but not Athens. Athens stood alone at Marathon. Sparta,
Socrates adds , arrived a day too late. These elements of the story are in
Herodotus too: Eretria and Athens burned down the Persian city of Sardis,
and in Darius' avenging invasion Eretria fell, though under obscurely related
circumstances that suggest that Athenian reinforcements abandoned the
Eretrians. Anyway Athens called on Sparta for help, though for religious
reasons the Spartans did arrive late; and the small Boeotian city Plataea
fought with Athens. 9
To the prevailing cause of the world's events, slavery and the fight for
freedom , the funeral speech adds its first itemization of history's participants.
In the Menexenus unlike Herodotus' Histories Athenians are not present at
the fall of Eretria, nor Plataeans at Marathon. The speech seems to require
that Athens acted alone.
When the fighting with Persia takes up again a decade later, it still seems
imperative to specify which battles count and which do not. Socrates orders
them: the naval battles at Salamis and Artemisium - Socrates speaks of ton
183
HISTORY
andr6n ton tote naumachesant6n "those men then battling at sea" - then the
last stand on land, at Plataea, where Athenians and Lacedaimonians united
to defeat the Persian juggernaut. 10 Socrates insists on the proper ranking
among these although nothing else in his version of history depends on it.
Salamis and Artemisium belong after Marathon and before the joint Greek
land battle at Plataea.
Some readers find history being rewritten in the slighting reference to the
Spartans at Marathon, when in truth the Spartans ' imminent arrival may
have goaded the Persians into beginning the fight before they were ready. But
this is a small nit to pick when the facts are as the speech presents them.
Surely the Menexenus should not be obligated to interpret all the data it
reports with the greatest charity towards Sparta. Even failing to mention
Plataea is forgivable , in light of the small troop size that city represented on
the field. Athens effectively did fight alone at Marathon. 11
Thermopylae is another story. According to legend , that battle took place
the same day as the sea fight at Artemisium; in any case it was before
Salamis. The Spartans distinguished themselves at Thermopylae , or rather
immortalized themselves , and inspired other Greeks to rally against Persia ,
but Plato does not even include this occasion on the list of battles. Yet he
acknowledges the Spartan presence at Plataea . If he wanted to leave Sparta
out of the war, why mention them by name at one battle and omit the other
battle's name?
Salamis hints at an answer. Herodotus reports the fight at Salamis as the
decisive battle that ruined the Persians; Aeschylus implies as much in his
Persians, when Xerxes' herald arrives to tell of the catastrophe in Greece and
does not mention Thermopylae. But the compresence of different Greek
navies in that fleet is such a significant feature of the battle that Herodotus
explains at length how and why a Spartan, representing a city with no navy,
should have become admiral of the combined fleet.12 The battle also combined
land and sea fighting. Aeschylus' messenger dwells on one scene of a slaughter
on dry land: Greek troops landed on the small island of Psyttalea where Persian
soldiers were waiting to join the battle, and killed those choice troops. 13 For
Aeschylus that infantry battle is the "other half ' of Persia's loss at Salamis; so
Salamis is a mixed fight won by mixed Greeks; yet here is Socrates emphasizing
both its status as a sea battle and as a solo effort by Athens. The narrative is
already drawing attention to its classifications of military engagements
according to where they are fought and who fights in them.
After disposing of Xerxes the M enexenus puts special weight on the years
after Plataea, which it depicts as a time of consolidation among Greek cities
and a final clean-up against Persia - which amounted to the same thing ,
Persia having to be put to flight before some Greek cities could overcome
their fear. Athenian soldiers drove the whole barbarian force "from the sea".
These were the men, Socrates says, who naumachesante s "sea-battling " at
Eurymedon, strateusantes "warring, mobilizing" in Cyprus , and pleusantes
184
HISTORY
"sailing" against Egypt and others , caused the Persian king to attend to his
own security rather than continue making designs on Greece . 14
Except for strateusantes, a general verb describing the actions of an army that
can apply equally to infantry movements or a fleet's mobilization, this passage
speaks exclusively of naval action. Socrates is continuing to draw attention to
the types of military engagements that Athens is involved in. The tide did turn
against Persia at Eurymedon , whether or not Athens's ulterior motive there
was to intimidate and dominate its Greek allies (a process that Socrates sees
as unifying Greece) , and despite the reversal in Egypt , for the immediate
success that the Athenians achieved there was followed by complete defeat. 15
By all accounts Cimon led the Athenians at Eurymedon , a battle fought in
the middle 460s. (The campaign in Egypt , which lasted for six years , began not
right afterwards as the funeral speech implies, but in 460 or 459.) Thucydides
calls Eurymedon pezomachia kai naumachia "land-battle and sea-battle".
Versions told in later antiquity , which go into detail about the battle's tactics
and may be informed by a different source, depict Cimon arriving with a
fleet for a naval engagement that turns into a fight on land. Victory took
place on dry land , according to Diodorus Siculus' Library of Histor y. The
terminology in the Menexenus is positively insisting on the contrary of what
other histories report. 16
The Mene x enus follows Thucydides in dating the first dissent among
Greek cities to the years after Eurymedon , but the terms of its explanation
depart from Thucydides in a way that will prove significant. Socrates says
that Athens "received that which human beings direct towards those who do
well: ze los first and then phthonos". As a rule ze los and phthonos are both
translated "jealousy" or "envy", but this would make the sentence a riddle
instead of an explanation .
The charged term is phthonos , often more malevolent than envy alone and
more akin to Schadenfreude. Plato 's Philebus says that phthonos accounts for an
audience 's enjoyment of comedy; the emotion is pleasure at the kaka "ills"
befalling others. Socrates on trial blames the phthonos of the populace for his
coming conviction, although they have no reason to envy him. 17 As a response
to superiors , which would seem to be the situation at hand , phthonos is resentful.
The study of these Greek emotions by Ed Sanders calls it "begrudging envy"
inasmuch as phthonos can describe the act of begrudging someone else
honour , praise and position. 18 Thus Plato's Timaeus says the creator-god
feels no phthono s, being not merely without envy but "ungrudging " . The
Phaedrus excludes phthonos from the divine realm for similar reasons. 19
As for ze los, it might have carried a sense of destructive envy or covetousness
in archaic Greek. The word is unstable in Hesiod 's Works and Day s,
sometimes resembling the Good Strife that Hesiod contrasts with Bad Strife,
then also coming close to phthonos in meaning. But later authors used ze los
as the positive alternative to phthono s, sometimes as what turns into phthono s.
Of these later authors the closest to our purposes is Thucydides , in the last
185
HISTORY
speech he attributes to Pericles. Pericles evokes the spectacle of the Athenian
empire. The man who wants to accomplish something himself ze l6sei "will
want to emulate " the Athenian achievement, while the one who has gotten
nothing for himself phthone sei "will envy it". Socrates is voicing much the
same sentiment. The allies turned from a positive response to another's good
fortune to a negative one, resenting Athenian success.20
Thucydides traces the differences among the former allies to a specific
event. Faced with a revolt by their subject Helots , the Spartans asked Athens
for help. Cimon sent troops to Sparta , but the Spartans did not trust them:
they saw the Athenians as allophulous "members of a different tribe" or nonkin.
The Spartans sent the Athenian soldiers home, offending Athens and
leading Athens to give up the xummachia "alliance" that the two cities had
maintained since the Persian invasion. 21
Whatever the cause may have been, the proof of hostility was the pair of
battles the two cities fought at Tanagra and Oenophytae. According to
Thucydides , the Spartan army entered the Greek mainland for other reasons
and then lingered near Attica , perhaps with the intention of attacking the
Athenian democracy. Both suspicious and seizing the occasion of Sparta 's
vulnerability , the Athenian army marched out to engage the Spartans , losing
amid much phonos "killing " on both sides. Two months later the Athenians
returned (after the Spartans had gone home) to confront the Boeotians alone
at Oenophytae , where they took I 00 hostages. 22
When Socrates recounts the same events he softens the bad news. Tanagra
had no clear victor , but the Athenians came back to decide the issue at
Oenophytae. On this telling their motives have been ennobled . Twice the
M enex enus says that the Athenians fought on behalf of the Boeotians' freedom.
Plato's readers rebuke him for attributing this best of all motives to the
Athenians when they actually fought for reasons of the opposite extreme , for
the sake of conquest. 23 Against this charge of distortion it is worth noting
that although Thucydides does not speak of Athenian altruism , he makes
clear that the Athenians were right to suspect the Spartans ' motives. Even on
his interpretation the Athenians over-reacted to a fear of attack; hardly the
same as aiming at conquest.
History accelerates, Socrates skipping to events that Thucydides reaches
only volumes later. The Peloponnesian War is under way, or more specifically
the Archidamian War, as the first phase of the fighting is sometimes called.
Thucydides cannot imagine an event more important to human history than
the war between Sparta and Athens , and he claims to have surmised its
significance as soon as the fighting began ; Socrates simply speaks of pollou
polemou "much war". He chooses one battle from this phase to identify by
name , the fight at Sphacteria , in southwestern Peloponnesus , that Athens
won. It is another naumachia " sea-battle " . Plato 's speech emphasizes the
clemency with which Athens fought, taking Spartan prisoners rather than
slaughtering them . Thus a single battle demonstrated both Athenian military
186
HISTORY
superiority over other Greeks and the city's commitment to a kind of
pan-Hellenism. 24
It would take pages just to list the events that Thucydides includes between
Oenophytae and Sphacteria. That Plato recounts history with at least the
distortion of selective memory, compared with Thucydides, ought to be granted
without argument. As for Sphacteria itself, Thucydides includes an element of
luck in his story. The general Demosthenes was supposed to sail to Corcyra but
stopped at Pylos first, where bad weather kata tuchen "by chance" drove the
ships to shore. The Athenians moored and decided to build a wall , so luckily
they were ready when the fight came against Sparta. Commending Athens for
this victory would have compelled Thucydides to speak highly of Demosthenes,
whom the History scorns, as well as the demagogue Cleon. In the present
context Thucydides portrays Cleon as ruining an excellent opportunity for
negotiation , refusing to bargain for a mutually desirable peace with Sparta
after this lucky win. 25
Thucydides probably overstates his case. Diodorus Siculus reads Athenian
success at Sphacteria as the product of forethought and wise strategy, suggesting
that Socrates is right to say the battle proved Athenian military
superiority. Among modern historians , George Cawkwell takes Thucydides
to task for not recognizing Demosthenes' merits as general. The Athenian
strategy at Sphacteria must have been canny , Cawkwell says, and a reflection
on Demosthenes' expertise. 26 Again, the Menexenus for all its brevity might
contain the more accurate representation of this battle.
Despite their differences , Thucydides and Diodorus Siculus agree that the
fighting at Sphacteria took place on both land and sea. In fact they use nearly
identical language to make this point, both of them registering surprise at
what must have surprised all Greece at the time, that Sparta the land power
fought at sea while Athens the naval force fought on land. 27 This reversal
must have become part of the lore surrounding this battle; and the evidence
goes clearly against Socrates' simplistic reference to Sphacteria as a naval
battle. His choice of the word naumachia feels insistent, again as if he were
compelled to sort the battles into their categories.
Next comes another jump in the chronicle , to the war that recommenced
after the truce of Nicias. In 415 Athens sent a huge fleet to invade Sicily,
renewing hostilities that would not end until the Athenian surrender a
decade later. Socrates' summary of this war includes the Sicilian Expedition,
"the sea-battles at the Hellespont", negotiations between Athens's Greek
enemies and Persia, and then another naval battle at Arginusae. 28
In Thucydides, the Sicilian Expedition is a slowly grinding climax to his
history, begun in Athens's imperial ambitions and visibly leading towards
disaster, even if Thucydides did not live to bring his story to its wretched
finish. The idea for the invasion originates with appeals from Leontini and
Egesta, but the desire for power and wealth draw the Athenians to undertake
the invasion, and political infighting among the Athenians accounts for the size
187
HISTORY
of the force that sails, with generals who have no use for each other. As for
why the Expedition met with crushing defeat, the narrative in Thucydides
offers a cluster of explanations, from the desertion of Alcibiades to Nicias'
superstitious timorousness , to the "national character" explanation that
the Syracusans possessed the same quick and bold temperament as the
Athenians. 29
Socrates replaces this entire painstaking analysis with a remark about the
distance between Athens and Sicily, plus the all-purpose edustuchesan "they
had bad luck". 30 His reference to the trophies that the Athenians raised in
Syracuse (i.e. the battles they won) even suggests that victory had been closer
than it was.31 As for why Athens ever restarted the war, Socrates returns to
the Athenians' constant willingness to free other Greeks. But while Plato
may well be pressing an explanation at odds with the type found in Thucydides ,
modern readers should not rush to call the historian a realist and the philosopher's
speech a distortion , whether the result of Plato's naivety or of his
satirical impulse. Cynics can distort reality too. Donald Kagan has represented
Thucydides as tendentious in his claims about Athenian motives ,
which are the very claims that Plato's critics accept credulously when they
take issue with the Menexenus's history. In particular Kagan calls simplistic the
claim in Thucydides that Athens invaded Sicily for material or imperial reasons.
The wish to help a threatened ally makes better sense of the assembly 's
deliberations than a quest for domination would , even assuming Thucydides '
own report of what people said at that meeting. 32
Socrates surely does simplify, and thereby distorts , when he blames the
Athenian loss on the distance from Athens to Sicily. As Thucydides tells the story,
the reasons for the Athenian loss come to more than travelling distance. And yet
Thucydides might reinforce the Menexenus; he might even be the source for
Socrates ' claim. According to Thucydides one Syracusan , Hermocrates ,
predicts that Athens will find itself too far removed from Sicily to respond
flexibly to warfare there. If Syracuse prepares a fleet it will have an advantage
at sea. 33 Meanwhile Hermocrates makes the same claims about Athenian
motives that Thucydides puts forward in his own voice, that Athens coveted
Syracuse and so pretended to want to aid the Sicilian cities. In other words
Thucydides is presenting Hermocrates as a reliable interpreter of events. 34
And later sources report that long after the Athenians had been slaughtered
at Sicily, their fellow citizens back home had still not heard the news.
Socrates is not obviously wrong to blame the Athenian loss on the distance
to Sicily. 35
From the infantry battles on Sicily36 Socrates proceeds to multiple naval
battles at the Hellespont, a vague reference - Athens both lost and won
major battles in that area - that apparently refers to engagements fought in
411/410, among the last events Thucydides tells of: one battle off Cynossema ,
another at Abydus and a third at Cyzicus. The funeral speech says the
Athenians captured all the enemy 's ships in one day, though the reports of
188
HISTORY
smaller numbers in Thucydides sound more plausible. The first battle netted
the Athenians twenty-one ships and they took another eight a few days later;
the History does add that a trireme sped back to Athens with the anelpiston
"unexpected" good news, which rumor may well have puffed up into more
than those twenty-nine ships. 37
The greater distortion lies not in how Socrates reports this set of battles
but in his choice to report this one out of all the war's fights, selectively
presenting a victory that the Athenians found meaningful, omitting (among
others) the immediately preceding losses on Euboea that brought the Spartans
within striking distance of Athens and its harbour. 38 Then Socrates reports
the enemy's ethnic betrayal , the mutual-aid treaty between Sparta and the
Persian governor Tissaphernes in the year before the Athenian naval ventures.
As Thucydides also does, the Menexenus represents the last phase of war as
unnecessary ; but where the History finds the Athenian itch for conquest and
hasty policy at fault, the funeral speech locates what was truly anelpistos kai
deinos "unforeseeable and terrible" - Socrates uses that phrase twice within a
few lines - in the other Greeks ' alliance with barbarians. Here is the surprise
that made the war turn out as it did. For although Socrates is loath to admit
to any bad news for Athens, he is soon saying "we defeated ourselves" - a
euphemism, but one that concedes defeat. 39
Thucydides reports the conditions of the treaty much earlier in Book 8; and
well before coming to those terms he tells why the treaty took place to begin
with. Tissaphernes owed the king back taxes, and hoped that by neutralizing
the Athenians he could collect tribute from the Greek cities under his
jurisdiction. The Persians, the Spartans and the weaker Greek cities had
begun to plot against Athens with renewed encouragement in the wake of
the disaster in Sicily, for now their victory seemed within reach. 40
By ignoring the Persians' motives as Thucydides reports them , Socrates
can pin the blame for the treaty on the other Greek cities. The motivating
impulse behind history shifts from one imperial governor's anxiety over his
budget to the non-Athenians' character. And what is that character? In
Thucydides the Persians and Spartans are pouncing on a weakened Athens.
Their actions are rational even if not splendid. But according to the
Menexenus's version of history they are moved by philonikia, 41 whose literal
etymology means "love of victory" but more often, as actually used, was an
unattractive motive, contentiousness or resentful quarrelsomeness - something
akin to the spiteful phthonos with which lesser Greek cities
contemplate Athens's pre-eminence. The other cities look more rivalrous if a
proof of Athenian virtue and might sent them scurrying to deal with Persia,
than they would look if the sight of Athens weakened by Sicily led them to
seize an opportunity for victory.
To protest that the Platonic speech misrepresents the pact between Sparta
and Persia42 is not false, but is sometimes put forward incuriously, without
the question why Socrates should insert the treaty in the narrative where he
189
HISTORY
does, and why he should assign it the significance that he does. There are at
least three explanations, and they are compatible with one another.
1 First is philonikia: the other Greeks suffer from a character flaw, not the
worst flaw (Socrates does not call them money-grubbing or lustful) , but
bad enough to differentiate their souls from the soul of Athens. Later in
this chapter philonikia and phthonos (the malice glimpsed among nonAthenians
after the Persian War) will point towards a deep structure
in history. Moving the treaty to the time after an Athenian victory brings
out the contentiousness in the other Greek cities.
2 The stress that Socrates places on this moment shows how much it matters
that alliances with barbarians are now part of Athenian history. Who
makes peace with the King , and when , becomes a recurring question in
the remainder of the chronicle, as it had not been before. From now on
Greeks are making common cause with Persia , to everyone's detriment.
3 The third consideration comes back to the two texts' relationship with
one another. Thucydides himself follows the successful naval battles
around the Hellespont with a shift back to Tissaphernes, whose action
closes Book 8 and as much of the History as was written. Alcibiades
claims to have made Tissaphernes "more of a friend" than he had been ,
although Thucydides portrays the Persians jockeying for influence with
Sparta. Anyway, everyone wants to know what the Persians will do next.
The History ends with Tissaphernes sacrificing to Artemis; if Plato were
writing this part of the Mene x enus while consulting Thucydides , this
closing sequence could have been the cause of his own displacement of
events - or if not the cause then the excuse, Plato seizing on the Hi story's
turn to Greek-Persian relations to complete and correct Thucydides. As
Thucydides writes history , the Persian alliance plays a secondary role in the
war. An accurate history , from Plato 's point of view, would note the
international intrigue that Thucydides acknowledges , then amplify its
significance as Thucydides does not. 43
One more battle remains before Athenian defeat and civil war. Out of all the
events of the next six years Socrates chooses Arginusae, the last significant
engagement of the war, fought in 406. Athens won brilliantly , with eleventhhour
reinforcements arriving just in time to reverse what could have been a
massacre. Even in Xenophon 's Hellenica, which tells the story from Sparta 's
perspective , the Athenians are valiant. Sparta may chafe at playing the
courtier to Persia , but Persian money subsidizes the Spartan fleet. The
Athenian general Conon loses thirty ships when Sparta 's fleet of 170 reaches
him at Mytilene. Athens sends out a fleet and wins decisively. Misfortune
prevents the surviving Athenians from collecting their shipwrecked fellows,
according to the M enexenus; Xenophon specifies that the wind was the
cause. 44
190
HISTORY
But while Socrates concludes that Arginusae demonstrated Athenian power,
most ancient accounts emphasize the battle 's depressing aftermath , in which
satisfaction at victory was eclipsed by the officers' blaming one another for
not having retrieved the shipwrecked survivors. In the end Athens executed
six generals en masse, among them the young Pericles , son of Pericles and
Aspasia. (See comments on this case in Chapter 3, on Socrates.) Socrates
evidently used his powers as executive officer of the day to block this illegal
suspension of judiciary procedure , but whether because another officer
succeeded him the next day, or for some other reason , his veto did not prevail.
It is poignant to imagine Socrates defending the son of the political figure he
once mocked ; even more poignant to think Aspasia might have written a
speech , and Socrates then recited it, with no special emphasis on these events
from either of them . "We defeated ourselves ", and not least by throwing
even the victorious generals into a pit; 45 but the speech does not stoop to
particulars about losing a son or standing alone against the assembly. 46
Self-defeat implies a city that is not one. Division within the city can
become civil war, as it did in Athens when the Thirty Tyrants tried to hold
on to power despite increasing opposition from the democratic faction . The
Mene x enus recalls the return to democracy as harmonious. That the reality
was bitter and bloody is too well known to need arguing: Socrates himself
acknowledges that reality at his trial , referring to the Tyrants ' not only
slaughtering their enemies but also spreading the blame around for those
arrests. Xenophon and Lysias make the extent of this terror clear. 47The
funeral speech understates the civil war. And no doubt the understatement
furthers the general propagandistic effect. But note that it also serves the
purpose of reintroducing ethnic unity into history , right after those other
cities affronted Hellenic unity by cozying up to Persia. The Athenians
quickly settled such civil war as they had because they were a homophulo s
populace, members of the same tribe or stock. If only such motives applied
to the other Greeks!
Strictly speaking, the chronicle continues for another two full pages after the
defeat of Athens (and largely after the death of Socrates). But the distortions in
those pages are harder to catalogue. Socrates spends more of the remaining
narrative interpreting world events and their participants ' motives than he
does telling what happened. These are recent events, as he says - and in fact the
way the speech passes over them is one more reason to date the M enexe nus
close after the last incidents it relates. It tells of these final incidents with a
tone suited to that which goes without saying. 48 Athens forgave its barbarian
enemies but not its Greek erstwhile friends . (The ignominious end to the
Peloponnesian War, elided over in the actual chronology , is tacitly admitted
to here. The other Greeks had taken Athens 's ships away and torn down its
walls .) With Athens absconded from the responsibility of keeping other cities
free, Sparta soon enslaved them . Greeks and Persians alike pleaded for help .
Athens showed its one culpable impulse , its pity, liberating fellow Greeks
191
HISTORY
once more and looking the other way while Athenian citizens , acting privately ,
gave aid to Persia. 49
The speech restates the cause for the city's actions, its Hellenic purity. No
barbarian ancestry mingles in Athenian bodies , so Athens refused to let
Persians hold the Ionian Greek cities of Asia Minor. This decision , which
the speech mentions twice , organizes the few specific references to military
events that remain: Athens fighting with Persia against Sparta , then fighting
at Corinth and Lechaeum. Socrates comes back to the Athenian alliance
with Persia after his mention of Corinth and Lechaeum , making the alliance
the act of clearing the sea of Spartan ships. He apparently means the actions
of the Persian fleet under Conon's command. 50
When it reaches the Corinthian War the speech comes as close to a confession
of failure as it ever does. "In this war as well esterethemen 'we were
deprived of' good men , who dealt with dusch6ria 'bad ground' in Corinth
and prodosia 'betrayal' at Lechaeum". But Athens fought alongside and
against other Greeks at Corinth; Socrates turns elusive when Persia enters
the story. He makes Athenian cooperation with Persia the private work of
lone Athenians, not the city's collective action. This is false. Conon may have
commanded the Persian fleet on his own initiative and answering to Persian
rulers, but he worked on behalf of Athens. It was Sparta that Conon chased
from the sea. More than one source says he brought Persian money to his
hometown to rebuild the strategic long walls that connected Athens with its port
Piraeus. Socrates says proudly that Athens built up its navy and walls and
again proudly that it kept them after the Corinthian War. He only does not
admit who paid for them. 51
Most obscure of all is the way this speech treats the King's Peace. That
treaty ended the Corinthian War in 386, so by rights it should be the final
event in the Menexenus speech's history. In a way the peace treaty does
appear in the speech , but transposed and negated , as an unwelcome thought
would be in a Freudian dream. Socrates negates the bargain that Persia
struck with the major Greek cities and turns it from an effect of warfare into
a cause. Xenophon and Diodorus Siculus , whose narratives differ in other
essentials , both assert that:
1 Athens formed an alliance with other Greek cities, principally Thebes
(395).
2 The alliance fought Sparta.
3 Sparta, stuck in two wars at once , approached Persia seeking peace.
4 Persia declared that it had the right to rule all Greek cities in Asia Minor.
5 Sparta and the other Greeks agreed, and the Peace established the new
status quo for the eastern Mediterranean. 52
Athens probably disliked the Peace. 53 It meant that the Ionian cities that had
risen up against Persia more than a century earlier - Athens had supported
192
HISTORY
that rebellion , and Persia's invasion of Greece had been the reply - after all
this fighting , would belong to Persia again. The Persian Wars proved to have
been not a decisive war after all, only a preliminary battle that the old King
lost en route to the new King's finally winning the war by other means.
Losing Ionia was not merely a sentimental affair and not even a symbol.
It meant that Athens could no longer imagine re-establishing its old empire.
Sparta governed Greece, with Persia behind the throne. (The Spartans
themselves might not like to acknowledge that Persia determined the new
political landscape , but their reluctance must have been the symptom of
general Greek contempt for deals with the Persians. 54)
Given the unacceptability of this new reality, which in turn makes the
King's Peace unacceptable, presenting the events of recent history in their
raw state is impossible; nor just because this is a funeral speech and therefore
propagandistic. It would pain Athenians to be reminded of history's final
dispensation ( or what promised to be the final dispensation at the time, to
Athenians unprepared for Macedonia's rise). Plato does not have to be
seeking dramatic verisimilitude to speak obliquely of the King 's Peace; it is
enough for him to be Athenian and sharing in his city's humiliation.
To see the obliqueness in the Menexenus, consider what the funeral speech
does to the events attested to by historians, which in that form constitute a
sequence of cause and effect:
(1)---+( 2)---+( 3)---+( 4)---+( 5)
For example, because (2) the other cities fight Sparta , there/ ore (3) Sparta
seeks peace, and so (4) Persia stipulates that it keep the Ionian cities. But the
last stretch of the M enexenus's historical narrative may be schematized:
(1)---+( 4)---+~ (5)---+( 2)
The negation in front of (5) refers to Socrates' denial that Athens ever agreed to
Persian control over the cities in Asia Minor. 55 Athens did sign the Peace, but
Socrates denies the fact twice. And then , instead of making the negotiation with
Persia a consequence of warfare, as it seems to have been, Socrates inverts
the causal sequence so that Athens appears to have fought and lost because
of its principled stand on behalf of Ionia. The fundamental information is all
here, but rearranged to hide the forbidden thought that Athens formed an
agreement with Persia contrary to those Greek cities' freedom. This retelling
softens the hard news, which is nevertheless too important to leave out
altogether, that Persia now controls Greece. The cycle that began with
Athens's first principled opposition to Persia - before Marathon and consequently
at Marathon - reaches its ignominious finish with the Peace. The
speech can disguise that last fact as if in a dream, because every Athenian
listening or reading knew what had happened and understood what it meant.
193
HISTORY
Apart from the distortions that are most visible concerning the events that
Socrates reports, there are the unreported incidents and relationships that
Plato's readers have drawn attention to. Some commentators focus on longer
lists of omissions, others on shorter ones, but a few turn up on more than
one list. Of three significant distortions cited in Kahn's treatment of the
M enexenus, two are the dialogue's silence about Athens 's empire (before and
during the Peloponnesian War) and its silence about its times of amicable
relations with Persia (especially around the Corinthian War). These are two
of the three significant distortions that Trivigno finds in the Menexenus as
well. 56 These steady misrepresentations of history do not have to prove that
the speech is a parody, but they do demand some explanation. 57
This chapter will offer an interpretation that accounts for Plato's emphasis
on Persia. The interpretation begins with the undeniable fact that recent
commentators have been right to press, which is that Plato must have a
reason for showing Athens steadfastly at odds with Persia despite all the
other changes in international relations, and (as in connection with the
King's Peace) at odds with reality. The Menexenus aims at expounding a
universal history, one with a schema that accounts for the entire known
world and illustrates basic principles of motivation and action. 58 Patriotism
aside, the constraints of such a history will call for Athens to function as a
solo and sui generis participant in world events, as well as a state that (for
reasons to be explained) refuses to make alliances with Persia.
The speech's silence about "empire" is a harder business. Everyone knew
that Athens had brought its allies together into a league of putative equals that
it came to dominate and even tyrannize. In his last speech in Thucydides ,
Pericles tries to rally an assembly full of dispirited plague survivors to
continue the war against Sparta. He appeals to their pride in Athenian military
successes. Athenian arche "rule" does not extend merely over xummachon
"allies"; it is greater than that. It will be remembered that erxamen "we
ruled" more Greeks than any other Greeks did. What Athenians risk at this
turning point in the war is not just enslavement but loss of arche. To make
clear the imperial nature of this rule Pericles even says that Athens is now
hos turannida "like a tyranny" among the other Greek states. 59 Why should
Socrates' anti-Periclean speech ignore the international relation that defines
Periclean Athens? Does his silence serve to conceal Athens's ugly past and
implicitly to condemn Pericles' policy of conquest? Or is Plato refraining
from saying anything where he had nothing nice to say?60
But maybe proposals about the political purpose of eliding over the
empire are looking in the wrong place, presuming that the historical narrative
of the Menexenus could hold such an entity as the Athenian empire and
wondering why it failed to mention it. A different hypothesis should be open
to consideration , that the story being told in this dialogue presupposes a
different political ontology. Whether the empire was a good or bad thing, or
the cause of Athenian bullying and cruelty , speaking of empire forces the
194
HISTORY
historian to redescribe the dynamic of international relations, so that Athens
is not an individual participant in those affairs but part of a larger body. It is
easier to visualize a state's actions on the world stage as if the state were an
individual and acted as one; and the universal history that this chapter finds
in the funeral speech will consistently treat Athens as such a unit.
The M enexenus and the historians
Besides differing from other historical accounts in the facts it includes, the
Menexenus also seems novel in its methods of historical narrative and historical
explanation. It is practically impossible to say at this remove what historical
works were available in Plato's day and which of them he would have read;
still, orienting the funeral speech among the historians whose works survive
might help to focus what if anything is new about Plato's historiography.
What Plato read
No events mentioned in the funeral speech would require Plato to have read
or listened to any works of history written in his time. Most of those that
were not important incidents had taken place after his birth, and the rest (e.g.
Salamis) would have been familiar to everyone. Nevertheless it is almost
beyond doubt that Plato read other historians. There were local histories, lost
today, that chronicled individual cities in isolation from all other world
events; he likely also read Ges Periodos, "World Survey" by Hecataeus of
Miletus, the author Herodotus treats as a predecessor.
The local histories of Athens are known collectively as "Atthidography".
Although only fragments remain from this genre that began before Thucydides
and continued after the death of Aristotle, those surviving parts suggest
that the Atthidography available to Plato would not have influenced the
Menexenus. From what we can tell, aetiologies , etymologies , genealogies and
the explanations of religious ritual seem to be common elements in the local
histories; they are all absent from the history that Socrates tells in the
Menexenus. 61
As for Herodotus, he does not tell of many events that also appear in the
Menexenus. The Histories ends with the Persian Wars, about where the funeral
speech begins. Plato seems to have read Herodotus , at least by the time he
wrote the Timaeus, which contains several allusions to the Histories, including
what is close to a direct quote from its first sentence; 62 and in another context
it would be worth developing points of correspondence between Plato's
Theaetetus and Herodotus ' work. But Herodotus will not inform the specifics
of history as told in the M enexenus.
Xenophon's Hellenica is less relevant than the Histories. Nothing in the
Menexenus depends on Plato's having read the Hellenica ; and because of the
late date of that work it is possible that Plato never saw it, or had not seen it
195
HISTORY
by the time he wrote his own chronicle. The Hellenica will probably not
inform historical method in the Menexenus, whatever its intrinsic historical
worth might be.
Thucydides is another matter. Scholars in the past sometimes denied that
Plato read the History , or denied that he paid attention to what he did read. 63
Given the numerous ways in which Plato's history diverges from Thucydides' ,
this judgement is understandable. On the other hand the Menexenus funeral
speech is closely attentive to the speech of Pericles as structured in the History.
There is no evidence that the famous funeral oration existed in any other
context or other written form. Plato must have known the version as it
appeared in Thucydides , and he must have read much of the rest of the
History. Can we imagine a Plato so uninquisitive that he read the speech and
set out to reply to it but did not bother reading the rest?
As for all the divergences between Plato and Thucydides: there is a third
obvious possibility besides his reading then disregarding the History and
never having read it at all. Plato could have been disregarding Thucydides
actively and deliberately, taking a stand against a number of points of Thucydidean
history and historiography. The stand involves Plato's own answers
to why one writes history in the first place; which events a historical account
should include; whether those events come together in a grand overall shape
or lead to a definitive conclusion; and how any one event brings about the
one after it.
Why write history?
Thucydides' motives have integrity even if he does betray biases and personal
grudges along the way. Setting down a lasting record of events, adding to the
store of human knowledge , have become standard for historical practice , along
with the unconcern for immediate effects that those motives imply; and perhaps
also (though it would not be cordial to impute this to historians at large)
unconcern about the immediate delight that a work of history brings its
audience.
Socrates announces a different set of motives as he begins his funeral
speech. One tells the history of Athens in order to praise the dead and
improve their survivors, and presumably to do both right away. Thucydides
has left out what his History might have included if it had ever been recited
to a crowd, which is to say a function in the culture that produced it.
The M enexenus might even be eschewing the ambition to produce historical
knowledge for its own sake (assuming that Plato believes there is any such
thing as historical knowledge). As if to stress the unimportance of historiography's
record-keeping function, Socrates asks as his speech approaches
very recent events whether he needs to tell those stories. Everyone present
knows them. It is like something that Critias says in the Timaeus, not about
recent events but about a story so old that everyone has forgotten it. Retelling
196
HISTORY
the tale will be a "hymn of praise" suitable to the goddess on the occasion of
her festival. As different as the Menexenus's history is from the stories of
legendary Athens that Critias speaks of in the Timaeus , both contexts seem
to call for some instrumental value to justify the telling of history; and praise
is at least one of those instrumental values. 64
If you attribute motives to ancient historians according to what they
declare their motives to be, then history for praise's sake aligns the M enexenus
more with Herodotean than Thucydidean history. The Histories begins by
announcing three purposes:
1 It will preserve otherwise-forgotten actions - but then every historical
account preserves some version of the past .
2 It will tell why the Persian War took place - another unobjectionable
motive for historians , and one that does not distinguish Herodotus much
from Thucydides.
3 Herodotus also speaks of the kleos "glory" that great men and great events
deserve. To recognize the kleos of the great is to praise them. Herodotus may
praise less than Socrates does in the funeral speech , and Thucydides
may praise his favourite figures, such as Themistocles and Pericles, more
than his official image of history-writing would imply; but if the Menexenus
wants a spiritual predecessor among the historians of its time , that would
more likely be the one who announces praise as a task for history.
Universal history
Whatever the reason for writing about history 's incidents , the story that
results will have to select and organi ze the events that it tells of, and also in
some way explain them , if not explaining the totality of facts then at least
accounting for many of them taken separately.
Plato's predecessors and contemporaries will not account for the selectiveness
in the funeral speech's history. The readers of Herodotus sometimes
wonder what criterion he could have used for excluding stories from his
book , in light of the impression he gives of welcoming every character and
wild tale. Of course this first impression does not last. To a greater degree as
the Histories continues , it focuses on facts germane to the war against Persia ,
the event that Herodotus must have grown up hearing about as unsurpassed in
importance. And so, broadly speaking, he may be described as selecting the
most noteworthy historical incidents to include in his work.
Thucydides makes the criterion explicit. He writes about the Peloponnesian
War because it exceeded the Persian and even the Trojan wars in importance;
for the same reason Thucydides rarely pauses to talk about anything but
Athenian activity pertaining to that war. Xenophon behaves as heir to the
historical tradition in his attempt - even if it is only a professed attempt - to
tell of what he found "noteworthy " . 65
197
HISTORY
Plato does not seem to be fishing for important events the way the historians
do. This is not to say he is unselective in his choices, only that he is rejecting the
idea that history should be about the greatest battles , and should detail the most
notable events. He replaces that standard with a philosophical conception
of history , in deference to which he both omits some facts that every other
historian would include , and includes what the others pass over.
After the selection of events comes the work of arranging and explaining
them. Those tasks have a way of blurring into each other , depending on what
you take the dominant sign or effect of "universal history " to be. Sometimes a
history of all things everywhere shows its ambition diagnostically, finding the
same cause or few causes ( e.g. class struggle) at work in all historical events.
Then history exhibits a uniform texture , and it speaks universally insofar as
the explanatory theory finds the same specific sequences everywhere.
A history may also present itself as universal teleologicall y, if it finds all
events tending in a single direction , towards the end of days or the end of
history. Then history enacts a uniform text , a story that no matter how
multifarious is bound to reach a single conclusion .
Either , or neither , kind of universal history may be called "determinist " .
Neither one can claim that title exclusively, and although the two approaches
to history might overlap they do not have to. The same force might determine
each step in a sequence without the total sequence 's ever arriving anywhere.
Conversely, history might be heading for a single telos by means of countless
different causal sequences .
Thucydides, for example , emphasizes prevailing causes in history but
rarely speaks of large-scale patterns of historical narrative. What stands out is
his pronouncement about the cause of the Peloponnesian War that superseded
all others . The alethestate "truest " explanation lies in the Athenians ' becoming
megalou s "great" and causing phobon "fear, terror " in the Spartans. Wars
begin when a state has military reasons to feel threatened .66
Thucydidean thinking has such a seductive unsentimentality that modern
readers may forget Thucydides is offering one diagnosis among many. As
J. E. Lendon has recently argued , many ancients assessed international relations
in the quite different vocabulary of prestige , deference and insult ; moreover
Lendon says they were right to do so. Lendon 's first claim stands regardless
of whether the second one does. Whatever the truth of the matter about the
causes at work in Greek history , the classical sources that Diodorus Siculus
would later draw on , as well as the man in the Athenian street, found it more
natural to assess the relations among cities in terms of genuine and perceived
insult. Even if Thucydides is right and other classical observers are wrong ,
his analysis strikes the other ancients as foreign and counter-intuitive. 67
Diagnostically , then , Plato might follow a vision of history as rigorous as
the one Thucydides adheres to, without committing himself to Thucydidean
calculations of force and fear. Indeed the philonikia or competitiveness that
this chapter will find at work among Athens 's rivals (what the Menexe nus
198
HISTORY
calls the half-Greek cities) fits congenially with assessments of leadership and
demonstrations of respect. As Lendon says, the Greek cities themselves
assessed the political landscape in terms of which city was hegem6n and
which others had to defer to that one. These will be close to the terms the
M enexenus appeals to.
By comparison, that bottom-line motive in Thucydides, phobos , is not a
candidate for generating history as Plato sees it. The speech never ascribes
fear to Athens. Other Greeks are afraid of Athens, otherwise of Persia; the
King of Persia fears Athens too ; but Athenians act from different motives. 68
Herodotus does not diagnose all historical change in terms of a single
force or commonest cause of action. The Histories is full of causal explanations ,
but they cover a range of motives. 69 Any determinism in Herodotus must be
a very soft variety , in which many of the greatest events are notable for their
contingency. They could well have turned out otherwise: as one commentator
writes , "Herodotus took every opportunity to show that the Persian War had
not been inevitable". 70
Even so, such universality as history does possess for Herodotus derives
from its total text as opposed to any continuity in texture. Something like
mega-history is visible in the great cycles that Herodotus announces at the
start of Book 1. "I will go forward and tell the story of small and great cities and
people alike. For of those that were great in the past , many became small, and
those that were great in my time were previously small". The change does
not come by chance. Smallness means poverty, and poor nations become
tough; meanwhile riches make men soft, hence vulnerable , and the great
subsequently fall into smallness. Herodotus brings his grand narrative to a
finish with the Persian king Cyrus espousing exactly this causal mechanism at
work in history, a succinct explanation at the end of Book 9 for the phenomenon
that Book 1 began by observing. 71
Plato's dialogues are fond of cyclical visions of history in other contexts. 72
The funeral speech refuses to read repetitions and cycles in the passage of
time (as the next section will argue); in this respect it contradicts Herodotus.
But it replaces the pendulum of Herodotus not with a chaos of unintelligible
small events, as if that were the only alternative to cyclical repetitions , but
with a steady story. Herodotus will turn out to have been right to see a general
pattern in history. He only did not look closely enough to see what that
pattern really was.
Order in history
To see what Plato's history lesson purports to teach 73 perhaps as other
historians of his time did not try to do, it may be worth leaving aside the
omissions and inclusions and ask , as few readers have asked , what internal
logic might drive the resulting narrative. What sense does this story make to
Plato? Consider the sequence:
199
HISTORY
1 Marathon. Athens wins a land victory over Persia (240c-d).
2 Artemisium and Salamis. Athens wins a sea victory over Persia
(240e-241b).
3 Plataea. Athens and Sparta together win a land victory over Persia
(241c).
4 Eurymedon, followed by expeditions to Cyprus and Crete. Athens and
Greek allies defeat Persia (and its subject Egypt) decisively at sea
(241e).
Now other Greek cities begin to envy the honour that Athens has earned for
itself. The Peloponnesian War begins:
5 Tanagra and Oenophytae . Fighting over freedom for Greeks in Boeotia ,
Athens defeats Sparta (242a-b ).
6 Sphagia ( = Sphacteria). Athens defeats Sparta in a sea battle but spares
the Spartans present (242c).
7 Sicily. Treacherous Greek cities impose heavy losses on Athens in land
battles (242e-243a).
8 Hellespont. Athens wins a ruinous sea battle over allied Greek cities
(243a-b).
At this point the enemy cities join forces with Persia (243b ).
9 Mytilene/Arginusae. Athens defeats Sparta and Persia at sea in a
disastrous battle (243c).
10 Corinthian War (1). Corinth and Lechaeum. Athens joins with Persia to
battle Sparta on behalf of other Greek cities. Athens loses a difficult
battle on rough ground at Corinth (245e).
11 Corinthian War (11). Athens and Persia drive Sparta from the sea
(246a).
The battles alternate between land and sea, falling into pairs or triplets
(1, 2), (3, 4), (5, 6), (7, 8, 9), (10, 11), as determined by who Athens 's allies
and enemies are. Athens fights alone against Persia at Marathon and again
in the naval confrontations of 4 79. Then Athens fights together with Sparta
and other Greek cities, first by land at Plataea and then at sea.
Part of the sculpting of history has the effect of putting army and navy on
equal or close to equal footing. In the M enexenus the two win together and
lose together . This is to say that neither force is more effective than the other ,
also to say that they aim at the same targets. Accordingly the Mene xe nus's
language repeatedly pairs army and navy. 74 Thus Athens returns to warfare
teichisamene ... kai naupege samene "having built walls and ships" .75 Army
and navy do not represent distinct foreign policies . But describing army and
navy this way amounts to a remarkable concession , given how many
200
HISTORY
Athenians had come to see their navy as a symbol of decline. Especially after
the debacle at Arginusae, when Athens won the battle but left its shipwrecked
sailors to drown , "navy" seemed to equal radical democracy and the chaos
that democracy produced. 76
The navy's second billing in the Menexenus is not meant as an insult to
ships. Rather it makes the difference between army and navy a difference in
degree. The ranking simply puts Athens's army ahead of its navy, and not
nearly far enough by comparison with some dialogues. The Republic makes no
provision for a navy despite its recognition that even the first most primitive city
will ship goods in and out by sea and despite its ship-of-state metaphor for
the disorderly city. 77 The Laws positively condemns the effect a navy has on
citizens. People who fight by rowing instead of by meeting the enemy on dry
land only learn to be cowards. Much better to give up the benefits of maritime
commerce than to endure the corrupting consequences of sea travel. 78
Moreover a navy empowers the most impoverished segment of the population ,
which Plato saw as the constituency most favouring military expansion. 79
The other dialogue that contains something like a history of real-life
Athens, the Critias, pictures a beautiful Athens of legendary past without
either ships or walls. It is Atlantis , the infamous enemy, that packs hundreds
of thousands of sailors into its fleet of 1,200 ships. 80
But the Critias might also show why the Athens of history ought to have
been depicted with a navy. That is the only dialogue that Plato abandoned
unfinished. Maybe he did so because the all-infantry Athens it imagines
could not have defeated the island nation and its thousand ships. Cities that
isolate themselves from world politics can maintain only marching regiments
to defend themselves with, but a city engaged in alliances and power politics
in the world as it exists will have to sail into that world. The navy in the
Menexenus is a sign that the Athens it tells of will be embedded in larger
politics. Somewhat as Republic Book 8 attends to economic activities , not
because Plato values money but because citizens acting as economic agents
bring about constitutional changes, so too Plato does not have to like navies
to include them in his history of the world beyond Athens.
Soul, city, world
In addition to alternating land and sea forces the Menexenus rigs its
chronicle to finesse the order of participants, making that order: Athens
fights alone; Athens fights alongside other Greek cities; then Athens against
those cities; lastly Athens fights together with Persia.
Barbarians literally threaten in this history , even if Plato does neglect to
mention the warm gates they stormed through. But as our discussion of
autochthony emphasized , Socrates' talk of barbaroi distracts from the rigorous
division of peoples that is at work: not a division in two as ethnocentricity
alone would have it, but three. World history now involves real Greeks
201
HISTORY
(Athenians), barbarians (paradigmatically the Persians) and half-Greek
people from the cities outside Athens. Psychodynamic relations among these
three determine whether the best of them preserves a healthy harmony in the
whole or the lower elements rebel to destabilize that harmony.
Education is part of the relationship. The good birth that sets the uppermost
group apart does not release them from the need for good training. When
gods tutored the first Athenians, they included the instruction necessary pros
ten huper tes choras phulaken "for the guardianship of their territory". So
another word for Athenians might be phulakas "guardians".
Having been so finely educated, these finest people exercise their leadership
by training those below them. Athenian victories at Marathon and Salamis
taught Sparta and the other Greeks the virtue of courage. "The other Greeks
were educated fpaideuthenai] by those who fought at Marathon and Salamis ,
learning and accustoming themselves [mathontas kai ethisthentas] ... not to
fear the barbarians". The mixed Greeks later "dared [etolmesan] to risk
endangering themselves, having become students [mathetai] of the Marathon
soldiers". 81
Talk of wars and barbarian enemies recalls the Republic's proposals for a
new warfare that favours fellow Greeks. 82 But something else in the Republic
is more to the point. Socrates says he wants the city's divisions to correspond
to aspects of human nature; so as a first heuristic he identifies actual
appearances of (1) to thumoeides "the spirited element" , (2) to philomathes
"knowledge-love" and (3) to philochrematon "money-love", the motive
impulses behind the city's classes and roughly the names of the motives
he will find in human souls. 83 In this passage the three motives are said to be
found among (respectively) (1) Thracians, Scythians and other people to the
north, (2) Athenians, 84 and (3) Egyptians and Phoenicians.
The Hippocratic treatise Airs, Waters, Places had already associated
ethnicities with character traits before Plato's birth, most notably the Europeans
with courage and people of "Asia" (whatever area the author means by that
word) with cowardice. 85 The Republic does not take the line of thought further,
but leaves Socrates' analogy standing as a possible mapping between parts of
the soul and nations of the world. The Menexenus's explanation of history
can be read as the development of this suggestion. One ethnicity guards and
teaches , the next is its auxiliary and the third generally threatens. Sparta's
reputation for warrior courage most approximates to that of the northerners
in Thrace and Scythia, so on this reckoning Sparta functions within the
world as the thumoeides does in the individual human being.
Certainly the Republic's classification of Egyptians and Phoenicians
transfers to Persia, which the Menexenus calls wealthy and numerous. And it
is relevant that the M enexenus refers to Egypt as an enemy, thus linking
Egyptians with their fellow barbarians the Persians. The Menexenus funeral
speech also acknowledges the multiplicity of the nationalities contained
within the Persian Empire. Persia may go by a single name but it is a grab
202
HISTORY
bag of ethnicities , much as the Republic calls the soul 's desiring element
poikilon "manifold". 86
Aligning the Menexenus's ethnic categories with the three parts of the soul
is a logical extension of the Republic's city/soul analogy. Thanks to this
alignment , psychological principles can be invoked in accounting for historical
phenomena. The Menexenus strives to tell an orderly story of the Athenian
century , indeed to order the existing story by identifying the dominant
motives that move history along. 87 Where Republic 8 confines itself to the
doings within one city, holding the rest of Greece fixed, the Mene xen us
speech situates Athens amid neighbouring and domestic powers largely
holding internal politics constant. 88
And so during happy times justice within the city and pan-Hellenic harmony
abroad are both ensured by the respective top groups ' wise governance. A small
power that recognizes what is best for the larger body it belongs to educates
the less perfect members of its own kind; the training partly consists in
bringing out the next group 's courage so that the amorphous third concatenation
of humanity surrenders to their alliance. The small governing
power is a peacemaker , restraining its orge "anger" in the interests of to
koinon "the common ", what is common to all Greeks. This is a city that lets
shame govern its behaviour , as if to say that measure is built into the Athenian
nature. 89
The three parties of the Menexenus all fit into these categories . This way of
looking at justice in the world now makes sense of apparent Athenian
altruism to other Greeks - the Athenians are the guardians of the world - and
at the same time explains their superiority - the Athenian s are the guardians
of the world. In the Republic guardianship is a function of breeding and birth
that comes with responsibilities of altruistic service to the lower classes.
Not only the parties to history but their motives and destiny recall the
Republic. 9° For the cooperativeness and the moral instruction that characterized
Greece during the Persian Wars prove not to survive the subsequent peace.
International harmony begins to decline along a trajectory familiar from the
Republic. This is the meaning of the order in the Mene x enus's list of battles.
Warf are reduplicates relations among the city 's classes and the soul 's parts.
In Greece as in the Republic 's city the first step is momentous. What
could undo a well-functioning system? The fault lies with that problematic
middle group whose imperfections turn it away from the great alliance. 91 The
middle group comes under the influence of phthonos, the grudging envy
or malice already noticed in the Mene xen us's history. In Republic Book 8, the
chronicle of worsening souls pictures a good man moving from the first rank
to the second, becoming timocratic. This man hears his mother complaining
about the advantages that other women have. Her husband, the best kind of
man , does not give his family the possessions and honours they would like to
have. So the soul 's turn to the worse begins with resentment, or what can
fairly be called grudging envy, at the advantages that other people possess.
203
HISTORY
Later in the story of souls' declines the word phthonos is explicitly associated
with the second-best person (as well as with worse types). Socrates says that
in the timocratic type of man the spirited part of the soul has gone wrong.
Such a man satisfies his philotimian "desire for honour" not with the honours
that come of behaving virtuously but rather by phthonos. 92
The Menexenus finds the same wish for domination operating in Greek
cities considered as individuals. After the wars against Persia , Socrates says
Athens was honoured at first by those so-called compatriots. But "she
received that which human beings direct toward those who do well: ze los
first and then phthono s" . The Peloponnesian War followed. Other Greeks
admired Athens , but the wish to emulate gave way to resentment. As already
seen, the contrast between ze los and phthonos sets an admiring respect for
superiors against the resentful wish to see them brought low. And as in the
late books of the Republic, the element that should have been an aide to the
natural leader becomes the cause of the first decline. 93
The Menexenus also applies the word philonikia "contentiousness " to the
non-Athenian cities of Greece ,94 reinforcing the parallel to the Republic's
psychology . The context makes clear that Socrates is not using that word in a
positive or even neutral sense, meaning (for instance) "competitiveness ". The
other cities see Athens ascendant and the thought pains them , and they seek
victory in an unacceptable manner , through a treaty with Persia. Plato does
sometimes use philonikia without negative connotations , but more often the
word implies something disagreeable. The dialogues sometimes pair this
contentiousness with a baser motive, implicitly contrasting the two but only
by way of distinguishing bad from worse. The penalty for spurious prosecution
in the Laws depends on whether philonikia or philochrematia "love of
money" is the cause - worse to sue in hopes of gain than for the purpose of
ruining a rival - but still the difference comes to death in one case, in the
other case death after the second offence.95
More broadly the Timaeus calls philonikia and epithumia "desire" two
human motives that feed one 's bodily nature, making a soul more mortal ,
as opposed to the intellectual pursuits that feed the soul 's immortal yearnings.
This epithumia is the Republic 's word for desire, understood as the soul's third
part, and the passage in the Timaeu s comes close to recapitulating the
Republic 's psychology , with philonikia in the place of that second-ranked part
of the soul the thumo s. As a matter of fact the Republi c itself puts philonikia
into that same place; philonikia is evident in the second-best regime, early in the
good city's decline, because of the prominence of the thumos "spirit , anger " in a
timocratic regime. Where thumos is at work , philonikia is the sign.96
It is telling that centuries later, when Polybius self-consciously undertakes
to produce a universal history that will bring Greece and Rome together in a
grand story of the world, he appeals to phthonos as the Republic and
Mene xe nus do. For Polybius the number two 's wish to supplant number one
is a constant in world history. It is hard not to see Plato as his inspiration ,
204
HISTORY
especially given that no one else from classical Greece had spoken of history
in those terms. 97
As for the lowest of the world's three forces, the Menexenus portrays it
re-entering history for tactical reasons. The second-best element seeks to
cement its own place by joining in an alliance with the third; the third now
asserts its own pre-eminence. And even here a psychological explanation
might be at work that the Republic would recognize. 98 Socrates says that
Athens had a reason to ally itself with the Persians. At first blush he is only
piling on the praise. If you wanted to criticize Athens dikai6s "justly" and
orth6s "rightly", he says, you would have to say that the city "has always been
excessively prone to pity". In this instance Athens could not stand to watch
even Persia suffering and allied itself with the King. Athens is philoiktirm6n
"fond of pitying".
Socrates might seem to be pretending to criticize Athens, saying, "Our flaw
is that we care too much about world justice"; as people pretend to criticize
themselves when they call themselves perfectionists. But suppose that the
funeral speech calls this accusation "right" and "just" not as a joke , but with
the purpose of distinguishing what right justice commands from the surrender
to pitying passions. After all, the Republic envisions a city whose rulers do
not let compassion stop them from assigning bronze souls to the third rank,
according to Socrates' explication of the noble lie. Pity that contravenes the
demands of rational rule would amount to the soul's lowest part governing
when it ought to be obeying.
For that matter it is pity, not one of the high-profile desires like lust and
hunger, that Republic I O condemns in connection with tragedy. Socrates
urges a ban on mimetic poetry in order that the good citizens not be
encouraged to enjoy lamenting people's misfortunes.
In both of the relevant passages from the Republic, the words for pity
come from the root eleos; the Menexenus's description of Athens as prone to
pity, philoiktirm6n , is built on the root oiktos. Some Greek authors show a
definite preference for one of the two words (eleos or oiktos) over the other,
but they seem to overlap considerably in meaning and psychological force.99
If the Republic sees no joke in curbing pity in the interests of justice, this
passage in the Menexenus can be read as a diagnosis of the world's final
deterioration. The worst political element returns to power in coincidence
with the worst psychological element's sway over Athens.
The proof that history reached its terminus in 386 is the progress of
enslavement. In the Republic slavery provides the occasion for seeing power
in a perverse or distorted form; 100 along similar lines the Menexenus charts
the sombre spread of slavery. The funeral speech discovers the beginning of
history within Persia, when Cyrus frees the Persians and enslaves the Medes.
Slavery is not merely physical, which is why Socrates insisted that the Athenians
cannot be one another's slaves or masters. Non-Athenian Greeks are not
attached to natural liberty in the same way: Athens releases them from
205
HISTORY
douleia but they enslave themselves again_ IOI At last, as the tyrant finally comes
into power in Republic 9 and makes slaves of all citizens, the Corinthian War
re-establishes Persia's dominance over the eastern Mediterranean; and the
Greeks had no better model for a tyrant than the one who sat on Persia's
throne.
A parody of history?
Previous commentaries have not noticed the importance to Plato of a
tripartition of peoples, a division he cared about enough (as the previous
chapter argued) to force it upon the dichotomy implied by autochthony. Nor
have other treatments of the Menexenus observed that the tripartition lets
Plato find an order in world history that resembles the orderly if dispiriting
sequence that befalls the good city in Republic 8 and 9.
That the two themes work together implies more coherence to the funeral
speech than it might first appear to have. It also must be said that an analysis
of this complexity hardly makes sense as a parody of Pericles , whose speech
says next to nothing about either non-Greeks or Athenian history. Much
more probably Plato is offering an account of history of a kind that he
believes other orators ought to have given (maybe other historians too).
Psychological principles can now explain international alliances and their
dissolution in meaningful Platonic terms - which is to say again that the
narrative seems intended as a better work than its predecessors, not a
mockery of them.
Notes
1 One part of this chapter , together with sections of the preceding chapter , previously
appeared in Pappas and Zelcer (2013), although the sections combine in
that article in a way that they do not here.
2 L. Merider is one exception . On his reading the problem is simple error:
"Omissions deliberees, partialite des interpretations, grossisments systematiques
ne sont pas les seuls defaults a relever dans !'expose historique du Mene x ene. On
peut signaler des alterations manifestes et des mensonges grossiers" (quoted in
Zurcher 1954: 28).
3 Thus Collins and Stauffer (1999a: 89- 90) say the speech "proves to contain its
fair share of comedy or ridiculousness , including a long history of Athenian
actions in war riddled with distortions". Also see Salkever (1993); Vlastos
(1964).
4 Clavaud (1980: 173).
5 Interpreting the Menexenus as a response to other thinkers appears to have been
common in the ancient world; at least enough to have incited the reply from the
Anonymous Prolegomena to Platonic Philosophy noted in Chapter 4.
6 For example, Clavaud (1980: 137). Clavaud 's analysis is based on a negative
reading of the chronicle: facts omitted , others misstated. He offers no positive
description of the narration.
7 Graves (1896: vii).
206
HISTORY
8 Menexenus 239-40a. Five forms of verbs containing the root doul "slave" occur
within the span of 125 Greek words: douloumenous , edouleue, edoulosato,
dedoulomenai , katadedoulomene.
9 Menexenus 240a-c . No other source recounts the story, told here , of the Persian
army walking across Eretria holding hands , although it is plausible enough.
Herodotus Histories 6.31 describes this "dragnet" practice and claims that the
Persians used it whenever practicable , as it was on Chios , Lesbos and Tenedos .
Herodotus Histories: Athens and Eretria supporting rebel cities, burning Sardis ,
5.99.1- 5.102 .1; Eretria falling because of internal division , 6.100.1- 6.101.3;
Athenian reinforcements fleeing, 6.101.1; Spartans waiting for full moon , 6.106 ;
arriving late, 6.120.1; Plataeans the only allies to Athens , 6.108. Plato repeats
the handholding story in Laws 3.698d , though the Athenian Stranger sounds
sceptical. In further contrast with the Menexenus, he claims that whether the
story was true or not it terrified all the Greeks who heard it, but especially the
Athenians.
10 M enexenus: Salamis and Artemisium ranked second after Marathon , 240e-241 a;
"those men then battling" , 241 a; Plataea with Athens and Sparta together
ranked third , 241 c.
11 Walters (1981) shows that the claim of solo Athenian effort at Marathon was
common in local rhetoric , even becoming one official version of history
co-existing with the version that called the Plataeans loyal allies. For Vlastos
(1964: 190) the "error was so encrusted in the Athenian image of its own past
that Plato may have been honestly mistaken on this point". Collins and Stauffer
(1999b: 41-42) propose that simply by marching towards Marathon the Spartans
boosted Athenian morale and caused the Persians to make hasty decisions .
12 Herodotus Histories: roster of cities in the Greek fleet (127 Athenian ships out of
271 total), 8.1.1; Eurybiades the Spartan admiral of joint naval forces, 8.2.2;
Sparta convened the council of war because other Greek generals did not trust
Themistocles , 8.58.
13 Aeschylus Persians: messenger's report on Salamis, 249-471; Salamis the ruination
of Persia, 273, 284; Xerxes' best troops at Psyttalea where Greek infantrymen
slaughtered them , 447-71; sea battle only half of the misfortune, 435-37. See
Strauss (2004).
14 M enexenus: driving Persia from the sea, 241 d; "sea-battling ", 241 d; "warring ",
241 e; "sailing " , 241 e.
15 Thucydides History: Athens consolidating its own arche "rule , empire " at
Eurymedon , 1.97 .2; initial success in Egypt , 1.104.2; later failure , 1.109-10 .
16 Thucydides History 1.100; cf. Diodorus Siculus Library 11.61, Plutarch Cimon
12.5.6.
17 Plato: allies ' zelos and phthonos , M enexenus 242a; phthonos and comedy, Philebus
47e- 50c; pleasure at kaka going to others , Philebus 48b; public's phthonos
toward Socrates, Apology 28a. Harte (2010) writes about phthonos in comedy; the
word is significant in Pindar, as in Pythian 7.18- 19, for example: "I grieve that
phthonos is the repayment for fine actions". On the Greek vocabulary for varieties
of envy, grudging and malice , see Sanders (2014: 33-57) .
18 Ibid .: 38- 39. Phthonos begrudging honour, etc.: Aeschylus Agamemnon 833, 904;
Aristophanes Knights 1051; Thucydides History 2.35.2; Xenophon Anabasis 5.7.10.
19 Plato: creator without phthonos, Timaeus 29e; divine realm, Phaedrus 247a. See
Stevens (1948); see Bumyeat (2009: 182n.33) onphthonos in the Timaeus; Burnyeat
says "without grudging" , diagnoses phthonos as "the wish to keep all good to
oneself ', criticizes the words "jealousy " and "envy " in other translations of
Timaeus 29e.
207
HISTORY
20 Zelos versus phthonos : Sanders (2014: 46-49); distinction almost prefigured in
Hesiod Works and Days 20-26; zelos as positive alternative, Demosthenes
20.141; turning into phthonos , Sophocles Oedipus Tyrannus 381-82; Pericles on
Athens and other Greeks , Thucydides History 2.64.4 . See Sanders (2014: 48).
21 Thucydides History: Spartans ask for aid , 1.102.1; see Athenians as allophulous ,
1.102.3; end of alliance , 1.102.4.
22 Ibid .: Spartans in Boeotia , 1.107.4; Athenian mobilization , 1.107.5; Athenian
suspicions, 1.107. 6; Spartan victory amid losses, 1.108 .1; Spartans returning
home , 1.108.2; Athenian victory at Oenophytae , 1.108.3.
23 Menexenus: Tanagra and Oenophytae , Boeotians ' freedom , 242a-b. Modern
readers: Collins and Stauffer (1999b: 44n.20); cf. Walters (1981), who reads
Tanagra as an attempt to break up the Boeotian league.
24 M enexenus 242c-d. Thucydides on the significance of the war, Histor y 1.1.
25 Thucydides History: all the events between Oenophytae and Sphacteria , 1.108-4.3;
Sphacteria , 4.1-39; Athenians landing by chance , 4.3.1; Cleon 's refusal to
negotiate , 4.21 .3.
26 Diodorus Siculus Library 12.61- 63; Cawkwell (1997: 73- 74).
27 Thucydides History 4.14.3; Diodorus Siculus Library 12.62.7.
28 Menexenus 242e- 243c.
29 Thucydides History: appeal from Egesta , 6.8.1; political infighting , 6.8-25 ;
departure of Alcibiades , 6.61; Nicias superstitious , 7.50; Syracusan temperament ,
7.40.2 , 8.96.5.
30 Menexenus: dia de mekos tou plou "on account of the length of the voyage ",
243a; "bad luck" , 243a.
31 The trophies on Sicily have been called a "pathetic gesture " to prop up Athenian
morale (Kagan 2003: 312). But it is worth bearing in mind that as the Menexenus
appraises world events, victory and defeat come down to whether or not a state
is enslaved . Athens failed to carry the day on Sicily but was not enslaved ;
the ref ore this was no defeat .
32 Kagan (2009: 164- 86). Some of Kagan's remarks are worth quoting: "Thucydides '
interpretation does not in fact accord well with the Athenians ' behaviour as
reported in his own narrative" (ibid.: 167); "Apart from Thucydides ' characterization,
we have no reason to believe that the Athenians who received the Segestan
request for aid in 416/15 were planning to use it as an excuse to conquer Sicily"
(ibid.: 167- 68); "[Thucydides '] first reference to the expedition of 415 assumes a
goal of conquest from the start . . . Before presenting an account of how the
decision was made - indeed , omitting a description of the debate in the assembly -
he has established his view of the motive for the action, which is unsupported by his
own narrative and contradicted by the evidence " (ibid.: 185).
33 Thucydides History: speech by Hermocrates , 6.33- 34; plou mekos "great distance "
between Athens and Sicily, 6.34.4. Note that Socrates is effectively quoting
Hermocrates ' prediction as after-the-fact explanation.
34 Thucydides History: Hermocrates on Athenian motives, 6.33. What complicates
this use of Hermocrates is his appearance in the dialogues Timaeus and Critias,
which were evidently planned as instalments in a trilogy whose last member would
be the Hermocrates. On the original plan , Hermocrates would have delivered the
third long speech about Athens and its place in world history. Because Plato
never finished the trilogy it is impossible to be sure of his stance toward the
man; but he and Thucydides might both have made him a credible mouthpiece.
35 On the long delay before Athens heard of the defeat see Plutarch Nicias 30.
A stranger came to town , stopped into a barbershop, and commented on the
calamity that he assumed all Athens knew about. For failures of communication
208
HISTORY
across much smaller distances see Plato Phaedo 57a-b. Echecrates in Phlius, a
town that is barely a walk from the Isthmus of Corinth , says he hears very little
news from Athens.
36 The speech says epleusan "they sailed " to Sicily, but does not speak of the
expedition as a naval action . Indeed setting up tropaia "trophies" implies dry
land, and most of the fighting in Sicily did take place on land: M enexenus
242e-243a .
3 7 Thucydides History: naval battles , 8 .104-7; ships captured at Cynossema ,
8.106.1- 3; ships at Cyzicus , 8.107.1 ; "unexpected" good news, 8.106.5 .
38 See Thucydides History 8.94-96.
39 Menexenus: anelpistos kai deinos , 242e-243b; other Greeks ' alliance with Persia,
243b; "we defeated ourselves" , 243d. Note that the Menexenus reiterates this
anelpistos , meaning something unforeseeable in the bad sense, right after
its reference to the naval battles near the Hellespont, which is when Thucydides
uses the word in a positive sense to mean an outcome better than anything the
Athenians hoped for. The word anelpistos occurs twenty-one times in Thucydides
but is rare for Plato , which suggests that he would have needed a reason to use it
twice in a single passage as he does here. This might be a point at which Plato
wanted to correct Thucydides , making the unforeseeable event that followed the
Hellespont the Spartans ' treaty with Persia. This thought goes with the possibility
that Socrates reasons from Hellespont to Persia in the fallowing sentence; see
point 3 below.
40 Thucydides History : the treaty, 8.18; Tissaphernes' motives, 8.5.4-5; encouragement
of plots against Athens , 8.2.
41 Plato Menexenus 243b.
42 Thus Collins and Stauffer (1999b: 46n.26).
43 Thucydides History: return to Tissaphernes, 8.108- 9; Alcibiades made him
"more of a friend " , 8.108 .1; Persians jockeying for influence , 8.109; Tissaphernes
sacrificing , 8 .109.
44 Menexenus: Athenian ships cut off at Mytilene , fresh ships sent, misfortune keeping
bodies from being collected, 243c. Xenophon Hellenica: Sparta chafes at being
Persia 's courtier , 1.6.6-7; Persia funds Sparta , 1.6.18; Conan trapped at Mytilene ,
1.6.16- 17; Athens sends 110 ships (as opposed to Plato 's sixty), 1.6.24; Athens wins,
1.6.33-34; but wind prevents Athenians from gathering the dead , 1.6.35.
45 This passage follows Socrates ' reference to Arginusae . Rahn (1971: 504- 5) reads
Xenophon as making a similar point . He argues that Arginusae is a turning
point for Xenophon , who emphasizes that the Athenians defeated themselves by
succumbing to mob rule , ignoring their own laws even in the face of victory. See
Euryptolemus ' speech in Hellenica , 1.7.33. The Athenians were behaving like a
defeated city. Thucydides too has Athens surrendering because it defeated itself
through internal strife, History 2.65.
46 On the turns of the trial see Xenophon H ellenica 1. 7; perhaps more objecti ve is
Diodorus Siculus Library 13.101- 2, where Socrates is not mentioned. Socrates as
lone opponent to illegal procedure: Hellenica 1.7.15, and Memorabilia 1.1 and
4.4; also see Plato Apology 32b-c ; Gorgias 473e.
47 The Thirty Tyrants: Plato Apology 32c- d; Xenophon Hellenica Book 3; Lysias
12 Against Eratosthenes.
48 Menexenus: chronicle continues, 244b- 246a; these recent events, 244d.
49 Ibid.: Athens forgave barbarians not Greeks , 244b- c; had lost ships and walls to
Greeks, 244c; absconded to form power vacuum that Sparta exploited , 244c-d ;
was begged for help, 244d; is guilty of pity for the oppressed, 244e; freed Greeks
and let Athenians help Persia , 245a.
209
HISTORY
50 Ibid. : Athenians free of barbarian admixture, 245c-e; refused Persian demand
for Asian cities, 245c, e; fought with Persia against Sparta, 245b; at Corinth and
Lechaeum , 245e; drove Sparta from sea, 246a. The acts of the Persian fleet
under Conan are chronicled by Diodorus Siculus, who has Persia imprisoning
Conan before the events that Diodorus calls the Corinthian War: Library 14.79,
14.85 (Conan and the fleet), 14.86 (Corinthian War). Xenophon might put the
imprisonment later: see Hellenica 4.4.5-13 for fighting at Corinth , Canon's
imprisonment at 4.8.16. But it is hard to match the battles Xenophon testifies to
with events reported in the Menexenus.
51 M enexenus: "In this war" , 245e-246a; private citizens helping Persia, 245a;
Athens building walls and ships, 245a; keeping them, 245e. On Athenian
friendliness with Persia at this time see Diodorus Siculus Library 14.81.4; Conan
commanding Persian fleet, 14.79.5; fighting Sparta, 14.79.6. For Canon's using
his position to help rebuild the walls see Diodorus Library 14.85.3, Xenophon
Hellenica 4.8.9-10.
52 These points occur in both Xenophon Hellenica and Diodorus Siculus Library:
(1) Hellenica 3.5.7- 17, Library 14.82.1- 3; (2) Hellenica 4.4, Library 14.86; (3)
Hellenica 5.1.29, Library 14.110.2; (4) Hellenica 5.1.31, Library 14.110.3;
(5) Hellenica 5.1.35, Library 14.110.4. Regarding (1), Xenophon presents the
alliance as Thebes' idea (Hellenica 3.5.7-16) , but his hatred for Thebes may
colour his report . Diodorus makes the agreement seem mutual; Lysias Pro
Mantitheus at least does not ascribe the treaty to Theban instigation (Lysias
16.13). By the way, H ellenica calls this agreement the "first peace ", looking ahead
eleven years to renewal of the treaty in 375. The Menexenus shows no awareness
of a second treaty; so even if Plato was not writing it exactly in 386 he did not
wait long either. The two treaties have been called similar: Cawkwell (1981: 73).
53 Diodorus Siculus Library 14.110.4. In Xenophon Athens is more eager to agree
to terms: Hellenica 5.1.29.
54 Cawkwell (1981: 80) argues that Xenophon systematically understates the
intrusion into Greek affairs that the Peace constituted. The Spartan power that
grew stronger after the Peace depended on the King 's authority , but Xenophon
felt compelled to treat the arrangement as less important than it was.
55 Menexenus 245b- c, d- e.
56 Kahn (1963: 225); Trivigno (2009: 38).
57 Trivigno (2009) uses the combination of these distortions to show that the dialogue
is satirical; also see Henderson (1975: 34). But Kahn (1963: 225) excuses the
distortions by arguing that the public did not expect much accuracy in their
oratory , and generally allowed for lapses in memory.
58 See Liddel (2010) for a discussion of "universal historiography".
59 Thucydides History: speech to the assembly by Pericles (his last), 2.60- 64;
Athenian rule not merely over allies, 2.62.2; "we ruled" more Greeks , 2.64.3;
Athenians now risk loss of rule, 2.63.1; Athens a tyranny , 2.63.2.
60 Silence to conceal past, Collins and Stauffer (1999b: 9). To say nothing where
there is nothing nice to say, Kahn (1963: 225).
61 Pearson (1942) is still a good overview and first guide to Atthidography .
62 See Timaeus 20e on erga mega/a kai thaumasta "great and wondrous deeds",
which fade from memory in time. The first sentence of Histories announces that
it intends to preserve erga mega/a kai th6masta from eventual obscurity
(W~cowski 2004: 146n.22). For a philosophical look at Plato and Herodotus
together see Sharp (2006).
63 Thus Grote (1865: 3:410- 11) says that Plato never read the History or read and
then disregarded it.
210
HISTORY
64 Plato: recent events, Menexenus 244d; "hymn of praise ", Timaeus 21a.
65 See Rahn (1971).
66 Thucydides History 1.23.6.
67 See Lendon (2006, 2007); also sections of a book in progress on the Peloponnesian
War that he graciously showed us. Lendon does not discuss Plato 's way of
practising historical narration , but his sketch of ancient alternati ves to Thucydides
made it possible to situate the Menexenus among those alternatives .
68 Menexenus: non-Athenians fearing Persia , 240c, 241 b-c ; fearing Athens , 244d;
King tends to his safety, 241e; finds himself in aporia , bafflement , 244d; fears,
245b. The King 's fear is always of Athens . The non-Athenian Greeks are also
said, twice, to be katapeplegmenoi "overwhelmed , stunned " presumably by fear;
but phobos and cognate words are absent from those passages.
69 See, for example , Derow (1994).
70 Van Wees (2002: 343).
71 Herodotus Histories: "I will go forward ", 1.5.3-4 ; words of Cyrus, 9 .122.3-4.
72 Plato on cycles in history: myth of Cronus , Statesman 268d-277b ; cf. Timaeus
23a- b.
73 Kahn too focuses on the Menexenus 's history as the key to its overall import . He
too alludes to the navy and to Pericles ' role in Athenian history (Kahn 1963:
223-24). But he does not look at the history as an illustration of historical and
psychological causal principles. His orientation towards the dialogue prohibits
that approach , for he dismisses inaccuracy as a by-product of the genre it belongs
to. No one expects historical fact in a funeral speech. Right or wrong , this premise
predisposes a reader not to look for significance in the way Plato has organized his
list of Athenian battles. As for Pownall, he emphasizes the historical inaccuracies in
the M enex enus, but with too much stress on demonstrating that the dialogue as a
whole is parodic; see Pownall (2004: 49).
74 Mene x enus 241c, 244c, 245a, 245e.
75 Ibid .: 245a . The pairing of walls and ships seems to have been a common
expression in Greek writing. The orator Andocides pairs them in his speech
arguing for a peace with Sparta: On the Peace 3.37. Aristophanes pairs them in
Birds 379: "Cities learn , not from their allies, but from their enemies, how to
build high walls and assemble fleets of ships". Walls and ships are paired in
Euripides ' Rhesus , Sophocles Antigone 1010 and Thucydides Hi story 3.2.
76 See Strauss (2004), who considers not only what obvious anti-democrats like
Xenophon said, but also assesses Arginusae as a focus for anxiety over the
democratic navy.
77 Plato Republic: most primitive city, 2.371a- b; ship of state, 6.488a-489c .
Describing the activities of the first city, Socrates says, "If some trade takes place
by sea [kata thalattan] ... ", 2.371e. Athenians knew that commercial shipping
invited piracy , so that no seafaring trade could take place until after someone
possessed a navy strong enough to quash pirates. See Thucydides Hi story 1.4-5 .
The ship-of-state image does not contradict the dialogues ' usual contempt for
ships and sailors. The ship of state is badly managed precisely because of its
irrational , ungo vernable crew, because it resembles a democracy .
78 Laws 4.704d- 4.705e; Kloska (1986: 9- 11). The Laws ' condemnation of navies
goes with the Athenian Stranger 's denial that Salamis and Artemisium mattered
to victory over Persia. Plataea won the war, says Law s 4.707c, as M enexe nus
241c also implies, and as the most reliable sources from that time - Aeschylus
and Herodotus - do not.
79 The modern reader needs to remember that wealthy Athenians would feel less
allegiance towards the navy because they had to pay for it. A trireme was a
211
HISTORY
big-ticket item, funded until late in the Peloponnesian war by one rich man per
ship. The concrete benefits of imperialism flowed to the Athenian public in the
form of jury-duty pay and assembly pay, these and other expenditures made
possible by the tribute Athens collected from the subject-states of the Delian
League . Thus see a passage in Aristophanes ' Assembl yw omen , a play that Plato
knew well, in which the Athenian assembly considers a motion to launch ships,
the poor citizens voting "yes" and the rich voting "no " (197).
80 Plato Critias : ancient Athens forested (maybe because Plato links deforestation
to timber for ships) , 11 lc; Atlantis with fleet, l 19a- b. On reading Critias for
political and historical import see Naddaf (1994); Vidal-Naquet (1998).
81 Menexenus: Athenians educated to be guardians, 238b; other Greeks educated
by Athenians , 241c; students of Marathoners , 240e.
82 Plato Republic: Greek cities should fight other Greeks with restraint , 5.469b--47lb ;
internecine Greek war stasis "civil strife ", 5.4 70a- b.
83 Plato Republic 4.435e-436a. In his comment on 436a , Shorey (1959) calls
philochrematikon "a virtual synonym " for epithumetikon "desire", citing Republi c
580e and Phaedo 68c, 82c in support of this identification .
84 Herodotus Histories 1.60.3 as an example of Greek thinking about Athenians:
"the Greek nation has of old been thought of as cleverer [dexioteron] than the
barbarians ", while Athenians in turn are said to be first among Greeks in
sophien "wisdom etc .".
85 Hippocrates Airs, Waters , Places: cowardice of Asians , eh. 16; courage of
Europeans , eh. 23.
86 Mene xe nus: Persia wealthy and numerous , 240d , 241 b; Egyptians enemies of
Athens , 24le ; multiplicity of nations in the Persian Empire , 239d- e. The desiring
part of the soul poikilon , Republic 9 .588c.
87 Liddel , discussing the relevance of constitutional change to universal history
among ancient historians , writes , "The Republic 's analysis of constitutional
transformation was carried out without historical reference" , contrasting this
with the discussion of Persian and Athenian constitutions in the La ws (Liddel
2010: 22). The rich history in the Menexenus partly satisfies Liddel 's wish for a
Platonic universal history .
88 Internal constancy of Athens is another implication of the claim (238c- e) that
Athens has always had the same form of government .
89 Menexenus: small power recognizing what is best , 239b , 242d , 244e, 245e;
bringing out courage , 240e-241c ; restrains its anger , 242d ; serves the common as
peacemaker , 242c-d ; restrained by shame , 245a , e.
90 The several paragraphs that follow are especially indebted to the generosity and
scholarly accomplishment of Heidi Northwood 's comments at a meeting of the
Ancient Philosophy Society, Baltimore, MD, in April 2009 .
91 Menexenus: imperfections in the second-best group , 237b ; that group leaves the
alliance, 245d.
92 Plato Republic: timocratic man 's complaining mother, 8.549b; his phthono s,
9.586c ; phthonos in tyrannical souls, 9.579c , 580a; philosophical soul does not
experience phthonos , 7.500c . For a precise distinction between philotimia and
phthonos that makes a good gloss on Republic 586c, see Aristotle Rhetoric 2.10
( e.g. l 387b32 , 1388al-3).
93 Other cities' ze los and phthono s, Mene xe nus 242a. Northwood writes in elucidation
of this point: "as in the Republic , the 'fall ' from the best in the Menexe nus also
involves a perversion of a proper love of honour and love of the best", a summation
it would be hard to improve upon.
94 Menex enus 243b.
212
HISTORY
95 Plato on philonikia: the word used without negative connotations , Laws 8.834c;
with disagreeable sense, Gorgias 515b, Laches 194a, Laws 9.860d , Timaeus 88a;
two motives behind spurious prosecution , Laws 11.938b-c.
96 Plato: philonikia and epithumia , Timaeus 90b; and thumos , Republic 8.548c.
97 Polybius Histories: phthonos , 6.7.8, 6.9.1. See Liddel (2010) on Polybius and
regime change as they figure in the history of universal history. For phthonos in
other historians see Herodotus Histories 7 .236 (but there it is merely a general
description of all Greeks) , Thucydides History 3.82.8, 3.84.2. Thucydides
acknowledges phthonos as a contributory motive in history , but it does not
belong among his "truest causes " .
98 We owe this point to Heidi Northwood.
99 Plato: Athens made alliance with Persia out of pity, Menexenus 244e; rulers ' not
pitying lower souls in the good city, Republic 3.415c; tragedy and pity, Republic
10.606b-c. On eleos and oiktos, see Sternberg (2005: 22- 24). Perhaps eleos connotes
mercy in addition to pity, while oiktos specifies the emotional strength of the feeling.
But Sternberg makes clear how difficult it is to distinguish between them sharply .
The funeral oration of Lysias specifies that the men fighting at Salamis felt eleos
for their children and oiktos for their aging parents; Lysias 2.39. Both are apt
objects of pity, strong pity in both cases.
100 Plato 's historical passages present slavery as an emblem of other forms of authority .
One should expect to find authority threatened when people who should be free are
slaves and vice versa. Thus in the Republic the first degeneration fallows from
preoccupation with property and with holding "as slaves those they once guarded
as free friends . . . and occupying themselves with guarding against those they
have enslaved": 8.547b. The freedom of people who ought to be slaves is just as
bad a sign. Tyranny comes naturally into existence in a city where "male and
female slaves are no less free than the persons who bought them ": 8.563b.
101 Menexenus: Cyrus enslaves Medes , 239d-e; Athenians not one another 's slaves or
masters , 239a ; non-Athenian Greeks when freed enslave themsel ves again , 245a .
213
CONCLUSION
Buried in philosophy
At every turn , this book has argued , the speech in the Mene x enus puts itself
forward as something better than the famous funeral oration of Pericles.
Because a parody distorts the original or otherwise amplifies its faults , this
effort to improve on the speech of Pericles prevents the Mene x enus speech
from having been meant as parody.
The Menexenus's improvements to the funeral speech
On our reading the will to improve on Pericles appears everywhere . For one
thing the speech surpasses the original in its emphasis on educat ion. Where
Pericles vaunted the virtue of Athenians , their courage above all, he omitted
explaining how to educate his fellow citizens . The Mene xe nus speech forces
education into each Periclean lacuna , specifically with talk of imitating the
excellent fall en soldiers as the process by which one achieves the same
excellence they had.
As rhetoric of prai se, the new speech improves on the original by honouring
the act of praising, and practising praise, where Pericles shied away from
praising in practice and theorized about its dangers. He feared that high
praise might excite envy in his audience ; but Socrates , gluing the parts back
into Aspasia 's speech that Pericles had evidently cut out of it, lets the language
of praise suit its objects: the earth of Attica , the city of Athens , the Athenian
people 's virtues.
The speech in the Mene x enus most clearly improves on the speech that
Pericles gave, or so Plato would have to see things , in its uses of myt h and
histor y. Pericles glided over the traditional Athenian story of autochthony
despite its obvious popularity to Athenians . In place of his silence Socrates tells
the story in its most patriotic terms , revising it as he does. When Earth alone
has borne the Athenian people , they face no conflict between the two characteristics
that the traditional myth had left them with , their natures from Ge and
their intelligent technai from Athena . The Mene x enus assigns Athena 's traits to
Ge and so lets nature do the work of culture. As Chapter 7 says, nature now
generates the technai that had once been thought of as impositions upon nature.
214
CONCLUSION : BURIED IN PHILOSOPHY
Finally there is a new history, to be set against the chronicle that Thucydides
had offered his readers as the serious way of writing the past. In this case we
found the speech's well-known omissions , distortions and outright falsehoods
playing a role of previously unsuspected precision , shaping the events of the
preceding century so that international history (what an Athenian of the
classical age would have seen as the world at large) fits the same patterns of
decline that Republic 8 and 9 found at work in the city and the individual
soul. Where Thucydides can only explain events in terms of bad luck,
intractable human conflict and irrational fears contemplating irrational restlessness,
the Menexenus describes a world of rational order that malicious
envy sets on a downward path , until the forces of desire have taken over
reason's role.
The book 's overriding question "Was this intended as an improvement? "
avoids debates that are incapable of resolving , in which one side hears merriment
or smells an arcane joke , the other sees straight-ahead assertions and feels no
humour. It seems plain to us that if the rewriting of some work issues in a new
work of the same kind , one that is intended to be a better ex ample of the same
form or genre, then the new work is not a parody. It does not , in the words of a
recent handbook of literary terms , "mock the style and stance of particular
authors , works , or genres " . Those who want to call a would-be better example
of the same form or genre a parody according to some fresh and unorthodox
conception of parody are welcome to that fresh conception as long as they
agree that the M enex enus speech is meant to be superior to the speech we know
as Pericles'. Literary terms change ; after all , "parody " originally ref erred to
musical antiphony. 1 But they will have to say that the New Testament parodied
the Hebrew Bible and Einstein parodied Newton.
The Menexenus and other dialogues
Because reading through even a short dialogue takes time and many pages ,
and more than usual in the case of a work that has been less examined by
scholars, the preceding chapters mainly looked into the claims and arguments
of the funeral speech itself. To elaborate at every step about the view in
Pericles that is being rebutted would have bloated this book and blurred its
central arguments. We have pointed out where certain ideas in Pericles find
themselves replaced by Socratic ideas: Athens as educator to other cities
(which becomes Athens educating its own), Athens as mistress (improvised
into Athens the mother) , even the fundamental idea of a burial , the act of
saying goodbye to Athenian soldiers , in Pericles close to a resolution to
speak of them no more, in Socrates an occasion for them to give their own
last speech .
As for the man behind the words of Pericles: Thucydides produced such a
monumental history that it would be hopeless to try juxtaposing our reading
of the history in the Mene x enus to the overall story told in Thucydides. The
215
CONCLUSION: BURIED IN PHILOSOPHY
complete account of what makes Plato's funeral speech philosophically
better than the one Pericles delivered would require a complete account of
both Pericles and Thucydides.
Even so it may be worth reading the Menexenus alongside other works , and
especially alongside other Platonic dialogues. We have noted some connections
along the way, but there is more to say. Regarding the progressive decline in
history, experienced readers of the Republic will see other similarities between
those two dialogues: the species of disunion that appears when a rational
order crumbles , the persisting image of not just rationality within the dominant
element but even philosophical rationality . As history, the Menexenus belongs
close together with the Republic.
But there are also histories , after a fashion , in the Timaeus and Critias. The
legendary Athens that those dialogues tell of is a city that had its origin in its
people's autochthonous birth, then grew with wisdom and virtue until it
halted a mammoth enslaving power. It is simpler to cast Plato as nothing but
antagonistic towards Athens , and understandable; but the balanced story of
how he saw his native city would put the Timaeus and Critias together with
the Menexenus, and with passages in other dialogues , to bring forward a
strain of patriotism , and Plato 's sense of Athens as he would like to be able
to love it - Athens as it would have to be for him to feel justified in loving it.
The Mene x enus 's ripostes to Pericles on the subject of education might be
the most specific. Every time Pericles slips past the idea of making his fell ow
citizens better, Socrates ( or Aspasia) glues a comment back in about education.
As a call to education in virtue the Mene xenus harmonizes well with the
Republic as a whole , of course , and with passages in the Statesman and La ws.
But there are also the Gorgias, the Meno and the Protagora s to think 0£ In all
these dialogues , every well-run city is said to need an education in virtue
overseen by philosophy, but that is one element left out of democracy's civic
culture. Again what Socrates does to the speech of Pericles looks like what
Plato would call an improvement.
But even supposing that the speech by Socrates is better than the one it
answers , and even if you call it better by Platonic standards on the grounds
that it supports moral or political claims to be found in other dialogues; even
so that does not make it better rhetoric by Platonic standards. The sceptic
might not grant that Plato sees this speech as an example of rhetoric superior
to the speech that Pericles made. On what grounds would Plato call the
M enexenus superior rhetoric? We need a word here, even if it is no more than
a closing word , about Plato's understanding of rhetoric , and if possible with
reference to a less controversial source than the Menexenus itself.
Rhetoric dominates two dialogues, the Gorgias and the Phaedrus, although
the two put forward different claims about the value that rhetoric might have,
which is to say about whether it is open to philosophical redemption. At least
at first sight the two dialogues' assessments are incompatible. The Gorgias
lets Socrates voice such harsh judgements towards rhetoric that looking to it
216
CONCLUSION : BURIED IN PHILOSOPHY
for the promise of good rhetoric feels desperate. It should not be the dialogue to
bring into this parting look at Platonic rhetoric, when rhetoric on its analysis
amounts to no more than practical canniness. Socrates calls rhetoric an empeiria ,
a word that translators render as "knack " or "empirical know-how "; a good
ordinary single word might be "practice ", and rhetoric is part of the more
general practice that Socrates calls kolakeia "flattery, fawning, currying
favour". Rhetoric belongs with cooking , standing against justice as cooking
does against medical science. It is something you do and that you might even
get better at doing , with time , but not because you come to know something
in the process. After all teaching differs from rhetoric in that the former
persuades by supplying knowledge , the latter by bringing belief without
knowledge . 2
Where practical tricks suffice in the realm of knack and know-how ,
philosophical knowledge could not accomplish more , even if a philosopher
should think to attempt a rhetorical exercise. The very attempt would
resemble a modern statistician 's buying lottery tickets . Winning the lottery is
a matter of chance; understanding statistics would not make you better at
that chancy pursuit, except in the sense that seeing how bad the odds are
would prevent you from buying a ticket. Likewise , knowing philosophy could
only help you at rhetoric by steering you away from it. So much for a
philosophically guided funeral speech . If this is the only conception of
rhetoric to be found in Plato , then it almost follows that the Mene x enus
speech must be a parody.
The middle section of the Theaetetus contrasts philosopher with public
speaker in similar terms. The man who speaks effectively in courtrooms
appears to have genuine skill. And surely, whatever this ability to move a jury
is, the philosopher does not possess it. But then the philosopher , a gentleman
of the soul compared with the slavish orator , inquires into general truths as
the orator could not hope to . As in the Gorgias, philosophically informed
rhetoric is, if not an oxymoron , an absurdity by some other measure . (The
Gorgias imagines a doctor having to debate a pastry chef; in the Theaetetus
the philosopher is a gentleman while the courtroom speaker resembles a
slave in the kitchen sweetening the sauce. 3)
Despite being associated with rhetoric, the Gorgias only spends about a
quarter of its length on the subject , twenty Stephanus pages out of eighty. That
first quarter attacks rhetoric without mercy, closing with a remark by Socrates
that orators work without nous "intelligence ", and that he does not expect to be
disabused of that opinion . After this, rhetoric only returns to the conversation
briefly, a couple of times ; and in one of those returns to the subject Socrates
says one thing that might be construed as a concession. Rhetoric could exist
that improved its audience , though he does not think that Callicles (to whom
he is talking) has ever seen an example of this nobler variety. 4
Can Socrates be holding out the prospect of a new rhetoric composed and
delivered by philosophers? The dialogue 's subsequent conversation does not
217
CONCLUSION: BURIED IN PHILOSOPHY
explore the question , but it is not hard to read such a promise in this passage.
On the contrary the problem is that it is too easy ; trivial really ; and trivially
easy to show that the M enex enus meets this one open standard . As long as
the M enex enus speech is seen as somehow able to educate , the lone criterion
in the Gorgias is satisfied. The speech contains true claims , as this book has
argued. It seems to aim at keeping its audience moderate and thinking
reasonably. The Gorgias's Socrates would have to call it better rhetoric than
the speech of Pericles .
The Phaedrus
According to most accounts of Plato on rhetoric it is the Pha edrus that
suggests anything resembling a compromise . The same Socrates who scoffs at
long speeches in other dialogues now calls himself a lover of rhetoric. He
praises Pericles and nods at such rivals as Isocrates . To be sure, philosophy
sets the terms for reconciliation with rhetoric. In the Phaedru s rhetoric is
said to require an understanding of its subject matter , an understanding that
calls for rigorous definition using the division-and-collection method. First
narrow the large genera into smaller species, then be ready to talk. This is
the philosopher 's method. What professional speechwriters instead believe
they need to know , what they find in manuals that distinguish the parts of
every speech , is too little too late. A manual provides vague descriptions of
speeches without regard for the knowledge that makes them work. 5
Besides defining the item to be talked about , Socrates says, the practitioners
of rhetoric must master a taxonomy of human souls. They need to identify
the souls in their audience and tailor each speech to the type of soul that
is hearing it. The Phaed rus makes clear that this knowledge comes from
philosophy too . So you will be able to produce good rhetoric if you learn
your subject as philosophers do and then communicate it according to principles
of philosophical psychology. And not otherwise. 6
The game is rigged in philosophy 's favour, but at least the Pha edrus shows
how it might be played . And the main speech that Socrates delivers, the one he
treats as a case of successful rhetoric , appears to follow the dialogue 's rules. This
account of er6s praises the passion and the god who is called by the same name ;
even praises them to excess, as Socrates will praise Athens in the M enexe nus.
One can always praise without knowledge. But if we make knowledge the
Platonic touchstone for successful philosophical rhetoric, the M enexe nus
speech again passes the test . Every aspect of the speech that this book has
investigated finds Socrates replacing Periclean propaganda with Platonic
knowledge-claims - about education in the most pointed way, but also about
rhetoric , and about the running of the city.
Even division and collection appears in the M enexe nus, when Socrates
separates Athens from all other Greek cities on the grounds that its people
are indigenous to Attica while the people in other cities migrated to their
218
CONCLUSION : BURIED IN PHILOSOPHY
present homes. Those who migrate have step-maternal cities where Athenians
have a true motherland: the differentiation echoes the passage in the Phaedrus
that separates good eras from its bad variety (putting , as Socrates says there ,
the bad one on the left).7 A god is at work in cases of good eras, as the great
goddess Ge lies behind the good city that is Athens and not , or not in the
same way, behind other Greek cities.
What about the Phaedrus's demand that philosophical rhetoric begin with
what philosophy has to teach about souls? First notice how closely the Menex enus's
myth of autochthony is made to reflect what other dialogues say about
the soul. As we argue , this myth that served other purposes in its traditional
manifestations is made to say in the Menexenus, as it does nowhere else, that
there are three types of human beings: Athenians , other Greeks and nonGreeks.
In light of the fact that the M enexenus portrays those three types as
behaving according to (respectively) reason , high-spiritedness that is capable
of courage , and the desire for sex and other bodily pleasures , they embody
the three parts of the soul as given in the Republic, but also in the Phaedrus
and Timaeus. Surely this specificity about human motivations imbues the
funeral speech with psychological content.
Of course , one can see the most famous sentence from the M enexenus as a
nod to the Phaedrus and a sign that it meets the Phaedrus's criteria for better
rhetoric . When Socrates says "It is not hard to praise Athens among the
Athenians "8 he is already tipping Menexenus off (and the alert reader) that
besides understanding the centrality of praise to the speech he is about to
give, he understands the souls of the people who will hear it.
If this much soul-knowledge does not suffice, the great speech in the Phaedrus
points to another way of understanding the subject. That speech clearly contains
and seeks to demonstrate knowledge about human souls. Socrates ranks
souls : this seems to be a central part of the knowledge available ( even if the
dialogue leaves open the possibility that there are other taxonomies available for
sorting souls). Depending on the philosophical insight each soul achieved in its
life before taking on a body , it will find itself in one of the following lives:
1 philosopher or beauty-lover or musical and erotic man ;
2 legitimate king or warrior;
3 politician or household manager or chrematistiko s "financier";
4 trainer or doctor ;
5 prophet or priest ;
6 poet or mimetic artist ;
7 worker or farmer ;
8 sophist or demokopiko s "demagogue"; and
9 tyrant, tyrannical type.9
The point of writing out this ranking is that soul-knowledge, as this must be,
contains knowledge of the degradations to which souls are subject. Readers
219
CONCLUSION: BURIED IN PHILOSOPHY
do not always connect this passage from the Phaedrus with the Republic's
tale of decline, the one that our previous chapter drew on, but the two fit
together surprisingly well. The soul types in bold type on this list correspond
respectively to (1) the Kallipolis or best city; (2) the honour-loving timocracy;
(3) money-chasing oligarchy; then to (8) democracy , which makes a welcome
home for sophists and elevates public speakers to powerful positions; finally
to (9) tyranny. 10
These are not extreme claims. The complete theory of the human soul will
include a theory of how some souls are better than others and for what reasons.
But if the argument of Chapter 8 is plausible , that the historical narrative in
the M enexenus organizes events from recent history to match the stages of
individual and political history one finds in Republic Books 8 and 9, that
narrative too seems to contain some theory of soul, or is not ignorant of such
a theory. By the standards that Socrates proposes in the Phaedrus for rhetoric
a philosopher can respect, the speech in the Menexenus succeeds.
There is no other way to say it. Philosophizing pervades the funeral speech.
We trust that by now it no longer seems like mock-philosophizing. The thought
in the Menexenus gives this speech the status it has as serious rhetoric, fitting
Plato's idea of how rhetoric might look if someone serious thought to practise
it. If philosophers cannot govern the city yet, they might still help it along by
coming forward on a sombre day to guide its mourning and give the survivors
hope. The fall en soldiers may well find themselves waking on the Isles of the
Blessed; at least (what also counts) their families will believe such a thing; for
the soldiers are being , they will have been, buried in philosophy.
Notes
1 Parodies "mock the style"; the word meant antiphony (Mickics 2007: 224).
As we said in the introduction , the proviso that the new work is meant as a
better version of the same genre is meant to ward off a counter-example in
which, say, a travel book is tedious but the parody of it is brilliant parody.
"Galway Bay" is undistinguished as nostalgic song of home , but the parody is
an excellent drinking song. In such instances the parody is a better example of
its kind than the original had been, but is not, nor was intended to be, a better
example of the same genre.
2 Plato Gorgias: rhetoric an empeiria , 462c; part of kolakeia , 463b; is to justice as
cooking is to medicine , 465c; differs from teaching , 454e.
3 Plato Theaetetus: contrasts philosopher with orator , 172c-17 5e; speaker's
appearance of skill, 173a- b; philosopher lacks it, 174c; philosopher surpasses
orator in abstract inquiry, 175c-d; is to orator as gentleman to kitchen slave,
17 5e; cf. Gorgias 464e on doctor and chef.
4 Plato Gorgias: orators lack nous, 467a; noble rhetoric might exist though Callicles
hasn 't seen it, 503a-b.
5 Plato Phaedrus: Socrates lover of speeches, 236e; praises Pericles, 269e;
acknowledges Isocrates , 278e- 279a; rhetoric requires division and collection ,
264e-266c; manuals of rhetoric inadequate , 266d-268d.
6 Plato Phaedrus 270e- 272a.
220
CONCLUSION: BURIED IN PHILOSOPHY
7 Ibid.: 266a-b.
8 Menexenus 235d.
9 Plato Phaedrus 248d-e.
10 Why the four other types at ranks ( 4)-(7)? This is not the place to interpret the
Phaedrus , but a few words are worth adding . First , the speech in the Phaedrus
aims at completeness , accounting for all (free, male , Greek) souls. Second , Plato
may well have observed what Aristotle would say after him: that actual
constitutions combine oligarchical and democratic elements ; therefore , if you
want to find the greatest number of actual examples of humanity you should
look between (3) and (8). Third , within ( 4)-(7) you find first the higher technai
and then the lower ones: ( 4) higher rational professions, (5) higher irrational or
"manic " professions , (6) lower irrational or manic professions , (7) lower rational
professions.
221
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Annas, J. 1982. "Plato's Myths of Judgment". Phronesis 27(2): 119-43.
Aty, J. 1982. "Dorians and Ionians ". Journal of Hellenic Studies 102: 1-14.
Austin , J. L. 1958. "Pretending". Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 32(Suppl.):
261-78.
--1962. How to Do Things with Words. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Avery, H. C. 1982. "One Antiphon or Two?". Hermes 110(2): 145-58.
Balot , R. 1999. Review of Podlecki, Perikles and his Circle. Bryn Mawr Classical
Review 1999.1.14, http://bmcr .brynmawr .edu/1999/1999-01-14.html (accessed
March 2014).
--2001 . "Pericles' Anatomy of Democratic Courage ". American Journal of Philology
122(4): 505-25.
Barbeyrac , J. 1729. "An Historical and Critical Account of the Science of Moralit y".
Preface in S. Pufendorf , Of the Law of Nature and Nations , G. Carew (trans.).
London: Walthoe et al.
Bauman , R. A. 1990. Political Trials in Ancient Greece. London: Routledge.
Bayle, P. 1739. A General Dictionary , Historical and Critical, vol. VIII , J. P. Bernard
et al. (trans.). London: James Bettenham .
Berges, S. 2007. "Virtue Ethics, Politics, and the Function of Laws: The Parent
Analogy in Plato 's Mene xenus". Dialogue 46(2): 211- 30.
Betegh, G. 2009. "Tale, Theology, and Teleology in the Phaedo ". See Partenie
(2009a), 77- 100.
Bicknell, P. J. 1982. "Axiochus Alkibiadou, Aspasia and Aspasios ". Acta Classica 51:
240- 50.
Blank , D. 1985. "Socratics versus Sophists on Payment for Teaching ". Classical
Antiquity 4(1 ): 1- 49.
Bloedow, E. F. 1975. "Aspasia and the 'Mystery ' of the Menexenos ". Wiener Studien
n.s. 9: 32- 48.
Boedeker, D. 2007. "Athenian Religion in the Age of Pericles". In The Cambridge
Companion to the Age of Pericles, L. J. Samons II (ed.), 46- 69. Cambridge :
Cambridge University Press.
Borthwick , E. K. 2001. "The Cynic and the Statue". Classical Quarterly 51 (2): 494- 98.
Boyd, T. W 1995. "Libri Confusi ". Classical Journal 91(1): 35- 45.
Brandwood , L. 1992. "Stylometry and Chronology " . In The Cambridge Companion
to Plato , R. Kraut (ed.), 90-120 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
222
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Burnyeat, M. 1977. "Socratic Midwifery , Platonic Inspiration". British Institute of
Classical Studies 24: 7-16.
--2009 . "Eikos Muthos" . See Partenie (2009a), 167-86.
--2012. "First Words: A Valedictory Lecture" . In his Explorations in Ancient and
Modern Philosophy, vol. 2, 305-25. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carson, A. 1992. "How Not to Read a Poem: Unmixing Simonides from Protagoras" .
Classical Philology 87(4): 110-30 .
Cavell, S. 1969. "Aesthetic Problems of Modern Philosophy". In his Must We Mean
What We Say?, 73-96. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
--2005. Philosophy the Day After Tomorrow . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Cawkwell , G. L. 1968. Review of I. A. F. Bruce , An Historical Commentary on the
"Hellenica Oxyrhynchia". Classical Review 18(3): 288-90 .
-- 1981. "The King's Peace". Classical Quarterly n.s. 31(1): 69- 83.
-- 1997. Thucydides and the Peloponnesian War. London: Routledge.
Clavaud , R. 1980. Le Menexene de Platon et la rhetorique de son temps. Paris: Societe ,
d'Edition "Les Belles Lettres".
Cohen , E. E. 2006. "Free and U nfree Sexual Work". In Prostitutes and Courtesans in
the Ancient World , C. A. Faraone & L. K. McClure (eds), 95- 124. Madison, WI:
University of Wisconsin Press.
Colakis , M. 1998. Review of Henry, Prisoner of History. Classical World 91: 299.
Collins, S. D. & D. Stauffer 1999a. "The Challenge of Plato's Menexenus " . Review of
Politics 61 (1 ): 85- 115.
-- 1999b. Empire and the Ends of Politics: Plato's "Menexenus" and Pericles' Funeral
Oration: Translation , Introduction, and Notes. Newburyport , MA: Focus Publishing.
Connor, WR . 1993. "The Ionian Era of Athenian Civic Identity". Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society 137(2): 194- 206.
Cooper , J. (ed .) 1997. Plato: Complete Works. Indianapolis , IN: Hackett.
Coventry , L . 1989. "Philosophy and Rhetoric in the Menexenus". Journal of Hellenic
Studies 109: 1- 15.
Davison, J. A. 1955. "Peisistratus and Homer". Transactions and Proceedings of the
American Philological Association 86(1 ): 1- 21.
Dean-Jones , L. 1995. "Menexenus - Son of Socrates " . Classical Quarterly n .s. 45(1) :
51-57 . ,
Delcourt , M. 1957. Hephafstos OU la legende du magicien . Paris: Societe d'Edition
"Les Belles Lettres".
Derow , P. 1994. "Historical Explanation: Polybius and his Predecessors " . In Greek
Historiography , S. Hornblower (ed.) , 73-90. New York: Oxford University Press.
Destree , P. & N. D. Smith (eds) 2005. Socrates' Divine Sign: Religion , Practice and
Value in Socratic Philosophy. Kelowna, BC: Academic Printing & Publishing.
Detienne, M. & J.-P. Vernant 1978. Cunning Intelligence in Greek Culture and Society,
J. Lloyd (trans.). Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press.
Dillery , J. 2005. "Greek Sacred History". American Journal of Philology 126( 4): 505-26.
Dombrowski , D. A. 1981. Plato's Philosophy of History . Washington , DC: University
Press of America.
Dougherty , C. 1998. "It 's Murder to Found a Colony " . In Cultural Poetics in Archaic
Greece: Cult, Performance, Politics , C. Dougherty & L. Kurke (eds) , 179-98. New
York: Oxford University Press.
223
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Drews, R. 1986. Review of Fornara , The Nature of History in Ancient Greece and
Rome. Classical Philology 81(2): 164-69.
Dupin , L. E. 1690. Nouvelle Bibliotheque des auteurs ecclesiastiques, vol. I. Paris:
Andre Pralard.
Ehlers, B. 1966. Eine vorplatonische Deutung des sokratischen Eros: Der Dialog
Aspasia des Sorkatikers Aischines. Munich: Beck.
Ferrari , G. R . F. 2009. "Glaucon's Reward , Philosophy's Debt: The Myth of Er" . See
Partenie (2009a), 116-33.
Ficino , M. 2006. Gardens of Philosophy: Ficino on Plato, A. Farndell (trans.).
London: Shepheard-Walwyn.
Finley, M. I. 1973. Democracy Ancient and Modern. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press.
Frangeskou, V. 1999. "Tradition and Originality in Some Attic Funeral Orations ".
Classical World 92(4): 315- 36.
Frutiger, P. 1930. Les Mythes de Platon. Paris: Felix Alcan.
Fussi, A. 2001. "The Myth of the Last Judgement in the Gorgias". Review of Metaphysics
54(3): 529- 52.
Gagarin, M. 2002. Antiphon the Athenian: Oratory, Law, and Justice in the Age of the
Sophists. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Gaiser , K. 1980. "Plato's Enigmatic Lecture: 'On the Good "'. Phronesis 25(1): 5- 37.
Gale , T. 1677. The Court of the Gentiles, or, A Discourse Touching the Original of
Human Literature . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Geddes , A. G. 1987. "Rags and Riches: The Costume of Athenian Men in the Fifth
Century". Classical Quarterly 37(2): 307- 31.
Geddes, J. 1748. Essay on the Composition and Manner of Writing of the Antients,
Particularly Plato . Glasgow: Robert Foulis.
Gehrke , H.-J. 2001. "Myth , History , and Collective Identity: Uses of the Past in
Ancient Greece and Beyond ". In The Historian 's Craft in the Age of Herodotus ,
N. Luraghi (ed.), 286- 313. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gellrich, M. 1994. "Socratic Magic: Enchantment, Irony, and Persuasion in Plato 's
Dialogues". Classical World 87(4): 275- 307.
Ginsburg , J. 1997. Review of Henry , Prisoner of History. Classical Philology 92(2):
189-93.
Graf , F. 1997. Magic in the Ancient World, F. Phillip (trans.) . Cambridge , MA:
Harvard University Press.
Graves, C. E. 1896. The "Euthyphro " and "Menexenus" of Plato. London: Macmillan .
Gray , V. J. 1981. "Dialogue in Xenophon's H ellenica". Classical Quarterly 31 (2):
321-34.
--1987 . "Mimesis in Greek Historical Theory ". American Journal of Philology
108(3): 467-86.
--1991. "Continuous History and Xenophon , Hellenica 1-2.3.10 " . American
Journal of Philology 112(2): 201-28.
--1997. "Reading the Rise of Pisistratus: Herodotus 1.56-68". Histos 1, www.dur.ac.
uk/Classics/histos/1997 /gray.html ( accessed September 2013).
Greckol , A. 1999. "A Commentary on Plato 's M enexenus". MA thesis, University of
Alberta.
Grote , G. 1865. Plato and the Other Companions of Sokrates , vol. III. London: John
Murray.
224
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Hale, J. R. 2009. Lords of the Sea: The Epic Story of the Athenian Navy and the Birth
of Democracy. New York: Viking.
Hall , J. M . 1997. Ethnic Identity in Greek Antiquit y. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
--2002 . Hellenicity: Between Ethnicity and Culture. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
--2007 . A History of the Archaic Greek World, ea. 1200-478 BCE. Malden , MA :
Blackwell.
Halperin , D. 1990. "Why is Diotima a Woman?" In his One Hundred Years of
Homosexuality, 113-52. New York: Routledge.
Hanson , V D. 1995. The Other Greeks: The Family Farm and the Agrarian Roots of
Western Civilization. New York: The Free Press.
Harte , V 2010. "Mixed Emotions about Comedy: Philebus 48a-50b ". Paper presented
at the Conference on Art and Morality in Plato , Leuven , 6- 7 May.
Hedreen , G. 2004. "The Return of Hephaistos , Dionysiac Processional Ritual and the
Creation of a Visual Narrative". Journal of Hellenic Studies 124: 38- 64.
Henderson , M. M. 1975. "Plato 's Menexenus and the Distortion of History " . Acta
Classica 18: 25-46.
Henry , M. M. 1995. Prisoner of History: Aspasia of Miletus and her Biographical
Tradition. New York: Oxford University Press.
Herrman , J. 2004. Athenian Funeral Orations: Translation , Introduction , and Notes .
Newburyport, MA : Focus Publishing .
Holmberg , I. E. 2003. "Hephaistos and Spiders ' Webs" . Phoeni x 57(1- 2): 1- 17.
Hornblower , S. 1995. "The Fourth-Century and Hellenistic Reception of Thucydides ".
Journal of Hellenic Studies 115: 48- 68.
-- 2004. Thucydides and Pindar: Historical Narrative and the World of Epinikian
Poetry. New York: Oxford University Press.
Huby , P. M . 1957. "The Menexenus Reconsidered ". Phronesis 2(2): 104- 14.
Irwin , T. 2000. Nicomachean Ethics , 2nd edn . Indianapolis , IN: Hackett .
Isherwood , C. 2007. "Checking in with Glimmer Twins, Plato and Aristotle ".
New York Times (18 June) , www.nytimes.com/2007 /06/ 18/theater/reviews/18targ .html?
pagewanted=all&_r=0 (accessed March 2014).
Jones , C. P. 1999. Kinship Diplomac y in the Ancient World. Cambridge , MA: Harvard
University Press.
Kagan , D. 1991. Pericles of Athens and the Birth of Democra cy. New York: Free
Press.
--2003 . The Peloponnesian War. New York: Viking .
--2009 . Thucydides: The Reinvention of Histor y. New York: Viking .
Kahn , C. 1963. "Plato 's Funeral Oration: The Motive of the Menexenus ". Classical
Philology 58( 4): 220-34.
--2009. "The Myth of the Statesman". See Partenie (2009a) , 148-66.
Kassel , R. & C. Austin (eds) 1998. Poetae Comici Graeci. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Keefer, D. 2011. "Speaking Well of the Dead: On the Aesthetics of Eulogies ". Sophia
50(2): 303-11.
Kerch , T. M. 2008. "Plato 's Menexenus: A Paradigm of Rhetorical Flattery ". Palis
25(1 ): 94-114.
Klagge , J. C. & N. D. Smith (eds) 1992. Methods of Interpreting Plato and His
Dialogues. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
225
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Kloska , G. 1986. The Development of Plato's Political Theory. New York:
Methuen & Co.
Kyle, D. 2003 . '"The Only Woman in All Greece': Kyniska , Agesilaus , Alcibiades
and Olympia" . Journal of Sport History 30(2): 183-203.
Ledbetter, G. M. 2002. Poetics Before Plato: Interpretation and Authority in Early
Greek Theories of Poetry. Princeton , NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lendon, J. E. 2006. "Xenophon and the Alternative to Realist Foreign Policy: Cyropaedia
3.1.14-31". Journal of Hellenic Studies 126: 82-98.
--2007. "Athens and Sparta and the Coming of the Peloponnesian War". In The
Cambridge Companion to the Age of Pericles, L. J. Samons II ( ed.), 258-81. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Levin, S. 1959. Review of Delcourt , Hephafstos ou la legende du magicien. Classical
Review 54(7): 332-34.
Levine, J. 1990. "Ulysses". In The Cambridge Companion to James Joyce, D. Attridge
(ed.), 122- 48. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Liddel, P. 2010. "M etabole Politeion as Universal Historiography" . In Historiae
Mundi: Studies in Universal Historiography , P. Liddel & A. Fear (eds), 15- 29.
London: Duckworth.
Long , C. P. 2003 . "Dancing Naked with Socrates: Pericles , Aspasia and Socrates at
Play with Politics , Rhetoric and Philosophy" . Ancient Philosophy 23(1) 49- 69.
Loraux , N. 1986. The Invention of Athens: The Funeral Oration in the Classical City,
A. Sheridan (trans.). Cambridge , MA: Harvard University Press.
-- 1990. "Kreousa the Autochthon: A Study of Euripides' Ion " . In Nothing to Do
with Dionysos? , J. J. Winkler & F. I. Zeitlin (eds), 168- 206. Princeton , NJ: Princeton
University Press.
-- 1993. The Children of Athena: Athenian Ideas about Citizenship and the
Division between the Sexes , C. Levine (trans.) . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University
Press.
-- 2000. Born of the Earth: Myth and Politics in Athens , S. Stewart (trans.). Ithaca ,
NY : Cornell University Press.
Mahoney , P 0. 2010. "The Origin of the Olive: On the Dynamics of Plato 's Menexenus ".
Palis 27(1 ): 38- 57.
McCoy , M. 2008 . Plato on the Rhetoric of Philosophers and Sophists . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press .
McPherran , M. L. 1996. The Religion of Socrates. University Park , PA: Pennsylvania
State University Press.
Mickics , D. 2007. A New Handbook of Literary Terms. New Haven , CT : Yale
University Press.
Moles , J. 1996. "Herodotus Warns the Athenians " . Papers of the Leeds International
Latin Seminar 9: 259-84.
Monoson , S. S. 1992. "Remembering Pericles: The Political and Theoretical Import
of Plato 's Menexenus " . Political Theory 26(4) : 489-513 .
--2000. Plato's Democratic Entanglements : Athenian Politics and the Practice of
Philosoph y. Princeton , NJ: Princeton University Press.
Morgan , K. A. 1998. "Designer History: Plato's Atlantis Story and Fourth-Century
Ideology " . Journal of Hellenic Studies 118: 101-18.
Morrison , J. V 1994. "A Key Topos in Thucydides: The Comparison of Cities and
Individuals " . American Journal of Philology 115(4): 525-41.
226
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Naddaf , G. 1994. "The Atlantis Myth: An Introduction to Plato's Later Philosophy
of History". Phoenix 48(3): 189-209.
Nagy , G. 1992. "Homeric Questions" . Transactions of the American Philological
Association 122: 17-60.
Nails , D. 2002. The People of Plato: A Prosopography of Plato and Other Socratics .
Indianapolis , IN: Hackett.
Nehamas , A. 1982. "Plato on Imitation and Poetry in Republic X". In Plato on
Beauty, Wisdom and the Arts , J. Moravcsik & P. Temko (eds), 47-78. Totowa , NJ:
Rowman & Littlefield.
Nightingale , A. W 1993. "The Folly of Praise: Plato's Critique of Encomiastic
Discourse in the Lysis and Symposium". Classical Quarterly 43(1): 112-30.
Nussbaum, M. 1980. "Aristophanes and Socrates on Learning Practical Wisdom " .
Yale Classical Studies 26: 43-97 .
Ober , J. 2000. Review of Wilson , The Athenian Institution of the Khoregia. Bryn
Mawr Classical Review, http://bmcr.brynmawr.edu/2000/2000-10-02.html ( accessed
March 2014).
-- 2005. Athenian Legacies: Essays on the Politics of Going on Together. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Olson , S. D. 2007 . Broken Laughter: Select Fragments of Greek Comedy. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Ophir , A. 1991. Plato's Invisible Cities: Discourse and Power in the "Republic".
Savage, MD: Barnes & Noble .
Page , D. L. 1981. Further Greek Epigrams. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pallas , T. E. 1976. "Reflections on Plato's Menexenus". PhD thesis, University of
California at Santa Barbara.
Pappas , N. 1989. "Socrates ' Charitable Treatment of Poetry " . Philosophy and Literature
13(2): 248- 61.
-- 201 la. "Autochthony in Plato's Menexenus " . Philosophical Inquiry 34: 66- 80.
-- 2011 b. Review of Partenie, Plato's Myths. Philosophical Inquiry 34: 101- 6.
Pappas , N. & M. Zelcer 2013. "Plato 's Menexenus as a History that Falls into Patterns ".
Ancient Philosophy 33(1 ): 19- 31.
Partenie, C. (ed.) 2009a. Plato's Myths. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Partenie , C. 2009b. "Plato's Myths". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (23 July) ,
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/plato-myths ( accessed March 2014).
--2009c. "Introduction " . See Partenie (2009a) , 1-27.
Pearson , L. 1942. The Local Historians of Attica. Philadelphia , PA: Lancaster Press.
Pelling , C. 2009. "Bringing Autochthony Up-to-Date: Herodotus and Thucydides ".
Classical World 102(4): 471-83.
Pendrick , G. 1987. "Once Again Antiphon the Sophist and Antiphon of Rhamnus ".
Hermes 115(1): 47-60 .
Petre , Z. 2009. "Revenants et Sauveurs: Le Menexene de Platon et le Drame
Attique " . In Memory , Humanity, and Meaning , M. Neamtu & B. Tataru-Cazaban
(eds), 149-62. Bucharest: Zeta Books .
Pickard-Cambridge , A. W , J. Gould & D. M. Lewis 1988. The Dramatic Festivals of
Athens , 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Podlecki, A. J. 1998. Perikles and his Circle. London: Routledge.
Pomeroy, S. 1996. Review of Henry , Prisoner of History. American Journal of Philology
11 7 ( 4): 64 8- 51.
227
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Poulakos , T. 1990. "Historiographies of the Tradition of Rhetoric: A Brief Histor y
of Classical Funeral Orations ". Western Journal of Speech Communication
54(2): 172-88 .
Pownall , F. 1998. "Condemnation of the Impious in Xenophon 's Hellenica ". Harvard
Theological Review 91(3): 251-77.
--2004 . Lessons from the Past: The Moral Use of History in Fourth-Century Prose.
Ann Arbor , MI: University of Michigan Press .
Press, G. (ed.) 2000. Who Speaks for Plato ? Lanham , MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Rahn , P. J. 1971. "Xenophon's Developing Historiography ". Transact ions and
Proceedings of the American Philological Association 102: 497-508.
Raubitschek , A. E. 1941. "The Heroes of Phyle ". Hesperia 10(3): 284-95.
Rhodes , P. J. 2010. A History of the Classical Greek World 478-323 BC, 2nd edn.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Rinon, Y. 2006. "Tragic Hephaestus: The Humanized God in the Iliad and the
Odyssey". Phoenix 60(1- 2): 1- 20.
Roberts , J. T. 2012. "Mourning and Democracy : The Periclean Epitaphios and its
Afterlife " . In Thucydides and the Modern World: Reception , Reinterpretation and
Influence from the Renaissance to the Present , K. Harloe & N. Morley (eds), 140- 56.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Roberts , S. C. 1921. A History of the Cambridge University Press 1521- 1921. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Romero , M. R. 2009. "'W ithout the Least Tremor ': Ritual Sacrifice as Background in
the Phaedo". Epoche 13(2): 241- 48.
Rosenstock , B. 1994. " Socrates as Revenant: A Reading of the Menexenus". Phoenix
48( 4): 331- 48.
Rosivach , V J. 1987. "Autochthony and the Athenians ". Classical Quarterly 37(2):
294- 306.
Roth , P 1984. "Teiresias as Mantis and Intellectual in Euripides' Bacchae ". Transactions
of the American Philological Association 114: 59- 69.
Rowe, C. 2009. "The Charioteer and his Horses: An Example of Platonic Myth-Making ".
See Partenie (2009a ), 134- 4 7.
Roy, J. 1997. "An Alternative Sexual Morality for Classical Athenians " . Greece and
Rome 44(1): 11-22 .
Sage, P. W 1989. Review of Loraux , The Invention of Athens. Classical World 83(1):
67-68 .
Salkever, S. G. 1993. "Socrates' Aspasian Oration: The Play of Philosophy and Politics
in Plato 's Menexenus ". American Political Science Review 87(1): 133-43.
Sanders , E. 2014. Envy and Jealousy in Classical Athens: A Socio-p sycho logical
Approach. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sandys , J. E. 1885. M. Tulli Ciceronis: Ad M. Brutum Orator. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press .
Sansone , D. 1985. "The Date of Herodotus ' Publication " . Illinois Classical Studies
10: 1-9 .
Saxonhouse , A. 1986. "Myths and the Origin of Cities: Reflections on the Autochthony
Theme in Euripides ' Ion". In Greek Tragedy and Politi cal Theory, J. P Euben (ed.),
252-73. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Schofield , M. 2009. "Fraternite, Inegalite , la Parole de Dieu: Plato 's Authoritarian
Myth of Political Legitimation ". See Partenie (2009a), 101-15.
228
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sedley, D. 2008. Creationism and its Critics in Antiquity. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
--2009 . "Myth, Punishment , and Politics in the Gorgias". See Partenie (2009a) ,
51-76 .
Seeberg , A. 1965. "Hephaestus Rides Again ". Journal of Hellenic Studies 85: 102-9.
Sharp , K. 2006. "From Solon to Socrates: Proto-Socratic Dialogues in Herodotus ".
In La costruzione de! discorso filosofico nell'eta dei Presocratici [The Construction of
Philosophical Discourse in the Age of the Presocratics], M. M. Sassi (ed.), 81-102.
Pisa: Edixioni della N ormale.
Shorey, P. 1959. Plato in Twelve Volumes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Smith , J. E. 1986. "Plato 's Use of Myth in the Education of Philosophic Man".
Phoenix 40(1): 20-34.
Stalley, R. 2009. "Myth and Eschatology in the La ws". See Partenie (2009a), 187- 205.
Stern , H. S. 1974. "Plato 's Funeral Oration" . New Schola sticism 48: 503- 8.
Sternberg , R. H. 2005. "The Nature of Pity ". In Pity and Power in Ancient Athens ,
R. H. Sternberg (ed.), 15- 47. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stevens, E. B. 1948. "Envy and Pity in Greek Philosophy ". American Journal of
Philology 69(2): 171- 89.
Strauss , B. 2004. "The Dead at Arginusae and the Debate over the Athenian Navy".
Nautiki Epithewrisi [Naval Review] 545.160s: 40- 67.
Tarrant , H. 2007. Proclus, Commentary on Plato 's Timaeus, vol. I, book 1. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Thomas , A. L. 1773. Oeuvres Diverses, vol. III. Amsterdam: E. van Harre velt.
Tompkins , D. P. 1988. Review of Loraux , The Invention of Athens. Hi story and
Theory 27(3): 306- 12.
Tracy, S. V 2009. Pericles: A Sourcebook and Reader . Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Tritle , L. A. 2007. '"Laughing for Joy': War and Peace Among the Greeks ". In War
and Peace in the Ancient World, K. A. Raaflaub (ed.), 172- 90. Oxford: Blackwell.
Trivigno , F. V 2009. "The Rhetoric of Parody in Plato 's M enexenus". Philosophy and
Rhetoric 42(1 ): 29- 58.
Tsitsiridis , S. 1998. Platon s Menexenos: Einleitung , Text und Kommentar. Stuttgart:
Teubner .
Tulin, A. 2000. Review of Tsitsiridis, Platons Menexenus. Classical World 93(3): 305-6 .
Van Wees, H. 2002. "Herodotus and the Past ". In Brill's Companion to Herodotus,
E. J. Bakker , I. J. F. de Jong & H . van Wees (eds), 321-49. Leiden: Brill.
Vernant, J.-P. 1974. Mythe et societe en Grece ancienne. Paris: Maspero.
Vidal-Naquet , P. 1998. "Athens and Atlantis: Structure and Meaning of a Platonic
Myth ". In his The Black Hunter: Forms of Thought and Forms of Society in the
Greek World, A. Szegedy-Maszak (trans.) , 263-84. Baltimore , MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Vlastos , G. 1964. "Isonomia Politike ". In Isonomia: Studien zur Gleichheitsvorstellung im
Griechischen Denken , J. Mau & E. G. Schmidt (eds), 1-35. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag .
Walsh , G. 1978. "The Rhetoric of Birthright and Race in Euripides ' Ion ". Herm es
106(2): 302-15.
Walters , K. R. 1981. "'W e Fought Alone at Marathon ' : Historical Falsification in the
Attic Funeral Oration " . Rheinisches Museum fiir Philologie 124(3-4): 204-11.
229
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Walton , F. R. 1960. Review of Delcourt , Hephaistos ou la legende du magicien.
Classical Philology 55( 4): 286-89.
W~cowski, M. 2004. "The Hedgehog and the Fox: Form and Meaning in the Prologue
of Herodotus' Histories" . Journal of Hellenic Studies 124: 143-64 .
West, G. 1753. Odes of Pindar, with several other Pieces in Prose and Verse, Translated
from the Greek , 2nd edn. London: R. Dodsley.
West , W C. 1988. Review of Loraux , The Invention of Athens . American Historical
Review 93(2): 396-97.
Westerink, L. G. (ed. , trans.) 1962. Anonymous Prolegomena to Platonic Philosophy .
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Wickkiser , B. L. 1999. "Speech in Context: Plato's Menexenus and the Ritual of
Athenian Public Burial". Rhetoric Society Quarterly 29(2): 65-74.
Williams , B. 1993. Shame and Necessity . Berkeley , CA: University of California Press .
Wilson , P. 2000. The Athenian Institution of the Khoregia: The Chorus, the City and
the Stage . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wooten , C. W 1987. Hermogenes' On Types of Style. Chapel Hill, NC: University of
North Carolina Press.
Worthington , I. (ed.) 1994a. Persuasion: Greek Rhetoric in Action. London: Routledge.
Worthington , I. 1994b. "History and Oratorical Exploitation " . Persuasion: Greek
Rhetoric in Action , I. Worthington (ed .), 109- 29. London: Routledge.
Yunis , H. 1996. Taming Democracy: Models of Political Rhetoric in Classical Athens .
Ithaca , NY: Cornell University Press .
Zatta , C. 2010. "Making History Mythical: The Golden Age of Peisistratus". Arethusa
43(1): 21- 62.
Zeitlin , F. 1990. "Theater and Self and Society in Athenian Drama " . In Nothing to
Do with Dionysos?, J. J. Winkler & F. I. Zeitlin (eds), 130- 67. Princeton , NJ: Princeton
University Press .
Ziolkowski , J. E. 1981. Thucydides and the Tradition of Funeral Speeches at Athens.
New York: Monographs in Classical Studies .
Zurcher , J. 1954. Das Corpus Academicum. Paderborn: Schoningh.
230
INDEX
Acropolis 49, 175, 180n94; as story
genre 146, 157-58 , 178n47
Aeschines (Attic Orator): Against
Timarchus 137n10
Aeschines of Sphettus: Aspasia 34-36 ,
54n47 , n50 , n53
Aeschylus: Agamemnon 153, 177n31 ,
207n18
Aeschylus: Persians 44- 45, 48, 50,
56n95 , 57nl 18, 147-48 , 184, 207n13
Aesop 156, 178n42
Alcibiades 24, 25, 39, 53n38 , 54n52 ,
102-3 , 114n22, 123, 139n47, 188, 190
Alcmaeonid family 4 7
Ameipsias : Connus 38
anachronism 21, 25, 26-29 , 33, 37
Anaxagoras 3, l0nl0 , 24, 25, 48, 5ln12 ,
5 7 n 114, 11 7, 1 0 5, 114 n2 6, 119, 16 3,
179n58
Anaximander 108, 109
Andocides 211n75
Anon ymous Prolegomena to Platoni c
Philosophy 85, 206n5
Antiphon of Cephisia 55n64 , 90
Antiphon of Rhamnus 37- 39, 55n64 ,
n68 , n69 , n71
Anytus 101, 102, 154
Anytus of Euon ymon 41
Apollo 153, 160, 167
Apollodorus 159; Library 178n48, n52
Archidamian War 186
Arginusae 17, 25, 33, 187, 190-91 ,
200- 201, 209n45 , 211n76
aristocrac y 16, 55n66 , 70, 72, 149
Aristophanes 3, 24, 32- 33, 46, 53n35 ,
108; A charnians 32, 52n33 , 53n34 ;
Birds 24, 51nl 1, 21 ln75 ; Clouds 24,
55n60 , 56n90; Eccl esiazusae (The
231
As semblyw omen) 53n35 , 212n79 ;
Frogs 3, 24, 51nl 1, 78; Knights 38,
55n61 , 207n18 ; Lys istrata 53n35 ,
54n46 ; Wasps 38, 53n36 , 55n62 ,
57n115 , 158, 178n47
Aristotle 1, 7, 1 ln22 , n24 , 38, 46, 51n7 ,
52n30 , 133, 134, 138n24, 148,
221n10 ; Constitution of Ath ens 40,
46, 56n78 , n82 , 57n104 , n109 ,
177n22 ; Eudemian Ethic s 55n65;
N icomachean Ethi cs 52n30; Poeti cs
74nl ; Politic s 5ln7 ; Rhetoric 177n19 ,
212n92
Aristoxenus : Harmoni cs 52n25
Artemisium 17, 183, 184, 200, 207n10 ,
21 ln78
Aspasia 1- 2, 5, 9, 1 On 7, 11 n 1 7, 15, 19,
20-23 , 25-27 , 31-37 , 38-39 , 40, 42-45 ,
46, 47, 51n2, n3, 52n26 , 53n35 , n38,
n45, 54n46, n47 , n49, n50 , n52 , n53 ,
59, 61, 65, 66, 67, 74n7 , 81, 82, 87,
88, 91, 93, 93n27 , 95, 102, 104, 105,
106, 107, 111-13 , 119, 121, 134-35 ,
140, 144 45, 191, 214, 216
Athenaeus53n40, 54n52 , 55n60 , 140n63
Athenian Stranger 3, 164, 207n9, 21 ln78
Athens : as educator 35- 36, 215; as
mistress 135, 215
Atthidograph y 195, 210n61
Attica 107, 109, 111, 135, 144, 145, 150,
161, 163, 214, 218
Augustine 176n 11
Austin , J. L. 132- 33
autochthon y 30, 35, 54n51 , 55n54 , 83,
8 6, 9 7, 1 0 7, 1 09, 111, 12 5- 2 7, 131,
135, 139n39, 143, 145- 47, 150, 151,
157-75 , 176n8, 178n55, 179n59,
180n81 , 206, 214, 216, 219
INDEX
Balot, Ryan 101
barbarian 17-18, 28, 39, 70, 87, 110,
131, 13 8 n23 , 16 5, 1 71-7 2, 1 7 4,
l 80n85 , 184, 189-92 , 201, 202,
212n84
battles: land and sea 149, 184, 187,
200, 201
Bayle, Peter: Dictionnaire Historique et
Critique 87
beauty 18, 98, 130-31 , 139n37, 171
Beauty , Form of 171
birth from the earth see autochthony
Boreas and Orethyia , myth of 156
boule 43, 45, 74n9
Cadmus 164, 171
Callicles 21 7
cave, allegory of 9, 154
Cavell, Stanley 10nl3 , 154
Chaeronea , Battle of 28, 63, 64
Cicero 6-7 , llnl9 , 34, 54n53; De
Inventione 54n48, n53; De Oratore
75nl6, l 77nl6; Orator ad M. Brutum
l lnl9
Cimon 47- 48, 59, 185- 86
city/soul analogy 8, 71, 201-3, 215
Clavaud , Robert 7, 10nl4 , l lnl8 , nl9 ,
5 ln6 , 56n95, 84, 92nl , l 14n28,
144-45 , l 76n9 , 206n6
Cleisthenes l 80n90
Connus 22, 37-38 , 42, 50nl , 5ln2 ,
55n59, n6 l , n62
Conan (Athenian general) 190, 192,
210n50
Corinthian War 6, 28, 29, 44, 63, 171,
192, 194, 200, 206, 210n50
courage 18, 35, 55n55 , 83, 99-101 , 106,
1 0 7, 1 09- 13, 113 n 8, 118, 119, 122,
202, 203, 214, 219
Cousin , Victor 73
Critias 2, 164, 165, l 79n64 , 196, 197
custom 71, 83, 108, 119, 171
Cyrus the Great 16, 199, 205
dancing naked 42, 43
Darius 17, 45, 87, 183
Dean-Jones , Leslie 42-44 , 50
Delian League 49, 175, 212n79
Demiurge 157
democracy 16, 40, 48, 49, 55n66, 62, 68,
7 0, 7 2, 7 3, 7 5 n 18, 8 0, 101, 144, 14 9,
191, 201, 21 ln77 , 216, 220
232
Demosthenes (general) 187
Demosthenes ( orator) l ln20, 28, 31, 40,
63-65, 67-71 , 75n22 , 76n35, 87,
139n39, 145, 158
Diodorus Siculus 185, 187, 192, 198,
210n50
Diogenes Laertius: Lives of the Eminent
Philosophers 4
Dionysus 3, 4, 160, 167
Dionysius of Halicarnassus 7, 85
Diotima 2, 10n7, 37, 88
dragnet practice 207n9
Duck Soup l 13nl3
earth , as mother 16, 35, 107, 109, 110,
126-29 , 135, 145, 158, 162, 164,
166- 6 7, 16 9, 170, 1 71, 215, 219
education 8, 16, 20, 30, 35, 37, 49,
55n54 , n66, 56n87 , 69- 71, 76n28, 82,
8 3, 91, 97-101 , 10 3-13 , 113 n 8,
114 n 15, 119, 122, 12 9, 144, 15 0,
166- 69, 175, 202, 214, 216, 218;
moral 8, 34, 37, 68, 82, 98, 99-101 ,
l 14nl5 , 135
Egypt 17, 136, 165, 179, 185, 200, 202
Egyptians and Phoenicians 202
Ehlers , Barbara 34, 54n47
Eleatic Stranger 77, 109
Eleusis 40, 147
empeiria 22, 217
encomia to salt and bumblebees 123,
130, 131, 139n30
envy see phthonos
Ephesian philosophers 156, l 77n41
Ephialtes 47, 48
Erechtheus (Erichthonius) 146, 158,
159, 162
ergon 71, 78, 82, 83, 116, 117- 22,
137nl , 148, 175,
er6s 2, 35, 54n50, n51, 124, 130, 218, 219
Esther 19nl
Eupolis 32, 52n3 l
Euripides: Heracleidae 3, 89, 121; Ion
157-59, 167, l 78n47 , n49 , l 79n69
Eurymedon 17, 47, 184, 185, 200
Euthyphro 43, 124
evolution , theory of 108-9
exceptionalism, Athenian 117, 144, 174
explanation , historical 19 5
Ferrari, G. R. F. 153, 154
Ficino , Marsilio 86, 87
INDEX
flux, doctrine of 156
foreigners 41, 118, 122, 126, 136, 172
Forms 130-32, 163, 168
Gale , Theophilus 87
Ge see earth as mother
generals , execution of 25, 33, 191
Gettysburg Address 137n2
Glaucon 132, 164
Good , Form of 132
Gorgias 61-63 , 65, 70, 116, 130, 131,
140n48; Encomium to Helen 62, 123,
130, 131
Graves, C. E. 183
guardian , Athenians as 202-3
Hades 44, 76n27, 160
Hall , Jonathan 173
Hecataeus of Miletus: Ges Periodos 195
Helen 62, 124, 130-32
Hellespont , battle at 17, 187, 188, 190,
200, 209n39
Helots 170, 186
Henry , Madeleine 31, 35, 53n35, n39,
54n47, n49 , n50
Hephaestus 54n51 , 146, 156, 159-67 ,
178n51, n52, n55
Hermippus 32
Hermocrates 2, 188, 208n34
Hermogenes 7, 39, 134
Herodotus: Histories 31, 46, 53n34 ,
54n46, 57n100, 74nl 1, 88, 143, 161,
165, 173, 176n3, 179n66, 180n80,
n90 , 183, 184, 195, 197, 199, 21 ln78
Herskovits, David 5ln4
Hesiod 90, 119, 185; Theogony 89,
167; Works and Days 178n50, n55 ,
185
Hipparchus , son of Peisistratus 149
Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places 202
Hippothales 123
historiography: Plato 82, 84, 182, 196;
Thucydidean 57n106, 196; universal
194-95 , 197-99 , 204, 210n58
Homer: Iliad 148, 149, 153, 156, 158,
160, 161, 173; Odyssey 89, 148, 149,
161
Homeric Hymn 161
hoplite 24, 49
Hornblower, Simon 172
Hyperides 63- 65, 67, 68, 69, 71, 75,
145, 158
233
improvisation 59, 60, 74n8, n9, 91,
103, 106, 116, 127, 132-37, 140n55,
n56 , n60
intertextuality 2
Ion 43, 44, 158, 167
Isles of the Blessed 27, 120, 137, 220
Isocrates 123, 124, 131, 139n30, n37 ,
173, 218
Kagan , Donald 188, 208n32
Kahn, Charles 1, 153, 194, 210n57 ,
21 ln73
Kallipolis 36, 220
Kekrops 146, 158, 159
Kerameikos , as story genre 157, 163,
176n8
Kierkegaard , S. 4
King 's Peace (Common Peace) 25, 41,
44, 56n86 , 63, 192, 193, 194
knowledge 15, 18, 21, 5 ln7 , 71, 97, 99,
104, 105, 109, 196, 202, 217, 218, 219
Lamprus 37
Lechaeum 18, 192, 200
Lendon, J. E. 198- 99, 21 ln67
Leontini 187
Libya 17
Livy: History of Roman Republic
113n12
logos 71, 7 4 n2, 7 8, 8 2, 8 3, 116- 22,
151, 175
Loraux , Nicole 71-73, 75n19, 76n39,
n41, n46, 80, 145, 146, 157, 166, 168,
176n8, 178n47, 179n57
Lycurgus: In Leocratem 177n20
Lysias (orator) , son of Cephalus 2, 61,
62, 63, 65, 67, 70, 75n16 , nl 7, n18 ,
124, 145, 158, 191, 213n99; speech in
the Phaedrus 44
Lysimachus 124
Marathon , battle of 5, 17, 29, 44, 110,
147, 183, 184, 193, 200, 202, 207nl 1
matchmaking 34, 53-54n45
mathematics 98, 112
Medes 16, 19nl , 183, 205
Megarian Decree 32-33 , 53n33
Meletus 101, 133, 154
Menexenus, character: as son of
Socrates 44, 50, 57n95
metals in soul 97, 108, 163, 164
midwife 22, 51n5 , 53n45
INDEX
mimeisthai 106-7
mimesi s 5, 61, 99, 106-7 , 109-13 , 127, 135
mixed Greeks 171, 184, 202
mother 16, 107, 109, 119, 126-29 , 135,
145, 150, 158, 162, 164, 166-67 , 169,
170, 171, 215
Muses 89-90 , 152
muthos 151, 156, l 76n3 , l 79n62
myth 109, 110, 127, 131, 135, 143- 75,
214, 219
M ytilene/ Arginusae , battle at 17, 190, 200
Nails , Debra 28-29 , 53n38
national character , as explanation
188-90 , 202
Nestor 140n47
Nietzsche , F. 4
noble lie 83, 97, 108, 152-53 , 157,
163- 64, 166, 168, 169, 170, 205
nomos 71, 83, 108, 119, 120
Ocean (god) 156
Oenophytae 186, 187, 200
pan-Hellenism 147, 150, 172- 74, 187, 203
Paralus and Xanthippus 25, 47, 101, 102
Parmenides 3, 89
parody , Menexenus as 4-9 , 11, 23, 43,
44, 54n46 , 65-68 , 72, 73, 77-91 , 104,
122, 145, l 76n7 , n9 , 182, 194, 206,
214, 215, 217, 220nl
Partenie , Catalin 153, l 77n25 , n27
Parthenon 49, 175, l 76nl 1, 18ln94
Pausanias: Description of Greece
178n51
Peisistratus 148-49
Pelasgians of Attica 161
Peloponnesian League 175
Peloponnesian War 1, 23, 25, 29, 49,
60, 63, 70, 75, 79n19 , 186, 191, 194,
197-201 , 204, 212n79
Pentekontaetia l 76n6
Pericles the Younger 25, 33, 52n31 , 191
perileimmata 106, 111
Persia 6, 16-18 , 29, 41, 44, 45, 47,
52n23 , 56n86 , 64, 110, 147, 148, 172,
175, 181 n94 , 18 5, 18 6, 18 7, 18 9,
190- 94, 199, 200, 201, 202, 205- 6;
King of 17, 18, 45, 185, 190, 193,
199, 205; war against 5, 16, 17, 25,
44, 4 8, 5 0, 6 3, 14 7, 1 7 2, 1 7 5, 18 3,
186, 190, 193, 195, 197, 200, 204
234
Phaedrus 91
Philip of Macedon 28, 63
philonikia 189, 190, 198, 204
p h tho nos 111, 113 n 10, 115n 41, 122, 18 5,
189, 190, 203, 204, 207nl7 , 213n97
Pindar 86, l 78n51 , 207nl 7
Piraeus 56n81 , 192
pity 18, 191, 205, 213n99
Plataea 17, 180n94, 183, 184, 200, 207nl 1
Plato: Apolog y 2, 4, 9, l0nl 1, 24, 25,
27, 30, 5lnl0 , nl2 , 52nl4 , nl9 ,
55n64 , n67 , 56n83 , 57n96 , 76n27 ,
l 14n24, 131, 140n57 , 149, l 77n31 ,
207nl 7, 209n46 , n47; Charmides
55n67 ; Craty lus 134, 140n57; Critia s
2, 29, 146, 163, 164, 165, 166,
l 76nl2 , l 79n64 , n65 , 201, 208n34 ,
212n80 , 216; Crito 129-30 , 138n28,
139n42, n44 ; Euth y demus 37, 50nl ,
55n59 , 134, 139n29, 140n58;
Euth yphro 9, 21, 139n33, 140n57,
146, l 76nl2; Gorgias 21, 24, 47,
5ln3 , n6 , nl0 , nl2 , 74n6 , 102, 103,
104, 105, l 14nl8 , n24 , 138n28,
139n29, 152, 153, 209n46 , 213n95 ,
216-18 , 220n2 , n3 , n4; Ion 21,
13 8 n2 7, 15 7, 15 8, 15 9, 1 7 8, 1 7 9;
Laches l 13n8, 139n33, 213n95 ; La ws
87, 138n27, n28 , 139n29, n30 , n33 ,
l 40n68 , 146, 155, 163, 164, l 77n35 ,
179n62, 201, 204, 207n9 , 2lln78 ,
212n87 , 213n95; Ly sis 10n9, 42,
56n89 , 123, 124; Meno 57nl07 ,
nl08 , 101, 105, l 14nl6 , 140n68, 216;
"On the Good " 30; Parmenide s
55n64 , 90; Pha edo l0nl0 , 26, 42,
5ln5 , nl2 , 52nl6 , 57nl 17, 153, 156,
177n31, 178n42, 179n74, 209n35 ,
212n83 ; Phaedrus 2, l lnl6 , 22, 44,
51n3 , 57n107 , nl 14, 63, 75n16 , 91,
93n41 , 105, l 14n21, n26 , 124, 134,
138n28, 139n29, n30 , n35 , 140n58,
148, 155, l 76nl6 , l 77n39 , 185,
207nl9 , 216, 218-21 ; Philebu s 185,
207nl 7; Protagoras 2, l0nl 1, 25, 47,
5ln9 , nl2 , nl3 , 57nl08 , nl 17, 89,
102, 103, 105, l 14nl9 , n32 , 138n27,
n28 , 139n29 , 216; Republi c 3, 8, 9,
l lnl6 , 29, 30, 36, 54n45 , 63, 71, 84,
8 5, 8 7, 9 7, 9 8, 9 9, 1 04, 1 0 7, 113 n 1,
n2 , nl2 , l 14n24, n37 , 123, 132,
138n27, n28 , 139n29 , 140n52 , n53 ,
INDEX
n68, 146, 148, 156, 163, 164, 168,
176n12, n16, 177n40, 178, 179n60,
n61, n74 , 180n85, 201, 202, 203, 204,
205, 206, 211, 212, 213, 215, 216,
219, 220; Sophist 1 lnl 6, 107, 109,
114n35, n38, 163, 179n59; Statesman
155, 177n36, 179n59, n67 , 21 ln72 ,
216; Symposium 2, 9, 37, 51n4 , n9 ,
12, 55n67, 57n107, 88, 102, 114nl 7,
n32 , n33 , 123, 124, 130, 138n28 ,
139n30, n34, n47, 140n47, n51 , n68 ,
154, 177n54, 180n85; Theaetetus
10n9, 22, 51n5 , 53n45 , 57nl 17, 85,
138n28, 139n33, 140n64, 156,
177n41, 195, 217, 220n3; Timaeus 2,
1 ln16 , 29, 30, 84, 85, 92n22 , 114n35,
146, 151, 163- 66, 177n26 , 179n66 ,
185, 195, 196, 197, 204, 207n19,
208n34, 210n62, 211n64, n72 ,
213n95 , n96 , 216, 219
Plutarch: Laconian Apophthegms
1 ln18; Life of Agesilaus 55n56; Life
of Alcibiades 114n22; Life of Cimon
46; Life of Lycurgus 177n21 Life of
Nicias 208n35; Life of Pericles 1 ln15 ,
33, 46, 53n39 , 57n100 , 74n7; Life of
Solon 177n21; Moralia 180n83
Polybius 204, 213n97
Poseidon 127, 146-47 , 150, 160, 165, 167
praise 1, 7, 8, 9, 15, 16- 18, 34, 35- 37,
47, 67-70, 78, 83, 91, 99, 106, 107,
109, 119, 121-25 , 125-29 , 130-33 ,
136- 37, 138nl 9, n22 , 28, 139n31,
n33 , n37, 144, 147, 148, 166, 185,
196, 197, 205, 214, 218- 19
Proclus: Commentary on Plato 's
Parmenides 90, 93n35; Commentary
on Plato's Timeaus 85- 86
Protagoras 3, 25, 48, 108, 119
pseudo-Demosthenes see Demosthenes
pseudo-Longinus: On the Sublime 62,
75n14
pseudo-Plato: Hipparchus 149
pseudo-Plutarch: Lives of the Ten
Orators 39
Pufendorf , Samuel: Of the Law of
Nature and Nations 87
Pylos 187
recollection , theory of 109, 168
revenant, Socrates as 26, 27, 44
revivals of tragedy 44
235
rhetoric 1, 5, 6, 7, 9, 1 ln23, 15, 20, 21,
22, 23, 27, 28, 33, 36, 37-40 , 43, 44,
45-47, 50, 54n46, n49, 60-62 , 68,
72-73, 75n16 , 77-80 , 82, 83, 86, 87,
97-99 , 104-6 , 112, 116-40 , 145-46 ,
157, 182, 207nl 1, 214, 216- 20; magic
of 136-37
Rosenstock , Bruce 26, 27, 28, 44, 50
Rousseau , J. J. 4
Rowe, Christopher 152, 154
Sage, Paula Winsor 76n46
Salamis 1 7, 4 5, 50, 110, 14 7, 148, 14 9,
183, 184, 195,200 , 202, 211n78, 213n99
Samas 178n52
Sanders, Ed 185
Sardis 17, 183, 207n9
Schofield, Malcom 153, 164
Scythia 17, 202
Sedley, David 152-53
Segestan request for aid 208n32
sex, god's 159, 162, 167, 178n48
shame 32, 52n30, 102, 108, 113n8, 118,
203
ship-of-state metaphor 201, 21 ln77
Sicily 17, 187, 188-89 , 200, 208n31,
n32 , 209n36
Simonides 3, 89
Sintians , wild-talking 161
Skiron 140n64
slavery 16, 17, 18, 33, 170, 172, 183,
191, 194, 205-6 , 207n8 , 208n31 ,
213n100
Solon 113n12, 149, 165
Sophist 21, 25, 38, 39, 48, 55n68, n69,
102, 107, 114n24, 153, 154, 171,
219-20
Sophocles 8, 1 ln24; Antigone 21 ln75;
Oedipus Tyrannus 208n20
soul 8, 22, 26, 27, 38, 53n45 , 71, 76n27,
9 7-9 8, 104, 10 8, 13 7, 15 3, 15 6, 16 3,
164, 169, 190, 201-5, 215, 218-20 ,
221n10
Sparta/Spartans 8, 17, 18, 24, 32, 49,
52n23 , 55n55 , 68, 70, 75n26 , 100,
1 0 1, 1 0 8, 11 0, 111- 12, 118- 19, 13 5,
140, 15 3, 1 7 0, 1 71, 1 7 5, 1 7 6 n 6,
18 ln94, 183, 184, 186- 87, 189- 94,
198, 200, 202, 207n9 , nl0 , nl 1, n12 ,
209n39 , 210n50 , n54 , 211n75
Sphagia (Sphacteria), battle of 17, 183,
18 6, 18 7, 200
INDEX
stepmother 70, 126-28, 135, 166,
167, 171
Strabo: Geography 149
stylometric analysis 30, 52n27
Suda 46, 59-60 , 74n4 , n8, 103, 136
Tanagra and Oenophyta , battle of 17,
186, 200
Thebes , founding of by Cadmus 164,
171
Themistocles 50, 57nl 18, 197, 207n12
Thermopylae , battle of 110, 184
Thirty Tyrants 39, 40, 41, 55n67, 63,
75n18, 191
Thucydides: History of the
Peloponnesian War 4, 6, 8, 9, 10n6,
24, 31, 47, 49, 60, 61, 66, 87, 101,
120, 135, 136, 158, 176n3, n6, 187-89 ,
190, 194, 196, 199, 210n63 , 215
thumos 204
Timaeus 2, 3
timocracy 220
Tissaphernes 189, 190
training 70, 71, 100, 108, 109, 110, 111,
112, 118, 167, 202, 203; of a wife 34;
Socrates' 15, 23; Spartan 8, 70, 101
tripartition of humanity 70, 174, 201- 6
Trivigno , Franco 78-79 , 91, 194
236
Trojan War 53n35, 62, 130, 137n10, 197
Typhon , child of Ge 161
Typhone (Tuphaeon) 161
tyrant 149, 206, 219
Ulysses (James Joyce) 89
Varro 176nl 1
Vernant , Jean-Pierre 110
virtue 8, 15, 18, 31, 34, 35, 67, 69, 70,
81, 1 00, 1 0 1, 1 0 2, 1 0 5, 1 0 6- 7, 111,
119, 151, 189, 214, 216
walls and ships 200, 21 ln75
Wickkiser , Bronwen 120
Wilamowitz-Moellendorff , Ulrich von
23, 5ln6
Williams , Bernard 8, 11 n24
Xenophon 21, 24, 25, 34, 35, 36, 38, 39,
41, 53n45 , 54n46, n47 , 55n68, 56n86 ,
190, 191, 192, 195, 197, 209n45 ,
210n50, n52 , n53, n54 , 211n76
Xerxes 45, 62, 75n14, 184
Zeno 48
Zeus 62, 7 5, 108, 130, 151, 153- 54,
160-61 , 168