

























ma 


Ase 





Viadik S. Nersesyants (b. 1938), D. Sc 
(Philosophy), a Moscow University grad- 
uate (Law Department), is now head of the 
Sector of State, Law and Political Teach- 
ings of the Institute of State and Law of the 
USSR Academy of Sciences. His scholarly 
interests centre upon the history and theory 
of politico-legal thought and the philoso- 
phy of state and law. 

Nersesyants has written over one hundred 
works, including monographs, such as The 
Hegelian Philosophy of Right: History and Con- 
temporaneity (1974), Socrates (1977), Political 
Thought of Ancient Greece (1979), Hegel 
(1979), The Indwidual and the State in Politio- 
Legal Thought (1980), Right and Law (1983), 
Plato (1984). He is also an editor and co- 
author of the textbook A History of Political 
and Legal Teachings (1983), and a co-author 
of a number of books on the history and 
theory of politico-legal teachings and on 
the methodology of the science of law. 


‘ > 


. 
a a - See 
- 


s ar wo 














V.S.NERSESYANTS 


POLITICAL 
THOUGHT 
of ANCIENT 


GREECE 


[in 


PROGRESS PUBLISHERS 


Translated from the Russian by Vladimir Stankevich 
Designed by Yuri Samsonov 


B. C. Hepcecany 


NOAMTHYECKHE YYEHHA APEBHEM rPEWMM 


Ha anenuucnom azine 





© Maaareancrso «Hayxa», 1979 
English translation © Progress Publishers 1986 


Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 





71 0202000000-648 55, 9¢ 
014(01)-86 





Contents 


Introduction. 4 -¢ avs sb: & Ge hae hk ee ee MP we oe ne GOR ep pS 


Chapter One 
THE EARLY PERIOD 
(Ninth-Sixth Centuries B. C.) 


Inception of Political Thought 


SEVEN Sagess 6 bee ele eas, SE eae dot ae ee we an eR 


Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans 
ythag ythag 


oS 


Heraclitus 


Chapter Two 
THE ZENITH 
(Fifth-Early Fourth Centuries B. C.) 
. Democritus 
. The Sophists 
. Socrates 
. Plato 


Noe 


+ O38 


wm 
> 
15 
ee 
aD 
= 
° 
o 
a 
oe 


Chapter Three 
HELLENISTIC PERIOD 
(Late Fourth-Second Centuries B. C.) 


1. Epicurus 
2. The Stoics 
3. Polybius 
Conclusion 


176 
183 
193 
203 





| 
| 


Introduction 


The Ancient Greek thinkers have played an outstanding part 
in the history of intellectual culture in general and political and 
legal thought in particular. They laid the foundation for a theo- 
retical approach to nature and society and are justly credited 
with effecting a transition from the mythological world view 
based on a fantastic reflection of reality and oracular prophecy 
to the rational understanding and explanation of being. 

Proceeding from the need to know rather than to believe, the 
Greek philosophers were the first to raise the most fundamental 
problems of the state, law and politics. The solutions they 
offered have foreshadowed in many respects the future develop- 
ment of political thought and their echoes have not yet 
completely died down in our times. 

Speaking of the unique place occupied by Greek philosophy 
in the entire history of culture, Engels wrote: “Ifin regard to the 
Greeks metaphysics was right in particulars, in regard to meta- 
physics the Greeks were right in general. That is the first reason 
why we are compelled in philosophy as in so many other spheres 
to return again and again to the achievements of that small peo- 
ple whose universal talents and activity assured it a place in the 
history of human development that no other people can ever 
claim. The other reason, however, is that the manifold forms of 
Greek philosophy contain in embryo, in the nascent state, 
almost all later modes of outlook on the world.” ! 

This high appraisal of the Ancient Greeks’ philosophy covers 
also their achievements in political theory, the views of the state 


' Frederick Engels, Dialectics of Nature, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1974, 
p. 46. 


w 








and law which were closely connected with philosophical doc- 
trines and shared their merits and demerits. 

The purpose of this publication is to provide a descriptive 
analysis of the main ideas and doctrines of the leading represen- 
tatives of Greek political thought throughout its history, from 
the first attempts at a rational explanation of political phenom- 
ena to the final stage of its decline and extinction. The problems 
arising in this analysis usually lie at the crossroads of such discip- 
lines as the history of political and legal teachings, the history of 
philosophy, the philosophy of the state and law, etc., and are 
therefore notable for their complex character. This made it 
necessary to elucidate, within the framework of the so-called 
portraiture method traditionally used in the exposition of politi- 
cal teachings, a number of general methodological problems. 

In writing this book the author tried to trace the links 
between different conceptions in the evolution of Greek political 
theory and did his best to show, if only in brief outline, their in- 
fluence on the political thought of later epochs. 





CHAPTER ONE 


THE EARLY PERIOD 


(Ninth-Sixth Centuries B. C.) 


1. INCEPTION OF POLITICAL THOUGHT 


At the early stage of history the world outlook of ancient peo- 
ples, the Greeks inclusive, was essentially mythological. Their 
political and legal views had not yet separated off from this sin- 
gle syncretic outlook and the order of things on the earth was 
regarded as an integral part of the cosmic order, divine in its ori- 
gin and content. The earthly life of men, their social, political 
and legal institutions, relations with the gods and with one 
another were treated within the framework and on the basis of 
the mythological versions of the origin of the cosmos (cosmol- 
ogy) and the gods (theogony). The mythological history of the 
world reflecting various cosmogonic and theogonic views was 
not a simple narration of the events that had occurred in the 
past, but an obligatory world outlook upheld by custom and tra- 
dition as one of the foundations of social life. Myth as a peculiar 
form of historical knowledge was at the same time a source of 
mandatory rules and standards of behaviour which were to be 
strictly observed at present and in the future. Myth served as a 
model of human relations sanctified by divine authority. In the 
period when the mythological views of the divine (cosmic, heav- 
enly) origin of social institutions held undivided sway over men’s 
minds, myth constituted the basis of a totalitarian ideology un- 
opposed by any rival notions, conceptions or doctrines. The 
doubts that arose later as a result of long historical development 
and found their expression in the rationalisation of myth testi- 
fied to the beginning of its disintegration and collapse. 

Strictly speaking, political and legal theories emerge only at a 
comparatively advanced stage of early class societies and states. 
From the theoretical viewpoint, the rise of political teachings 
(political theory) is an expression of the general process of the 


7 








rationalisation of human knowledge and genesis of philosophy. 

Developing within the framework of this process, legal and 
political views take shape as but one of the aspects of the world 
outlook expressed in myth.! 

Mythological consciousness is dominated by the idea of the 
divine, supra-human origin of the existing social order and 
power. To the Greek mind the cosmos, in contrast to chaos, was 
arranged by the gods and owed its orderliness to divine pres- 
ence. This idea runs through all myths concerned with ethical, 
socio-political and legal problems of Ancient Greek society. 

The existing social relations and institutions were sanctified 
by one or another myth which provided an explanation of their 
origin, justified their existence and served as an ideological basis 
for attempts to perpetuate the traditional social system. In short, 
in primitive societies myth performed the legislative function 
making and enforcing the norms of social conduct.? At the stage 
of religio-mythological consciousness law had not yet turned 
into a body of legal norms of behaviour and existed as one of the 
aspects of the private, social and public life that was in confor- 
mity with tradition and public sentiment. The laws of that time 
reflected mythological, religious, ethical and other views closely 


' The traditional heading “from myth to logos” in relevant literature 
epitomising the general progress of the rationalisation of man’s world outlook 
can hardly be regarded as accurate, though it cannot be denied the advantages 
of demonstrativeness and clarity. First and foremost, myth and Jogos are not 
always comparable, since logos is a specific method of discourse and inquiry, 
whereas myth is a combination of both the method and the substance of nar- 
ration (the plot of the story). The syncretic method of myth does not exclude 
logos and the view that myth is essentially illogical appears to be erratic. The 
essence of myth, its specificity should not be confused with the inadequacy of its 
method as such (e. g. lack of logic or some other defect), nor with the arbitrari- 
ness of its subject (that is why myth is not a fancy, but a legend); the dis- 
tinguishing feature of myth is the obvious cognitive discrepancy between its 
form and content which inevitably leads to misunderstanding (in the literal 
sense of the word) characteristic of myth in general. The distortion of facts and 
the lack of their comprehension in myth result from the ignorance of the myth 
originator and his inability to explain the factual material he deals with. 

2 This socio-normative aspect of myth was the object of special attention of 
the English ethnographer and mythologist Bronislaw Malinowski (Myth in 
Primitive Psychology, London, 1926). According to him, myth played an impor- 
tant social function. It justified the existing social system, laws and moral 
values, expressed and codified, as it were, current beliefs, sanctified tradition, 
guided men in their practical activity and taught them the rules of behaviour. 


8 





knitted together and were generally traced to a divine primary 
source. They were ascribed either directly to the gods or to their 
deputies on the earth (legendary state founders and lawgivers or 
living rulers). Like the Hindus, Egyptians and Jews, the Ancient 
Greeks also believed in the divine origin of their laws. 

Since legal order on the earth was conceived as an integral 
part of cosmic order, all thoughts of violations of traditional 
rules, rites and norms by individuals were believed to pose a se- 
rious threat to celestial and terrestrial harmony and to be 
fraught with cosmic catastrophies. This explains, for one, the 
meticulous ordering of people’s conduct and the existence of 
various religious taboos that were to be observed on pain of 
severe punishments (both in this and in the other worlds). Since 
the existing orders and laws were regarded as divine and sacred, 
their violation was tantamount to challenging the gods. 

The process of the rationalisation of politico-legal views that 
started in the first millennium B. C. was indicative of the depar- 
ture from the primeval mythological world outlook and of the 
collapse of the priests’ monopoly. 

This rationalisation consisted in the secularisation of myth 
which gradually lost its aura of holiness and its interpretation 
stopped being the exclusive province of the priesthood. As a 
result, the broad public became increasingly involved in more or 
less free discussions of matters of the state and law. In the eighth- 
sixth centuries B. C. the departure from the initial mythological 
views and the tendency towards a more rational outlook on the 
world in general and on the state and law in particular were in 
evidence everywhere, though the intensity of this process, its 
forms and consequences were different in different countries 
depending on their social and political conditions. This univer- 
sal tendency was expressed in the teachings of Confucius, 
Mo-tzt, Lao-tzu and the legists in China, Buddha in India, 
Zarathustra in Persia, the sermons of Jewish prophets Jeremiah, 
Isaiah and others in Palestine, the oral and written works of epic 
poets, dramatists, sages, sophists and philosophers in Greece, 
and jurists in Rome. 

The struggle of the gods for power over the world was one of 
the main themes of ancient theogonic and cosmogonic myths (in 
the interpretation of the orphics, Homer and Hesiod). ‘The pass- 
ing of the highest power from Uranus to Cronos and then to 
Zeus had been accompanied, according to myth, by radical 


9 


changes in the principles and methods of governing the world. 
These changes affected not only relations between the gods 
themselves, but also their attitude to people and the whole 
organisation of terrestrial life. According to Greek theogony, it 
was only after supreme power was seized by the Olympian gods 
with Zeus at the head that justice and the rule of law was estab- 
lished on the earth (i. e. in polis life). 

From the viewpoint of ethics, Zeus was considered the 
supreme guardian of universal justice (dike); its violation was 
not only an anti-social act, but, first and foremost, an offence of 
the gods bound to incur a divine punishment. This view is 
clearly expressed, for instance, in Homer. 


As when, in autumn time, the dark-brown earth 
Is whelmed with water from the stormy clouds, 
When Jupiter pours down his heaviest rains, 
Offended at men’s crimes who override 

The laws by violence, and drive justice forth 
From the tribunals, heedless of the gods 

And their displeasure... 


The notions dike (justice) and themis (custom, law justice) ? 
used by Homer are very characteristic of the sense of right of 
Greek society in the Heroic Age (the late second and the early 
first millennium B. C.) commonly known as Homeric society or 
Homeric Greece. Describing this society with its system of gov- 
ernment (the council — boule, the popular assembly— agora, and 
the military commander — bast/eus) father right and the inheri- 
tance of property by the children, Engels notes that in the He- 
roic Age the state was still non-existent: “Only one thing was 
missing: ...an institution that would perpetuate, not only the 
newly-rising class division of society, but also the right of the 
possessing class to exploit the non-possessing classes and the rule 
of the former over the latter.” ? 


‘The Iliad of Homer, Houghton, Mifflin and Company, Boston, 1870, 
pp. 110-111. (Book XVI, pp. 482-485). 

2 Themis was also the name of the Greek goddess of justice. 

3 Frederick Engels, ‘“The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the 
State”, in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works in three volumes, 
Vol. Three, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1973, p. 275. 


10 








In view of the absence of the state as a specific organisation of 
class domination, Homeric society, naturally enough, did not 
know law in the sense of the state legislation, but it knew law as 
custom and justice (themis), as well as the principle of social and 
legal justice (dike). Law and justice, though closely linked 
together in the consciousness of Homeric society, were not iden- 
tical and differed from one another even terminologically. Jus- 
tice (dike) was the foundation and principle of law as existing 
custom and tradition (themis), whereas custom or common law 
(themis) was understood as kind of materialisation of eternal jus- 
tice (dike), as its presence, manifestation and observance in rela- 
tions between people and the gods themselves. 

As distinct from themis standing for custom or common law 
based on justice (dike), the honour due to every god or man by 
right and custom is called by Homer time. The meaning of this 
word is clearly revealed in Iliad in the passage where Poseidon 
claims his “honour” as the realm he received by lot: 


We are three brothers, Rhea brought us forth— 
The sons of Saturn, Jupiter, and I, 

And Pluto, regent of the realm below. 

Three parts were made of all existing things, 
And each of us recewed his heritage. 

The lots were shaken; and to me it fell 

To dwell forever in the hoary deep, 

And Pluto took the gloomy realm of night, 
And, lastly, Jupiter the ample heaven 

And air and clouds. Yet doth the earth remain, 
With high Olympus, common to us all. 

(Iliad, p. 69 [Book XV, pp. 232-242].) 


Each god or hero has his own honour (fzme) and, conse- 
quently, his rights. In point of fact, this is just what t7me means— 
the right to be in charge of a certain field of activity and rela- 
tions, to possess one’s own domain. For instance, Ares is in 
charge of war and bloody battles, Aphrodite’s domain is love, 
Athena Pallas is pre-eminent as a civic goddess wise in the pro- 
tection of city-states (polises), etc. Heroes also have “honours”’ 
and the “honour’”’ of Achilles as a goddess’s son is higher than 
that of mortal Hector. Both the gods and the heroes fight for 
their “honour”. This fight is no easy matter and calls for the 


11 





utmost exertion of one’s powers—in other words, for a feat of 
valour. 

The legal significance of this fight for “‘honour”’ is obvious: in 
the Heroic Age described by Homer and notable for transition 
from primitive-communal society to the state organisation 
“honour” was nothing else but an individual’s claim corres- 
ponding to his merits (feats) and founded on the right of the 
stronger. 

This close interdependence of right and “honour’’ ! attests to 
the fact that the law of Homeric society was understood as a 
body of rights vested in an individual in accordance with the 
principle of justice (dike) and in compliance with the existing 
custom (themis). Since both the content and scope of rights 
depended on the bearer and therefore had a strictly individual 
character, rights were in fact nothing but privileges. That means 
that not only the idea of equal rights, but even the conception of 
law as an equalising principle and a standard were entirely alien 
to Homeric society. Moreover, the very purpose of law in that 
society was to consolidate and formalise inequality, though this 
inequality was understood to derive not from arbitrariness, but 
from justice (dike) and custom (themis).? 

Consequently, the just (in accordance with dike and thems) 
was the foundation and the criterion of the lawful. The notion of 
law was inseparable from that of justice. It was only due to the 
legitimation of what fell within the notion of justice (dike) that 
one or another claim acquired a legal status and became a cus- 
tom (themis), a generally recognised standard of conduct and 
relations among the members of a community. 

Unequal, selective approach to different people in accordance 
with their relative merits and virtues was well exemplified by 


' Significantly, dishonour automatically entailed the forfeiture of rights. A 
man deprived of “honour” became an alien without kith and kin in a given 
group or society (Iliad, IX, 646-648). Even much later, when written law was 
already in existence and the judicial proceedings were sufficiently elaborated, 
dishonour, for instance in Athens, was regarded as a severe punishment imply- 
ing the offender’s loss (complete or partial) of his rights. 

2 The concept of justice as inequality was characteristic of the ancient sense 
of right in general and figured prominently in the writings of Plato and Aristo- 
tle. The Stagirite even went so far as to distinguish between rectificatory and 
distributive justice: the latter, administered in accordance with deserts, merits, 
etc., is in fact nothing else than inequality. 


12 


Odysseus’s attitude to his fellow countrymen: exhorting the 
“good” ones and appealing to their sense of honour and to com- 
mon ideals, he resorted to threats and even man-handling in 
relation to the “bad” ones, e. g. Thersites: 


But when he found one of the lower sort 
Shouting and brawling, with the royal wand 
He smote him, and reproved him sharply, thus: 
“Friend, take thy seat in quiet, and attend 
To what thy betters say; thou art not strong 
Nor valiant, and thou art of mean repute 

In combat and in council. We, the Greeks, 
Cannot be all supreme in power. The rule 
Of the many is not well. One must be chief 
In war, and one the king, to whom the son 
Of Saturn gives the sceptre, making him 
The lawgiver, that he may rule the rest. 
(Iliad, pp. 36-37 [Book II, 246-257].) 





Homer’s life fell on the eighth century B. C. and the events 
described in his poems took place as far back as the late thir- 
teenth century B. Cy’ (Troy fell in 1225 B. C.). As regards the 
cosmological and theogonical myths treated by Homer already 
in a Clearly rationalistic and sometimes even skeptical vein, their 
origin dates to a much earlier period when the primitive mind 
took mythological stories at their face value and had no doubt 
about the authenticity of the events they described. 

Further rationalisation of the primordial cosmogonies and 
theogonies is represented by Hesiod’s Theogony (Origin of the 
Gods) and Works and Days (seventh century B. C.). In the con- 
text of the problems we are concerned with, special interest 
attaches to Hesiod’s understanding of the mythological gods as 
the ethical and legal principles and forces. 

The descent in the line of supreme deities (Chaos— Uranus — 
Cronos— Zeus and the Olympian gods, semigods and heroes) is 
conceived in the Theogony as a process of successive changes of 
ethical forces leading to the establishment of the moral and legal 
order in divine and human affairs. Very characteristic in this 
respect is Hesiod’s view of the basic principles allegedly underly- 
ing the rule of Zeus and the Olympian gods. According to his 
theogony, the marriage of Zeus and Themis, one of his 


13 





numerous wives, resulted in the birth of two daughters, god- 
desses Dike (justice), and Eunomia (fairness). Hence, Zeus’s 
coming to power ushered in the era of justice, legal order and 
social prosperity. 

Very much like in Homer, justice (dike) in Hesiod is con- 
trasted with coercion and violence. Dike and Eunomia, the 
daughters of Zeus, the embodiment of perfection and benevo- 
lence, and Themis, the embodiment of eternal, natural and 
divine order, represent two different aspects of law: Dike safe- 
guards divine justice and punishes those who encroach upon it, 
whereas Eunomia signifies the divine nature of lawfulness in 
society and stands for the inseparable unity of the rule of law on 
the one hand, and social (state) order, on the other. Here we 
find in embryo the antithesis of two notions running through the 
entire history of the Greek philosophy of law: the notion of 
natural law or the law deriving from nature (physis) and the 
notion of artificial or positive law which is a product of conven- 
tion (nomos). 

In his Works and Days Hesiod describes the history of human 
society as a succession of five ages: Golden, Silver, Copper, the 
age of semigods or heroes and, finally, the contemporary Iron 
Age. The people of the Golden Age (under Cronos) led a happy 
life without toil and worries. The people of the Silver Age who 
did not worship the gods were destroyed by Zeus. The bellicose 
people of the Copper Age destroyed themselves in internecine 
wars. The noble race of semigods — the heroes of the fourth epoch 
(the age of Heracles and the Trojan War) — perished in evil wars 
and bloody battles. 

The life of people during the last, Iron Age is painted by 
Hesiod in dark colours. Lamenting over the back-breaking toil 
of his generation, the reign of force and violence in human rela- 
tions, the degradation of morals and the contempt of law and 
justice, he remarks: 


And I wish that I were not any part 

of the fifth generation 

of men, but had died before it came, 

or been born afterward. 

For here now 1s the age of iron. Never by daytime 
will there be an end to hard work and pain, 

nor in the night 


14 








to weariness, when the gods will send anxieties 
to trouble us... 

...when the father no longer agrees with the children, 
nor children with thew father, 

when guest is no longer at one with host, 

nor companion to companion, 

when your brother 1s no longer your friend, 

as he was in the old days. 

Men will deprive their parents of all rights, 

as they grow old, 

and people will mock them too, 

babbling bitter words agaist them... 

...Strong of hand, one man shall seek 

the city of another. 

There will be no favor for the man 

who keeps his oath, for the righteous 

and the good man, rather men shall give thewr pratse 
to violence 

and the doer of evil. Right will be in the arm. 
Shame will 

not be. The vile man will crowd his better out, 
and attack him 

with twisted accusations and swear an oath 

to his story... .' 


The poems of Homer and Hesiod had a powerful impact on 
the subsequent ethical and mythological notions of the Ancient 
Greeks.? The “‘father of history’? Herodotus (fifth century B. C.) 
wrote: “Whence the gods severally sprang, whether or no they 
had all existed from eternity, what forms they bore~ these are 
questions of which the Greeks knew nothing until the other day, 
so to speak. For Homer and Hesiod were the first to compose 
Theogonies, and give the gods their epithets, to allot them their 
several offices and occupations and describe their forms; and 


'! Hesiod, The Works and Days, 174-193, The University of Michigan Press, 
Ann Arbor, 1959, pp. 39-41. 

2 The ethical and legal views expressed in the poems of Homer and Hesiod 
were used by a number of ancient lawgivers. For instance, on the evidence of 
Plutarch, the legendary legislator of Sparta Lycurgus found in Homer’s poems 
a wealth of material invaluable for education of a statesman. 


15 





they lived but four hundred years before my time, as I believe” 
( The History of Herodotus, 11, 53). Herodotus also tells us that the 
knowledge about the gods came to Greece from the Pelasgi who, 
in turn, had got it from Egypt (The History of Herodotus, II, 52). 

The ethical rationalisation of myth, the ascription of human 
characteristics and weaknesses to the gods and the unmistakable 
anthropomorphic trend in Homer’s and particularly Hesiod’s 
poems aroused serious objections of a number of Ancient Greek 
philosophers in the later period. For instance, the reputed 
founder of the Eleatic school (called so after the city of Elaea in 
South Italy) Xenophanes (the sixth-fifth centuries B. C.) 
advanced a philosophical idea of One God comparable to mor- 
tals neither in form nor thought and criticised Homer and 
Hesiod for having “attributed to the gods all things that are a 
shame and disgrace among mankind: theft, adultery, and 
mutual deception”. Xenophanes’s idea of god, ‘“‘ungenerated, 
eternal and like a ball’? marked a further departure from the tra- 
ditional mythological notions and another step towards the in- 
terpretation of the mythological pantheon in rationalistic terms. 

Homer’s understanding of the mythological gods was also crit- 
icised by Plato. His contemporaries still held the poet in high 
esteem and regarded him as an educator of Hellas whose views 
ought to be known well and used as a guide in ordering human 
affairs and regulating one’s life (Plato, Republic, X, 606c).! Shar- 
ing this opinion and acknowledging Homer’s greatness, Plato 
nevertheless deemed it necessary to ban his poems in the ideal 
state: “For if you ... allow the honeyed Muse to enter, either in 
epic or lyric verse, not law and the reason of mankind, which by 
common consent have ever been deemed best, but pleasure and 
pain will be the rulers in our State” (Plato, Republic, X, 607). 

It should be noted, however, that for all its deference to the 
names of Homer and Hesiod Athenian democracy showed 
rather a guarded attitude to some of their statements consider- 
ing them detrimental to the interests of the populace. Signifi- 
cantly, Socrates’s accusers who had him brought to trial and 
condemned to death in 399 B. C. adduced the philosopher’s 
habit of quoting “the worst passages from great writers, particu- 
larly Homer and Hesiod” as evidence of his hostility towards the 


' Great Books of the Western World. Vol. 6, Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc., 
Chicago, 1952, p. 60. 


16 








common people (see Xenophon, Memorabilia, 1, II, 56-58). In- 
deed, under the conditions of acute political struggle waged by 
the Athenian populace against the adherents of the aristocratic, 
oligarchic or tyrannical system of government a number of pas- 
sages in Homer and Hesiod had acquired a clear anti-democra- 
tic ring and evoked suspicion on the part of democratic leaders. 

The general trend towards rationalisation of morality, law 
and justice in human affairs characteristic of Homer’s and 
Hesiod’s poems gained even greater prominence in the activity 
of the Seven Sages. 


2. SEVEN SAGES 


Under this head ancient tradition usually included Thales, 
Pittacus, Periander, Bias of Priene, Solon, Cleobulus and Chilo 
the Lacedaemonian, whose life and activity fell on the late 
seventh-early sixth centuries B. C. However, historical sources 
are not unanimous regarding the names of the Seven. For in- 
stance, Plato in his Protagoras mentioned Myson the Chenian in- 
stead of Periander. The apophthegms (dicta) ascribed to these 
sages included various moral maxims and political precepts and 
represented folk wisdom notable for its rationalistic and secular 
character. Not infrequently, the authors of these apophthegms 
took an active part in politics and were rulers or legislators. 

The inception of Greek natural philosophy is linked with the 
name of Thales of Miletus. He is known to have made extensive 
travels in the East and was believed to be initiated in the mys- 
teries of the Babylonian, Egyptian, Phoenician and Persian 
magi and priests. Having but little faith in mythological stories 
and seeking to account for the universe in naturalistic terms, 
Thales advanced a materialistic idea of water as the primary 
cause of everything. The depth of his scientific knowledge was 
attested to by his accurate prediction of a full solar eclipse that 
occurred, according to modern data, on 25 May 585 B. C. 

Though Thales came from a noble family, his socio-political 
views were moderate and he opposed the extremes of both 
wealth and poverty. This idea of moderateness, the golden mean 
in law, politics and property relations was also characteristic of 
the other sages whose lives were contemporaneous with the pe- 
riod of aggravating struggle of the broad masses against the old 
aristocracy on the one hand, and the rising class of the nouveaux 


17 
2113 





riches, on the other. From the viewpoint of politics, the exal- 
tation of measure in the dicta of the Seven was directed towards 
achieving a compromise between different sections of the popu- 
lation and preserving the unity of the polis in the face of the in- 
tensifying class struggle. Thales is credited with this eloquent 
maxim of moral and righteous conduct: ‘‘Refrain from doing 
what you blame in others.” 

As regards his actual participation in politics, we have the evi- 
dence of Herodotus to the effect that Thales urged the Ionian 
cities to form a confederation against the impending Persian in- 
vasion: ‘He councelled them to establish a single seat of govern- 
ment, and pointed out Teos as the fittest place for it, ‘for that,’ 
he said, ‘was the centre of Ionia. Their other cities might still 
continue to enjoy their own laws, just as if they were indepen- 
dent states’.” (The History of Herodotus, 1, 170). 

Thales’s advice, however, was not followed. After the Ionian 
polises had been subjugated by the Persians, a similar idea of 
alliance was put forward by Bias of Priene, also one of the 
“Seven”. According to Herodotus, Bias exhorted the Ionians 
“to join in one body, set sail for Sardinia, and there found a sin- 
gle Pan-Ionic city; so they would escape from slavery and rise to 
great fortune, being masters of the largest island in the world, 
exercising dominion even beyond its bounds; whereas if they 
stayed in Ionia, he saw no prospect of their ever recovering their 
lost freedom” (ibid.). Bias was reputed to have set the greatest 
store by the state where the citizens have as much fear of the law 
as they would have of the tyrant. Tradition also credits him with 
the opinion that death by the law is the worse. 

Respect for the law is characteristic of other sages too. 
Assigned to Chilo, for instance, is the saying ““Obey the law”. In 
his opinion the best polis was the one where citizens obeyed the 
law more than they did the orators. Consonant with it is the 
apophthegm “Obey the law which you would make for your- 
self’ originated by Pittacus who was entrusted by the Myti- 
lenaeans with dictatorial power for 10 years to protect them 
against the exiled nobles. According to another of his sayings, 
supreme power is vested in the laws. He is also said to be the 
author of the aphorism ‘“‘Learn to obey before you command”. 
On the evidence of Diogenes Laertius, he made a law whereby 
for any offence committed in a state of intoxication the penalty 
should be doubled. Its very modern ring shows that the legal 


18 





consciousness of that period was anything but archaic. 

No less concordant with our times appears to be Periander’s 
concern with crime prevention. Diogenes Laertius assigns to him 
this precept: “Correct not only the offenders but also those who 
are on the point of offending.” ! Preferring democracy to tyr- 
anny, Periander maintained, however, that a good democracy 
should approximate to aristocracy. He is also credited with the 
apophthegm “‘Use old laws, but young greens” which presuma- 
bly not only extolled the stability of the laws, but also reflected 
veneration for tradition characteristic of the adherents of aris- 
tocratic government. Not a few of Periander’s dicta were 
devoted to the ethical principles of human conduct and political 
relations within a city-state. This latter aspect gained special 
prominence in the activity of Socrates and his followers, particu- 
larly Plato. 

The canon of the Seven Sages also included Solon (c. 638-559 
B. C.), a famous Athenian statesman and law-maker. By the 
amount of property he owned, as well as by his occupation and 
way of life Solon belonged to the middle strata of Athenian 
society. On the evidence of some sources in his early life he was a 
trader, made extensive travels and acquired a wealth of knowl- 
edge of the customs, laws and forms of government of other 
statés. He was held in high esteem both by his fellow-coun- 
trymen and outside Athens. According to Aristotle, he ranked 
among the foremost men of his time.? 

Under the conditions of bitter political strife between the 
Athenian populace and nobility (the eupatrids), the rich and the 
poor, the debtors and the creditors, Solon was elected first archon 
(ruler or leader) with legislative powers and found himself in the 
position of an umpire trusted by both contending parties and 
having the task of their reconciliation. Having taken the matters 
in his hands, he passed new laws (594 B. C.) and introduced 
radical changes in the socio-political structure of the Athenian 
polis. According to Engels, Solon “‘started the series of so-called 
political revolutions by an encroachment on property... In 
Solon’s revolution, creditors’ property had to suffer for the bene- 





' Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers, Heinemann London; Har- 
ward University Press, Cambridge, Mass., Vol. 1, MCMXXXVIII, p. 101. 

? Aristotle: LI, The Athenian Constitution, 53, Great Books of the Western World, 
Vol. 9, Chicago, Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc., 1952, p. 554. 


19 
Qe 





fit of debtors’ property. The debts were simply annulled”.' 

Solon’s first step was the so-called “disburdening ordinance”’ 
whereby he cancelled all private and state debts and released 
from slavery those who had been unable to pay them. He 
prohibited enslavement for debt in the future and banned per- 
sonal security for loans. He also carried out an important consti- 
tutional reform breaking the eupatrid monopoly of the chief 
magistracies. For this purpose he divided the free population 
into the four classes on a basis of property qualification: pentaco- 
stomedimnot, hippeis (horse-men), zeugitae (probably hoplites or in- 
fantrymen) and thetes (day labourers). Responsible offices were 
open only to members of the first three classes. The thetes were 
not eligible for office, but they were assured memberships of the 
popular assembly and participation in law courts. 

Solon instituted a council (boule) of 400 (100 from each of the 
four Athenian tribes) which partly sapped the authority of the 
Areopagus, heretofore the stronghold of aristocracy. However, 
even after the Solonian reforms the Areopagus retained a 
number of important prerogatives (exposition and guardianship 
of the law, prosecution for unconstitutional acts and homicide 
cases, etc.). 

Solon is also known to have made a law “enacting that any 
one who, in a time of civil factions, did not take up arms with 
either party, should lose his rights as a citizen and cease to have 
any part in the state” (Aristotle: II, The Athenian Constitution, 8, 
5, op. cit., p. 556). This law was evidently intended to stir the 
middle strata of the population to political activity and thus to 
weaken the influence of the extremist elements in both contend- 
ing parties. 

Solon attached great importance to the political and legal 
agility of the citizens. He held that the triumph of justice could 
not be assured if the wrong was left for the victim alone to fight 
against —the important thing was to enlist the support of those 
who were not directly affected by an act of injustice. It is for this 
reason that Solon’s legislation provided in certain cases for the 
right of every citizen to sue the wrongdoer and plead in behalf of 
a wronged party. The idea of the citizens’ universal participa- 
tion in the struggle for the rule of law in a polis was central to the 
Solonian understanding of lawfulness. 


! Frederick Engels, ‘““The Origin of the Family...”, op. cit., p. 280. 
20 








According to Solon, the rule of law was of utmost importance 
for the state’s prosperity. Lawlessness and internecine strife were 
the greatest evils, and law and order, the greatest boon for a peo- 
ple. Characterising the state system established by Solon’s legis- 
lation, Engels wrote: ‘“Thus, an entirely new element was intro- 
duced into the constitution: private ownership. The rights and 
duties of the citizens were graduated according to the amount of 
land they owned; and as the propertied classes gained influence 
the old consanguine groups were driven into the background. 
The gentile constitution suffered another defeat.” ! 

Solonian moderate democracy restricted by property qualifi- 
cations was based on a compromise between the nobility and the 
demos, the rich and the poor. However, the lawgiver apparently 
failed to justify the hopes of both rival parties. The nobles were 
dissatisfied with his departure from the traditional order and 
cancellations of debts, whereas the populace resented Solon’s 
concessions to the aristocrats and failure to level all men in prop- 
erty and rights. According to Aristotle, “Solon, however, had 
resisted both classes. He might have made himself a despot by 
attaching himself to whichever party he chose, but he preferred, 
though at the cost of incurring the enmity of both, to be the 
saviour of his country and the ideal lawgiver” (Aristotle: II, The 
Athenian Constitution, 112, op. cit., p. 557). 

Solon, who was also an excellent poet, made no secret in his 
elegies of his unwillingness to gratify excessive claims of one rival 
party at the expense of the other. Speaking of his reconciliatory 
role, he likens himself to “fa wolf turning at bay among the 
hounds” and notes with satisfaction that he “stood forth a land- 
mark in the midst, and barred the foes from battle” (ibid., 
p. 558). 

Elsewhere he describes his stand in the following words: 


I gave to the mass of the people such rank as befitted 
their need, 

I took not away their honour, and I granted naught to 
their greed, 

While those who were rich in power, who in wealth were 
glorious and great, 

I bethought me that naught should befall them unworthy 


Engels, ‘““The Origin of the Family...”, op. cit, p. 281. 
21 





their splendour and state, 

So I stood with my shield outstretched, and 

both were safe im its sight, 

And I would not that either should triumph, when the 
triumph was not with right (ibid., p. 557). 


Solon admits that he stood against tyranny and coercion on 
the one hand, and equality of the commoner and nobleman, on 
the other. Addressing the dissatisfied demos, he recalls that they 
owe their gains to him alone, and remonstrating with the aris- 
tocrats he reminds them of their sad plight in the face of the 
popular discontent that he managed to abate: 


..had another held the goad as I, 
One in whose heart was guile and greediness, 


He had not kept the people back from strife (ibid., p. 557). 


Many of Solon’s poems that were preserved for us by Aristotle 
are keynoted for the feeling of satisfaction with his choice of the 
path of justice and with the successful accomplishment of the dif- 
ficult task he was assigned. They sound both as an account of the 
work he has done and as a reply to his critics: 


Of all the aims for which I summoned forth 
The people, was there one I compassed not? 
Thou, when slow time brings justice in its train, 
O mighty mother of the Olympian gods, 

Dark Earth, thou best canst witness, from whose 
breast 

I swept the pillars broadcast planted there, 

And made thee free, who hadst been slave of 
yore. 

And many a man whom fraud or law had sold 
For from his god-built land, an outcast slave, 

I brought again to Athens; yea, and some, 
Exiles from home through debt’s oppressive load, 
Speaking no more the dear Athenian tongue, 

But wandering far and wide, I brought again ; 
And those that here in vilest slavery 

Crouched ‘neath a master’s frown, I set them free. 
Thus might and right were yoked in harmony, 
Since by the force of law I won my ends 





And kept my promise. Equal laws I gave 

To evil and to good, with even hand 

Drawing straight justice for the lot of each (ibid., 
pp. 557-558). 


Solon’s reforms and legislation gave rise to widely diverging 
interpretations. The Athenians started to ply him with questions 
regarding the true meaning of his laws which, according to Aris- 
totle, “‘were not drawn up in simple and explicit terms” (ibid., 
p. 556). Anti-democratic elements believed that Solon had de- 
liberately made the laws obscure in order that the final decision 
might be in the hands of the people whose influence in the courts 
was predominant. Aristotle rejected this idea explaining the in- 
definiteness of Solon’s laws as follows: “It is impossible to attain 
ideal perfection when framing a law in general terms” (ibid.). 

In the face of the sharpening controversy over the new laws 
Solon the legislator, unwilling to be involved in the interpre- 
tation of his own ordinances with respect to concrete cases and 
specific situations, made up his mind to leave Athens for ten 
years after having the citizens swear a solemn oath that they 
would observe his laws and not change them during that period. 
Solon believed that his presence at Athens and personal inter- 
vention in the interpretation and enforcement of the new laws 
would be detrimental to their stability and to the firmness of 
legal order. 

Solon framed his laws for one hundred years, i. e. for all time. 
Despite the dissension among the Athenians after his departure, 
the limited democracy established by him lasted several 
decades. 

In the sixties of the sixth century B. C., political power in 
Athens was usurped by Pisistratus! whose administration, 


' Pisistratus was expelled from Athens twice, but each time came back to 
power. Of special interest are the circumstances of his first restoration as they 
throw a very clear light upon the character of the Athenians’ social conscious- 
ness. According to Herodotus (History), the adherents of Pisistratus played a 
crude practical joke on the Athenians. They arrayed a tall beautiful matron as 
Athena the goddess and paraded her in a chariot along the city streets having 
announced beforehand that the protectress of the polis herself was to bring 
Pisistratus back from the exile. The Athenians took the farce at its face value 
and accepted the deposited tyrant. This story is illustrative of both the 
naive faith of the spectators and, in no lesser degree, of the craft of the con- 
spirators who had gone so far in their unbelief as not to stop at fabricating gods. 


23 








according to Aristotle, “was temperate ... and more like consti- 
tutional government than a tyranny” (ibid., p. 559). The dicta- 
torship lasted for nearly half a century and under his sons 
became harsh and cruel. 

After the Pisistratides’ tyranny was overthrown, the socio- 
political system of Athens was further reformed along demo- 
cratic lines in 509 B. C. by Cleisthenes whose innovations were 
even more radical than Solon’s. During the subsequent period of 
Greco-Persian wars power in Athens went into the hands of the 
aristocratic party for at least 17 years. Yet already in 462 B. C. 
the reforms of Ephialtes deprived the Areopagus of its most im- 
portant functions and marked another big step towards streng- 
thening the democratic regime. 

The rule of the demos was further consolidated under Peri- 
cles, a famous statesman and an outstanding leader of the masses 
in the period between 450 and 429 B. C. It was only twice (in 
411 and 404 B. C.) that the anti-democratic party succeeded in 
seizing power for a few months during the Peloponnesian War as 
a result of oligarchic coups. However, after temporary setbacks 
the Athenian demos successfully regained power. In his survey 
of the political changes in the Athenian polis Aristotle notes that 
democracy took its rise from Solon’s reforms. 


3. PYTHAGORAS AND THE PYTHAGOREANS 


Pythagoras (c. 580-500 B. C.) was, according to Herodotus, 
one of the most outstanding Hellenic philosophers ( The History of 
Herodotus, 1V, 95). He was born on Samos, an Ionian island, in 
the family of a wealthy trader Mnesarchus. Tradition tells us of 
his travels in Egypt and Babylonia. After Polycrates the tyrant 
assumed power on Samos, Pythagoras left his native island for 
good and settled at Croton, the leading Greek colony with aris- 
tocratic government in South Italy. Owing to his reputation, 
Pythagoras soon attained a position of authority in the city and 
founded a school where he expounded his views to a select body 
of followers bound by stringent rules of discipline and loyalty to 
their master. The Pythagorean clandestine aristocratic societies 
or brotherhoods, partly religious and partly political, sprang up 
first in Croton, then in many other cities in South Italy and 
other parts of Magna Graecia. Their members’ interests focused 
not only on scientific, philosophical, religious and ethical pro- 


24 





blems, but also on politica! issues. At its initial stage Pythagor- 
eanism was a secret esoteric lore which was revealed only to the 
initiated in a given society (Aeterta). Admission to hetertas was 
open, after appropriate check-ups and tests, both to men and 
women. The Pythagoreans led an ascetic life and were notable 
for self-imposed restrictions and temperance in everything— 
food, clothing, behaviour, speech, emotions. Characteristic of 
the relations between the members of a Pythagorean community 
was strict discipline and loyalty to their brotherhood and to one 
another, as well as the spirit of mutual assistance, friendship and 
love. The authority of Pythagoras was absolute. He was consi- 
dered the author of all the basic principles of Pythagoreanism as 
a doctrine, movement and organisation. 

There are good reasons to believe that Pythagoras expounded 
his teaching by word of mouth and that all those initiated into 
the mysteries of the new lore were bound to keep allegiance to 
the oral traditions. The first Pythagorean credited, though on 
disputable grounds, with a written treatise On Nature was Philo- 
laus of South Italy born in Tarentum or Croton some 25 years 
after Pythagoras’s death. At the end of the sixth century B. C., 
an outburst of popular discontent swept off Pythagorean socie- 
ties in the cities of South Italy and a number of their leading 
members were killed. Some of the survivors, among them Philo- 
laus, Lysis and Archippus fled to other Greek polises which had 
already developed by that time a ramified network of Pythagor- 
ean communities. According to Porphyry, men like Lysis and 
Archippus of Tarentum who managed to escape, as well as tho- 
se who were abroad at the time of the rebellion collected in note 
form what little they could of the philosophy of Pythagor- 
as—‘“‘dim and obscure scraps’. On the evidence of Diogenes 
Laertius, “the book which passes as the work of Pythagoras is by 
Lysis of Tarentum, a Pythagorean, who fled to Thebes and 
taught Epaminondas”’ (Diogenes Laertius. Lives of Eminent Philoso- 
phers. Pythagoras, VIII, 7). Pythagoras was presumably the first 
to distinguish philosophy as love for wisdom from wisdom 
(sophia) as such and to call himself a philosopher but not a wise 
man, for, he said, no one is wise save god. 

Central to Pythagoreanism was the number-doctrine accord- 
ing to which numbers constitute the cause and the principle of 
the universe. Referring to the Pythagorean teaching, Aristotle 
writes: ‘‘Contemporaneously with these thinkers, and even 


25 





before them, the so-called Pythagoreans, who were engaged in 
the study of mathematical objects, were the first to advance this 
study, and having been brought up in it, they regarded the prin- 
ciples of mathematical objects as the principles of all things. 
Since of mathematical objects numbers are by nature first, and 
(a) they seemed to observe in numbers, rather than in fire or 
earth or water, many likenesses to things, both existing and in 
generation (and so they regarded such and such an attribute of 
numbers as justice, such other as soul or intellect, another as 
opportunity, and similarly with almost all of the others), and (b) 
they also observed numerical attributes and ratios in the objects 
of harmonics; since, then, all other things appeared in their 
nature to be likenesses of numbers, and numbers to be first in the 
whole of nature, they came to the belief that the elements of 
numbers are the elements of all things and that the whole 
heaven is a harmony and a number.” ! 

The Pythagorean conception of opposites is notable for ele- 
ments of dialectics. Believing opposites to be the source of all 
being, the Pythagoreans put forward ten pairs (limit and unlim- 
ited, odd and even, one and plurality, right and left, male and 
female, at rest and moving, straight and crooked, light and 
darkness, good and bad, square and oblong) and held that their 
combination and unity account for the harmony of our world 
and the universe as a whole. Harmony, in their opinion, has a 
numerical nature and can be expressed in numerical or mathe- 
matical relationships. Expounding Pythagorean views, Philo- 
laus wrote that the nature and power of number manifest them- 
selves not only in demonic and divine things, but also in human 
affairs and relations, in all technical arts and in music. The 
nature of number and harmony are averse to falsehood which is 
their antithesis; conversely, truth is akin to number and linked 
to it from the very beginning. 

As regards ethics, the Pythagoreans held that justice is 
expressed in number 4 as being the first square, that is the first 
number multiplied by itself, and the essence of justice is requital 
or reciprocity. Referring to such views, Aristotle wrote: “‘Pytha- 
goras was the first to treat of virtue, but erroneously; in reducing 
the virtues to numbers he made his researches irrelevant to their 


' Anstotle’s Metaphysics, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, 1966, 
p. 20-21. 


26 





subject, for justice is not a square number “(Magna Moralia 1182 
a ll). 

Leaving aside the Pythagorean addiction to number-symbol- 
ism and attempts to identify ethical and other relations with one 
or another number, one ought to admit that their definition of 
justice as requital of like for like was a philosophical abstraction 
of the ancient principle of retaliation (“‘an eye for an eye, a tooth 
for a tooth”). Its distinguishing feature, besides the notably 
abstract character, consists in a particularised conception of jus- 
tice understood as reciprocity ad hoc, for a given particular case, 
and not as equality in the sense of one and the same measure 
with respect to different phenomena and relations. In other 
words, equality for the Pythagoreans was a variable measure dif- 
ferent in different situations, and not a single standard or model 
of behaviour. To be sure, the category of measure and commen- 
surability (viewed, in its numerical form, as the essence of har- 
mony and even justice) was of special importance for the genesis 
of the notion of abstract equality and, consequently, for the con- 
ception of law as the application of equal measure to relations of 
inequality. Indeed, the Pythagorean doctrine was an important 
advance on the views of the Seven Sages: the Pythagoreans not 
only conceived of justice as due measure, but focused on the 
moment of equality which was crucial for all subsequent evolu- 
tion of ethical and legal notions. 

The depth and novelty of the Pythagorean conception con- 
sisted in that they construed the familiar notion of due measure 
in terms of numerical proportion or equality. Their mathemat- 
cal approach causing them to reduce all problems to equations 
proved instrumental in deepening the analysis of ethical ques- 
tions; however, this method could not be carried too far—there 
was a limit beyond which lay the mysticism of numbers and 
downright absurdity. 

According to the Pythagorean ethical theory, men in their 
diverse relations should proceed from different kinds of justice 
understood as reciprocity, its concrete form depending on the 
character of the relations. This principle accounts for the varia- 
tion of the “‘due measure”’, the proper way of conduct which, in 
the Pythagoreans’ view, may change within a broad range. A 
certain line of conduct may be appropriate in dealings with one 


'W.K.C. Guthrie, A History of Greek Philosophy, Vol. I, p. 302. 


27 








sort of people under one set of circumstances and quite 
unacceptable in dealings with another sort and under different 
circumstances. Much depends on the difference in age, social 
worth, kinship, merits and other distinctions among people. 

This ‘“‘case approach” to the selection of proper measure in 
human relations was combined in Pythagorean ethics with a 
tendency towards classification of similar circumstantial pat- 
terns and modes of behaviour under typical conditions, i. e. with 
attempts to define standards of man’s conduct in similar cases, as 
well as a certain principle of proper measure applicable to all 
spheres of relations among people. This proper measure presum- 
ably lends itself to quantitative analysis, the methods of which 
could be studied like a special art, yet, according to the Pytha- 
goreans, its essence is elusive and it cannot be grasped by 
rational thought and become the object of science dealing with 
the general nature of things. However, the proper measure is 
always attended by what men call beauty and harmony. It is 
akin to the cause which is the soul of everything, be it science, 
experience, birth, or a house, a state, an army, etc., but is hard 
to perceive and comprehend... 

As is evidenced from these statements, ethical studies extend- 
ing also to politics and law brought the Pythagoreans to the 
problem of a general definition of justice which would apply not 
only to individual cases and specific fields, but cover all spheres 
of human relations. In search of such a general principle of jus- 
tice they strove to give more meat to the abstract notion of jus- 
tice understood broadly as requital of like for like (good for good 
and bad for bad) and focused their attention on the meaning 
and nature of “proper measure”. Admitting the difficulties in- 
volved in the definition of ‘proper measure” in general and in 
particular cases, the Pythagoreans nevertheless pointed out 
some of its mathematico-aesthetic criteria (beauty, mensurabil- 
ity, harmony) and axiologico-hierarchical characteristics. In the 
eyes of the Pythagoreans, the proper measure was not the arith- 
metic mean, 1. e. the commonnest and the most typical, but the 
most valuable. In other words, the measure as a yardstick repre- 
sented the highest good in a hierarchy of values and, owing to its 
normative character, had a beneficial influence on the conduct 
ofmen. The Pythagoreans were very cautious in their approach 
to the definition of the cause or principle of “proper measure’, 
since an error of judgement regarding the principle was likely, in 


28 





their opinion, to derail the whole science based upon it. Indeed, 
a wrong premise, they held, inevitably invalidates all the conse- 
quences. On the evidence of Aristoxenus, a peripatetic author of 
Pythagorean Declarations, central to the Pythagorean doctrine of 
the ‘‘proper measure” was the ethico-aesthetic principle of “true 
love for beauty”. Characteristic of the Pythagoreans, as well as 
of the ancient mind as a whole, was a syncretic understanding of 
beauty as both ethical and aesthetical perfection, as the beauti- 
ful and the good moulded into one. However, the originality of 
Pythagoreanism lies in that it transcended this synthesis by 
bringing in the mathematical idea, scientific and mystical at the 
same time, of beauty as essentially divine numerical harmony. 
The love for such harmony was in the Pythagoreans’ view the 
key to the radical restructuring of man’s entire life, his personal, 
family and public relations in accordance with true principles. 
Calling himself philosopher, Pythagoras was in fact the first 
thinker to propose the reformation of society along the lines 
prompted by reason. In his person philosophy set up its first 
claim to the throne of wisdom rallying great minds under 
its banner and also making no less powerful enemies for many 
centuries to come. 

Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans held that true love for 
beauty manifests itselfin the way of life and devotion to science. 
Indeed, true love, particularly intellectual by nature, opens the 
way to high morals and virtuous life, whereas theoretical and 
practical studies concerned with harmony and perfection reveal 
hidden beauty in the structure of the universe. This true love for 
beauty was cultivated with special zeal in Pythagorean com- 
munities which devoted great attention to the purification and 
salvation of the soul and believed mathematical and musical 
studies to be the most instrumental in promoting the soul’s 
harmony. 

Owing much of their philosophy to the Orphic religious tradi- 
tion with its notions of the soul’s immortality and transmigration 
after the death of the body, the Pythagoreans were engaged in 
secret rites (mysteries) whereby they sought to achieve purga- 
tion and assimilate to the divine. According to the Orphico- 
Pythagorean beliefs, what men call life is in fact the death of the 
immortal soul which is condemned to the body as a tomb. By 
reason of its bodily contamination, the soul passes through an in- 
definite cycle of births assuming different forms in accordance 


29 





with its way of life on the earth. Man’s aim in life therefore is 
redemption from the wheel of transmigration, that is from the 
body with its sensations and desires, by elevating the divine ele- 
ment of his sou] and subduing the earthly so as to unite with the 
gods in the region of the blessed. This ethical doctrine prohib- 
ited suicide on the grounds that the soul is yoked to the body as a 
punishment and man is condemned to endure the trial by the 
will of the gods. Characterising the Orphico-Pythagorean views 
on the subject, Plato wrote: “There is a doctrine whispered in 
secret that man is a prisoner who has no right to open the door 
and run away.” ! For the Pythagoreans conformity with the 
divine was the ultimate purpose of man’s life and the chief aim 
of all their prescriptions. Their whole life was ordered with a 
view to assimilating to god. Pythagoras taught that justice could 
best be ensured by the power of god and the idea of supreme 
deity as a guardian of mankind was the governing principle of 
his views of the state and law. 

Next to the gods and demons in authority came the parents 
and the laws which were to be obeyed willingly and without any 
resentment. In the eyes of the Pythagoreans, obedience to the 
law ranked high in the scale of virtues and good laws were con- 
sidered a great asset.? Castigating the legislators’ bias towards 
new-fangled ideas, the Pythagoreans demanded adherence to 
the traditional customs and laws, even if they were not perfect, 
maintaining, on the evidence of Jamblichus, that it did not befit 
a man to reject the existing laws in favour of dubious innova- 
tions (Jamblichus, V. P. 174). 

The greatest evil for the Pythagoreans was anarchy (lawless- 
ness). Criticising it, they pointed out that man by nature cannot 
do without guidance and leadership. They described ‘man’s 


' The Dialogues of Plato. Phaedo, 62b, Oxford at the Clarendon Press, 1953, 
Vol. 1, p. 412. 

? This is vouched for as a strong Pythagorean conviction by numerous 
ancient sources. One of them is cited in Philosophy of Right by Hegel who tells a 
story of a father inquiring of a Pythagorean about the best way to bring up his 
son in the spirit of morality and receiving advice to make him citizen of a state 
with good laws. Hegel cites this reply in support of his own view that an indivi- 
dual can gain his rights only if he is citizen of a good state. Hegel on the whole 
subscribed to the Pythagorean conception of education as an art of making men 
moral and preparing them for the acceptance of a political order governed by 
the law. 


30 





nature” as complex and unstable, dominated by different feel- 
ings, emotions, moods and passions, since man is endowed with 
both the senses and reason, the mortal body and the immortal 
soul. Owing to such a heterogeneous composition man cannot 
do without leadership which must mould his nature into due 
shape and bring order into his life. In support of their views the 
Pythagoreans adduced the example of a wilful unruly beast that 
has to be subdued for its own good. However, their argument for 
the need of guidance and control of man’s conduct was not con- 
fined to this rather crude analogy, and in order to substantiate 
their theory the Pythagoreans underscored the specific character 
of rule in human society. In his discourse upon the rulers and 
their subjects, Pythagoras pointed out that the former must be 
not only competent, but also humane, and the latter not only 
docile, but also willing to accept the guidance of their superiors. 
According to the Pythagoreans, an important task of the rulers 
was to cater to the interests of all age groups of the country’s 
population. In respect of the young it meant, first and foremost, 
proper education of children and youth in the spirit of the exist- 
ing customs and laws with a view to making them good citizens. 
Old men were assigned the field of judicial activity, advisement 
and cogitation. 

The Pythagoreans held that the purpose of education and 
management was to promote high standards in the conduct of 
personal and public affairs and to harmonise human relations, 
since order and symmetry are beautiful and useful whereas dis- 
order and asymmetry are ugly and harmful. Man therefore must 
never be allowed to act on his own. Every citizen must obey his 
lawful and benevolent authorities. 

The Pythagoreans advocated the aristocratic form of govern- 
ment understood not as the rule of the old gentile nobility, but as 
the authority of the best, the few knowing and competent. Their 
aristocratic sympathies and mistrust of democracy sprang from 
intellectual contempt for the common people’s judgement. The 
Pythagoreans held that it was unreasonable to heed the opinions 
of the mob as only few were endowed with the gift of clear think- 
ing and a sense of harmony. 

The Pythagoreans took an active part in the political life of 
city-states in Magna Graecia and their adherents ascended to 
power in many polises. After the democratic revolution of 510 
B. C. at the neighbouring city of Sybaris, Croton’s rival, Pytha- 


31 








goras persuaded the Crotonian assembly to grant asylum to the 
Sybaritean refugees and in the war that followed Sybaris was 
destroyed. Inc. 500 B. C., the demos rebelled at Croton itself 
and its influential Pythagorean society was smashed. Later, in 
the time of Philolaus (about 430 B.C.) the rebellion spread 
throughout the country and the leading members of the Pytha- 
gorean brotherhood perished. Only few managed to escape from 
Magna Graecia to other Greek polises. However, even in the 
fourth century B. C. the Pythagoreans still held important 
offices in Italian cities. For instance, Plato’s close friend Pytha- 
gorean Archytas of Tarentum was several times elected strategus 
(commander in chief with practically unlimited powers) and 
gained numerous victories over the enemies of his native city. 
Besides politics, Archytas made notable contributions to mathe- 
matics, mechanics, philosophy and, according to Diogenes Laer- 
tius, was generally admired for his excellence in all fields. On the 
same evidence it was none other than Archytas who warned 
Plato of the intention of Dionysius the Younger, the tyrant of 
Syracuse, to put him to death and in this way saved his friend’s 
life. 

In the work On Mathematus Archytas, treating of purely 
mathematical problems, expounds simultaneously the typically 
Pythagorean idea of numbers as the criterion and instrument for 
ordering human relations. In his opinion, the art of calculation 
is instrumental in ending strife and promoting concord among 
people; it has made it possible to prevent men from cheating one 
another and allowed equality ‘fo set in. Indeed, all deals are 
based on a count whereby the poor people get their due from the 
rich, and the rich reckon with the poor, both believing in the 
exchange of equal possessions. Again, count keeps the ill-inten- 
tioned from deceit as they know well that their tricks can be 
easily exposed. The beneficial influence of calculation extends 
even to those who cannot count, as they are careful not to persist 
in their erroneous judgements so as not to descredit themselves. 

Archytas is said to have spoken of law court with great rever- 
ence as the seat of justice. On the evidence of Aristotle, he 
equated the judge with the altar, since a wronged man turns for 
protection to both. 

Timaeus of Locri (fifth century B. C.) was another Pythagor- 
ean who played a prominent part in the public affairs of Magna 
Graecia. A contemporary of Socrates, Anaxagoras and Philo- 


32 











laus, he was described by Plato in his dialogue Timaeus as one of 
those men who were equally capable of philosophical studies 
and statecraft owing to their natural intelligence and education. 

The ethical and political conceptions and ideals of the Pytha- 
goreans by far outlived their original societies violently trampled 
out all over Magna Graecia in the middle of the fifth century 
B. C. Pythagoreanism left an indelible mark on the history of 
ancient culture and many outstanding thinkers of later times, 
among them Socrates and Plato, were strongly influenced by its 
political and legal concepts, not to speak of the philosophical 
doctrines. ! 

Pythagorean influence is traceable in a number of utopian 
projects of a perfect society and state system that made their 
appearance in the fifth century B. C. The authors of those proj- 
ects were evidently inspired not only by the ideas of equality, 
justice and harmony expressed in philosophical and mathemati- 
cal terms and conceived as the foundation of a perfect social 
order, but also by the practical example of the Pythagorean 
societies, their common meals, common studies and the remark- 
able spirit of friendship, collectivity and mutual assistance. The 
Pythagorean teaching of purification whereby society can be 
reformed and harmony substituted for dissension and anarchy 
had a unique emotional and intellectual appeal to numerous 
expounders of the ideal social order. 

One of such ancient utopias is ascribed to Phaleas of Chalce- 
don. According to Aristotle, Phaleas started from a conviction 
that the pivotal question of all revolutions was the regulation of 
property and accordingly proposed that the citizens of a state 
ought to have equal possessions in land. He thought that in a 
new colony the equalisation might be accomplished without dif- 
ficulty, and in an old state it might be effected by the regulation 
of dowries: the rich might give dowries, but should not receive 
them, and the poor might receive dowries, but should not give 
them (Aristotle: II, Politics, I], 7, 1266a). 

A different scheme for achieving social harmony was 
advanced (in the second half of the fifth century B. C.) by neo- 
Pythagorean Hippodamus of Miletus, a man of versatile knowl- 
edge and great abilities. He was an architect and achieved fame 





' For more detail see Ernest Barker, Greek Political Theory, Plato and His Pre- 
decessors, Methuen & Co. Ltd., London, 1947, pp. 45-50. 


33 
3113 





as a town-planner. Ancient tradition credits him with the con- 
struction of the port town of Piraeus on the rectangular grid 
plan that was later adopted throughout the Greek world. On 
some evidence he also planned the city of Rhodos on the island 
of the same name and is said to have built a strategic road con- 
necting Piraeus with Athens. It was in the sphere of architecture 
that Hippodamus gave substance to the Pythagorean notions of 
proportion, perfection and harmony. Aristotle described him as 
an eccentric and ambitious man who tried to pass himself off as 
an adept in the knowledge of nature. 

Turning to social and political problems, Hippodamus, ‘‘the 
first person not a statesman” (Aristotle: IT, Politics, I, 8, 1267b) 
hazarded a project of the best form of government.! The ideal 
polity of Hippodamus was composed of 10,000 citizens divided 
into three classes — artisans, farmers, and soldiers. All magistrates 
were to be elected by the people, i. e. by the aforementioned 
three classes outside of which remained the slaves, the aliens and 
all those who were not “citizens”. The main task of the magis- 
trates was to watch over the interests of the state. 

Hippodamus also divided the land into three parts, one 
sacred, one public, the third private. The revenue from the 
sacred land was to maintain the customary worship of the gods, 
the public land was to support the warriors, whereas the private 
land was to be the property of the husbandmen. Hippodamus 
also divided laws into three classes on the grounds that there are 
three subjects of lawsuits—insult, injury, and homicide. 

More concrete were Hippodamus’s plans regarding judiciary. 
He, for one, proposed setting up a single final court of appeal to 
examine all cases alleged to have been improperly decided by 
the courts of first instance. Such a court of appeal conceived as 
an elective body of old men had hitherto not been known in the 
Hellenic judicial system. Hippodamus further proposed to 
reform the court proceedings which, in his opinion, were defi- 
cient in that the existing rules committed the judges to perjury 
as they had to choose only between sustaining the charges in full 


' This genre of politico-legal literature later gained wide currency and was 
popular both in the classical period of Greek thought (cf. Plato’s projects of the 
ideal state) and in the Hellenistic epoch (e. g. the perfect social systems without 
slavery and private property in Euhemerus’s Sacred History and in Jambul’s City 
of the Sun dating to the third century B. C.). 


34 


and passing a verdict of “guilty” or acquitting the defendant. In 
other words, the judges were deprived of any initiative and 
limited to the alternative offered by the parties even if the truth 
was known to lie half-way between or elsewhere. Hippodamus 
therefore proposed that court decisions ought not to be given by 
the use of a voting pebble, but that everyone should have a tab- 
let on which he might not only write a simple condemnation, or 
leave the tablet blank for a simple acquittal, but, if he partly 
aquitted and partly condemned he was to distinguish accord- 
ingly. As is evidenced from the above, the main idea of the 
reform proposed by Hippodamus in the sphere of the judicature 
boiled down to the enhancement of the court’s role, extension of 
its prerogatives and strengthening of its autonomy and indepen- 
dence from the litigants’ claims. Hippodamus also deemed it 
necessary to adopt a special law for honouring those who dis- 
covered anything for the good of the state. 

The ethical and political views of Pythagoras and the Pytha- 
goreans have been a matter of much dispute which mainly 
results from different understanding of the substance and char- 
acter of what is generally described as Pythagorean aristocrat- 
ism. Indeed, the historians are apparently unanimous in defin- 
ing the Pythagorean social teaching as aristocratic, but differ in 
whether it should be regarded as expressing the ideology of old 
hereditary aristocracy nostalgic for its former sway, or as eulo- 
gising the new “aristocracy of spirit’ and advocating the rule of 
the moral and intellectual elite. According to the French histo- 
rian of philosophy Francgois Laurent, Pythagoras did lean to- 
wards aristocratic rule, but then this attitude could be an impu- 
tation on all antiquity. The ancients, in Laurent’s opinion, did 
not know true equality, they practiced it only within a certain 
caste. The philosophers yielding to this universal trend con- 
structed their perfect polity along the same lines. Like Plato, 
Pythagoras may have been inspired by the Doric political 
organisation which realised equality, unity and solidarity at 
least in the metropolis (Sparta). Yet aristocracy as understood 
by Pythagoras was far more superior to the existing aristocratic 
system of government which was merely formalised by the Lace- 
daemonian legislation. Sparta was founded on coercion and 
only held out by a most outrageous abuse of force. By contrast, 
the Pythagorean community did not come about by way of con- 
quest, its soul, according to Laurent, was brotherhood and love. 

35 
3° 








In this explicit account of Pythagorean aristocratism the 
author rightfully underscores the limited character of the 
ancient notion of equality and aptly points out the difference 
between the Pythagorean and Spartan elitist approach, yet his 
interpretation of the aristocratic tendency of Pythagoreanism as 
a mere expression of the ancients’ peculiar understanding of 
equality in the teeth of the Pythagorean patent hostility towards 
democracy can hardly be accepted as tenable. Nor should one 
ignore the fact that the Pythagoreans themselves, for all the 
ostensible difference of their ethical and political views from the 
Spartan-Cretan ideology and political practices, particularly 
over the problem of violence, were by no means advocates of 
non-resistance to evil. The Croton-Sybaris conflict of 510 B. C. 
and other similar events provide convincing evidence for their 
readiness to resort to force wherever they deemed it necessary for 
establishing the politico-legal order they approved. Theoreti- 
cally, too, their understanding of justice as requital of like for 
like implied reciprocity and, consequently, justified the use of 
force in principle. Besides, one ought not to identify the theoreti- 
cal principles of Pythagorean ethics and the principles underly- 
ing the relations of the members of the Pythagorean brother- 
hood itself with the political practices they introduced and 
defended. Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans are known to have 
been strongly biased towards the aristocratic state systems of 
such Doric polises as Crete and Sparta, yet they advocated the 
rule of new enlightened aristocracy very different from the old 
hereditary nobility. Hence their exaltation of knowledge and 
“those who know”, their conception of justice as equality (which 
was completely unacceptable to old gentile aristocracy), their 
laudation of the rule of law and justice.! In the light of the above 
the contention of Karl Hildenbrand, a German historian of the 
philosophy of right, that the purpose of the Pythagorean 
alliance, this “‘aristocracy of spirit” was to enhance the influence 
of the “aristocracy of blood”? can hardly be regarded as 
tenable. 

The aristocratism of the Pythagoreans seems to be reformative 
and renovating rather than conservative. Leading in contem- 
porary science and philosophy, the Pythagoreans championed 





! Barker, op. cit., pp. 46-49. 
* Karl Hildenbrand, Geschichte und System der Rechts- und Staatsphilosophie, 
Leipzig, Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1860, S. 52-53. 


36 





scientific progress, stood for the development of production, 
trade and monetary relations, and rejected old aristocratic nar- 
row-mindedness and stagnation. 

The Pythagorean moderate philosophical doctrine of the har- 
mony of opposites does not automatically lead to an ideology of 
political conservatism, nor the Heraclitean radical dialectical 
doctrine of the struggle of opposites to a progressive social stand 
(though Heraclitus’s political convictions were indeed different 
from the ideals of old aristocracy). The antithesis of the 
philosophical doctrines of the Pythagoreans and Heraclitus 
(conciliation of opposites as against their struggle) need not 
necessarily imply a similar antithesis of their socio-political plat- 
forms. On the contrary, for all the distinctions between the phi- 
losophical conceptions of the Pythagoreans and Heraclitus, they 
both espoused the side of genuine aristocracy, the aristocracy of 
knowledge. The difference between them surfaced in the answer 
to the question: What is true knowledge? 

Unlike the Pythagoreans who were actively engaged in public 
affairs, Heraclitus shunned all political activity as something 
below his dignity (according to one of the apocryphal anecdotes, 
he was found playing dice with the children and when asked 
why replied to the citizens: ““Why are you surprised, you good- 
for-nothings? Isn’t this better than playing politics with you?’’— 
Diogenes Laertius. IX, 3). The Pythagoreans showed far greater 
interest in the problems of society and the state than Heraclitus. 
For one thing, the very formation of societies playing an active 
part in the political life of Greek cities provides conclusive evi- 
dence for the greater social vigour of the Pythagoreans. Their 
spirit of collectivism, even inspired as it was by aristocratic 
ideals, was alien to the individualist-minded Ephesian aristocrat 
who held the majority of mankind in great contempt and viewed 
any collective as a hateful unreasonable mob. In the light of the 
above it appears wrong in principle to regard the Pythagorean 
communities and their political activity as indicative of the 
aristocratic conservatism of the Pythagoreans identifying at the 
same time, rather one-sidedly, the blatant individualism and 
political indifference of Heraclitus with progressive social views 
and rejection of old aristocratic ideals. 

Insofar as the socio-political views of the Pythagoreans and 
Heraclitus are comparable at all, the former appear to go far 
beyond the latter in radicalism, concreteness and common sense. 


37 





In the time of the Pythagoreans and Heraclitus (the sixth— 
the early fifth century B.C.) the broad masses that rose to politi- 
cal activity through the whole of Magna Graecia dealt a death 
blow to the domination of old aristocracy. Its downfall had been 
prepared by the steady growth of productive forces, the develop- 
ment of trade and handicrafts that resulted in the accumulation 
of great wealth in the hands of a new stratum of slave-owning 
society —shop owners, big tradesmen, etc. In the struggle for 
power between hereditary nobility, the nouveaux riches and the 
demos in most polises old aristocracy was gradually losing its 
dominant positions and, in case of an occasional reversal of for- 
tunes, regained them but temporarily. Yet even in such cases it 
had to take into account the interests of the new social strata— 
influential money-bags, tradesmen, artisans and the poor sec- 
tions which tended to coalesce in the acute class struggle. Aris- 
tocracy was therefore compelled to steer the middle course and 
seek compromise with its social and political enemies. The time 
of its undivided sway had long since passed and the new social 
conditions imperatively demanded that the leaders of aris- 
tocracy adopt a new political strategy and offer new ideological 
solutions. As a result, the views of the adherents of aristocratic 
government and the very conception of aristocracy were bound 
to undergo a radical transformation. In point of fact, the master- 
minds of aristocracy were faced with the problem of reappraisal 
of values and had to evolve a new conception of aristocracy or, 
more accurately, a conception of new aristocracy. 

The approach of the Pythagoreans and Heraclitus to this 
problem rested on a common foundation: they both selected an 
intellectual (logico-philosophical, mathematical, i. e. ‘‘artifi- 
cial” and not natural) criterion for ranking a man as “‘best”’, 
“noble”, ‘‘virtuous” regarded in their time as synonymous with 
“aristocratic”. This transition from the conception of hereditary 
aristocracy (aristocracy by birth, i. e. by nature) to that of aris- 
tocracy of spirit was highly significant if only for the fact that 
aristocracy was no longer regarded as an exclusive caste and 
became, as it were, an open class. The access to it was not a 
natural privilege, a gift of nature, but a result of merits and per- 
sonal endeavour. This renovation and extension of the concep- 
tion of aristocracy was patently at variance with old aristocratic 
ideology and ran counter to the convictions of its orthodox 
expounders. 


38 








Very indicative in this respect is the contrast between the 
Pythagorean and Heraclitean conception of “the best” as aris- 
tocrats of spirit on the one hand and the attitude of Theognis the 
poet of Megara (the late sixth— early fifth centuries B. C.), on 
the other. Theognis in his elegiac verse extols the nobility of 
birth, the old aristocracy, and sharply contrasts it as “the good” 
to the mob, “the bad”, “knowing nought of decrees or of laws”. 
The noble character and the exalted qualities, according to 
Theognis, are hereditable, and it holds true both of men and 
animals. The poet laments over the fate of a state where aristoc- 
racy has been overthrown and compares it to a non-steerable 
ship caught in the midst of a storm. He is ready to shed the blood 
of “the bad” in order to restore the rule of “the noble” so dear to 
him, and calls on his supporters to quell the demos without any 
mercy. 

In the light of Theognis’s uncompromising stand which can 
be taken for a model of loyalty to the old aristocratic traditions, 
the new approach championed by the Pythagoreans and Herac- 
litus acquires special significance for all the difference of their 
neo-aristocratic ideals. Indeed, grieving over the past and com- 
menting with sarcasm on the new order of things Heraclitus is 
not blinded by his aristocratic descent and sympathies to the in- 
evitability of social change and is keenly aware of the need to 
reappraise values and adopt new (neo-aristocratic) ideals. As 
regards the Pythagoreans, they are not handicapped by nostal- 
gia for bygone days; filled with optimism and confidence, they 
engage in reformative activity in a bid to promote the rule of 
“the best”, the aristocrats of knowledge, specially selected and 
nurtured. Ifone may use modern terminology, the Pythagorean 
communities were in fact nothing but education and training 
centres for the functionaries of a new aristocratic party. Its pro- 
gramme was neo-aristocratic reformation intended to stem the 
tide of popular discontent and prevent the demos from seizing 
political power. 


4. HERACLITUS 


Heraclitus of Ephesus (c. 530—c. 470 B.C.), a famous 
ancient dialectician, came of an aristocratic clan of the highest 
rank whose members were known to have been kings (basileuses) 
at his native city. However, in the time of Heraclitus the power 


39 





at Ephesus was in the hands of the demos and his royal clan had 
been driven into the background. Turning his back on political 
activity and disdaining participation in public affairs, Herac- 
litus nevertheless devoted considerable attention to the problems 
of polis life in his philosophical treatises. On the evidence of Dio- 
genes Laertius (IX, 5) Heraclitus’s work On Nature “is divided 
into discourses, one of the universe, another on politics, and the 
third on theology”’. 

The political and legal views of Heraclitus can only be under- 
stood in the context of his world outlook as a whole.! He held 
that all things in the world are in perpetual change, motion, 
struggle and renewal, and asserted that it is not possible to step 
twice into the same river (Plato, Cratylus). The sun, according to 
Heraclitus, is not only new every day, but always new at every 
moment.? 

In this perpetual flux of change everything consists of oppo- 
sites which pass into each other and make a unity. Day and 
night are one, good and bad are one, the straight and the 
crooked are also one. “The road up and the road down are one 
and the same” (Fr. 60). More explicit is fragment 88: “And as 
the same thing there exists in us living and dead and the waking 
and the sleeping and young and old: for these things having 
changed round are those, and those things having changed 
round agazn are these ones.” Fragment 42 asserts: ““We exist and 
do not exist... The rivers into which we step are the same and 
not the same.” Similar relativism, not absolute but within the 
framework of a definite contrariety is expressed in fragment 65: 
“One thing, the only truly wise, does not and does consent to be 
called by the name of Zeus.” This relativism in Heraclitus him- 
self and in a number of his followers is not by any means tanta- 
mount to an assertion that the world is disorderly and 
unknowable. 

The examples of the identity of opposites (whole and not 


' Characteristic of Heraclitus and the ancient thinkers in general is a ten- 
dency to consider social problems, as well as all earthly human affairs and rela- 
tions in their inseparable connection and unity with global, cosmic processes. 
Hence the conception of polis order as a reflection of the cosmic order, and the 
search for the cosmic sources of the norms and standards of human behaviour. 
Political knowledge is understood as a part of the knowledge of nature at large. 

? Heraclitus, The Cosmic Fragments, 6, 32 B, Cambridge at the University 
Press, 1962, p. 264. 


40 











whole, all and one, life and death, good and bad, war and peace, 
concord and discord, the convergent and divergent, satiety and 
hunger, etc.) cited by Heraclitus testify to the presence of neces- 
sary connections and “invisible harmony” which can be grasped 
by the human mind. The first cause of the orderly interaction of 
opposites and the principle of orderliness of the cosmos as a 
whole understood by Heraclitus as the “ordered world” or the 
“world order” is fire, the primary substance of the world in the 
Milesian sense. Heraclitus describes it as a universal equivalent 
of opposites passing into one another and as a measure of the 
world order: ‘‘All things are an equal exchange for fire and fire 
for all things, as goods are for gold and gold for goods” (Fr. 22). 

The measure of fire determines the appearance of the cosmos. 
Heraclitus’s fire governs everything, separating and connecting 
world phenomena. The formation of the cosmos, i. e. the order- 
ing of the world results from the want of fire (the way down), 
whereas the abundance of fire (‘“‘satiety” and the way up) leads 
to a conflagration and destruction of the cosmos. The length of 
the whole cycle (the Great Year) from the beginning to the end 
of the cosmos is 10,800 years. ‘“This (world-) order (the same of 
all) did none of gods or men make, but it always was and is and 
shall be: an ever-living fire, kindling in measures and going out 
in measures” (Fr. 20). Lenin described this pronouncement as 
“a very good exposition of the principles of dialectical 
materialism”! 

This changing measure of fire swaying the destinies of the 
cosmos is, according to Heraclitus, the universal law, the eternal 
logos which orders all things and determines the course of all 
that comes to pass. Everything in the world occurs in accord- 
ance with the universal and divine logos, i. e. in strife and by 
necessity, therefore justice and truth consists in living up to its 
dictates. 

The notions of universal strife and eternal war of opposites 
underly not only the cosmological and epistemological views of 
Heraclitus, but also his ethical, social and political conceptions 
and constitute the core of his world outlook as a whole. “One 
must know that war is common and right is strife and that all 


' V. I. Lenin, “Conspectus of Lassalle’s Book The Philosophy of Heraclitus the 
Obscure of Ephesus’, Collected Works, Vol. 38, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 
1981, p. 347. 


4] 





things are happening by strife and necessity” (Fr. 62). 

The philosophical proposition of law and necessity as the gov- 
erning principle of the world (the universal logos) constitutes the 
basis of Heraclitus’s ethical theory. The very idea of a single 
ordering principle that reigns supreme in the world implies, 
when extended to the sphere of human affairs and relations, a 
moral obligation to observe it: ‘““Therefore it is necessary to fol- 
low the common (that is, the universal: for “ccommon’”’ means 
“universal”): but although the logos is common the many live 
as though they had a private understanding” (Fr. 92). From 
this philosophico-epistemological tenet of Heraclitus ensues the 
conception of the different worth of people, their inequality. The 
faculty of reason is a great asset common to all men, yet most of 
them prove unable to grasp the meaning of the obvious (the 
common logos), each claiming a wisdom peculiar to himself. 

Wisdom, according to Heraclitus, is only accessible to few. It 
consists in the understanding that the world is governed by rea- 
son, the logos. Though even the wisest of men will appear an ape 
when compared with god, one can grasp the truth by thinking 
and self-search and act in accordance with his knowledge. Echo- 
ing the saying “Know thyself” said to have been inscribed on 
the wall of Apollo’s temple in Delphi and evidently viewing it as 
god’s command, Heraclitus confessed with pride that he had 
“sought for himself’ (Fr. 101). He definitely puts himself on 
the side of the wise and claims to have seen the truth as 
no man before. However, human wisdom compared to divine 
reason is nothing but opinion and the highest a mortal can 
aspire to is to become a philosopher, i.e. not a possessor, but 
only a lover of wisdom. In the view of Heraclitus, men who are 
philosophers must be inquirers into many things (Fr. 49). 

Heraclitus shows little respect for his predecessors and con- 
temporaries universally held in high esteem as sages: “Of all 
whose accounts I have heard no one reaches the point of recog- 
nizing that wise is separated from all” (Fr. 18). Homer, in his 
opinion, deserves to be expelled from the contests and flogged. 
Incidentally, a similar derogatory attitude to Homer was ex- 
hibited by Plato, the reason being presumably Homer’s frivolous 
and disparaging remarks on the gods. Heraclitus also speaks 
with irony of Hesiod, Pythagoras, Xenophanes and Hecateus: 
“Much learning does not teach sense” (Fr. 46). He speaks in 
complimentary terms only of one of the Seven Sages- Bias of 


42 





Priene ‘‘who was of more logos than the rest” (Fr. 112). Herac- 
litus must have been favourably impressed by Bias’s insistence 
on the obedience to law in polis life and particularly by his con- 
viction that the highest good is reason capable of grasping justice 
and truth. In Heraclitus’s eyes Bias must have taken the correct 
road towards the comprehension of the logos of ethics and law in 
the polis life. 

In order to get a clear insight into the mind of Heraclitus as a 
champion of aristocracy, we should take into account his sharp 
contrast between the so-called ‘“‘philosophers”’, “the wise’’, ‘the 
best’’ on the one hand, and the ignorant mob, on the other. The 
epistemological antithesis between the knowing and the ignor- 
ant transforms in the socio-political antithesis between few and 
many. In the struggle of these opposites the sympathies of Her- 
aclitus are entirely on the side of the “knowing”, the few. He 
openly and blatantly—in a manner comparable perhaps only 
with Nietzsche — attacks “the mob”, “the many”, their opinions, 
way of life, religion, political institutions. Everything connected 
with the mob is alien and hateful to him. There is no doubt that 
Heraclitus is opposed to democracy in general and to the 
democratic government in his native Ephesus in particular. He 
bitterly resents the victory of the populace and speaks of his fel- 
low-countrymen with sarcasm and undisguised animosity. 

Democracy for Heraclitus was the rule of “the bad”’ and “un- 
reasonable’. Rejecting democracy and advocating the govern- 
ment of “the best”, Heraclitus put forward a case for 
aristocracy — yet not the old hereditary nobility, the aristocracy 
of blood, but new aristocracy of spirit, the intellectual elite. He 
had little sympathy for the nobles who took for granted all their 
privileges, the political ones inclusive, as a natural endowment, 
as something belonging to them by the right of birth. The revolt 
of the demos and the establishment of the democratic form of 
government had dealt a death blow to the patriarchal ideology 
of old aristocracy, and Heraclitus never sided with the conserva- 
tive advocates of “the best” clinging to the past and dreaming of 
getting back their lost privileges—he was not a practical politi- 
cian and pragmatic approach to reality was entirely alien to his 
cast of mind. Estranged and contemptuous, he looked down on 
the sphere of politics with its petty interests and polis passions 
from the height of the cosmic logos he believed himself to be in 
communion with: ‘The best renounce all] for one thing... But 


43 


most men stuff themselves like cattle” (Fr. 111). Having turned 
away from the public affairs of his native city, Heraclitus throws 
this sarcastic wish at his fellow-countrymen: “May wealth not 
fail you, men of Ephesus so that you may be convicted of your 
wickedness!” (Fr. 84). The loftiness of Heraclitus sprang not so 
much from the psychologycal traits of his character as from the 
high standards, the measure of the cosmic fire and logos, that he 
applied to human affairs and polis life. Hence the gloomy pes- 
simism of the Ephesian thinker and his sobriquets of the Weep- 
ing Philosopher and the Obscure.! The philosopher indifferent 
to earthly blessings and oriented towards eternal glory could not 
have wept over the lost privileges of aristocracy, nor could he 
have been inspired by the idea of their retrieval... 

Heraclitus’s pronouncements on “the best” and “the bad”, 
on the polis, the laws, etc. are more than the expression of his 
personal views — they are in fact philosophical conceptions relat- 
ing to politics, the state and the law. It should therefore be clear 
that his aristocratic political ideals can by no means be identi- 
fied with one or another positive programme and specific ide- 
ology of political power. The philosophical doctrine of Herac- 
litus is notable for its abstract universal character which sets it 
apart from concrete politico-ideological programmes. This 
means, for instance, that the principle of conformity of men’s 
entire life (including the affairs of the state, the laws, etc.) with 
the dictates of the logos is applicable to all forms and types of 
government. It stands to reason that this principle is directed, 
first and foremost, against democracy, yet it is also incompatible 
with the rule of old hereditary aristocracy. 

Owing to its ideal character as a universal measure and scale, 
the philosophical principle of government stated by Heraclitus 
does not accord with the positive political practices of either old 
aristocracy or democracy, though there does seem to be one 
point of close affinity between the views of Heraclitus and the 


! The title of the Weeping Philosopher bestowed upon Heraclitus in anti- 
quity was more than just a figure of speech. There is good reason to believe that 
the folly and misery of mankind indeed moved him to compassionate and help- 
less tears of a man acutely aware of a tremendous gulf between the cosmic logos 
and men’s wretched and vain life. Heraclitus’s “weeping” and his “obscurity” 
(which was not a simple lack of clarity in his aphorisms) derive from one and 
the same source—the sorrow of his wisdom. 


44 








old aristocratic ideology—the eulogy on the merits of the few, 
“the best”, as contrasted with the baseness and stupidity of the 
many, “the bad”. This, however, should not mislead us since the 
above attributes acquire new connotations in the mouth of Her- 
aclitus for whom the criterion of the division is not birth and 
blood, but personal virtues and wisdom. The main division of 
mankind, according to Heraclitus, is into the knowing and the 
ignorant, and this division underlies the philosopher’s scale of 
values. Both the old aristocracy and Heraclitus are for the few, 
“the best”, but they are different “few” and different “best’’. 

In the light of the above the social doctrine of Heraclitus 
should be rightly qualified as elitist. Under the specific historical 
and political conditions of his time this elitism was objectively a 
neo-aristocratic alternative to democracy which was in the 
ascendant throughout the Greek world.! In all fragments where 
Heraclitus extolls “the best” as “the few”, he levels his shafts 
against democracy; in other fragments where he identifies “the 
best” with “the knowing”, “‘the wise”, he clearly departs from 
the aristocratic tradition. This departure from the ideology of 
the old nobility is particularly manifest in the question of the 
laws. Historians justly note that underscoring the importance of 
the new written law of the polis (nomos) Heraclitus thereby 
rejected old aristocratic sense of right based on the clan law and 
age-old traditions and customs. 

The people, according to Heraclitus, must fight for the law as 
they do for the city wall (Fr. 100). This clear-cut statement, 
very much in the nature of a battle-cry, is not of course a call for 
defence of the rights of a democratic party—rather, it is a supra- 
party principle of legality as such, a principle of the rule of law 
in polis life. 

The polis and its law, according to Heraclitus, are derived 
from one common source and are equally divine and rational: 
“Those who speak with sense must rely on what is common to 
all, as a city must rely on its law, and with much greater 
reliance: for all the laws of men are nourished by one law, the 


' The opinion that Heraclitus propounded reactionary views in politics and 
advocated the political ideology of hereditary aristocracy appears to us one- 
sided. Equally untenable, in our view, is the opposite theory regarding Herac- 
litus as a champion of social reforms in the manner of Solon, i. €. as a moderate 
democrat which he was not. 


45 





divine law; for it has as much power as it wishes and is sufficient 
for all and is still left over” (Fr. 91). Elsewhere the divine law as 
the source of all human laws is called by Heraclitus the logos, 
reason and nature (see Fr. 65). 

The universal logos or divine justice (dike) must be reflected in 
human laws. Their imperfection, according to Heraclitus, 
results from men’s inability to understand it. Correct thinking or 
reflection can overcome wrong notions of justice and help man 
grasp the everlasting logos. Significantly, the Heraclitean doc- 
trine of divine justice identified by him with the universal Jogos 
was later elaborated by Socrates and Plato in their sharp po- 
lemics with the sophists who adduced the plurality of notions of 
justice as an argument for ethical relativity and individualism. 

Heraclitus holds that the divine cosmic processes and the 
cosmos as a whole representing the measure of eternal fire pro- 
vide the scale and measure for human affairs and relations, the 
laws inclusive. Without such a divine fiery scale men would not 
have the very notion of justice. Heraclitus thus does not confine 
himself to an assertion of the divine origin of human laws: the 
traditional theological approach is too shallow for him. In his 
eyes, Zeus is no more than just another name for the world logos. 
Heraclitus modifies the old conception of Zeus as the ruler of all 
things and speaks instead of the logos and everlasting fire. Zeus, 
logos and fire for Heraclitus are synonyms. On the theological 
side, the human law is derived from divine justice and truth, on 
the epistemological side, from the universal logos, and on the 
ontological side, from eternal fire. In this triad the leading role 
belongs to the ontological principle providing the measure and 
scale for everything else; indeed, the measure of fire is ac- 
countable for the orderliness of the cosmos itself. 

It will be recalled that already the Seven Sages in their ethico- 
political maxims showed great interest in the notion of measure 
which they generally understood as the golden mean between 
two extremes. The Pythagoreans elaborated this notion and 
made an important advance on their predecessors. Due measure 
in their teachings is no longer the arithmetic mean and the typi- 
cal—it is the world’s most valuable harmony which is essentially 
numerical. The essence of measure is thus derived by the Pytha- 
goreans from the numerical essence of the cosmic order and har- 
mony, but not from empirical phenomena as their “‘mean”’. 
Heraclitus treats the problem in a similar manner, linking the 


46 





conception of measure with the cosmic order and its primary 
cause (fire). However, his approach to the problem appears to 
be more consistent and profound: the changeful ‘‘measure”’ 
(and mensurability) inherent in fire itself as the cosmic primary 
source and material becomes in Heraclitus the universal scale of 
all being. Heraclitus in fact asserted not only the objective, onto- 
logical nature of the “measure”’, but also pointed out the dialec- 
tics of its change and “fluidity”. 

According to Heraclitus, the measure of all cosmic and 
earthly phenomena depends on the fluctuating (within the 
limits of the great, cosmic year) measure of fire which underlies 
the necessity and order of natural and social processes: ‘‘Sun will 
not overstep his measures, if he does, the Erinyes, the minions of 
Justice, will find him out” (Fr. 29). To bolster up his ontology 
Heraclitus, as we see, appeals to theology: the fiery measure is 
guarded by the gods who relentlessly crack down on those over- 
stepping it. Heraclitus foretells inevitable punishment of tres- 
passers against measure both in this and in the other world. 

The main epistemological characteristic of the human laws 
consists in their conformity with the universal (cosmic) law. This 
implies correct understanding of the cosmic and divine nature of 
the law, that is its ontological and theological characteristics. 
Such an understanding can only be attained by the “knowing”, 
the best few. Here we again come to Heraclitean elitism. In- 
deed, the essence of the law being its conformity with the univer- 
sal logos, the formal procedure of its adoption by the city’s 
assembly becomes immaterial. Again, the insight into the logos 
and, consequently, the correct assessment of the law is only the 
blessing of the few... 

It is not surprising therefore that Heraclitus unequivocally 
prefers the legal judgements of the few over the opinions of the 
ignorant demos. Moreover, his mistrust of popular wisdom 
extends to all spheres of political life and he takes no pains to dis- 
guise his hostility towards democracy: “One man is to me ten 
thousand, if he be the best” (Fr. 113). 

For all his neo-aristocratic elitism and philosophical indiffer- 
ence to political practices, Heraclitus’s views exhibit a clear idea 
of solidarity of the free members of the polis. Despite their inter- 
nal discord, they have one common enemy, the slaves. War, 
according to Heraclitus, “is the father of all and king of all, and 
some he shows as gods, others as men; some he makes slaves and 


47 





others free” (Fr. 44). The ‘‘freemen-slaves” antithesis! is thus 
the general ideological and socio-political background for Her- 
aclitus, and it must never be lost sight of in the assessment of his 
statements about the contrast between “the good” and “the 
bad”, “the few” and “the mob”. 

Generally speaking, the basic propositions underlying the 
world view of Heraclitus do not rule out the possibility of social 
harmony, something in the nature of Plato’s ideal city — given 
the recognition of the universal logos by all its free members. 
Though the doctrine of Heraclitus lacks the political enthusiasm 
and optimistic faith needed to actualise this possibility, it does 
not reject it in principle since the way to the logos and, conse- 
quently, to the polis elite is open to everyone. 

It should be noted that this potentiality of the philosophical 
credo professed by Heraclitus was hardly recognised by the phi- 
losopher himself— political reformism and the idea of a perfect 
political system were entirely alien to him. The nearest he came 
to this idea was his statement about the common interests of the 
free members of the polis as reflected in the polis itself and in its 
laws. Hence his appeal to all the free citizens of the polis to quell 
insolence more promptly than a conflagration and to observe 
the common law of the polis. 

The political and legal views of Heraclitus remain firmly in 
the polis ideological tradition. Speaking of the polis and its laws, 
he is primarily concerned with his native Ephesus considered to 
be the city of Artemis, like Athens was believed to be under the 
patronage of Athena. His famous pronouncement that a right- 
minded people should defend the law as they would their city’s 
walls was in fact an appeal to the citizens to stand up for the 
divine (i. e. rational, according with the universal logos) statute 
of their polis. The law (nomos) in Heraclitus is not an ordinance 
of the city’s assembly or some other legislative body, but a divine 
principle of the polis constitution, the rational foundation of its 
existence. The polis and its law (nomos) are derived from divine 


! Contrasting the freemen and the slaves, Heraclitus simultaneously con- 
trasted the aristocrats (“the best”) and the common folk (the demos or ‘‘mob”’) 
which gives reason for qualifying his views as aristocratic, elitist and anti- 
democratic. The views of old aristocracy were not different in this respect and 
its advocates also took for granted the unbridgeable gulf between the freemen 
and the slaves. 


48 








justice and must not deviate from it in order not to incur the 
wrath of the gods. Urging his fellow-citizens to follow the dic- 
tates of the everlasting logos, Heraclitus deposits the manuscript 
of his work in the temple of Artemis leaving it in the custody of 
the city’s divine protectress. 

The teaching of Heraclitus was far-famed in Hellas and 
exerted a profound influence on the subsequent philosophical, 
political and legal thought. Thus Socrates and Plato advocating 
respectively the government of the knowing and the rule of the 
philosophers were obviously under no small debt to the Heracli- 
tean idea of the rule of “the best”? capable of understanding the 
universal logos. Very fruitful proved also Heraclitus’s concep- 
tions of reason as the objective (cosmic, divine) foundation of 
changeful human notions of justice and truth, and of the uni- 
versal logos as the foundation of nomos. These conceptions in- 
spired many ancient thinkers who elaborated on them and car- 
ried further the Heraclitean train of thought. One can safely say 
in this connection that Heraclitus’s conceptions established a 
paradigm for all natural right doctrines of antiquity and modern 
times in which natural right is identified with some rational 
principle (a norm of universal reason) that has to be expressed in 
the positive law. 

The wniters of antiquity widely adopted the Heraclitean neo- 
aristocratic vocabulary with its sharp contrast between the 
knowledge of “the best” and the opinion of the “mob” and the 
tendency to treat the old ‘‘aristocracy— demos” antithesis in 
terms of distinctions between the knowing few and the ignorant 
many. All post-Heraclitean ideological attacks against democ- 
racy and the advocacy of elitist conceptions revealed, as a rule, a 
clear trace of intellectual mistrust of the politico-legal judge- 
ments of the populace, so characteristic of Heraclitus. His pre- 
dominantly intellectual, even epistemological interpretation of 
the notion of “the best”, hitherto connotatively ethical, became, 
as it were, a philosophical standard for ancient authors. 

Various aspects of Heraclitus’s teaching have been the object 
of lively interest in all epochs and continue to draw the 
researchers’ attention in our time. Particularly fruitful and in- 
spiring to historians was his dialectical outlook on nature and 
society. Very characteristic in this respect was the admission of 
Hegel that he had not omitted a single proposition of Heracli- 
tean dialectics in his Logic. 


49 





A number of contemporary bourgeois writers specialising in 
the criticism of the principles of dialectics and historicism, par- 
ticularly in their Marxist interpretation, seek to establish direct 
links between the ancient conceptions, Hegel and Marxism, and 
adduce historical continuity of ideas as an argument in support 
of their politically biased theories. Thus Karl Popper castigating 
Hegel and Marx for “totalitarianism’”’ attempts to trace it back 
to ancient teachings: ‘Hegel, the source of all contemporary his- 
toricism, was a direct follower of Heraclitus, Plato and 
Aristotle.” ! 

Proceeding from this preconceived scheme and focusing on 
Heraclitus’s and Hegel’s conceptions of war, such writers class 
all proponents of dialectics with its doctrine of the struggle of 
opposites as their followers, thereby completely ignoring impor- 
tant distinctions between various conceptions of dialectics. To 
be sure, the general influence of Heraclitus, particularly his dia- 
lectical ideas, on all subsequent dialectical thought is indispu- 
table, yet it is hardly justifiable to interprete Hegel’s views on 
war, e. g. his “ethical moment of war”, in terms of Heraclitus’s 
war-father and war-common statements or to equate the con- 
ceptions of Heraclitus, Hegel and other dialecticians. 

The Heraclitean “war” taken in the context of his teaching as 
a whole is nothing but a sharp, concentrated image of universal 
strife, a figure of picture-language. It is a parable rather than a 
concept of the struggle of opposites and should by no means be 
construed as an adequate representation of the essence of real 
phenomena. Contrary to Heraclitus, Hegel conceives war not as 
the ‘‘father of all’’, but as a child of ethics. The war in Heraclitus 
is “common” and the “‘father of all” for the simple reason that 
he lacks the middle term, the synthesis of the opposites, so that 
harmony in his eyes takes the shape of the struggle as such. Un- 
like the Heraclitean war-father, the Hegelian war is but a 
moment of ethical unity understood as the synthesis of the 
opposing forces. 

The tendency to link Heraclitus, Hegel and Marx and di- 
rectly relate their views on a broad range of philosophical, poli- 
tical and legal problems clearly reveals itself in West-German 
historian Karlheinz Rode. In his opinion, the dialectical world 


' Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, Vol. 11, Routledge Kegan 
Paul, London, 1966, p. 27. 


50 


outlook of Heraclitus, modified and elaborated, revives 2000 
years later in the shape of Hegel’s complete philosophical system 
and closely related dialectical materialism determining today 
the legal system of half the world.! Distorting the real history of 
political teachings, the author strives to read the contradictions 
allegedly underlying the present-day ideological struggle into 
the early period of ancient thought. He, for one, shows a great 
amount of hindsight in the comparative analysis of the ideologi- 
cal platforms of Solon and Heraclitus interpreting them in terms 
of the present-day battle of ideas and making out as the proto- 
types of the antagonistic ideologies of the two socio-economic 
systems. According to Rode, Solon and Heraclitus represent two 
peaks of early Greek philosophy and are an inexhaustible foun- 
tain-head of modern antagonistic ideologies seeking to legitimise 
themselves.? Passing over to the Heraclitus-Hegel-Marxism 
ideological continuity, Rode models it on the Solon-Heraclitus 
antithesis. 

In connection with Heraclitus’s heritage special mention 
should be made of the rabid champion of the new aristocracy 
and new slavery Friedrich Nietzsche. Expressing his admiration 
for the Ephesian philosopher, Nietzsche interpreted his views in 
terms of his own anti-democratic doctrines of “superman” and 
“eternal return”. Nietzsche’s interpretation of Heraclitean phi- 
losophy as tragic world outlook was later adopted by many 
adherents of existentialism. 

Heraclitus’s teaching of universal strife in nature and society 
was widely used, in a modified form, by the representatives of 
Social Darvinism. The Heraclitean idea of the universal govern- 
ing logos, the divine source of all rational politico-legal systems 
and institutions in human society exerted a lasting influence on 
various doctrines of natural law and was used by the exponents 
of both rationalistic and theological theories. 


Karlheinz Rode, Geschichte der europiischen Rechtsphilosophie, Werner-Ver- 
lag, Diisseldorf, 1974, S. 12. 
2 Ibid. 





CHAPTER TWO 


THE ZENITH 


(Fifth-Early Fourth Centuries B. C.) 


1. DEMOCRITUS 


The life and work of Democritus (c. 460-370 B. C.) were con- 
temporaneous with the period of the greatest economic and cul- 
tural prosperity of ancient polises. He was born into an aristo- 
cratic family at Abdera, in Thrace. On the evidence of Diogenes 
Laertius, his father Damasippus was so wealthy as to be able to 
entertain Persian king Xerxes with all his army. From his early 
childhood to a venerable age Democritus was possessed by insa- 
tiable thirst for knowledge. His first teachers were magi and 
Chaldeans, left by Xerxes as a token of gratitude for the hospi- 
tality he was accorded. 

After his father’s death Democritus took the smaller share of 
the legacy and set out to see the world. He made voyages of 
study to Babylon, Persia, Egypt, Ethiopia, Athens and a number 
of other Hellenic polises. On his return to Abdera where he had 
left his brothers Herodotus and Damasus, Democritus faced a 
charge of dissipation involving punishment: the laws of his 
native city denied the right to be buried in Abdera to those who 
have squandered their father’s property. However, Democritus 
succeeded in winning the judges over to his side by reading to 
them his best work The Great Diacosmos. The book was estimated 
at a sizable sum of 500 talents (some sources give 100 talents) 
and the charge of dissipation against Democritus was dropped. 

Later the prestige of Democritus rose so high that the citizens 
of Abdera elected him archon (ruler). Among the extant evidence 
of his archonship is a silver coin with words “Under Democ- 
ritus” stamped upon it. The Abderites showed their respect for 
Democritus by nicknaming him Philosophy, just as later they 
would give the soubriquet of Reason to Protagoras, another of 
their famous compatriots. Democritus is known to have reached 





52 


a ripe old age and put an end to his life by abstaining from food. 
He was buried with great honours at the city’s expense and a 
bronze monument was raised to him. 

Democritus was an encyclopaedic thinker and one of the most 
prolific writers of antiquity. Judging from the extant evidence 
and a few isolated fragments of his genuine writings, the works of 
Democritus covered practically all the fields of contemporary 
natural, philosophical, ethical, legal and political studies. He 
shares the fame of the founder of atomistics with Leucippus 
(c. 500-440 B. C.) and occupies an outstanding place in the his- 
tory of philosophy. Lenin described Democritus as the brightest 
exponent of materialism in antiquity.! 

Democritus held that reality was essentially a combination of 
two primary causes or elements: atoms or indivisible material 
particles, and void. In their eternal motion in void immutable 
particles impinge on one another and come together to form 
physical objects. The universe is infinite in space and consists of 
innumerable worlds, some of them coming into being, others 
dying. Everything occurs by necessity as a result of spontaneous 
movement of atoms in empty space, without any outside inter- 
ference or divine providence. Being immutable and homo- 
geneous, the atoms differ from one another only in the shape, 
arrangement and position. As regards man’s ability to cognise 
reality, Democritus held that “truth is in the depths”, it is 
imperceptible, i. e. hidden from sense. Sextus Empiricus quotes 
Democritus as saying: “By convention is sweet, by convention 
bitter, by convention hot, by convention cold, by convention 
colour; but by verity atoms and void” (Sex. Adv. Math. VII, 
135).? In terms of contemporary science this view amounts to an 
assertion of the subjective character of such sensible qualities as 
taste, heat and cold because all of them come only from the 
shape, arrangement and position of the atoms. 

Despite this vein of scepticism regarding the trustworthiness of 
human knowledge in general and sense perceptions in particu- 
lar, Democritus did not deny the possibility of objective knowl- 
edge. According to the same source, he maintained that there 


' See V. [. Lenin, “Materialism and Empirio-Criticism”, Collected Works, 
Vol. 14, 1977, p. 130. 


* Sextus Empiricus, Against the Logicians, Book 1, William Heinemann, 
Ltd., London, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1935. 


53 





are two forms of cognition, one through the senses or “‘bastard”’, 
and the other through the intellect or “legitimate’’. “Whenever 
the bastard kind is unable any longer to see what has become too 
small, or to hear or smell or taste or perceive it by touch, (one 
must have recourse to) another and finer (instrument)”’ (ibid., 
139). 

Democritus’s atomistic theory and epistemological views 
could not but influence his approach to specific ethical, political 
and legal problems. He was one of the first thinkers in the his- 
tory of ancient philosophy who professed the evolutionary 
theory of society and its political institutions and treated the ori- 
gin of mankind and the progress of culture in terms of the uni- 
versal process of natural development reducible to haphazard 
collisions and recoils of atoms in vacuum. Democritus taught 
that men, like other animals, arose from water and mud and led 
a disorderly life, each seeking his own food and shelter. Grad- 
ually they learned to herd together in order to survive thus 
creating the nuclei of future nations. In the course of a long evo- 
lutionary process groups of people compelled by necessity and 
taught by experience and wild nature gradually acquired 
knowledge and skills, developed language as a means of com- 
munication, learned to use fire and build houses, invented the 
arts and everything else required for collective life. Thus human 
society, according to Democritus, emerged as a result of a long 
process of evolution from what was purportedly the original 
“natural” state. The leading role in this transition from sava- 
gery to civilisation was assigned by Democritus to “human 
nature’’, 1. e. to the fact that man is endowed by nature with 
deft hands, native intelligence and ingenuity. Owing to these 
gifts, as well as to his innate gregariousness, the primitive man 
managed to survive in the struggle for existence and adjusted 
himself to the unfavourable external conditions. 

According to the evolutionary view of society held by Democ- 
ritus the gods played no part in man’s ascent to civilisation. 
Progress was achieved by stern necessity and man’s natural cle- 
verness. The notions of the gods were born of ignorance and lack 
of understanding of celestial phenomena that inspired the primi- 
tive man with awe. Developing the atomistic doctrine, Democ- 
ritus laid particular emphasis on necessity as the only source of 
natural and social progress, and completely rejected any role of 
divine providence in human affairs. 


54 





Although society and its laws are a product of spontaneous 
development, they do not emerge as ready-made institutions, 
but are shaped by men in the process of their evolution to higher 
forms of civilisation. The very progress of man’s skills and cul- 
ture was conceived by Democritus in terms of his determinist 
theory, i. e. as the necessary development of man’s inherent 
qualitites. In his opinion, therefore, the seemingly artificial 
character of the state and the laws attested to the specificity of 
these products of human culture rather than to their arbitrari- 
ness and independence from nature. 

Elaborating on the evolutionary conception of society, 
Democritus offered a new solution to the problem of relation 
between nature and human society, dating from the time of 
Hesiod. He rejected the traditional Greek antithesis between 
what exists “‘by justice” or “by nature” on the one hand, and 
“by opinion” or “by common consent”, on the other, and held 
that there is no unbridgeable gulf between them. Indeed, 
according to the epistemological doctrine of atomistic deter- 
minism, man is capable not only of sensual (‘‘bastard’’) cogni- 
tion usually associated with convention and opinion, but also of 
rational (‘“‘legitimate’’) cognition providing the true knowledge 
of reality. ! 

The ethical, political and legal views of Democritus are based 
on his conceptions of ‘‘nature” and “truth”. Justice, according 
to Democritus, is what conforms to nature, and injustice is what 
contradicts it. The real thrust of this statement, reflecting the 
essence of the natura! law doctrine is not against justice as such, 
but only against erroneous notions of justice, i. e. against what is 
considered just by “bastard” knowledge and ill-informed “com- 
mon opinion”, wherefore the critical attitude of Democritus to 
the existing laws and state systems conforming with “common 
opinion” but running counter to the dictates of nature and true 
justice. On the evidence of Diogenes Laertius, Democritus main- 
tained that the laws exist only by convention, whereas “in 
nature there is nothing but atoms and void space’’. Proceeding 
from the same nature-law antithesis, Democritus taught that the 
laws are a wicked contrivance and a wise man should not obey 
them but live free. Freedom, in his opinion, is independence 
from convention and its artificial restrictions. 

The relationship between the natural and the artificial plays a 
very important part in the philosophy and ethics of Democritus. 


55 





His views on various social, political, legal and moral problems 
derive from a conviction that the artificial (understood in the 
broad sense as all spheres of human activity) need not be neces- 
sarily at variance with the natural and should be brought in har- 
mony with real justice and truth. His criticism of the artificial 
(existing social institutions, customs and laws) stems from posi- 
tive ideals and has nothing in common with the notorious nihil- 
ism of the later sophists who used to counterpose nature and art 
(law, convention, etc.). 

The ethical theory of Democritus resting on the premise that 
man is capable of attaining objective knowledge of reality given 
appropriate conditions (education, etc.) aims at bridging the 
gulf between the artificial and the natural and at improving 
men’s moral qualities and the existing socio-political institu- 
tions. On the whole, Democritus advocates reconciliation 
between what exists “by nature” and “by convention”’ giving 
priority to the natural principle of “truth” over “‘opinion” and, 
contrary to some sophistic theories, seeks to prevent enmity and 
war between them. 

Believing in the evolutionary progress of society as a result of 
the extension and deepening of human knowledge, improve- 
ment of morals, etc., Democritus professed the golden mean 
theory, criticising the extremes (excess and deficiency), castigat- 
ing vices (ambition, greediness, envy, intemperance, etc.), pil- 
loring injustice, arbitrariness, intolerance, and recommended 
observing “due measure” in everything. Since fortune is fickle 
and life is short and burdensome, man, according to Democ- 
ritus, should aspire to the sublime and eternal disregarding 
everything base and transitory. Tradition credits Democritus 
with a statement that he “would rather discover one cause than 
gain the kingdom of Persia” (Diogenes Laertius, VIII). He 
sharply attacked avidity and acquisitiveness and held that a wise 
man should be very moderate in acquiring property and should 
not take more care over it that it is absolutely necessary. Coming 
out against the dangerous extremes of wealth and property, 
Democritus sought in every way to play down the real signifi- 
cance of their opposition and contended that they are nothing 
but synonyms of want and abundance, thereby shifting the pro- 
blem from the socio-political to the moral-psychological plane: 
he who contents himself with little has but few wants and is ther- 
efore not poor. Hence, moderation in desires is equivalent to 


56 








abundance or, using Democritus’s own words, few wants equate 
poverty with wealth. Such utterances praising moderation and 
temperance were mainly addressed to the lower classes. As 
regards the rich sections, Democritus exhorted them to curb 
their vices (avarice, greediness, dissipation) and to show good 
will, justice and kindness to other citizens. In one of the extant 
passages he says that when the wealthy are ready to lend money 
to the poor and be helpful and kind to them, the ensuing com- 
passion, solidarity, comradeship, mutual assistance and confor- 
mity of opinions are of incalculable benefit. Moderation, tem- 
perance and observance of measure (in the amount of property 
one possesses, in needs, desires, conduct, etc.) are, according to 
Democritus, indispensable conditions not only for well organised 
social life, but also for the attainment of personal happiness and 
what is ultimate goal of living—cheerfulness or contentment 
(eythymia) understood by Democritus as ‘‘a state in which the 
soul continues calm and strong, undisturbed by any fear or 
superstition or any other emotion” (Diogenes Laertius, IX, 45). 
Contentment, according to Democritus, is a reward of wisdom 
and virtuous life and can only be achieved by the exercise of 
man’s intellectual and moral faculties. Without knowledge and 
intellect neither wealth nor power can make a man just or 
happy. 

Setting great store by proper upbringing and education, 
Democritus gave priority to training over natural disposition 
and adduced ignorance as the cause of wrongdoing. Education, 
in his opinion, helps nature bring out man’s innate qualities, its 
success being conditional on three things: natural abilities, 
practice and time. Practice has the leading part and most good 
men owe their virtuousness to training rather than to inherent 
qualities. Education provides guidance for young people and 
helps old men to tread their path, adorns the prosperous and 
consoles the distressed, entertains at home and does not burden 
in travels, always at hand—by night and in the day-time, in 
one’s native land and abroad. Democritus commends persever- 
ance in studies and persistence in labour: any work, he says, is 
more pleasant than idleness if people get what they expect from 
it. Proper education and training lay the foundation of wisdom 
with its three abilities which apply to all human affairs: to think 
well, to speak well and to act well (Diogenes Laertius, 822). 
Democritus repeatedly stressed that it is nothing else than reason 
that underlies the unity of word and deed, intention and action. 


A trustworthy man, he says, is distinguished and recognised not 
only by what he does, but also by what he wishes. Goodness, 
according to Democritus, consists not only in the abstention 
from doing wrong, but also in not wishing to do wrong. A vir- 
tuous man acts rightly from intelligence, the sense of duty and 
revulsion against wrongdoing as such, and not from fear of 
punishment. A man’s duty is primarily an obligation to himself, 
therefore self-respect and shame before one’s own conscience 
should prevent one from doing wrong even if no one else learns 
about it. Justice, according to Democritus, consists in fulfilling 
one’s duty, whereas injustice is failure to meet one’s obligations, 
evasion of one’s duties. In Democritus’s opinion, it is better to be 
wronged than to do wrong. Duty obligates a man to prevent acts 
of injustice and stand up for the wronged and the offended. If it 
proves impossible for some reason or other, a virtuous man 
should at least refrain from participation in wrongdoing. No 
support for exultant injustice —such is the minimum prescribed 
by the Democritean ethics of duty. As regards the maximum, it 
consists both in courage and right-mindedness (Fr. 181). 

The ethical views of Democritus, for all his exhortations to 
temperance and moderation have nothing in common with 
asceticism. The philosopher believes it unwise to suppress 
natural desires, since a life without holidays, as he aptly puts it, 
is a tiresome journey without halts and only dull people deny 
themselves pleasure congenial] to human nature and do not 
strive to enjoy life. By exercising his moral and intellectual 
powers, a man, according to Democritus, learns to enjoy excel- 
lence for its own sake. He who has achieved contentment re- 
spects himself as he simultaneously shares in the beautiful and 
contemplates it. This self-respect and love of one’s own self 
accompanying eythymia are something very different from selfish- 
ness or egocentricity. 

Democritus extols friendship, mutual assistance and compas- 
sion. However, contrary to the Pythagoreans who held that 
friends should have all things in common, Democritus was 
against the community of property even among members of the 
same family and friends. Common property, in his view, is never 
properly cared for and is apt to be squandered. 

Friendship goes hand in hand with conformity of opinion or 
consensus which is highly valued by Democritus on ethical and 
political grounds. Consensus unites the citizens of a polis in a sin- 


38 








gle body of friends and tends to enhance the strength of the state. 
Without a consensus, according to Democritus, it is not possible 
to perform feats of valour or wage wars. 

In the view of Democritus, conformity of opinion is synony- 
mous with moral, spiritual and socio-political solidarity which 
allows of noble emulation, but rules out hegemonistic tendencies 
among the citizens. A contest of the noble-spirited, Democritus 
explains, is beneficial to all contestants whereas aspiration for 
supremacy may involve harm to the opponent and make the 
aspirant forget his own interests wherefore it is not sensible. 
Besides, the striving for domination gives rise to envy and leads 
to discord detrimental both to the contestants and to the solidar- 
ity of the free citizens of the polis as a whole. Internecine war, 
according to Democritus, is an evil to both sides causing woe to 
both the conqueror and the conquered. In Democritus’s 
opinion, solidarity and consensus in the circle of intimate friends 
is a model for all free members of the polis. As regards the slaves, 
Democritus did not consider them self-dependent individuals 
and subjects of social relations in the nature of politico-legal 
“atoms”. Viewing slavery as a natural phenomenon, he likened 
the slaves to parts of their master’s body and taught that they 
should be used accordingly, each for his own purpose. This view 
of the slave as animate property was characteristic of ancient 
social consciousness and sense of justice, and later found its 
expression in Aristotle’s ethics. 

In Democritus’s view, conformity of opinion and the socio- 
ethical solidarity of the free members of the polis are indispens- 
able for a well-governed state. The polis is a “common cause” of 
all its free members. The state embodies the common cause of its 
citizens and serves as its foundation determining the form and 
substance of the citizens’ rights and duties. Democritus under- 
scored that the affairs of the state should be given priority over 
all other affairs and that every citizen should look after the pro- 
sperity of the state without striving to get more honours than are 
due him and without seizing more power than is necessary for 
the common good. A well-run state, he affirmed, is the greatest 
protection, and contains all in itself; when this is safe, all is safe, 
when this is destroyed, all is destroyed. 

This aphoristic statement by Democritus is one of the earliest 
and, perhaps, most unequivocal and outspoken eulogies of the 
polis as a form of “common cause’ which are characteristic of 


59 





all ancient political thought. Even Plato, a staunch adherent of 
the idea of statehood that he was, appears to be more prudent in 
his glorification of the state’s omnipotence. It should be noted, 
however — and this is borne out by the context of Democritus’s 
panegyric— that he speaks of a well-run polis, that is of an ideal 
state. Besides, the state as conceived by Democritus is a com- 
munity of free men united by common interest rather than by an 
external alien force dominating over them. Viewed in its most 
general form, the conception of Democritus implies that the 
power in such a community is vested in its free members who 
coalesce in the polis as their “commonwealth”. The state as such 
created by a community of free men but not identical with it, 
escaped Democritus’s attention. He is not concerned with the 
problem of how to protect the members of a community from 
the state, but rather seeks the methods for turning a community 
into a well-run polis and inducing the citizens to follow its laws, 
i.e. to lead a political life. 

The ancient polis in the time of Democritus was not only a 
city-state, but also a community-state, and all public life in it 
was centred upon public rather than private affairs involving 
the all-polis interests or public concern. Its sphere was very 
broad and included family life, upbringing of children, educa- 
tion, etc. Very characteristic in this respect was the general poli- 
ticisation of ancient thought that clearly manifested itself in a 
tendency to treat various philosophical, religious, ethical, social 
and other problems as matters of public concern pertaining to 
all-polis tasks and ideals, i. e. in a political interpretation of 
essentially non-political (from the modern viewpoint) issues. 
Using the notions of a later period, one could say that civil 
society in the epoch of ancient polis had not yet separated off 
from the “political state’? and had not turned into an indepen- 
dent sphere of private interests existing side by side with the 
public or political interests. In this indeterminate whole the 
political (all-polis) interests, affairs and notions clearly 
dominated over all particular and private interests, claims and 
sentiments: “Among the Greeks civil society was the slave of 
political society.” ! 

Characteristically, Democritus expresses the primacy of the 


' K. Marx, “Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Law”, 
in: Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, Collected Works, Vol. 3, 1975, p. 73. 


60 





interests of the state, the ‘“common cause’’, over the interests of 
its citizens not in legal, but in ethical terms considering it a 
moral duty rather than a legal obligation of each member of the 
polis to care for public welfare. From his viewpoint the links 
between the citizens and the polis are rooted not in legal, but in 
ethical principles, and represent a moral, and not a legal rela- 
tionship. Moreover, in Democritus’s eyes the polis itself is a 
moral rather than a legal institution. Such an ethical approach 
to the problem of relationship between the citizen and the state 
is notably one-sided as compared with the legal approach. In- 
deed, a legal relationship between two subjects, e. g. the citizen 
and the state, connotes reciprocity and requital in virtue of the 
very principle of equality and correspondence of rights and obli- 
gations inherent in the concept of law. Of course, in certain legal 
relations one side may prove to have nothing but rights, and the 
other side, nothing but duties. Such exceptions, however, do not 
disprove the general principle of legal relations which are impos- 
sible without the equality of their subjects and the reciprocity of 
their rights and duties. By contrast, ethical relations including 
those between the citizen and the state presuppose essential in- 
equality of their subjects and are based on principles other than 
mutuality and requital. Speaking of the relationship between 
the citizen and the polis, Democritus, as well as many ancient 
writers before and after him, proceeded from the obvious ethical 
inequality of the two parties: the state as the general and the 
whole was considered incomparably more valuable than 
individual citizens with their particular interests. The subor- 
dination of the lower subject (an individual citizen, a family, a 
community) to the higher one (the state with its common inter- 
est) was the absolute moral duty arising from a source other 
than equality and directed towards a goal other than the expec- 
tation of reciprocity. 

A more rationalistic, i. e. legal, approach to the relationship 
of the citizen and the state was still alien not only to Democritus, 
but also to later writers. This lack of sophistication was not, of 
course, a result of some intellectual inadequacy of ancient think- 
ers—it merely attested to the immaturity of the socio-political 
relations of the epoch reflected in contemporary political teach- 
ings. In the final analysis, this immaturity also accounted for the 
lack of differentiation, both in real life and in its theoretical ref- 
lection, between ethics and politics on the one hand, and legal 


61 











phenomena, on the other. 

Later, under the socio-political conditions of more developed 
Roman society secular jurisprudence became a separate branch 
of knowledge and its representatives in the person of the Roman 
jurists and particularly Cicero developed conceptions of the 
state not only as the “common cause’’, the “popular cause”’, 
etc., which were characteristic of the Greek thinkers too, but 
also as the “legal community” or “legal communion”. As a 
result, the relations between the citizen and the state were 
placed on a new footing and began to be viewed as legal 
relations. 

It should be noted, however, that the achievements of Roman 
political and legal thought rested on the foundation laid by the 
Greek thinkers, which fact the Romans themselves were only too 
willing to admit. 

It is highly characteristic of the ethical approach of Democ- 
ritus to political and legal issues that in the moral duties of a 
citizen he includes not only voluntary submission to the polis 
authorities and laws, but also due intellectual subordination in 
the form of a hierarchy based on the abilities ofits members. It is 
proper, he holds, to be obedient to the law, to the ruler, and to 
the wiser. In terms of politics, such pronouncements were in- 
tended to substantiate the “rule of the better” concept current 
among political thinkers in Ancient Greece. In line with the old 
tradition, Democritus unequivocally states that government is 
the prerogative of the better by nature. “‘The better” to him are 
not money-bags or old aristocracy, but those endowed with the 
highest intellectual and moral virtues. 

The extant fragments of Democritus do not offer any 
systematic exposition of his theory of the forms of government 
giving but disjointed views on the subject. Very outspoken, for 
instance, is the contrast between democracy and despotic 
(autocratic) rule: in the philosopher’s opinion, poverty under 
democracy is no less preferable to the so-called prosperity under 
a king than freedom to slavery. This explicit statement appears 
to be the only unambiguous evidence from Democritus’s own 
pen for his sympathy with democracy. Significantly, judging 
from the context of the above comparison, by the “king” 
Democritus understands the Persian monarch and treats the 
subject in the manner of other Greek authors counterposing the 
Hellenic polis and the freedom of its citizens to despotic barbar- 


62 








ian states with the slave system and arbitrary rule of the king. 
The critical shafts of Democritus could scarcely have been 
levelled against political parties in contemporary Greek states 
since the political life in Magna Graecia in his time centred 
upon the struggle between democracy, aristocracy and oli- 
garchy; any attacks against autocratic government would have 
been nothing but anachronism. True, the possibility of tyranny 
remained on the agenda — but in the eyes of the Greeks this form 
of government was different from monarchy and tyrant was not 
identified with king. 

Advocating free communion of polis members and rejecting 
the submission of the citizens to arbitrary rule, Democritus at 
the same time takes a firm stand for the government of “‘the bet- 
ter” and criticises the shortcomings of democracy. The philoso- 
pher’s numerous statements on the ethical and intellectual in- 
equality of citizens attest to his hostility towards the populace 
and sympathy with the intellectual elite, “the better”. Tradition 
credits him with these maxims having an _ obvious 
anti-democratic ring: “It is better for the fools to obey, than to 
rule’’; “It is hard to obey the unworthy”’; ‘‘It is unwise to trust a 
madman with a sword and an evil-minded one with power”. In 
the opinion of Democritus, the art of government is the highest 
of all arts. He recommends that it be thoroughly mastered and 
that only those be allowed to rule who have sufficient exper- 
ience, knowledge and moral virtues. 

According to Democritus, bad citizens promoted to high posi- 
tions which they do not deserve show negligence, stupidity and 
insolence in the conduct of state affairs. They are susceptible to 
flattery and fond of servility detrimental to the “common cause”’ 
and public welfare. In contrast with such “bad citizens”, a true 
statesman holds the community’s opinion of himself in high 
esteem and, accepting the honours he justly deserved, avoids 
flatterers and does not strive to curry favour with the populace. 

Among the extant fragments of Democritus are some in which 
he gives advice to the statesman. Before starting to rule others, a 
statesman, according to Democritus, ought to learn how to rule 
himself. He must be just, courageous and dauntless in his deeds 
and thoughts. He must know well the interests of the people, 
take account of the public sentiment and be able to appraise cor- 
tectly both the general state of polis affairs and the current situa- 
tion. He must be fearless when dealing with enemies and show 


63 





kindness to his subordinates. The highest virtue and justice of a 
political leader consists, according to Democritus, in the ability 
to distribute honours among citizens strictly in accordance with 
their merits. This concept of political justice notable for a cer- 
tain anti-democratic strain was later elaborated in great detail 
by Plato and Aristotle. 

Besides the accessibility of public office to all free citizens 
characteristic of democratic government, Democritus also cen- 
sures the accountability of state officials to the demos. In his 
opinion, it does not befit a ruler to be answerable to anyone but 
himself, nor is it proper for the one who rules over others to find 
himself in a year or so under their rule... 

It is worth noting that these critical remarks were not entirely 
groundless, as under contemporary democracy state officials 
failing to curry favour with the demos stood a good chance of 
being victimised and persecuted after the expiration of their 
term of office. Democritus however does not confine his criticism 
to the inadequacy of democratic procedures but comes out 
against the very principle of accountability of the ruler to the 
ruled, “the better’ to “the worse”. 

The laws, according to Democritus, are intended to improve 
men’s life in the polis, but they are not omnipotent. In order to 
benefit by the laws, the citizens must exert efforts and learn to 
abide by them: “‘The aim of the law is to benefit human life, but 
it can only do so when men are willing to accept its benefits: it 
reveals its excellence to those who obey”. In Democritus’s eyes, 
the ethical value of both the law and lawful actions lies in their 
conformity with virtue, the highest good. Virtue as such is more 
powerful than the law, the latter being but one and not the best 
instrument of the former. “By encouragement and persuasive 
words one will prove a more powerful advocate of virtue than by 
law and compulsion; for he who is kept from wrong by law is 
likely to sin in secret, but he who is brought to duty by convic- 
tion is unlikely to err either in secret or openly” (DK, Fr. 181). 

This passage provides a clue to Democritus’s assertions that 
the law is a bad contrivance, that a wise man should not obey 
the laws but live free, and that the whole world is open to the 
sage as it is the fatherland of lofty spirit. The freedom of the sage 
from any particular polis and its laws exalted by Democritus 
derives from the high degree of the sage’s virtuousness which ele- 
vates him above ordinary men needing the moral custody of the 


64 


» 


—— 





state. The laws are in fact made for rank-and-file citizens in 
order to put a curb on their envies, malice and natural tendency 
towards dissension. They are not needed by the sage who is 
guided by reason towards contentment (eythymia) and virtuous 
living under any form of government and under any laws. 

Treating the problems of the state and law from the viewpoint 
of the “‘sage’’, Democritus exhibits a good deal of scepticism 
towards traditional polis patriotism and respect for the laws. 
Remaining true to his principle of well-being or contentment as 
the goal of life, he recommends avoiding the extremes — excessive 
zeal for public affairs on the one hand and neglect of one’s duties 
to the state, on the other: ‘““T'o good men, it is not advantageous 
that they should neglect their own affairs for other things; for 
their private affairs suffer. But if a man neglects public affairs, he 
is ill spoken of, even if he steals nothing and does no wrong” 
(Democritus, Fr. 253). The general trend of Democritus’s 
moral precepts was against vanity in both public and private 
life. His maxims in fact boiled down to the advice to attend to 
one’s own business, i. e. to do what conforms with nature and is 
really necessary, as becomes a wise man. In his pursuit of con- 
tentment or well-being Democritus goes as far as rejecting mar- 
riage and child-bearing as things treacherous and troublesome. 
In his opinion, it is best to have no children at all, but if one feels 
a need for them, he should adopt a friend’s rather than beget his 
own. 

Democritus’s views on punishment occupy an important 
place in his political theory. In his opinion, discord and enmity 
among men spring from envy congenial with them. Only the 
few— sages, “the best”, are free from this vice, wherefore their 
right to be a law unto themselves. As regards all others, i. e. the 
majority of mankind, the polis law is absolutely indispensable as 
a means of holding in leash their deleterious wilfulness. ‘The 
laws, according to Democritus, would exercise no restraint on 
individual freedom if men did not strive to injure one another. 
Being laid, as they are, for ordinary men, the laws must be 
strictly observed and any attempt to break them must be severe- 
ly punished. All those who trample on justice and injure others 
are to be killed without compunction. The one who does so 
stands a better chance of preserving his rights, property, courage 
and the peace of mind under any form of government than the 
one who neglects this duty. 

65 
4113 








Advocating inexorable punishment of criminals in the name 
of public welfare, Democritus underscores the need to proceed 
in accordance with the written law or legal custom of long 
standing. In his opinion, scoundrels should be treated as pre- 
scribed for harmful animals and reptiles: they should be put to 
death in any state where the native laws do not rule otherwise. 
The exception, he adds, is to be made only in two cases: when 
the criminal takes refuge in a sanctuary or when his life is pro- 
tected by an oath or a treaty. Referring, in fact, to the conditions 
of necessary self-defence, Democritus maintains that the one 
who kills a robber or a pirate, or orders others to do so, should be 
exempted from punishment. On the other hand, the release of a 
criminal from weli-deserved punishment should be qualified, in 
his opinion, as injustice and culpable negligence. 

On the whole, the views of Democritus on crime and punish- 
ment are based on his conception of law as a means of restraint 
and compulsion of the interior majority of mankind incapable of 
virtuous conduct and heedless of persuasive words due to the in- 
herent moral and intellectual deficiencies of their nature. 

The conceptions of Democritus gained wide currency among 
the ancient thinkers already during his lifetime and exerted a 
profound influence on the subsequent development of 
philosophical and political thought. The atomistic doctrine of 
Leucippus and Democritus was elaborated by their outstanding 
follower Epicurus who also adopted and modified a number of 
principles of Democritus’s politico-legal teaching, particularly 
his political ethics and theory of law. 

Later writers on political and legal subjects were greatly in- 
debted to Democritus for his investigations into the problems of 
“nature” (physis) versus “law”? (nomos) and “truth” versus 
“opinion”. These problems pivoting on the conception of 
natural right were brought into the limelight by the sophists, 
acquired new aspects and for a long time occupied the centre of 
the philosophical stage exercising, after the sophists, the minds 
of Socrates, Plato and Aristotle. Despite the wide difference of 
these thinkers’ views on the origin and substance of the laws and 
political institutions of the polis, they could not keep away from 
the nomos-physis controversy and had to take a definite stand by 
subscribing to one of the versions of the conflicting theories. 

Democritus was an elder contemporary of the first-generation 
sophists known also as the “early’’ sophists, and one of the first 


66 





(before Socrates and Plato) critics of their relativism, rhetorical 
practices and verbal tricks intended to trip up opponents in a 
debate and confuse the issues. He is known to have called the 
sophists squabblers and tricksters, which opinion he may have 
formed during his talks with Protagoras of Abdera, the most 
prominent among the sophists (according to some sources, 
young Protagoras came to listen to his famous fellow-country- 
man and even became his pupil). On the evidence of Plutarch, 
confirmed also by Sextus Empiricus in his book Against the Logi- 
clans (VII, 389), Democritus had a polemic with sophist Prota- 
goras and advanced many convincing arguments against him. 

In connection with the so-called Democritus-sophists line it 
should be noted that the sophists carried to an extreme and 
turned into an absolute the Democritean thesis that social insti- 
tutions and laws are artificial and exist by “‘opinion’”’, and not by 
“truth”. Besides, exaggerating the role of sensations and sensible 
knowledge in general, the sophists called in question the validity 
of the very conception of objective truth substituting for it 
“opinion” and subjective conviction. 

The arguments of the sophists were later developed by the 
sceptics. On the evidence of Diogenes Laertius, the founder of 
ancient scepticism Pyrrho (c. 365-275 B. C.) quoted Democ- 
ritus more often than any other philosopher. According to 
ancient sources, Pyrrho’s teacher Anaxarchus had familiarised 
himself with the writings of Democritus, made no discoveries 
and written nothing of interest, but was known to abuse every- 
body — the gods and the men. Tradition says that he was a court 
philosopher of Alexander the Great and once told his master, 
with reference to Democritus, of the existence of innumerable 
worlds. The young conqueror was greatly upset and observed 
ruefully that he himself had not been able to subdue even one of 
them... 

The sceptics adduced a number of Democritus’s pronounce- 
ments on the difficulty of attaining true knowledge (such as 
“truth is in the depths”, etc.) as evidence of his sceptical views 
and did their best to recast his thoughts in their own mould. In- 
terpreting his eythymia (contentment) as ataraxia (imperturb- 
ability) and apathy (lack of emotion), they ascribed to him a 
much greater indifference to politics and public affairs than his 
ethical conceptions actually implied. 

Democritus was an outstanding precursor of Socrates and 


67 


Plato in the criticism of sophistic relativism and subjectivism. 
For all the difference of their views, all the three recognised, in 
contrast with the sophists, the objective truth and the possibility 
of its cognition, and this conviction was the corner-stone of their 
political and legal conceptions. In the light of this obvious 
affinity of their philosophical postulates it appears very strange 
that Plato never mentioned by name his famous predecessor 
whose works were known in Plato’s time to all enlightened 
Hellas. Touching upon this question, Diogenes Laertius gives 
this explanation: “‘Aristoxenus in his Historical Notes affirms that 
Plato wished to burn all the writings of Democritus that he 
could collect, but that Amyclas and Clinias the Pythagoreans 
prevented him saying that there was no advantage in doing so, 
for already the books were widely circulated” (Diogenes Laer- 
tius, IX, 40). However that may be, Plato’s silence can hardly 
be regarded as accidental. Most likely, he had ideological rea- 
sons of his own that are not known to us. His omission did not 
detract from the fame of Democritus, just as, for instance, the 
renown of Socrates did not suffer because of the refusal of 
Democritus to recognise his wisdom (on some evidence, Democ- 
ritus once visited Athens and had a talk with Socrates without 
disclosing his name). 

Democritus, it will be recalled, was averse to vainglory and 
preached modesty and avoidance of public notice. Let us 
assume, then, that the deplorable loss of his works anticipating 
Aristotle’s in encyclopaedic scope and versatility, and the glar- 
ing gap in Plato’s dialogues were but tricks of the Greek wilful 
goddess of fortune Tyche who turned the tables on the philoso- 
pher himself. 


2. THE SOPHISTS 


The rise of general interest in political and legal subjects in 
ancient Greece is connected with the sophists who came to the 
foreground in the intellectual life of Greek society in the second 
half of the fifth century-a period of sweeping democratic 
changes that followed the magnificent victory of the Hellines 
over their formidable enemy—the Persian Empire. 

The name “‘sophist”’ (from Greek “sophos’’— wise) was orig- 
inally applied to a man proficient in various fields of human 
endeavour (crafts, arts, science, etc.). Later, after Protagoras, it 


68 





came to mean ‘“‘man of wisdom” who trained his pupils for fees 
in the art of clear thinking and rhetoric needed for a successful 
business or political career. According to Protagoras, the first 
sophists among whom he included Orpheus, Musaeus, Homer, 
Hesiod, Simonides and other masters of the arts, did not call 
themselves by that name only because they feared jealousies, 
enmities and conspiracies: “I therefore take an entirely opposite 
course, and acknowledge myself to be a sophist and instructor of 
mankind; such an open acknowledgement appears to me to be a 
better sort of caution than concealment” (Plato, Protagoras, 
317). 

In popular use the word “sophist” has always had a ring of 
disdain about it: from the viewpoint of common sense it carries a 
connotation of cunning subtilisation and sly hair-splitting. The 
claim of the Greek sophists to wisdom which was presumably 
beyond the common people’s wits evoked natural negative reac- 
tion on the part of the demos to their mumbo-jumbo and often 
exposed them to suspicion and odium. Characteristically, speak- 
ing depreciatingly of Prometheus’s craftiness Greek dramatist 
Aeschylus calls his hero a “sophist’’. 

Particularly detrimental to the reputation of the sophists in 
the eyes of the public was their irresistible desire to outargue the 
opponents in a dispute at all costs and their remarkable unscrup- 
ulousness in the choice of methods to attain this end. The over- 
whelming majority of the sophists were not averse from using 
various verbal tricks and subtle logical fallacies in order to trip 
up and disparage their rivals. Sophistic rhetoric (art of elo- 
quence) and eristic (art of disputation) were double-edged 
weapons: on the evidence of Diogenes Laertius, Protagoras con- 
tended that there are two opposite, but equally tenable argu- 
ments on every subject, and a characteristic feature of sophistic 
orators was their readiness to defend with equal zeal any of the 
two opposing views seeking to make the weaker cause the 
stronger and vice versa. 

Not only the style and form, but also the content of the 
sophists’ discourse, their essentially new world outlook (a trend 
towards relativism and subjectivism, denial of all absolutes and 
authorities, scepticism towards the gods, sharp criticism of tradi- 
tional religious, ethical, political and legal conceptions, ridicule 
of superstitions) were a shock to the conservatives and a bold 
challenge to the age-old polis order, ancient customs and beliefs. 


69 








Not of the least importance was also the fact that the leading 
sophists had come to Athens, the centre of the contemporary 
cultural life and, according to Pericles, “the school of all 
Hellas”, from other polises and were naturally regarded by the 
conservative Athenians with certain suspicion as aliens. It was 
no wonder that in the eyes of most of the native citizens sophistic 
appeared a dubious, if not altogether disreputable, art (Athens 
produced its own philosophers and sophists much later and 
owed a great debt to the older philosophical schools and trends 
of the Hellenic polises in Asia Minor and South Italy). 

The Athenians clearly displayed their impatience with foreign 
charlatanry by ousting the visiting “teachers of wisdom’ na- 
tural philosopher Anaxagoras and sophist Protagoras, and by 
executing the home-bred “‘sophist’? Socrates, who was the 
second (after Anaxagoras’s pupil Archelaus) Athenian philoso- 
pher and, ironically, the first profound critic of sophistic 
philosophical and ethical conceptions. The final touch to the 
black reputation of the sophists was put by Plato and other Soc- 
ratics at whose hands the word “sophist” definitely became a 
term of opprobrium. Wishing to vindicate their teacher Socrates 
and dissociate him from the sins of the sophists, they set up an in- 
surmountable barrier between philosophy as an aspiration to 
true wisdom and sophistic as its counterfeit. Plato, for instance, 
describes the sophist in these words: “‘He, then, who traces the 
pedigree of his art as follows — who, belonging to the conscious or 
dissembling section of the art of causing self-contradiction, is an 
imitator of appearance, and is separated from the class of phan- 
tastic which is a branch of image-making into that further divi- 
sion of creation, the juggling of words, a creation human, and 
not divine— any one who affirms the real Sophist to be of this 
blood and leneage will say the very truth” (Plato, Sophist, 
268d). 

Plato’s negative attitude to the sophists was shared by Aristo- 
tle who pursued further the critical line of his teacher: ‘‘Dialec- 
tics is tentative concerning things which philosophy knows, 
sophistry makes the appearance of knowing without knowing”’ 
(Aristotle, Metaphysics, 1004b,). It is highly significant, however, 
that in both Plato’s and Aristotle’s works which are the main 
source of ancient evidence for the views of the sophists the latter 
emerge as original and profound thinkers despite the obvious 
anti-sophistic bias of their authors. In point of fact, the sophistic 


70 





conceptions, denied but not refuted, fall in and merge with the 
general Socratic-Platonic-Aristotelian line in ancient philosophy 
which could not have been started without the sophistic break 
with the old ‘physicists’? on a broad number of issues, political 
and legal ones inclusive. 

The sophists were brave and profound innovators in philoso- 
phy, logic, epistemology, ethics, politics, rhetoric and many 
other fields of knowledge. Previous natural philosophy, con- 
cerned primarily with the objective “divine” nature of things, 
left out of account the individual and his active role in the 
world, i. e. the subjective factor in being and cognition, and 
ignored the social substance and character of man’s theoretical 
and practical activity. The sophists, contrariwise, looked at the 
world from the standpoint of individual consciousness and drew 
radical conclusions from their new approach thereby turning 
the inquisitive human mind from the objectively divine to the 
subjectively human complex of phenomena and problems. 

The transition from the physicalistic to the humanistic out- 
look on the world was a great historical change, justly credited 
to the sophistic movement. The age of enlightenment, ushered 
in by the sophists, brought further rationalisation of the notions 
of nature, society, state, politics, law and ethics, and marked a 
new approach to the traditional problems of man-polis relation- 
ship and a new understanding of man’s place in the world. The 
motto of this ancient enlightenment was the famous thesis of 
Protagoras: ‘Man is the measure of all things.” 

Proceeding from this proud principle, the sophists set out in 
search of a more substantial basis for ethics and politics than tra- 
dition and old customs and focused their attention on the laws 
governing the emergence and operation of politico-legal institu- 
tions. Their conceptions laid the foundation of a theoretical in- 
quiry into a number of fundamental problems of state and 
law. 

The activity of the sophists presupposing free discussion of all 
philosophical, ethical and political questions tended, in turn, to 
deepen and further rationalise the moral, political and legal 
views in the broad masses stimulating their active participation 
in public affairs. It is not surprising therefore that the atmo- 
sphere of democratic polises, Athens including, was particularly 
conducive to the sophistic movement. Speaking of the Athenian 
democratic practices, Pericles said: ““We Athenians are able to 


71 





judge at all events if we cannot originate, and, instead of looking 
on discussion as a stumbling-block in the way of action, we think 
it an indispensable preliminary to any wise action at all” (Thu- 
cydides, The History of the Peloponnesian War, II, 40).! 

The sophists played an outstanding part in the political 
enlightenment of their fellow countrymen. However, the results 
of their efforts were not always positive, as was soon to be dis- 
covered by the sophists themselves and their contempo- 
raries. 

The sophists did not make a single school and professed ditfer- 
ent philosophical, political and legal theories. Already ancient 
doxographers distinguished between two generations of the 
sophists: Protagoras, Gorgias, Prodicus, Hippias, Antiphon, and 
others were known as earlier sophists, and Thrasymachus, Calli- 
cles, Lycophron and others, as later sophists. Most of the earlier 
sophists were on the whole of a democratic cast of mind, whereas 
the later sophists were largely represented by adherents of other 
forms of government (aristocracy, oligarchy). 

Protagoras (c. 481-411 B.C.) was a citizen of Abdera in 
Thrace. According to a biographical version traceable to Epi- 
curus, he earned his living as a porter and once, carrying a bun- 
dle of firewood, was met by Democritus. Impressed by the skill- 
fully made packet, Democritus took him in his service and made 
his clerk.? In the forties of the fifth century B. C. Protagoras 
came to Athens and, calling himself a sophist, started giving les- 
sons in the art of politics and “prudence in affairs private as well 
as public” (Plato, Protagoras, 318). His fees were very high and 
he fixed the sums personally. If a pupil considered the price too 
high, Protagoras offered him to go into a temple and take on 
oath of the value of the instruction he had received whereupon 
he paid the sum he had vouched for. Tradition tells us that Pro- 
tagoras once made a deal with his pupil Euathlus whereby the 
latter was to pay him the fee after winning his first case in a law 
court. The pupil, however, was in no hurry to get a case and the 
teacher threatened to sue him. Puzzled Euathlus replied that he 


' Great Books of the Western World, Vol. 6, p. 397. 

2 This legend is being dismissed by modern investigators as improbable 
since Protagoras was 15 or 20 years older than Democritus. It is much more 
likely that Democritus was influenced by Protagoras, but not vice versa. Prota- 
goras, in turn, was indebted to Parmenides and Anaxagoras. 


72 





had not won a case yet and had received no fee. ““Nay,”’ said 
Protagoras, “if I win this case against you I must have the fee, 
for winning it; if you win, I must have it, because you win it” 
(Diogenes Laertius, IX, 56). 

Protagoras enjoyed a reputation for great learning, eloquence 
and eristic (polemic) skill. He had numerous pupils and was a 
friend of Pericles. On the evidence of Plutarch, a man had been 
accidentally killed with a javelin in a public contest and Pericles 
“spent a whole day with Protagoras in a serious dispute, 
whether the javelin, or the man that threw it, or the masters of 
the games who appointed these sports, were, according to the 
strictest and best reason, to be accounted for the cause of this 
mischance”’ (Plutarch, Pericles, 36). According to Diogenes 
Laertius as reported by Heraclides Ponticus, Protagoras was in- 
vited by Pericles to draw up a constitution for a new Athenian 
colony of Thurii in South Italy. The visit of Protagoras to Cicily 
is vouched for by Plato (Plato, Greater Hippias, 282e). 

During his last visit to Athens Protagoras, already of ripe old 
age, was charged (by Athenian Pythodorus) with impiety. His 
books were collected from their possessors and publicly burned, 
and he himself hurriedly fled from the city. On some evidence, 
he was drowned by shipwreck on the way to Cicily. 

Protagoras was the author of numerous treatises of which only 
their titles, or, at best, isolated fragments have survived. The list 
of his works includes Truth, Of the Ancient Order of Things, On the 
Gods, The Art of Controversy, On Mathematics, Of Wrestling, Of the 
State, Of Ambition, Of Virtues, Of the Misdeeds of Mankind, Of For- 
enstc Speech for a Fee, A Book of Precepts, and others. The keynote of 
Protagoras’s views is his famous statement: “‘Man is the measure 
of all things, of the existence of things that are, and of the non- 
existence of things that are not” (Plato, Theaetetus, 152a). Plato’s 
Socrates interprets this maxim in the spirit of subjectivist 
sensualism and relativism: “Knowledge is simply perception” 
(ibid., 15le) and “things are to you such as they appear to you, 
and to me such as they appear to me” (ibid., 152). 

One can hardly accept this interpretation since “man” in 
Protagoras was not an empirical individual, but a human being 
as such, synonymous with mankind. Asserting the relativity of 
sensations and of human knowledge in general, Protagoras pro- 
ceeds not from the uniqueness of each individual and peculiarity 
of his perceptions, but from the specificity of human conscious- 


73 





EEE ae 


ness, the attitude of humanity to the surrounding world.! Prota- 
goras speaks of the relativity of all that lends itself to human 
measure rather than of the measure itself, thereby clearly exhib- 
iting the influence of the Heraclitean conception of universal 
flux. Relative and changeful, according to Protagoras, is not the 
measure, but what is being measured. If it were immutable and 
absolute after the manner of Parmenides, it would be its own 
measure, the limited human faculties would be completely in- 
adequate and, contrary to Parmenides, no thought would be 
able to attain to true knowledge. 

According to Protagoras, man alone, with his sensations and 
consciousness, provides a measure of relative and mutable being, 
thereby making truth as such possible. In the final analysis, it is 
this essentially human substance of truth that accounts for all in- 
dividual men’s “participation”’ in it despite the broad diversity 
and difference of their sensations and judgements. The absence 
ofa single (invariant) truth is therefore the result ofits “human” 
nature (due to the changefulness and relativeness of all things), 
but not of the difference of individuals and their sensations. 
Things appear different to different individuals not because of 
their epistemological inequality, but because—and this is the 
crux of the matter — they are different with different men. Hence, 
the diversity of individual truths results from and attests to their 
“human” nature which ts incompatible with a single and abso- 
lute standard. 

It is worth noting in this context that the man-measure doc- 
trine does not consort with the elitist theories professed by some 
of the sophists-one cannot reasonably see the measure of all 
things in man and simultaneously deny the possession of this in- 
strument of cognition to the ““many’’. Protagoras’s congruence 


' Taking exception to the views of ancient doxographers and modern com- j 
mentators who class Protagoras as a sensualist and relativist, some scholars 
adduce his “correlativism”, i. e. the doctrine of constant correlation between 
thought and reality very different from the Parmenidean identity of thinking 
and being. According to this doctrine of Protagoras, everything present in 
thought is real, and any statement of any man at any given moment is true, i. e. 
related to being. The non-existent is what is not being perceived or thought 
(Olof Gigon, Sokrates, A. Francke AG Verlag, Bern, 1947, S. 249-250). The 
weak point of this generally correct interpretation consists, in our opinion, in 
that it apparently ignores the universal character of Protagoras’s ‘‘man’’ as the 
source and carrier of the measure of all things. 


Qa 


74 





at this point is largely a result of his democratic views. Very 
characteristic in this respect is his account of the origin of human 
society given in the form of a myth and reproduced by Plato in 
his dialogue Protagoras. According to Protagoras, the original 
gifts of Prometheus (‘the mechanical arts of Hephaestus and 
Athene, and fire with them’’) and the subsequent gifts of Zeus 
(“reverence and justice” intended to save the human race from 
self-annihilation due to the lack of the art of government) were 
made the common property of all men, wherefore all men share 
in wisdom and virtue and are in principle equal. ‘These ethico- 
epistemological conceptions were in fact a reflection of Prota- 
goras’s democratic convictions. 

The man-measure doctrine of Protagoras glorifying man and 
placing him in the centre of the universe ran counter to the tra- 
ditional religious outlook, according to which the world measure 
was essentially divine, man’s knowledge was the gift of the gods 
and he himself was completely at their mercy. Coming out 
against this doctrine, Plato writes in the dialogue Laws: “Now 
God ought to be to us the measure of all things, and not man, as 
men commonly say (Protagoras)”’ (Plato, Laws, 716c). 

Sceptical attitude to the gods and religious traditions ensuing 
from Protagoras’s basic epistemological tenets was an important 
aspect of his enlightening activity. In the treatise On the Gods he 
wrote: ‘“‘As to the gods, I have no means of knowing either that 
they exist or that they do not exist. For many are the obstacles 
that impede knowledge, both the obscurity of the question and 
the shortness of human life’ (Diogenes Laertius, op. cit., Prota- 
goras, IX, 51). 

One must not be misled regarding Protagoras’s religious 
agnosticism by the mythological form he sometimes gave to his 
thought as is the case with the above tale. The great sophist 
resorted to myth not only by way of adornment likely to give 
more pleasure to his listeners and capture their imagination, but 
also as a convenient method for conveying his message along tra- 
ditional lines the audience was used to. 

Using the well-known myth of Prometheus, Protagoras in the 
debate with Socrates expounds his thesis that the art of govern- 
ment which is the prime requisite for organised social life can be 
acquired by training and that wisdom and political virtues are 
equally accessible to all people. It is only because these gifts had 
not been restricted by Zeus to selected individuals that men 


79 


ee 


were capable to pass from the original state of lawlessness, dis- 
persion and mutual destruction to law, order and_ unity. 

The democratic essence of Protagoras’s parable and politico- 
legal conception consists in the contention that there would be 
no state if only a few shared in political virtues, that is justice, 
fair-mindedness and moderation. 

Now virtues unlike reason and practical intelligence bestowed 
on the human race by Prometheus from the very beginning and 
underlying man’s ability to learn technical skills are not innate 
qualities. They do not arise automatically, but can be acquired 
by teaching and assiduous practice, and that is what the sophists 
are supposed to do. ““The existence of a state,”’ says Protagoras, 
“implies that no man is unskilled in virtue” (Plato, Protagoras, 
327a). Unlike Socrates who censures Athenian democracy for 
allowing incompetent citizens (carpenters, shoe-makers, copper- 
smiths, tradesmen, etc.) to participate in polis affairs, Protagoras 
readily accepts it as the Athenians, in his opinion, possess the 
political virtues to a sufficient degree. 

Since virtues needed in private and public affairs can be 
taught and learned, proper education of all members of the polis 
is a matter of state importance. Linking his conception of the 
attainability of virtue with man’s responsibility for his actions, 
Protagoras offers his own justification of the punishment of crim- 
inals: in his opinion, “he who desires to inflict rational punish- 
ment does not retaliate for a past wrong, for what has been done 
cannot be undone; he has regard to the future, and is desirous 
that the man who is punished, and he who sees him punished, 
may be deterred from doing wrong again” (Plato, Protagoras, 
324 b-c). Political virtues (justice, self-restraint, etc.), as well as 
the polis and its laws come, according to Protagoras, under the 
heading of things that have man as their measure. The progress 
of human society described by Protagoras in the myth shows 
that he regards the state and the laws as artificial institutions 
resulting from the spread of political virtues and man’s increas- 
ing skill in the art of government. They come not by nature, but 
by convention, embodying man’s wisdom and ability to master 
the political art for the common good of all citizens. 

Proceeding from his epistemological doctrine, Protagoras 
takes a resolute stand against what is natural (pAysis) and extols 
the state, laws and political wisdom as products of human 
knowledge, as man’s great achievements attesting to his rise 


76 








above the savageness of nature and assimilation to the “divine” 
(Plato, Protagoras, 322a). 

In contrast with the later sophists who divorced nomos from 
physis and put forward a case for the “natural’’ as true against 
the ‘‘artificial” as false, Protagoras viewed the artificial as the 
criterion of social progress and evidence for man’s wisdom and 
virtuousness. His idea of the possibility of promoting political 
virtues by education was aimed at consolidating and multiply- 
ing the gains of society of which the most important were the 
state and the laws. 

The “‘artificial’’ things, as well as the ‘‘natural’’ ones are rela- 
tive, fluid and mutable, yet the certitude of human knowledge 
(including the knowledge of the “artificial” state and laws) 
attests to their authenticity and genuineness. 

The adduction of knowledge as evidence for the validity of 
human institutions gives yet another dimension to Protagoras’s 
doctrine of education and training for the public weal and clari- 
fies the crucial role of the principle of utility in his theory of 
knowledge. The diversity of individual truths does not mean 
that they are equally useful or, to put it another way, that differ- 
ent truths about one and the same thing have equal values. 
From the viewpoint of the polis as a form of commonwealth, the 
greatest value lies with the virtuousness of its citizens and the 
equity of their relations. 

The wisdom (and usefulness) of the educator, be he a parent, 
an orator or an official, consists in the ability to instil in the 
citizens socially useful views and direct them to the course of 
action promoting common good. Plato ascribes to Protagoras 
the following words: ‘“The wise and good rhetoricians make the 
good instead of the evil to seem just to states; for whatever 
appears to each state to be just and fair, so long as it is regarded 
as such, is just and fair to it; and what the wise man does is to 
cause good to appear, and be real, for each of them instead of 
evil” (Plato, Theaetetus, 167c). 

The principle of common good underlies not only the prob- 
lem of proper education, but also the need for state coercion in 
relation to those who act in defiance of public interests and vio- 
late the law of the state. “The city,” says Protagoras, ‘‘outlines 
the laws, which were the invention of good lawgivers living in 
the olden time, and compels us to exercise and to obey authority 
in accordance with those; and he who transgresses them is to be 


77 





corrected, or, in other words, called to account, which is a term 
used not only in your country, but also in many others, seeing 
that justice calls men to account” (ibid., 326d-e). 

In the view of Protagoras, the relativity of all statements con- 
cerning the polis and the laws does not detract from their value. 
Though all artificial things, the state institutions and laws inclu- 
sive, depend on man’s advancement in political art through the 
mediation, as it were, of his ““measure”, they are not a product 
of man’s arbitrary judgement. For all their relativity (changeful- 
ness and diversity), the notions of the polis, laws, justice, etc. are 
objective by virtue of their veracity and, consequently, lend 
themselves to modification by the sensible conceptions of public 
weal. 

Which of the numerous competing truths in the sphere of poli- 
tico-legal relations in the polis gets the upper hand largely 
depends on the education of the citizens and on what they 
believe to be just and useful. Education and training, that is the 
job of the sophists, acquire great political importance and 
enlightenment turns into a powerful instrument in the struggle 
for people’s minds. Protagoras was well aware of the practical 
significance of his activity and maintained that a theory of art 
without practice and practice without theory are nothing. 

Protagoras went down in the history of Greek political 
thought as a champion of the principles of justice, law and 
order, believing them to be objective values. The democratic 
form of the realisation of these principles was in full accord with 
his own conception of truth and utility. His activity as an edu- 
cator and enlightener was aimed at promoting the political art 
and disseminating democratic ideas and values. 

Gorgias (c. 483-375 B.C.) was another prominent sophist 
who came from Leontini, a small town in Sicily. He is said to 
have taken lessons in philosophy from Empedocles (a pupil of 
Parmenides, the head of the Eleatic school), and in rhetoric, 
from Teisias of Syracuse who, after his teacher Corax, described 
rhetoric as the “demiurge of conviction”. Philostratus writes 
“that the art of the sophists carries back to him as though he 
were its father” (Philostratus and Eunapius, The Lives of the 
Sophists, I, 9, 492). 

Gorgias made a reputation for oratory in his native town. In 
427 B. C. he went to Athens on an embassy to plead the cause of 
Leontini against Syracuse and ask the Council for military aid. 


78 








His oratory amazed the Athenians and won them over to his 
view. Moving from one Hellenic polis to another, Gorgias gave 
lessons and public exhibitions of his skill for high fees. On the in- 
vitation of tyrant Jason he went to rich Thessaly where he spent 
most of his life. However, according to his pupil Isocrates, Gor- 
gias had no fixed abode in any city, incurred no public expenses 
and was exempt from all taxes. Besides, he was not married and 
had no children being thus free from this “most enduring and 
onerous of all social duties”. 

Gorgias lived a long life and preserved his spirits and lucidity 
of mind till the very end. When asked about the cause of his lon- 
gevity, he said that he had never done anything for pleasure. His 
memory was perpetuated by a statue of gold erected for him in 
the Delphian temple, presumably on the enormous means he 
had saved during his lifetime. 

Gorgias attached extreme importance to rhetoric and 
regarded it as the queen of sciences opening the way to supreme 
power. His views which exerted a considerable influence on the 
sophistic movement were based on definite philosophical 
principles and reflected a definite world outlook. Underscoring 
the need for philosophical studies, Gorgias once wittily observed 
that those who ignored philosophy in their pursuit of special arts 
reminded him of the suitors of Penelope fornicating with her 
maids... 

Gorgias’s own philosophical studies led him to ontological 
nihilism and agnosticism. For his theoretical creed we have this 
evidence of Sextus Empiricus: “Gorgias of Leontini ... in his 
book entitled “Concerning the Nonexistent or Concerning 
Nature”’ tries to establish successively three main points — firstly, 
that nothing exists; secondly, that even if anything exists it is in- 
apprehensible by man; thirdly, that even if anything is appre- 
hensible, yet of a surety it is inexpressible and incommunicable 
to one’s neighbour” (Sextus Empiricus, VII-VIII, Against the 
Logicians, Book I, 65 Vol. 2). It was in the spirit of this utter 
agnosticism denying any objective criterion of truth and truth 
itself that Gorgias developed his views on the role of rhetoric, as 
an art of persuasion by eloquence. Asserting that we all live in 
the world of opinion and the truth is whatever each of us is per- 
suaded to believe, he in fact substitutes rhetoric, verisimilitude 


and general consent for the philosophical demonstration of 
truth. 


79 














In contrast with Protagoras and other sophists who professed 
to be teachers of virtue, Gorgias claimed only the intention of 
making clever speakers, since true knowledge of any object or 
phenomenon (including virtue) was not accessible to either the 
teacher or the pupil. According to Plato, he held that “the art of 
persuasion far surpassed every other; this, as he says, is by far the 
best of them all, for to it all things submit, not by compulsion, 
but of their own free will’? (Plato, Philebus, 58-58b). 

One should not conclude from the above that Gorgias was 
against virtue and rejected all ethical notions. We have sufficient 
grounds to believe that his nihilistic attitude was confined to a 
single universal virtue, the same for all (and, naturally, to the 
possibility of its cognition should it exist) and did not prevent 
him from asserting the existence of individual virtues. 

In one of Plato’s dialogues, Gorgias’s pupil Meno speaking 
with Socrates gives this account of his teacher’s views: “‘Every 
age, every condition of life, young or old, male or female, bond 
or free, has a different virtue: there are virtues numberless, and 
consequently there is no difficulty about definitions; for there is 
a virtue relative to the actions and ages of each of us in all that 
we do. And I take it the same may be said of vice, Socrates”’ 
(Plato, Meno, 7le-72). 

Plato’s evidence for a differentiated approach of Gorgias to 
ethical categories is borne out by Aristotle’s laudatory com- 
ment: ‘‘Far better than such [general] definitions is their mode 
of speaking, who, like Gorgias, enumerate the virtues. All classes 
must be deemed to have their special attributes” (Aristotle: II, 
Politws, I, 13, 1260a 25). 

The “pluralisation” of ethical standards was an obvious 
departure from collectivist morality towards individualism 
which could not but erode the foundation of polis life and the 
traditional unity of citizens regarding ethical, political and 
moral problems. 

In rhetoric, Gorgias’s interest seems to have centred upon for- 
ensic speeches in which he usually described arguments for the 
defence against one or another accusatory thesis having a deep- 
rooted tradition behind it. The chief aim of his oratory 
addressed to the court of the people was to induce the judges, by 
word of reason, to change their minds and to win them over to 
the side of the defence overcoming their prejudice and dense- 
ness. Public speeches of this kind, invalidating obsolete religious, 


80 








aesthetic, ethic and legal views were bound to have a strong 
political resonance even if they were not directly concerned with 
polis affairs. In the conditions of the broad participation of free 
citizens in the discussion of common problems Gorgias’s public 
rhetoric was an essential component of the political art and 
could be used as an effective instrument in struggle for power. 
Public word in polis life turned into a_ public force.! 

The rhetoric of Gorgias can be exemplified by his Encomium of 
Helen where the master of the ‘“‘art of persuasion” comes out 
against the age-old tradition blaming Helen for the woes of the 
Trojan War. On the evidence of Gorgias himself he sought to 
disprove the opinion shared by all ancient poets, to vindicate 
Helen’s memory by disclosing the truth, and to reduce ignor- 
ance to silence. Gorgias argues the innocence of Helen by attrib- 
uting her flight into Troy to the operation of the forces beyond 
her control. Helen’s action, he contends, was either the result of 
the gods’ will so that she was driven by fate of necessity, or 
abduction by force, or seduction by persuasive words, or capti- 
vation by love. In all these instances Helen is guiltless, being 
either a victim of divine fate (in the first case, and also in the 
fourth, if love is believed to be sent by Eros), or mortals’ coer- 
cion (physical in the second case and mental in the third). 
Should one consider love but a body’s ailment and soul’s delu- 
sion, Helen again is not guilty, as her infatuation was in the 
nature of a misfortune rather than a fault and she acted without 
evil intent by a whim of chance, i.e. against her will. 

The case for Helen put forward by Gorgias is notable for a 
new concept of guilt essentially different from the views of his 
contemporaries. In contrast with a very broad understanding of 
culpability that was characteristic of his time and led to the so- 
called objective imputation (attribution of evil to a doer solely 
on the basis of objective results of his actions), Gorgias proposed 
to recognise a person guilty only in case of malicious intent on 
his part. Adducing force majeure (vis major) or chance (casus) 
as arguments against culpability, he in fact denied all other 
forms of guilt. His theory whereby a man can only be guilty of 
intentional wrongdoing was firmly within the sophistic tradition 


' One researcher justly notes that Gorgias’s art of persuasion making it pos- 
sible to manipulate the audience turned out “an instrument of power” (See 
Karlheinz Rode, op. cit., S. 17). 


81 
6 113 





of enlightened rationalism and individualism. 

It is very characteristic of Gorgias that both in Encomium on 
Helen and Defence of Palamedes ' he takes a firm stand for “truth” 
and “justice” underscoring their social value. Relative and 
dependent on the persuasiveness of their advocates as they are, 
truth and justice, in his opinion, adorn the city, instil courage in 
its men, impart beauty to the body, wisdom to the soul, virtue to 
the cause and verity to the word. The opposite, he says, is dis- 
cord and confusion. 

The art of eloquence, according to Gorgias, must be equal to 
its high mission. The word is a mighty despot and wields great 
power of persuasion moulding the soul at its will. Warning 
against the perils that come from the abuse of the power of word, 
Gorgias qualifies persuasion by false reasoning as compulsion 
and is perhaps the first thinker to have clearly equated them in 
terms of legal responsibility. 

Gorgias sharply attacked ‘‘false reasoning” and, ironically, 
foreshadowed in this point Plato’s criticism of sophistic. As evi- 
dence that artful persuasion can make false opinions appear true 
ones, Gorgias adduced verbal contests in popular assemblies 
where a skillful but deceitful speech not infrequently won the 
support of the demos. The guiding principle of his own rhetori- 
cal art was the exaltation of aesthetic, ethic and political virtues. 

Gorgias gives a high appraisal of the achievements of human 
culture including the “written laws, these guardians of justice”. 
A written law is man’s contrivance, i. e. something artificial, dif- 
ferent from unwritten “‘justice’’ which, according to Gorgias, is 
the substance of human affairs, the divine and universal law. Yet 
the distinction between them in Gorgias does not turn into their 
opposition. Advocating the written laws, Gorgias nevertheless 
rates justice as a higher value. 

In his Essay on Death glorifying the Athenians who had fallen 
in battle, Gorgias draws a line of demarcation between “‘mild 
justice” and “rigid law”, and brings in the notion of “right 
time” or opportunity, i. e. expediency (kazros). Eulogising the 
departed, Gorgias recalls their noble deeds and points out that 


' Palamedes was one of the heroes of the Trojan War killed by the Hellenes 
through a false charge of Odysseus. Plato’s Socrates mentions his name among 
those of his predecessors who have “suffered death through an unjust judge- 
ment” (Plato, Apology, 41-41b). 


82 








they often displayed genuine sense of right and placed the truth 
of the substance above the letter of the law, thus recognising that 
truly divine and universal] law consists in saying and doing the 
right thing at the right time. Gorgias further links justice with 
equality and points out that the deceased were just to their com- 
patriots by virtue of their inherent feeling for equality. 

Gorgias held in great esteem the blessings of peace which, in 
his opinion, brought everything beautiful and good to mankind. 
In his Olympian Oration delivered in approximately 408 B. C. 
during the inter-Hellenic Peloponnesian War Gorgias called all 
Hellenes to unity and peace exhorting them to end their fratrici- 
dal strife and join forces against the barbarians. 

The same idea of unity and peace was advocated by him in 
the Essay on Death— the funeral oration delivered in Athens, one 
of the two chief rival states in the struggle for domination over 
the Hellenic world (the other one was Sparta). Taking due care 
not to stroke the wrong way the bellicose and hegemonistically 
minded Athenians and praising them for their victories over the 
Medes, Gorgias at the same time cautiously rubbed in the idea 
that “‘victories over barbarians call for hymns of praise, but vic- 
tories over Greeks for dirges.”’ ! 

Gorgias had many pupils, the most famous of whom were ora- 
tor Isocrates, sophists Polus of Acragas and Alcidamas of Elaea. 

Sophist Prodicus (born c. 470 B. C.) came from Ceos, a small 
island north of Crete. Often coming to Athens on official mis- 
sions from Ceos, he acquired there a fame as a teacher of virtue 
and a great language specialist. He was particularly good at in- 
terpreting the meanings of words and drawing fine distinctions 
between synonyms. Socrates who was among Prodicus’s listeners 
spoke of his art in complimentary terms and even spent one 
drachma to hear his lecture (Prodicus is known to have charged 
50 drachmas for the full course, but Socrates evidently had 
neither such money nor the need for prolonged studies). In 
Plato’s dialogue Protagoras Socrates calls himself a disciple of 
Prodicus and even his friend-- though not without an undertone 
of irony characteristic of him. 

In his Theaetetus, Plato ascribes to Socrates a rather ambig- 
uous statement, obviously not very flattering to Prodicus, that 


' Philostratus and Eunapius, The Lives of the Sophists, 1, 9, 494, William 
Heinemann, Ltd., Cambridge, Mas., Harvard University Press, 1968, p. 33. 


83 
6* 





aaa ae 


he had sent many of his pupils barren of good ideas but other- 
wise bright and promising to Prodicus and “other inspired 

sages” as they were not in need of his art of midwifery, i. e. dia- 

lectics (Plato, Theaetetus, 151b). This and other statements fre- 

quent in Plato’s dialogues may well have been the echoes of his 
polemic against the sophists. 

Prodicus held that the highest good in man’s life is virtue and 
developed this idea in an allegorical form in his heroic fable 
“Choice of Heracles” (Xenophon, The Memorable Thoughts of 
Socrates). 

When Heracles was passing from childhood to adolescence 
and had to decide which path of life to take, he was accosted by 
two beautiful women representing Virtue and Vice. Striving to 
win him over, Vice promised him a life of ease and pleasure 
whereas Virtue exposing the falsity of her rival’s arguments, 
promised nothing but a life of hard work and anxiety insisting 
that everything good could only come by sweat and toil. She 
concluded her speech with these words: “If you would gain the 
favour of the Deity you must be at the pains of worshipping 
Him; if you would be beloved by your friends you must study to 
oblige them; if you would be honoured by any city you must be 
of service to it; and if you would be admired by all Greece, on 
account of your probity and valour, you must exert yourself to 
do her some eminent service. If you would render your fields 
fruitful, and fill your arms with corn, you must labour to culti- 
vate the soil accordingly. Would you grow rich by your herds, a 
proper care must be taken of them; would you extend your 
dominions by arms, and be rendered capable of setting at liberty 
your captive friends, and bringing your enemies to subjection, 
you must not only learn of those that are experienced in the art 
of war, but exercise yourself also in the use of military affairs; 
and if you would excel in the strength of your body you must 
keep your body in due subjection to your mind, and exercise it 
with labour and pains” (Xenophon, The Memorable Thoughts of 
Socrates, II, 1, 28). 

Virtue, according to Prodicus, is the only right, though long 
and arduous road to a happy and contented life not only for an 
individual, but for all people, the whole human race. In his 
moral theory he assigns an important role to labour as an instru- 
ment of personal advancement and social progress. His doctrine 
is keynoted by the idea of man’s responsibility for his own wel- 


84 








. 


fare and for the common good which is in marked contrast with 
the traditional beliefs in Providence and the will of the gods. 
The gods in Prodicus help only those who are themselves solici- 
tous about their affairs and do not shun hard work. His high 
assessment of the role of labour was an obvious departure from 
the views of his contemporaries scornful of all kinds of physical 
work. 

Prodicus also sets great store by labour in his theory of the ori- 
gin of society and the state in which he ascribes the emergence of 
the commonwealth and the general prosperity of its citizens to 
their purpose-oriented concerted efforts. It is not to the gods, but 
to hard toil and ingenuity that people owe their mastery over 
the blind forces of nature, suppression of baneful strife and the 
benefits of the selfless and organised polis life. An important 
place in this cultural progress belongs to language, the necessary 
instrument of people’s communion and mutual understanding. 

According to Prodicus, the progress of mankind brought 
about not only language and the state, but also religion, an im- 
portant product of human efforts and one of man’s greatest 
achievements. Taking a purely naturalistic and rational view of 
religion, Prodicus maintained that it had arisen from the ten- 
dency of primitive man to deify things useful to his life—the sun, 
various natural phenomena, bread (as goddess Demeter), wine 
(as god Dionysus), etc. He therefore recognised religion only 
from the utilitarian, as it were, viewpoint and criticised its un- 
reasonable and irrational rites, such as wailing over the dead, 
etc. In his opinion, death does not concern itself with either the 
living, or the dead, because the former have nothing to do with 
death as they are alive, and the latter are indifferent to it as they 
are dead. Like Protagoras, he exalts human skills and regards all 
artificial products of human progress, including the state, law, 
religion, and virtue as beneficial to mankind. His views are still 
free from the scepticism and nihilism in relation to everything 
“artificial” that became a characteristic feature of many later 
sophists. 

Hippias of Elis (c. 460-400 B. C.) was one of the most versatile 
men of his time proficient in such widely diverse subjects as 
music, language, mathematics, astronomy, poetry, rhetoric, 
politics, etc. As a paid teacher of sophistic he visited many Hel- 
lenic polises and enjoyed great success. Plato tells us that Hip- 
pias, being once in a boastful mood and praising his profession, 


85 








highly lucrative and demanding wisdom, said to Socrates: ‘‘Soc- 
rates, you know nothing of the real charms of all this business. If 
you were told how much I have earned, you would be 
astounded. To take one case only—I went to Sicily once while 
Protagoras was living there; he had a great reputation and was a 
far older man than I, and yet in a short time I made more than 
150 minas; ! why, in one place alone, Inycus, a very small place, 
I took more than 20 minas. When I returned home with the 
money I gave it to my father, reducing him and his fellow 
citizens to a condition of stupefied amazement. And I feel pretty 
sure that I have made more money than any other two sophists 
you like to mention put together” (Plato, Greater Hippias, 282e). 

Hippias took special pride in his versatility and apparently 
aspired after the ideal of omniscience which was synonymous 
with vanity and shallowness in the eyes of Heraclitus before him 
and Plato after. In the practical sphere it very naturally took the 
form of self-sufficiency which, on some evidence, Hippias 
regarded as the goal of life. According to Plato, he appeared at 
Olympia wearing only the things he had made himself including 
a ring, an oil flask and a strigil. His emphasis on man’s indepen- 
dence was one of the clear expressions of individualism charac- 
teristic in one or another form of the sophistic movement as a 
whole. 

The views of Hippias on legal problems were distinguished by 
originality and indicative of the independence of his thought. 
He was the first among the sophists to contrast nature (physts) 
and law (nomos) in the spirit of the natural-law theory? and 


' A fabulous sum in Hippias’s time: all the property of Socrates, his interlo- 
cutor, was said to be worth 5 minas, a good horse cost 10 minas and a skillful 
slave approximately as much. 

2 The many-sided Russian word pravo has no exact English equivalent and 
is translated as “law” or “right” depending on its specific meaning in the text 
or traditional usage. For instance, Hegel’s Grund/mien der Philosophie des Rechts is 
known in English-speaking countries as The Philosophy of Right, whereas in 
modern translations from Russian into English it is invariably called The Philo- 
sophy of Law. The same is true of the doctrine of natural right and the doctrine of 
natural law. Such examples can be multiplied, the more so as the translator had 
to take due account of the vocabulary of universally recognised English transla- 
tions of ancient writers frequently cited in the text. 

In view of the above, the terms “law” and “right” are often used in this 
book as synonyms, their selection being prompted by contextual rather than 
conceptual considerations.— Tr. 


8b 





make out a case for nature on humanitarian grounds. Uphold- 
ing the nature of things or the law of nature as true law free from 
the errors and limitations of human (positive) law, Hippias con- 
ceived it as the foundation of man’s right to self-determination 
in accordance with the dictates of nature. In his view natural 
law was justice, whereas positive law resulting from human con- 
sent and often changing imposed on man artificial conventions 
and was injustice: “The laws are what the citizens have 
ordained by an universal consent”? (Xenophon, The Memorable 
Thoughts of Socrates, IV, IV, 13). 

As arguments against the positive laws Hippias adduced their 
conventionality, frequent alterations, transitoriness and depen- 
dence on the judgement of short-lived legislators. Being a pro- 
duct of opinion, they could not be regarded as true for all times, 
as being absolutely necessary: “But how can it be imagined,” 
argued Hippias, “that the laws are a good thing, and that it is 
good to obey them, since even they that made them mend, alter, 
and repeal them so often?” (ibid., IV, IV, 14). By contrast, un- 
written natural law, according to Hippias, is universal in appli- 
cation and observed everywhere (ibid., IV, IV, 19). 

The theory of natural law was also professed by sophist Antz- 
phon (c. 400 B. C.). Arguing the equality of all men by nature, 
he adduced the same natural needs of both the Hellenes and the 
barbarians, the aristocrats and the common folk. Inequality, in 
his opinion, arose from human laws, not from nature. 

Contrasting the “laws of the polis” and the “laws of nature’’, 
he gives preference to the latter. Though justice, in his opinion, 
consists in not transgressing the laws and customs of one’s state, 
many prescriptions regarded as just by the law are at odds with 
man’s nature. Even useful commands of the law are fetters on 
man, whereas the precepts of nature are directed towards his 
freedom. Besides, violation of man-made laws without detection 
does one no harm, whereas the laws of nature cannot be flouted 
with impunity, because the edicts of the laws are imposed artifi- 
cially and those of nature are compulsory. Again, the precepts of 
human laws are arrived at by consent, not by natural growth, 
whereas those of nature are not a matter of consent. 

In his work On Concord Antiphon contrasts the hardships of the 
first men’s isolated existence with the advantages of civilised life 
in communities and castigates selfish strife among people, advo- 
cating concord and unity, particularly in relation to the polis 


87 








laws and public affairs. In this connection he underlines the im- 
portance of proper education which, in his opinion, should be 
based on natural law and aimed at suppressing the egoistic in- 
clinations of the citizens. 

Proceeding from the antithesis between natural and positive 
laws and comparing them to the advantage of the former, Anti- 
phon not only criticised the contemporary polis laws and institu- 
tions but also sought to bring them in conformity with his 
rationalistic conception of man’s nature. 

Thrasymachus of Chalcedon was one of the most original and 
famous sophists of the second generation. His approach to politi- 
cal problems was keynoted by realism and critical spirit 
accountable for his impatience with religious and moral hypoc- 
risy and for persistent attempts to uncover the naked truth and 
strip off all sorts of illusions. The views of Thrasymachus were 
notable for a good deal of scepticism and pessimism. The exact 
cause of his death is not known, but there are grounds to believe 
that he committed suicide. 

According to Thrasymachus, politics is the sphere of human 
interests, not the gods’ concern. The gods, he says, do not see 
what goes on among men. If they did, they would not neglect 
the greatest of human goods, namely justice, yet we see man 
making no use of it. 

In Thrasymachus’s view, what currently goes by the name of 
justice is nothing but fiction and actualiy stands for the interest 
of the stronger, those who are in power at a particular moment. 
All governments, he asserts, enact laws in their own interests and 
declare it justice. 

This reversal of moral values in the conception of Thrasyma- 
chus deprives politics (public power, laws, etc.) of any ethical 
foundation and uncovers its real essence — the struggle of differ- 
ent social forces for power. The positive laws divested of all 
objective moral value turn into the embodiment of the rulers’ 
interest. 

According to Thrasymachus, the interest of the stronger is the 
criterion of practical politics and the principle of government. 
In each state, he says, the laws are made by those who hold the 
reins: democracy frames democratic laws, tyranny — tyrannical 
laws, etc. Having established such laws, the authorities call them 
just for their subjects and punish the transgressors as violators of 
Justice. The subjects obey the laws in the ruler’s interest and to 


88 





their own disadvantage. For a ruler to seize power and keep sub- 
jects at bay is profitable whereas to display pity and give way to 
compassion is perilous. Injustice, says Thrasymachus, is stronger 
and more profitable than justice. 

Ridiculing the naive, from his viewpoint, attempts of Socrates 
to apply ethical standards to practical politics, Thrasymachus 
says to him: “So entirely astray are you in your ideas about the 
just and unjust as not even to know that justice and the just are 
in reality another’s good, that is to say, the interest of the ruler 
and stronger, and the loss of the subject and servant; and injus- 
tice, the opposite; for the unjust is lord over the truly simple and 
just” (Plato, Republic, I, 343, cd). 

As is evidenced from the above passages, Thrasymachus 
neither advocated, nor censured a definite form of government 
(e. g. aristocracy in the first case, which has been frequently im- 
puted to him, or democracy, in the second). All forms, in his 
opinion, are equally devised to further the rulers’ interests. His 
conception theoretically boils down to the assertion that in all 
contemporary states power and laws rest on force usually 
cloaked under a fine phrase. 

Thrasymachus went down in history as a political thinker who 
had brought in bold relief the role of compulsion in the activity 
of the state, focused on the authoritarian nature of law and poli- 
tics and clearly expressed the idea that the ethical notions of 
contemporary society (i. e. the sphere of contemporary ideo- 
logy) were dominated by the views of those who were in power. 

The ethical foundation of politics was also rejected by Polus of 
Acragas, Gorgias’s pupil. His interest mainly centred upon the 
practical aspect of social relations, i. e. the empirical reality of 
the contemporary state. Polus’s views on the part played by 
practical experience in the process of cognition were later highly 
appraised by Aristotle in his Metaphysics: “‘And experience seems 
to be almost similar to science and art, but science and art come 
to men through experience; for, as Polus rightly says, ‘exper- 
ience made art, but inexperience, luck’”’ (Aristotle, Metaphysics, 
98 1a). 

Polus extolled rhetoric as an important means for achieving 
domination over people. The orator, in his opinion, can do “as 
he likes” very much in the manner of the tyrant. Because there is 
no justice in relations among people, it is better, he argues, to 
commit injustice in achieving one’s ends than suffer injustice 


89 





eee 


from others. Or, to put it another way, it is better to be the tyr- 
ant than his victim. Pursuing further this train of thought, he 
comes to the vindication of the tyrant and exalts his free- 
dom —“‘the power of doing whatever seems good to you in a 
state, killing, banishing, doing in all things as you like” (Plato, 
Gorgias, 469c). 

The unrestrained urge for power and the conception of the 
right of the stronger are personified in Callicles, a young Ath- 
enian aristocrat, described in Plato’s dialogue Gorgias. Apart 
from Plato, we have no evidence for his existence and some com- 
mentators regard him as a purely fictitious figure brought in by 
Plato as an example of the unscrupulous and dangerous dema- | 
gogue holding the tyrant for an ideal and believing the height of 
justice to be a conquest won by force. He may well have been a 
mask for Plato’s ambitious uncle Critias. 

Contrasting the law of nature to the positive laws and customs 
very much in the manner of the sophists, Plato’s Callicles con- 
tends that “the makers of laws are the majority who are weak; 
and they make laws and distribute praises and censures with a 
view to themselves and to their own interests” (Plato, Gorgzas, 
483b). In his opinion, the majority are only too glad of equality 
as they know their weakness, ‘‘and therefore the endeavour to 
have more than the many is conventionally said to be shameful 
and unjust, and is called injustice, whereas nature herself inti- 
mates that it is just for the better to have more than the worse, 
the more powerful than the weaker” (ibid). 

According to Callicles, the law of natural right ordains that 
everywhere among animals, men, whole cities and races, the 
superior rule over and have more than the inferior. From the 
position of this law Callicles attacks democratic law and institu- 
tions based on the principle of equality. In his aristocratic inter- 
pretation the law of nature turns into the right of the better 
(stronger, wiser) to inequality. 

The political views of Critzas (450-403 B. C.), one of the lead- 
ing figures among the Thirty Tyrants (404-403 B. C.), are also 
traditionally included under the head of sophistic enlightenment 
though he never taught wisdom for money in the manner of 
regular sophists. Consumed with ambition and thirst for power, 
he became an intimate member of the circle of Socrates in order 
to learn something of his master’s skill of argument, then left it 
when he thought he had got enough and plunged into the 


90 





rough-and-tumble of politics. Sources tell us that he lost his life 
in war against democracy having earned himself a reputation of 
the most cruel and bloodthirsty member of the ruling tyrannical 
clique. 

In the play Sisyphus, Critias expounds his theory of religion as 
a contrivance of a clever ruler designed to keep his subjects in 
check. 

Speaking through the mouth of Sisyphus, the main hero of the 
play, Critias gives this story. There was a time when the life of 
man was disorderly and beastlike. Then men laid down laws, 
but these could only prevent open deeds of violence and men 
continued to commit them in secret. A way out was found by a 
shrewd legislator who invented the immortal gods, hearing and 
seeing everything so that no one could sin secretly with 
impunity. 

Hence, religion is described by Critias as a deliberate impos- 
ture designed to enforce the law by fear of punishment. 

According to Sextus Empiricus, ‘“‘Critias, one of the tyrants at 
Athens, seems to belong to the company of the atheists when he 
says that the ancient lawgivers invented God as a kind of over- 
seer of the right and wrong actions of men, in order to make sure 
that nobody injured his neighbours privily through fear of ven- 
geance at the hands of the Gods” (Sextus Empiricus, Against the 
Physwists, UX-X, 1, 54). 

Continuing the line of political voluntarism and ethico-reli- 
gious scepticism characteristic of the views of a number of 
sophists, Critias declares that not only the laws, but also religion 
and the ethical notions based upon it are a human invention—a 
useful teaching ‘‘concealing under speech untrue’’ (ibid.). 

Such theories undermining the traditional ethical and reli- 
gious canons cleared the way for political unscrupulousness and 
downright adventurism. Indeed, when the opportunity pre- 
sented itself and Critias was elected with the Thirty to draw up a 
constitution for Athens after its capitulation in 404, he passed 
from philosophy to practical struggle for power and, standing 
out for murderous excesses even against the background of his 
associates engaged in the massacre of his opponents. On the evi- 
dence of Xenophon, “‘Critias was the most insatiable and cruel 
of all the thirty tyrants” (Xenophon. The Memorable Thoughts of 
Socrates, London, Paris, New York, Cassell and Company, Ltd., 
1904, p. 18). 


4] 


ee 


Sophist Lyophron, according to Aristotle, regarded the state as 
a product of men’s agreement about alliance and believed law to 
be only a convention, “‘a surety to one another of justice”, that 
has no real power to make the citizens good and just (Aristotle: 
II, Politics, III, 9, 1280b 5, 10). 

In all evidence, Lycophron viewed “personal rights” as 
natural and inalienable and law as a means of guaranteeing 
their inviolability. His theory of social contract accounting for 
the origin of the state and law was based on the notion of the 
natural equality of men and their individual rights. Rejecting 
men’s inequality by nature, he disparaged noble birth as some- 
thing altogether empty. 

Another sophist of the younger generation, Alcidamas of Elaea 
(early fourth century) was, like Lycophron, a pupil of Gorgias. 
He chiefly owes his place in the history of political teachings to a 
theory that all people are equal including the slaves and is cre- 
dited with a remarkable statement: ‘‘God has set all men free; 
nature has made no man a slave.” 


* * * 


The humanism of the Greek sophists that came about as a 
natural product of the intellectual revolution in the fifth century 
B. C. and the shift of interest from external nature to man’s 
world found its expression in numerous and widely diverging 
theories. Inspired by the great idea of man’s sovereignty which 
was epitomised in the proud man-the-measure statement of Pro- 
tagoras they tried, as it were, almost every possible rationalistic 
and humanistic interpretation of the origin and functions of the 
existing religious, ethical, political and legal views and institu- 
tions. The sophists were the first secular theorists of the state, law 
and politics and exerted a tremendous influence on all subse- 
quent (and not only ancient) political and legal doctrines. Their 
theoretical views, particularly on the relationship between 
nature and law, the natural and the artificial in the field of state 
and legal relations, might and right, justice and law, ethics and 
politics have been widely used in different modifications by 
political thinkers in antiquity, the Middle Ages and in our time. 

The politico-legal conceptions of the Greek sophists have 
largely foreshadowed various modern juridico-positivist or 





92 


natural-right theories and are the fountain-head of current doc- 


trines reducing the essence of law to force, advocating the indivi- 
dual’s inalienable rights, etc. 


3. SOCRATES 





Socrates (469-399 B. C.) is one of the most remarkable far- 
famed characters in the intellectual history of mankind. For over 
two and a half millennia there has been a ring of glory about his 
name and an aura of enigma surrounding his personality. Des- 
cribing Socrates as the ‘demiurge of Greek philosophy” and a 
“wise man”, young Marx wrote in his dissertation “Difference 
between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of 
Nature”: ‘‘He is therefore just as much a substantial individual 
as the earlier philosophers, but after the manner of subjectivity, 
not enclosed in himself, not an image of the gods, but a human 
one, not mysterious, but clear and luminous, not a seer, but a 
sociable man.” ! 

Socrates was born in the family of Athenian sculptor or stone- 
mason Sophroniscus and midwife Phaenarete, and this later 
gave him the cause to call his method of dialectical reasoning 
maieutics or intellectual midwifery intended to help his 
interlocutors bring to birth their ideas if they had them. Aristo- 
tle says that the interest of Socrates in human problems was 
sparked off when he saw the famous motto “Know thyself” on 
the Delphian temple of Apollo. Its impression on Socrates was so 
great that he abandoned natural science for moral philosophy 
and later regarded this event as a turning point in his life. Soc- 
rates even came to view all his subsequent inquires into the 
nature of man as service to Apollo, the more so as the Delphic 
oracle named him, according to a wide-spread legend, as the 
wisest of all men... 

From the scanty evidence of his external life we know that he 
took part as a hoplite (a heavy-armed infantry soldier) in three 
large battles — at Potidaea (in 432 B. C.), Daelium (in 424 B. C.) 
and Amphipolis (422 B. C.). In all these military campaigns (on 
the eve of and during the Peloponnesian War) he distinguished 
himself by his pluck and remarkable endurance. 

On the testimony of Socrates himself his daimonion or inner 


! Karl Marx, “Notebooks on Epicurean Philosophy”, in: Karl Marx, Fre- 
derick Engels, Collected Works, Vol. 1, p. 438. 


93 








voice prevented him from taking part in politics. That does not 
mean, however, that he was in any way indifferent to polis 
affairs or to his duties as a citizen. All his life was spent in the dis- 
cussions of philosophical, moral and political problems. Though 
Socrates did not participate in debates in the popular assembly 
and was only engaged in private talks, his influence on public 
affairs was considerable as he promptly responded to every turn 
in contemporary political life, showed great concern about the 
shortcomings of Athenian democracy, proposed ways to correct 
them and displayed lively interest in all major theoretical prob- 
lems of the state, politics, law, justice and public duties of citi- 
zens. When once the lot fell upon him (in 406 B. C.) to partic- 
ipate in the trial of Athenian generals in the Council (boule), he 
refused, in the face of popular clamour, to yield to threats and 
support the illegal decision of its members to try the defendants 
in a body instead of considering their cases separately. 

The generals were finally slain after being convicted 
indiscriminately by hand-raising in the assembly contrary to 
law. Socrates proved the only member of the Council who 
defended legality to the end and remained true to his convic- 
tions. Significantly, soon after the execution of the generals the 
Athenians repented of what they had done and called to account 
the most zealous accusers for deluding the demos. 

A great deal of courage was also displayed by Socrates under 
the tyrannical government of the Thirty headed by Critias. The 
rulers banned his lessons and ordered him to participate in the 
arrest of the undesirable citizens in order to implicate him in 
their crimes (the usual practice of the oligarchs was to dispose of 
those whose property they coveted). Socrates openly refused to 
obey the orders of the new rulers and was only saved from their 
revenge by the restoration of democracy. 

Socrates is known to have been resolutely opposed to the prac- 
tice of taking fees introduced by the sophists. He maintained 
that by so doing they deprived themselves of the freedom to con- 
verse with those they liked and even called their art prostitution 
on the ground that selling one’s mind is no better than selling 
one’s body. He always gave his lessons free though his family’s 
circumstances were extremely straitened, if not altogether beg- 
garly (he had three children under age by Xanthippe, his wife). 
Seeking to nettle Socrates, Antiphon the sophist once told him 
with contempt that no slave would endure the miserable exist- 


94 








ence he was dragging out. 

In 399 B. C. the leaders of democracy that had come back to 
power brought him to trial on charges on impiety and corrup- 
tion of the youth. The indictment read: “Socrates is guilty of 
refusing to recognize the gods recognized by the state, and of in- 
troducing other, new divinities. He is also guilty of corrupting 
the youth. The penalty demanded is death”’ (Diogenes Laertius, 
II, 40). 

The Athenian court consisting of 501 judges sentenced him to 
the death penalty by a majority of 80 votes. 

Keeping his allegiance to the laws of the polis and rejecting 
the principle of “injustice for injustice’, Socrates refused to 
accept his friends’ plan to smuggle him out of the city and at the 
appointed time drank a cup of poison (hemlock). 

Socrates never put down his views in writing expounding 
them in talks with his friends and opponents. These talks des- 
cribed in detail by Plato, Xenophon and Aristotle contain the 
substance of his moral philosophy and provide a clue to his 
theory of the state, law and politics. 

Rejecting the ethical and epistemological relativism and sub- 
jectivism of the sophists together with their laudation of unres- 
trained brute force, Socrates affirms the objective character of 
moral standards, laws and political principles, and seeks to give 
them a rational explanation in logical terms. 

Ethics in the view of Socrates is political and politics is ethical. 
The highest of all virtues is the political art or arete which in- 
cludes statecraft and makes men good politicians, public offi- 
cials, house-managers, etc., that is useful citizens. 

This highest virtue, or ‘‘royal art” as Socrates called it, 
ensures success in both public and private affairs, as it implies 
the possession of the skill of management and is based on knowl- 
edge. The skill of a good house-master is akin to the skill of a 
public official and the former can easily switch over to the duties 
of the latter: ‘““Between the conduct of a family and that of a 
State the sole difference is that of a greater or lesser number; for 
as to all besides there is much conformity between them” 
(Xenophon, The Memorable Thoughts of Socrates, pp. 108-109). 

Athens, reasons Socrates, consists of more than ten thousand 
houses and one cannot propose to manage them if he does not 
know how to build one house. On the other hand, if one has the 
mastery of the necessary skill and knows how to manage people, 


95 





he will prove successful whatever he does—runs a house, com- 
mands an army or rules a state. Emphasising the affinity and in- 
herent unity of apparently very different arts, Socrates does not 
disregard their specificity. He is well aware that the skills and 
knowledge needed, for instance, by a house-manager, a general, 
a pilot or a politician essentially differ, the main thrust of his 
argument being against the confusion of virtue as such with 
technical skills and good workmanship in a carpenter, a shoe- 
maker, a physician, a flutist, etc., which are outside the province 
of ethics. 

Socrates holds that the political virtue, like virtue in general, 
is knowledge. “He said likewise that justice and every other vir- 
tue is only a science, because all the actions of justice and of the 
other virtues are good and honourable, and that all who know 
the beauty of these actions think nothing more charming”’ 
(Xenophon, The Memorable Thoughts of Socrates, p. 128). 

This fundamental principle of Socratic ethics underlies his 
political theory and determines his approach to the problems of 
the state, law and politics. In his moral philosophy Socrates does 
not distinguish between ethics and politics. Nor does Plato. A 
conclusive delimitation of these spheres which is not to be found 
even in Aristotle could only be undertaken on the basis of more 
mature socio-political relations and new theoretical concepts 
reflecting them. 

The political ethics of Socrates summed up, as it were, the 
results of the previous development of Greek political thought 
and served as a starting ground for its ascent to such heights as 
the political philosophy of Plato and the political science of 
Aristotle. 

For Socrates and his predecessors the ethical value of the polis 
with its laws and institutions, as well as political virtue as a 
whole, is derived from their divine origin, the mythical gods 
being regarded as the fountain-head of morality. Yet in his 
rationalistic interpretation the mythological foundation of the 
polis and the divine nature of virtue undergo radical transfor- 
mation. The traditional political conceptions dating to Homer 
and Hesiod (the divine nature of the polis laws), Pythagoras 
(philosophical reason as the foundation of polis life), the sages 
and Heraclitus (the rule of the law), Protagoras and some other 
sophists (the rule of the better as the dictate of reason, the need 
for teaching political virtue) are remodelled and elaborated by 


96 





Socrates in accordance with his own rationalistic philosophy. 
Believing in the power of reason and being convinced that uni- 
versals are only open to the mind, Socrates focused his attention 
on general notions and oriented the discussions of ethical, politi- 
cal and legal problems towards formulating broad definitions. 
He is traditionally regarded as the founder of theoretical ethics 
which paved the way for Plato’s and Aristotle’s logical and poli- 
tical conceptions. 

The philosophical doctrine of the objectivity of polis virtues 
and polis mode of life, moral foundation of politics and laws 
expounded by Socrates was directed against both the traditional 
mythological views and the sophistic ethical and epistemological 
relativism and subjectivism that went side by side with eulogies 
of brute force and with nihilistic attitude to moral canons. 
Adhering to the principle of legality, Socrates attacked the con- 
temporary political practices of democratic, oligarchic, tyranni- 
cal and aristocratic governments from the position of the 
abstract ideal of justice as deviations from the dictates of reason. 
In his view, the close connection and even internal unity of the 
polis and its laws arose from their common divine origin. The 
moral organisation of polis life is impossible without laws, just as 
law and order cannot exist without the polis. The laws, accord- 
ing to Socrates, are the foundation of the polis. 

Both Socrates and the sophists distinguished between what 
later came to be known as natural law (right) and positive laws, 
i. e. decrees, prescriptions and rulings of polis authorities. Yet 
Socrates did not turn the difference between them into an 
antithesis which was the case with some of the sophists. Both the 
unwritten divine law and the written human laws are rooted, 
according to Socrates, in one and the same justice which is not 
only the criterion of legality, but is in fact identical with it: “I 
should have thought,” said Socrates, “I had given at once a 
good definition, and a clear instance of justice, when I called it 
an aversion from doing injustice. But since you will not allow it 
to be so, see whether this will satisfy you: I say, then, that justice 
‘is nothing but the observance of the laws’’’ (Xenophon, The 
Memorable Thoughts of Socrates, p. 171). 

This pithy statement serves as an epitome of the whole of Soc- 
ratic political ethics, just as, for instance, the famous Hegelian 
thesis ‘“‘All that is real is rational; all that is rational is real’’ 
represents the gist of the Hegelian philosophy of right. Signifi- 


97 


113 








cantly, both propositions are notable not only for external and 
formal] likeness, but also for profound internal affinity, as they 
assert the rational and ethical substance of politico-legal 
phenomena. 

The mutability of human laws as such underlined by the 
sophists is not regarded by Socrates as attesting to their injustice, 
just as the transitory nature of war does not depreciate valour in 
the name of the native country. 

Socrates makes a firm stand for such an order in the polis 
which guarantees justice of the instituted laws. Preaching 
loyalty to the polis laws, he links it with the concord of the 
citizens without which, in his opinion, neither a state can subsist 
and not be overthrown, nor a house prosper. Characteristically, 
by concord Socrates means citizens’ allegiance and obedience to 
the laws, but not the uniformity of their opinions, views and 
tastes. Xenophon attributes to Socrates the following statement: 
“A Republic that is obedient to the laws is happy in peace, and 
invincible in war. Moreover, you know that concord is a great 
happiness in a State. It is daily recommended to the people; and 
it is an established custom all over Greece to make the citizens 
swear to live in good understanding with one another, and each 
of them takes an oath to do so. Now, I do not believe that this 
unity is exacted to them, only that they might choose the same 
company of comedians, or of musicians, nor that they might give 
their approbation to the same poets, or all take delight in the 
same diversions, but they may all unanimously obey the laws” 
(Xenophon, The Memorable Thoughts of Socrates, 1V, IV, 15-16). 

The exaltation of law-abidingness did not mean that Socrates 
regarded every enactment or prescript of polis authorities as a 
law that ought to command general respect and obedience. His 
proposition of the identity of lawful and just, as well as the high 
appraisal of legality and well-organised polis life based on the 
precepts of reason implied the ideal rather than actual state of 
affairs and therefore carried a formidable charge of criticism of 
contemporary practical politics and state officials (very indica- 
tive in this context is Socrates’s comparison of himself to a gadfly 
ordained by god to reproach men and arouse their conscience). 

In the sphere of politico-legal relations the identification by 
Socrates of virtue with knowledge which is the main principle of 
his moral philosophy finds its expression in the maxim “Rulers 
are those who know how to rule”. This aphorism is a natural 


98 





corollary to the Socratic doctrine of the state as the embodiment 
of reason and justice which has an obvious undertone of discon- 
tent and is addressed to all forms of government: kings and 
rulers, he contends, are not those who carry the sceptre, nor 
those on whom the lot falls, nor those who owe their power to 
force or trickery, but those who know how to rule (Xenophon, 
The Memorable Thoughts of Socrates, III, IX, 10). 

Socrates in fact advocated what later came to be known as the 
“king-philosopher” theory—the upshot of the intellectual aris- 
tocratism that pervaded his moral philosophy. It is highly indi- 
cative that Socrates was equally censorious of democracy, oli- 
garchy, tyranny, hereditary aristocracy and _ traditional 
monarchy, and that his political ideal did not seem to fit in with 
any government. 

On the theoretical side, Socratic ideal represented an attempt 
to give a rationalistic account of the essence of the state, whereas 
on the practical side it aimed at asserting the principle of compe- 
tence in the management of polis affairs. 

In his classification of the various forms of government Soc- 
rates sought to define their specific, constituent principles. He 
held that “the rule of men with their consent and according to 
the laws of the state was monarchy, but rule over unwilling sub- 
jects, not according to law but at the whim of the ruler, was tyr- 
anny. A constitution in which the rulers were chosen from 
among those who fulfilled the requirements of the laws he called 
an aristocracy, when the qualification for office was property, a 
plutocracy, and when all the people were eligible, a democracy” 
(Xenophon, Memorable Thoughts of Socrates, IV, VI, 12). 

The ideas of Socrates, particularly his emphasis on the law as 
the criterion for the classification of the forms of government, the 
contrast between monarchy and tyranny, and others exerted a 
considerable influence on the subsequent political theories of 
ancient thinkers, above all Plato, Aristotle and Polybius, and, 
through them, on various politico-legal doctrines of the middle 
ages and modern times. 

Socrates’s advocacy of the government of the wise, i. e. “those 
who know how to rule”, had nothing to do with a disguised 
apology of some contemporary political order. His theoretical 
principles were incompatible with the practical politics of his 
time: ‘He who will fight for the right,” he says, “if he would live 
even for a brief space, must have a private station and not a pub- 


99 






lic one”’ (Plato, Apology, 32a). For Socrates, the only acceptable 
rule was the rule of the law instituted with the citizens’ consent. 
It is worth noting in this context that the opinion of some schol- 
ars ranking Socrates with reactionaries or regarding him as an 
advocate of a reactionary state system appears to us completely 
untenable: Socrates deliberately set himself apart from political 
strife and abiding by his ethical canons alternately came into a 
conflict now with democracy, now with tyrannical dictatorship. 
That does not mean, of course, that he had no political sym- 
pathies or antipathies. On the evidence of Xenophon and Plato, 
he commended the laws of aristocratic Lacedaemon (Sparta) 
and Crete, moderately oligarchic Thebes and Megara. 

Generally speaking, Socrates favoured the rule of the wise 
rather than that of the old hereditary aristocracy or nouveaux 
riches. He was violently opposed to tyranny as the arbitrary and 
lawless rule of force. Underscoring the transitory character of 
tyrannical government, Socrates pointed out that the tyrant 
executing worthy and reasonable citizens is bound shortly to be 
punished himself (Xenophon, The Memorable Thoughts of Socrates, 
III, IX, 12). He was also disillusioned with democracy and 
expressed his disapproval of its methods of government, though 
in a milder form. 

The chief shortcoming of democracy in Socrates’s eyes was the 
incompetence of its officials appointed by the chance of the lot. 
He held in very low esteem the political wisdom of the popular 
assembly which played the decisive role in the home and foreign 
policy of Athenian democracy. Ridiculing the omnipotence of 
the demos which could make nitwits into generals, Socrates once 
mockingly suggested that the assemblv should vote asses into 
horses badly needed by the Athenians at the moment... 

It should be noted, however, that for all his attacks on democ- 
racy Socrates never proposed to replace it by another form of 
government, but only to improve its efficiency and competence. 
He was a great patriot of Athens and his bitter criticism of the 
shortcomings of democratic government went naturally hand in 
hand with his complete loyalty to the native polis. Exalting the 
high moral qualities of the Athenians as compared with other 
Hellenes, he noted with pride that no one could match his com- 
patriots in the valour of their ancestors and the number of glor- 
ious feats they had performed (Xenophon, The Memorable 
Thoughts of Socrates, 111, V, 3). Yet this superiority in valour over 


100 





other Hellenes had been irretrievably lost in the Peloponnesian 
War between Athens and Sparta. The military setbacks of 
Athens were accompanied by internal dissension and _ anti- 
democratic coups that brought in their wake short-lived oligar- 
chic and even tyrannical regimes. In order to suppress the grow- 
ing opposition, democracy in turn had to resort to extreme 
measures and this further aggravated internal tensions and 
struggle for power. 

In contrast with the enemies of the Athenian democracy who 
laid the blame for all external and internal difficulties on the 
democratic system of government, the rule of the demos, Soc- 
rates attributed them to the corruption of the morals of his fel- 
low-countrymen and to their arrogance that led to laxity, neg- 
lect of duty and insubordination in military and civil affairs. In 
his opinion, the Athenians tending to self-indulgence like all 
people were put off their guard and gave way to complacency on 
account of their great advantages. This proved fateful and they 
lost their superiority to the more wary rival. The Athenians 
would do better, he remarked with bitterness, if they at least 
tried to imitate those who are considered the first, and acted in 
their manner (Xenophon, The Memorable Thoughts of Socrates, 
TIT, V, 13-14). 

Socrates’s allusion to ‘‘the first” was not intended to disparage 
his fellow-citizens or induce them to restructure the Athenian 
state system on the Spartan model, but rather to urge them to 
restore their city’s greatness at all cost, even by imitating their 
more successful adversary. 

Socrates’s exhortation of the Athenians to take a closer look at 
their enemy’s achievements was but a sober and wise recom- 
mendation though, of course, it could not suit the taste of his 
ambitious compatriots. The aim of Socrates was to improve the 
management of public affairs in Athens and had nothing to do 
with a breach of allegiance to his native polis that was imputed 
to him. Significantly, Socrates did not regard the sins of his fel- 
low-citizens and their violations of moral canons as an incurable 
disease. When Pericles the junior complains to Socrates about 
the internal discord in his native city, the litigiousness of the 
Athenians, their mutual hatred and desire to make profit out of 
the state and one another, Socrates calls his young interlocutor’s 
attention to the advantages of the Athenian political system that 
holds out hope of the recovery of their city’s greatness. 


101 





Castigating the greed of gain and unscrupulous money-mak- 
ing that seized the Athenians, their contempt of reason and vir- 
tue, the incompetence of democratic officials and the practice of 
appointing the rulers of the city by lot in the belief that one 
man’s opinion is as good as another’s, Socrates at the same time 
did not call in question the fundamental principles of the Ath- 
enian political system that had been developing along demo- 
cratic lines ever since the Solonean reforms. The idea of the 
citizen’s unconditional loyalty to his polis and its laws underlies 
all moral philosophy of Socrates and is central to his politico- 
legal doctrine. In the view of Socrates every citizen entering 
voluntarily into a social compact and becoming a member of a 
state assumes a moral obligation to abide by its laws and usages 
(Plato, Crito, 51). This conception makes Socrates one of the first 
exponents of the social contract theory in the history of Euro- 
pean political thought. In the Socratic version of this theory 
notable for a peculiar paternalistic strain the citizen and the 
polis cannot be equal in their rights, just as the child and the 
slave cannot be on equal terms with the father and the master, 
respectively. Moreover, the laws are higher and holier than 
mother or father. Describing his imaginary talk with the Ath- 
enian laws, Socrates quotes them as saying: ‘‘We further pro- 
claim to any Athenian by the liberty which we allow him, that if 
he does not like us when he has become of age and has seen the 
ways of the city, and made our acquaintance, he may go where 
he pleases and take his goods with him. None of us laws will for- 
bid him or interfere with him” (Plato, Crito, 51). 

According to Socrates, any one who wants to emigrate to a 
colony or to any other city may go where he likes retaining his 
property. But he who has experience of the manner in which the 
laws order justice and administer the state, and still remains, has 
entered into an implicit contract that he will do as the laws com- 
mand him. 

In other words, citizenship is accepted voluntarily and the 
Athenian has three alternatives: either to obey the laws, or to 
get them changed by persuasion and other peaceful means in 
order to prevent possible injustice and wrongdoing, or else to 
emigrate. If the citizen casts his lot with the state, he is bound to 
keep his allegiance. ‘“And when we are punished by her, 
whether with imprisonment or stripes, the punishment is to be 
endured in silence; and if she leads us to wounds or death in bat- 


102 





tle, thither we follow as is right; neither may anyone yield or 
retreat or leave his rank, but whether in battle or in a court of 
law, or in any other place, he must do what his city and his 
country order him; or he must change their view of what is just: 
and if he may do no violence to his father or mother, much less 
may he do violence to his country” (Plato, Crito, 51 b-c). 

This law-abidingness demonstrated by Socrates all through 
his life and brought out in bold relief by his dramatic death 
stemmed from the traditional Hellenic attitude to the law as the 
basis of well-ordered and just polis life. The Hellenes even con- 
sidered respect for the law their main feature distinguishing 
them from the non-Hellenes, i. e. the “barbarians”. It is worth 
mentioning in this context the opinion of one of the Indian 
sages, gymnosophist (‘‘naked sophist”) Dandamis expressed by 
him about his Greek colleagues during the Asian Expedition of 
Alexander the Great. On the evidence of Plutarch, ““Dandamis 
received him [Alexander] with more civility, and hearing him 
discourse of Socrates, Pythagoras, and Diogenes, told him he 
thought them men of great parts and to have erred in nothing so 
much as in having too great respect for the laws and customs of 
their country...” (Plutarch, Alexander, 65).' True, already in the 
time of Socrates polis patriotism and the authority of the laws 
were being called in question and subjected to criticism, particu- 
larly severe on the part of the sophists, the itinerant teachers of 
wisdom. Cosmopolitan views had gained wide currency which 
attested to the progressing erosion of the Greek polis system and 
its ideology. Socrates’s pupil Aristippus, for instance, is said to 
have been “everywhere an alien” and professed a theory that a 
man could only be happy if he was free and did not identify him- 
self with any particular state (Xenophon, The Memorable 
Thoughts of Socrates, II, I, 14). 

Remaining firmly within the tradition of polis patriotism, 
Socrates viewed critically the contemporary trend towards cos- 
mopolitanism and emphasised the free citizens’ moral obliga- 
tions before the state being run in accordance with reason and 
just laws. It is only on this road of reason and justice that man, 
according to Socrates, can expect to attain freedom — an invalu- 
able treasure both for the individual and the state (Xenophon, 


1 Great Books of the Western World, Vol. 6, pp. 571-572. 


103 








The Memorable Thoughts of Socrates, IV, V, 2). To act freely is to 
act reasonably in the best possible manner, i. e. against one’s in- 
continence which tends to bring man under the control of his 
base instincts and passions. By turning man away from virtue, 
incontinence makes him a miserable slave who turns his back 
upon the compacts and agreements he contracted as a citizen 
and revokes his obligations to the polis plunging it into chaos. 
Arguing against sophist Callicles who exalted the right of the 
stronger and justified his wantonness and tyranny over the 
weaker, Socrates upholds equality as one of the fundamental 
principles of the polis order and justice: ‘‘And philosophers tell 
us, Callicles, that communion and friendship and orderliness 
and temperance and justice bind together heaven and earth and 
gods and men, and that this universe is therefore called Cosmos 
or order, not disorder or misrule, my friend. But although you 
are a philosopher you seem to me never to notice this: you have 
not perceived the power of geometrical equality, both among 
gods and men; you think that you ought to cultivate inequality 
or excess, because you do not care about geometry” (Plato, Gor- 
gias, 508). By “geometrical equality’? Socrates means political 
Justice and equity or right judgement in terms of political virtue 
as distinct from simple numerical or arithmetical equality. 
Man’s worth lies not in strength and ability to maintain his 
power by force, but in his reasonableness, political virtue and 
understanding what is good for the polis. This, in turn, calls for 
proper education and training. 

Political and other virtues are developed by study and effort. 
Those who aspire after a political career and power must learn 
the virtue of self-control or continence and acquire necessary 
knowledge for the good of the polis and its citizens. 

Ruling, according to Socrates, is not a pleasure but an exer- 
cise of virtue, and its aim is not to gratify the ruler’s selfish wishes 
and whims, but to attain the welfare of all. A politician is only 
entitled to those honours that he earned by his service to the 
state. Adducing Homer's reference to Agamemnon as the “shep- 
herd of peoples”, Socrates observes that a ruler or a military 
leader ought to be primarily concerned about the needs of his 
subjects or soldiers, and not his own. Those who use power to 
further their selfish interests deserve severe punishment. Culp- 
able, in Socrates’s opinion, is also the attitude of those who soli- 
cit a vote for an office without first studying the subject they are 


104 





going to concern themselves with. Socrates called strange the 
wide-spread opinion that statecraft, the greatest of all arts, 
comes to man automatically, whereas in all other trades, far less 
important, men only gain efficiency after appropriate study and 
application. 

In Socrates’s opinion, every individual, whether gifted or 
dull, should train himself for the craft he chose to ply. Particu- 
larly important is such training for talented men who decided to 
go in for politics. Such men, not infrequently unrestrained and 
wilful by nature, are apt to cause the state and their compatriots 
immense harm if they are not properly educated. Contrariwise, 
given good upbringing, thorough knowledge of their future 
field, mastery of the art of government and political virtue, they 
can be of tremendous benefit to their native country. 

The management of polis affairs in accordance with the pre- 
cepts of reason is, in Socrates’s view, the only sure way to the 
public weal. Setting great store by education and training, he 
valued their fruits higher than the gifts of fortune (Xenophon, 
The Memorable Thoughts of Socrates, III, EX, 14). 

Though Socrates kept off politics, he showed great interest in 
polis affairs and constantly sought to influence them in the right 
direction. The chief aim of his philosophical talks, all his enlight- 
ening activity was to educate his listeners, particularly young 
ones, in the spirit of political virtue. Firmly adhering to his views 
on justice, lawfulness and true government, Socrates repeatedly 
entered into conflicts with authorities (under democracy, as well 
as under the rule of the Thirty) which, naturally, strove to sup- 
press his damaging criticism and finally made his drink his cup 
of poison. 

The execution of Socrates was a great shock to the Athenians. 
On the evidence of Diogenes Laertius, they repented soon after 
his death and, believing themselves deliberately deceived, con- 
demned Meletus to death, and other accusers to banishment. 
Famous Greek sculptor Lysippus made a bronze statue of Soc- 
rates which was exhibited in the Athenian museum. Other 
ancient sources, corroborating the report of Diogenes Laertius 
on the general reaction of the Athenians, vary in detail. Accord- 
ing to Diodorus, the accusers of Socrates were executed without 
trial. Plutarch says they hanged themselves despised by their fel- 
low-countrymen and deprived by them of “fire and water’, 
whereas in the version of rhetorician Themistius (fourth century 


105 








B. C.) Anytus was stoned to death. 

All these reports of repentance and retribution may well have 
been greatly exaggerated, reflecting but the historical sense of 
justice of subsequent generations and being indicative of their 
tribute to the tragic memory of Socrates. However, in the light 
of the attested habit of the Athenians to reconsider their rash 
decisions and make up for the injustice they have committed in 
wrath they appear very plausible indeed. Their creditability 
becomes even higher if one thinks of the political background of 
Socrates’s trial and its psychological effects: after the thing had 
been done repentance was not only a good means of relieving 
one’s guilty conscience and declining all responsibility for the 
execution of the innocent, but also an effective method of mak- 
ing oneself a participant in his increasing fame. Living Socrates 
was an intolerable nuisance to his contemporaries, whereas dead 
Socrates, no longer casting their sins and vanity in their teeth, 
stood above all strife and could be used as a banner in political 
intrigues and struggle for power. A society based on social injus- 
tice is bound to be hypocritical and needs dumb idols to cover 
up the real intentions of its leaders. 

Judging from the extant evidence, the controversy over the 
heritage of Socrates that flared up in antiquity demonstrated the 
growing influence of the Socratics who surpassed their 
opponents in talent, number and organisation. Each of the rival 
Socratic schools—the Platonic, the Cynic (founded by Anti- 
sthenes and preaching man’s self-sufficiency and freedom from 
the outer world), the Cyrenaic (founded by Aristippus and pro- 
fessing the doctrine of pleasure as the sole or chief goal in life), 
the Megarian (founded by Euclides and famous for its logical in- 
quiries and numerous paradoxes), and the Elian (founded by 
Phaedo of Elis and showing a close affinity with the Megarians) 
—made a contribution to their common cause, the vindication of 
their teacher. 

Particularly important for the historical destinies of Socrates’s 
intellectual legacy was the role played by the Platonists. 

The ideas of Socrates underlying the activity of the Plato- 
nic Academy influenced Aristotle’s Lyceum (the Peripatetics) 
and the two schools came to dominate the philosophical scene 
for many subsequent centuries. Through the Cynics and Cy- 
renaics his conceptions, slightly modified, passed on to 
the Greek and then Roman Fpicureans, Stoics and Sceptics. 


106 








Socrates’s tragic end sublimated his whole life and gave him a 
nimbus of unique integrity and honesty. It invested his words 
and deeds with profound meaning and genuine sincerity, 
endowed his image with unfading attractiveness and became 
one of the Socratic enigmas exercising the minds of many philo- 
sophers and commentators till nowadays. The condemnation 
and execution of Socrates that crowned his life’s toils opened to 
him the way to spiritual immortality. 

The works of Christian writers of the Middle Ages as a whole 
show a general trend to make Socrates a martyr of faith in the 
manner of Christian saints despite his paganism, wherefore fre- 
quent parallels between Socrates and Jesus Christ. 

The Enlighteners, too, regard Socrates as their precursor and 
colleague who sacrificed his life on the altar of reason. 

A more profound view on the historical role of Socrates was 
expressed by Hegel who exerted a considerable influence on the 
subsequent writers. The tragedy of Socrates, in his opinion, con- 
sisted in that the truth was simultaneously on the side of Socrates 
and on that of the Athenian polis because the former cham- 
pioned the new principle of individual freedom and the latter 
defended the status quo sanctified by age-old tradition. The fate 
of Socrates was not accidental: it was predetermined, according 
to Hegel, by the law of world history whereby its heroes personi- 
fying novel principles are bound to come out against the existing 
principles and laws and to fall victim of their retaliation. Yet the 
retribution cannot suppress the novel principle, it only destroys 
its exponent, the individual. 

In the opinion of the nineteenth-century Danish religious phi- 
losopher Séren Kierkegaard, precursor of existentialism, Socra- 
tes’s execution was the inevitable requital for his life, the most 
interesting of all on the earth, since the more genuine (interest- 
ing) the man’s life, the greater the miseries and pains he has to 
endure. 

Fiercely attacking the rationalism of Socrates and his ethics as 
one of the theoretical fountain-heads of the slave morality of the 
masses, Friedrich Nietzsche at the same time did justice not only 
to his ability to live up to the rationalistic ideas professed by 
him, but, which is much more important, to depart without fear 
of death overcoming it by the power of his thought. Nietzsche 
notes that Socrates evidently got his death sentence of his own 
free will declining the alternative of exile and thereby becoming 


107 








an ideal of unprecedented attraction to the Greek youth. 

Gustav Kafka described the condemnation of Socrates as a 
blameworthy act of “reactionary democracy”. 

Karl Jaspers, one of the eminent representatives of existen- 
tialism in the twentieth century, describes Socrates as one of the 
outstanding figures of world history alongside Buddha, Confu- 
cius, and Jesus Christ. By his “‘existentia”, i. e. his life and 
death, Socrates, in Jaspers’s view, gave a convincing demonst- 
ration of the senselessness, fragility and absurdity of man’s exis- 
tence. The scepticism of Socrates, the ironic style of his life and 
readiness for death clearly displayed by him at the trial impart 
to life, absurd as it is, a profound meaning (incidentally, echoing 
the German existentialist, the British positivist John Stuart Mill 
caustically observed that it is better to be a dissatisfied Socrates 
than a satisfied pig). Socrates, according to Jaspers, was a 
martyr of philosophy who solicited his own death; his execution 
was not a juridical murder, but a juridical suicide. 

R. Guardini, too, describes Socrates’s acceptance of the death 
sentence as escape to genuine reality and true life. In his 
opinion, the decision of Socrates attested not to morbid longing 
for dissolution, but to acute awareness of the tragic character of 
his exalted mission and the inevitability of his doom. Owing to 
the dramatic culmination of Socrates’s life, his fate has become 
one of the central topics of European intellectual history. 

According to Helmut Kuhn, Socratic questions with their un- 
dercurrent of anxiety and uneasiness- and his questions are 
always topical as they are forever destined to remain 
unanswered—broke through the narrow horizon of Greek 
thought. In Kuhn’s opinion, the unlawful condemnation and 
death of Socrates testified to the fact that Athens was no longer 
capable of abiding a “true citizen’’. Socrates was the last one. By 
his death he released men from the chains of the polis, made 
them free and prepared them for acceptance of new solitariness 
and new forms of community. 

The objectivity of Plato, Xenophon and other adherents of 
Socrates describing his case is called in question by Bertrand 
Russell. He holds that the Athenians would not have con- 
demned Socrates to death if the character drawn by his advo- 
cates had been true to life. In Russell’s opinion, the trial, even as 
presented by Socrates’s supporters, was on the whole quite law- 
ful, and the only omission that might be imputed to the Ath- 


108 





enian court is its disregard of the defendant’s plea to hear the 
witnesses on the charge of youth corruption. 

A notable feature of the latest Soviet publications about Soc- 
rates, particularly those of historico-philosophical nature, is that 
their authors have largely abandoned the earlier conception of 
Socrates the reactionary who was justly punished for his retro- 
grade views by a death sentence. For instance, Alexei Losev, a 
Soviet researcher, has come to the conclusion that Socrates was 
executed by obscurants and die-hards. According to Feokhary 
Kessidi, the condemnation of Socrates was not only a tragedy, 
but also an event of tremendous significance in the entire history 
of moral values; as such, it is liable only to the verdict of poster- 
ity. Those who associate the name of Socrates with a new stage 
in the history of philosophical thought cannot justify his execu- 
tion, and the half-and-half solution proposed by Hegel can 
hardly be regarded as tenable. The death of Socrates, in Kes- 
sidi’s opinion, was neither a suicide, nor a judicial error—it was 
the inevitable result of his loyalty to the mission he was charged 
with. 

As is evidenced from the above survey of opinions, very cur- 
sory and fragmentary as it is, old Socrates’s file is leafed anew by 
each successive epoch. Yet such reassessment of the past un- 
avoidable in historical studies should not lead to its distortion, 
and historians must be constantly on guard against the possibil- 
ity of hindsight creeping into their accounts. It is also worth not- 
ing in this context that the so-called verdicts of history with their 
connotation of finality and irrevocability have one obvious dis- 
advantage - they can only be brought in on the doings of the 
dead and are therefore always late to exert any influence on the 
participants in the dramatic events that leave imprints in the 
consciousness of mankind. One would be utterly wrong, how- 
ever, to infer from this that verdicts of history carry but little 
weight with posterity. Experience points to the opposite. Based 
on fundamental human values such verdicts provide incontes- 
table precedents that help towards a better understanding of the 
present and future and, which is no less important, hold out con- 
solation and hope to victims of injustice who, like Socrates, 
prefer eternity and truth to the remnant of their earthly 
life. 

Staking one’s all on the verdict of history (which was the ver- 
dict of posterity or the gods in the case of Socrates) implies ada- 


109 





mantine faith in spiritual immortality. Paradoxically, Socrates 
charged with atheism in all earnest considered himself Apollo’s 
philosophical servant and sincerely believed in the gods’ judge- 
ment of all men after their death. His accusers and judges were 
patently inferior to him in the sincerity and genuineness of this 
faith. Socrates viewed the charges against him from the perspec- 
tive of history that would undoubtedly acquit him, and this 
could not but cast a shadow of predetermination on the course 
and outcome of his trial. 

What is obvious now in retrospect was clear to Socrates in 
perspective: wisdom condemned to death in his person would 
outlive the judges. 


4. PLATO 


Plato (427-347 B.C.) occupies a prominent place in the his- 
tory of ancient political theory and is justly ranked among the 
greatest thinkers of all times. He came from a very distinguished 
Athenian clan which included Attica’s last king Codrus, famous 
Athenian lawgiver Solon, leader of the Thirty Tyrants Critias 
and some other notable figures of Athenian history. As is evi- 
denced from his so-called seventh letter, largely autobiographi- 
cal, in his young years he also looked forward to a political ca- 
reer and intended to take part in state affairs as soon as he had 
come of age. However, the political turmoil of that period (the 
establishment of a tyrannical government headed by his uncle 
Critias and the execution of Socrates by reestablished democ- 
racy) made him give up his former plans. 

After the death of Socrates Plato together with his other 
pupils left Athens. He stopped for a while at Megara, then made 
several trips abroad visiting Egypt, South Italy and Sicily. He is 
known to have established friendly relations with a relative of 
the tyrant of Syracuse and made several trips to this city in the 
hope of winning its rulers over to his philosophy and realising his 
ideal of an enlightened monarch. His hopes, however, were 
rudely shattered: in an atmosphere of intrigues characteristic of 
tyrannical rule Plato for some unknown reason incurred the ty- 
rant’s wrath, was handed over to the Spartans and sold by them 
into slavery. 

Tradition holds that he was soon let free owing to the solici- 


110 





tation of his friends and returned to Athens where in 387 B.C. 
he bought a grove of trees in a green suburb just outside the city 
walls and founded there his famous Academy called after Ath- 
enian hero Academus. It was destined to become one of the in- 
tellectual and educational centres of Greece for almost a millen- 
nium (till 529 A.D.). 

The world outlook of Plato was formed under a tremendous 
influence of Socrates who was Plato’s teacher during the most 
impressionable years of his life (407-399 B. C.). Plato is also 
known to have thoroughly studied the views of his other prede- 
cessors— Pythagoras, Heraclitus, Parmenides and the sophists. 
Besides, Plato’s literary heritage reveals unmistakable traces of 
his long talks with the Egyptian priests in Heliopolis and the 
Pythagoreans in South Italy. 

Plato’s philosophical views underwent considerable changes 
in the course of his long life. His earlier dialogues known as Soc- 
ratic (Apology, Protagoras, Crito, and others) are on the whole 
dominated by Socrates’s rationalism which is clearly exhibited 
in the search for general notions covering a large variety of 
empirical phenomena, special interest in moral problems, etc. 
Plato’s own theory of ideas appears only in the later dialogues, 
such as the Republic, Statesman, Sophist, Parmenides, etc. In com- 
parison with the rationalism of the earlier Socratic dialogues 
they are indicative of a growing influence of mysticism, preoccu- 
pation with mythological themes and a clear trend towards 
Pythagorean and religious doctrines. 

Particularly characteristic in this respect is Plato’s last work 
Laws, a very long dialogue bearing an obvious imprint of Pytha- 
gorean numerical mysticism and religio-mythological beliefs. 
Significantly, it is Plato’s only dialogue in which Socrates takes 
no part. He is replaced by an old ‘“‘Athenian”’, presumably the 
author himself. 

The problems of the state, law and politics occupy an impor- 
tant place in Plato’s philosophy and it is not accidental that his 
two largest works are Republi and Laws. 

Central to Plato’s philosophy is his theory of ideas which boils 
down to the assertion that true reality consists of certain intelli- 
gible and incorporeal Ideas, whereas the empirical objects, 
things and phenomena given us in sensations are not real as they 
are related not to being but to something movable, becoming 
(Sophist, 246 b). Referring to this fundamental postulate, Lenin 


Itt 








described philosophical idealism as the “line of Plato” in 
philosophy. ! 

Plato does not deny the world of objects and phenomena, but 
considers it unreal and secondary from the ontological, episte- 
mological and axiological viewpoints. In Plato’s eyes, the 
phenomenal world is not absolutely divorced and isolated from 
the world of ideas as the former is nothing else but the latter’s 
distorted image and bleak shadow. Conversely, the world of 
ideas is the eternal, immutable and divine model of man’s 
changeful world, i. e. true reality. 

Knowledge, according to Plato, is the knowledge of true real- 
ity, i. e. the world of ideas. It is only accessible to few, the philos- 
ophers (Republic, V, 576 b), and cannot be grasped by the com- 
mon people, the crowd. 

The idea, according to Plato, is the image and essence of a 
thing, its primary cause and principle. Or, to put it another 
way, the idea is the essence of a thing with its empirically vari- 
able and changeful appearance. The primacy of the idea over 
the thing is the primacy of its immutable essence over the diver- 
sity of appearances and phenomena. The world of ideas is the 
constituting framework of the world of appearance, therefore 
any attempt to rationalise earthly phenomena (for instance, 
politico-legal relations), i. e. to bring them in conformity with 
their true being and divine archetypes consists essentially in 
modelling them on the corresponding ideas which are not only 
the ontological foundation and primary cause of the world of 
phenomena, but also the guiding principle, standard and model 
(paradigm) of its organisation. 

The ideal state as presented by Plato in Republic is the realisa- 
tion of divine ideas in earthly socio-political life with maximum 
possible accuracy. Constructing the ideal just state, Plato pro- 
ceeds from his conception of the correspondence between the 
cosmos at large, the state and the individual human soul. The 
very idea of justice implies that a just man is akin to a just state 
and assimilates to it. To the three faculties (or parts) of the 
human soul- the rational, the forceful, and the concupiscent 
correspond respectively the three functions of the state— the de- 
liberative, the protective, and the acquisitive—and these, in 


' See V. I. Lenin, “Materialism and Empirio-Criticism”, Collected Works, 
Vol. 14, p. 130. 


112 


a  — — — — ————, oO 


turn, to the three classes that make up the state structure: the 
rulers, the warriors, and the producers (the artisans and 
farmers). 

Now justice, according to Plato, consists in order, that is in a 
state of things where each class and each man has his own work 
to do and does not go outside the sphere assigned to him. 
Besides, justice demands a corresponding state structure, a social 
hierarchy ensuring a harmonious unity of the above three prin- 
ciples for the common good: wisdom (i. e. the philosophers, who 
personify the faculty of sound judgement) ought to rule, courage 
(i. e. the warrior class) ought to provide armed protection to the 
state and obey the first principle, and temperance or self-control 
(which is the virtue of the artisans, farmers and other producers 
“by nature most insatiable of gain” [Republic, 1V, 442]) ought to 
obey both. 

Seeking to substantiate the caste structure of his ideal state by 
arguments from history, Plato adduces the division of labour. 
Defining polis as a joint settlement of men brought together by 
common needs, he argues at length that the best way to meet 
them is to have all citizens specialise in different fields of activity. 
‘*Plato’s Republic, in so far as division of labour is treated in it, 
as the formative principle of the State, is merely the Athenian 
idealisation of the Egyptian system of castes.” ! 

The chief goal of education, which is the object of special 
attention in the ideal state, is to uphold the hierarchy of castes 
and ensure strict observance of the rules of private and public 
life laid once and for all. 

Plato sets great store by the “white lie” that all men were 
born of the mother-earth and therefore must care for the 
country they live in, defend it and treat other citizens as their 
brothers. Believing it vitally important to propagate this myth 
among the population of the ideal state, he offers to wind it up as 
follows: “Citizens, we shall say to them in our tale, you are 
brothers, yet God has framed you differently. Some of you have 
the power of command, and in the composition of these he has 
mingled gold, wherefore also they have the greatest honour; 
others he has made of silver, to be auxiliaries; others again who 
are to be husbandmen and craftsmen he has composed of brass 
and iron; and the species will generally be preserved in the 
children” (Republic, III, 415). 


' Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1974, p. 346. 
113 








8 113 








As one can see, this myth is intended to exhort the citizens to 
obedience, extols concord and brotherhood, and simultaneously 
serves as a justification of people’s inequality in the ideal state 
structure. | 

Rigid as the caste system may be, Plato does not forget to pro- 
vide for the cases when gold begets silver and vice versa. The in- 
ter-caste transfers (free changes of status!) are prompted by 
the need to preserve the principle of the initial division into dif- 
ferent castes and ensure the purity of the idea. It is not acciden- 
tal that the myth ends in a warning that the state would perish if 
its safety were entrusted to an iron or brass guardian. 

To ensure that the guardians or warriors are always equal to 
their tasks, their whole life is organised on the principles of soli- 
darity, community of interests, equality and collectivism. “In 
the first place,” writes Plato, ‘none of them should have any 


property of his own beyond what is absolutely necessary ; neither 
should they have a private house or store closed against anyone 
who has a mind to enter’’ (Republic, III, 416 d). The warriors 
receive everything they need from the third class. They should 
live together and have common meals like soldiers in a camp. 
They should be prohibited not only to use, but even to touch 


gold and silver. 

Of crucial importance for the safety of the ideal state is, in 
Plato’s opinion, the community of the guardians’ wives and 
children. Women in the ideal state have equal rights and possi- 
bilities with men. 

The two higher classes are denied the right to family in the 
conventional sense of the word. Children are brought up and 
educated by the state. Sexual intercourse for the purpose of 
reproducing the state’s population (even in matters of love Plato 
rejects pleasure and stands for curbing the passions) is strictly 
supervised by specially appointed officials who carefully select 
the mating couples on the principle of their class affiliation. By 
doing away with individual family among the guardians Plato 
hoped to unite them in a single ruling family in which all 
members are relatives. 

The lower class receives but little attention from Plato and he 
leaves the regimentation of their reproduction, property, labour 
and all their life to the discretion of the ideal state’s authorities. 
His chief interest lies in the proper selection and education of the 
rulers and their assistants. Despite Plato’s deliberate vagueness 


114 





in respect of the social status of the members of the third class, 
they are evidently conceived by him as free men and not slaves, 
though one does not find it easy to distinguish this freedom to 
satisfy obediently the material needs of the upper classes from 
the status of ordinary Athenian slaves. 

Plato’s design of the third estate does not provide for the free- 
dom of the slaves whose fate holds out but academic interest to 
the founder of the ideal state and is treated by him in ethical and 
epistemological rather than socio-political terms—in point of 
fact, his utopia modelled on an abstract idea confines the free 
demos to a kind of ghetto for the second-rate and underprivi- 
leged. The aristocrat’s daydream has at last come true: the com- 
moners are put in their place, if only in an imaginary state. 

It should be noted in this context that Plato, evidently 
vaguely aware of the dubious character of his political ideal, 
makes this significant remark by way of its justification: “Our 
aim in founding the State was not the disproportionate happi- 
ness of any one class, but the greatest happiness of the whole; we 
thought that in a State which is ordered with a view to the good 
of the whole we should be most likely to find justice” (Republic, 
IV, 420 bc). 

Plato’s ethical theory is governed by his aesthetical ideal: the 
ultimate aim of his perfect state is the beauty of the whole 
(Republic, 420), the “happiness”’ of the beautiful whole being not 
the conventional human “good”’, but the philosophico-political 
“justice”. 

Coming out against the extremes of wealth and poverty, Plato 
advocates temperance and moderation. In his view, the main 
socio-economic distinction of the ideal state from all other states 
consists in that each of the latter ones is a plurality: “Not one of 
them is a city, but many cities, as they say in the game. Each will 
contain not less than two divisions, one the city of the poor, the 
other of the rich, which are at war with one another; and within 
each there are many smaller divisions. You would be altogether 
beside the mark if you treated these as a single State” (Republic, 
IV, 422e-423). Showing a keen insight into the causes of the split 
ofa single state into “‘two cities” and tracing them to socio-polit- 
ical antagonism between wealth and poverty, Plato believes 
that suppressing private interests, giving priority to the claims of 
the state supposedly representing the interests of the whole, and 
inculcating a spirit of unquestioning obedience can avert the 


115 








danger of such a split and eliminate the source of internecine 
war. 

In Plato’s eyes, the ideal state is the just government of the 
best. He subscribes to the natural right doctrine of Socrates 
expounded by him in the controversy with the sophists and iden- 
tifies the lawful and the just based, in his opinion, on a common 
divine and ideal principle. One of the chief aims of his multifa- 
ceted dialogue Republic was to refute from this position the thesis 
of sophist Thrasymachus that justice is the right of the stronger. 

The rule of philosophers and the operation of just laws are 
presented in Plato’s Republic as two interdependent aspects of a 
single ideal project. 

The true philosophers, according to Plato, do not thirst for 
power, but their rule is necessary for the common good and for 
the state as a whole. Plato in fact proclaims the principle: ‘“‘phi- 
losophers for the state but not the state for philosophers”. Com- 
bining the fervour of an ancient enlightener with the rigorism of 
the founder of a just state, Plato demands that the philosophers 
should get down to earth from their soaring heights of contem- 
plation in order to take care of the poor imprisoned human 
souls. 

In the mouth of Plato, the well-known maxim about the right 
of the philosopher to political power assumes the form of the fol- 
lowing solemn pronouncement: “Until philosophers are kings in 
their cities, or the kings and princes of this world have the spirit 
and power of philosophy, and political greatness and wisdom 
meet in one, and those commoner natures who pursue either to 
the exclusion of the other are compelled to stand aside, cities will 
never have rest from their evilsno, nor the human race, as I 
believe, and then only will this our ideal State have a possibility 
of life and behold the light of day” (Republic, V, 473d). 

The ideal state as the rule of the better and noble is, according 
to Plato, the best form of government which can be called either 
a monarchy if the power in the state belongs to one ruler, or an 
aristocracy if it is shared by several rulers. Generally speaking, 
for Plato the notions of monarch and aristocrat are identical 
(Republic, IX, 587d). 

A curious feature of Plato’s ideal state is the vocabulary used 
by the members of different castes when addressing one another. 
All those who do not belong to the ruling caste call one another 
“citizens”. The citizens call the rulers “saviours” and “assis- 


116 


tants” (but not “lords” or “rulers”), the rulers refer to one 
another as “‘co-guardians” (but not “co-rulers’’), and to the 
third class as “payers” and ‘‘bread-winners’”’. 

The main political rights in the ideal state are vested in the 
rulers and their assistants. The advancement of the third class 
(labourers) into the first or second class and their entrance upon 
office is tantamount, in the view of Plato, to the ruin of the state. 

Plato in his Republic is firmly convinced that the project of an 
ideal state can be translated into reality, though he is aware of 
the difficulties involved. He shows no interest in the practical 
aspects of the problem: far more important for Plato is the exis- 
tence of the ideal model in heaven and its availability to any one 
who is prepared to commit himself to put it into practice, “but 
whether such a city exists or even will exist in fact, is no matter” 
(Republic, UX, 592b). 

However, even if an ideal state becomes a reality, its existence 
cannot be eternal. Conceiving the change and succession of var- 
ious forms of government as rotation within a definite cycle, 
Plato proceeds from a certain analogy between the five forms of 
government (aristocracy, timocracy,! oligarchy, democracy and 
tyranny) and the five faculties or parts of the human soul. Plato 
even maintains that there exists a geometrical number which 
determines the duration of this cycle for posterity and plays a 
decisive role in improving inborn qualities of the human race. 
On the whole, the cyclic rotation of the five government forms is 
conditioned by the corruption of human nature and penetration 
of iron into silver and brass into gold. The resultant discrepan- 
cies and deviations open the way to enmity and discord. 

Counterposing the aristocratic form of government as the only 
correct and good one to the four other incorrect and corrupt 
forms in the eighth book of Republic, Plato characterises them 
one after another in the order of their progressive degeneration 
into the lower forms. He gives a detailed description of the whole 
cycle of degradation and, using various arguments (philosophi- 
cal, historical, political, psychological, mythological, mystical, 
etc.) in support of his social theory, presents a broad and dyna- 
mic panorama of the contemporary political life in the diversity 
of its changing forms. 


' Defined by Plato as a state in which love of honour or glory is the ruling 
principle (from the Greek - time, meaning honour, worth, value). 


117 








The degradation of ideal aristocracy leads to the emergence of 
private ownership of land and houses which turns free men into 
slaves. Reason as the foundation of the state structure gives way 
to violence and rivalry characteristic of timocracy which Plato 
associates with the Crito-Spartan type of government. A timoc- 
ratic state will be eternally at war with its neighbours, and war, 
according to Plato, results “from causes which are also the 
causes of almost all the evils in States, private as well as public” 
(Republic, 11, 373e). Particularly pernicious, in Plato’s view, are 
wars among the Hellenes. 

The corruption of the timocratic state wrapped up in wars 
and internal strife leads to oligarchy due to the accumulation of 
considerable wealth in private hands. This system is based on 
property qualifications and state power belongs to the wealthy. 
The poor do not participate in government. 

Oligarchy depends for its existence on intimidation and the 
use of armed force. An oligarchic state is internally split in two 
antagonistic camps, the poor and the rich. The growing hatred 
of the indigent for the avid and good-for-nothing money-bags 
results in a revolution which brings in a democratic government. 

Democracy, according to Plato, ““comes into being after the 
poor have conquered their opponents, slaughtering some and 
banishing some, while to the remainder they give an equal share 
of freedom and power; and in this form of government the 
magistrates are commonly elected by lot” (Republic, VII, 557). 
Democracy on the whole is regarded by Plato as a rather agree- 
able social system lacking, however, proper government. The 
equality characteristic of democracy puts the good and the bad 
ones on the same level. 

In Plato’s opinion, democracy is distinguished by a general 
deterioration of moral standards due to the prevalence of false 
opinions characteristic of the mob rule. 

A corrupt state is brought to ruin by what is held in high 
esteem and avidly sought for: military victories under timoc- 
racy, wealth under oligarchy, freedom under democracy. In 
other words, each form of government perishes due to the abuse 
of its own principle and to the contradictions inherent in it. 

Thus democracy, according to Plato, gets intoxicated with 
straight freedom and passes into what is its continuation and 
opposite— tyranny. Excessive freedom turns into excessive sla- 
very. The tyrant gains power as the people’s protector: 


118 





“Whenever tyranny appears, the protectorship of the people is 
the root from which it springs” (Republic, 565d). Tyranny is the 
worst form of government based on lawlessness and extermina- 
tion of more or less prominent citizens as the tyrant’s potential 
opponents. It fosters suspicion, stifles free thought and engages 
in the mass execution ofall those who are courageous, magnani- 
mous, reasonable or wealthy under a false pretext of treachery. 

Such is the list of crimes, far from complete, imputed by Plato 
to tyranny at the end of his immortal eighth book of Republic. It 
went down in the history of ancient political theory as an exam- 
ple of devastating criticism of tyrannical rule, perhaps the most 
expressive in all world literature. 

The life of a tyrant, according to Plato’s ‘“‘moral arithmetics” 
is 729 times harder than the life of an aristocratic monarch. Such 
is, so to speak, the amplitude of happiness within the rotary 
cycle of government forms. 

Plato’s numerous political conceptions are further developed 
and elaborated in his later dialogues Crito, Statesman and Laws 
where the philosopher makes extensive use of myths and legends 
as the traditional setting of social theories. By comparison with 
the earlier Socratic dialogues notable for their rational analysis 
and special interest in general definitions, the investigations of 
later Plato show an increasing trend towards the philosophical 
interpretation and intellectual refinement of traditional mytho- 
logical material. 

The idealisation of the past takes the form of conscious orien- 
tation on large-scale mythological events which, according to 
Plato, are of everlasting importance in the history of mankind. 
In point of fact, these mythical events (the advent of the gods, 
the institution of government among the mortals, the communi- 
cation of divine gifts such as political virtues, etc.) provide for 
Plato a source of constant inspiration and serve as a starting 
point of all his later inquiries into philosophical and political 
problems. In Plato’s opinion, it is only in the light of these events 
that one can form a correct view of all subsequent human 
history. 

The glorious past emerging from the myths—which Plato 
always took for granted —is inseparably linked with Heaven, 
therefore even the greatest achievement of Plato’s philosophical 
thought, the theory of ideas, is rooted in his unquestioning faith 
in the divine origin of the human race and the whole world. This 


119 





faith also underlies his theory of knowledge, the knowledge of 
ideas inclusive, which is understood by him as a recollection of 
what happened to the soul in the other world. 

Plato is known to have held rather peculiar notions of the 
past,! owing them probably to his famous relatives (Solon 
through Critias) and partly to the Egyptian priests who did not 
think highly of the Hellenes’ knowledge of history. Thus Critias, 
the senior (probably the grandfather of Critias, the sophist and 
tyrant) describing an ideal state of the days of old refers the 
legend to Solon who has purportedly heard it from priests (Cri- 
tias, 108d). According to tradition, nine thousand years before 
Solon’s time a war had occurred between the tribes which dwelt 
outside the Pillars of Heracles (i. e. Gibraltar) and all those who 
dwelt without them. Of the combatants on the one side, the 
ancient city of Athens was reported to have been the leader and 
to have fought out the war; the combatants on the other side 
were commanded by the kings of the island of Atlantis. Both 
Athens and Atlantis are described by Plato as the models of 
divine government and perfect organisation of the mortals’ life. 

The political system of ancient Athens described in Critias 
reminds one of the ideal state in Republic, whereas the govern- 
ment of Atlantis based on the laws of Poseidon with their many 
specific prescriptions is given a more detailed consideration in 
Laws. 

A number of important politico-legal problems are discussed 
by Plato in his dialogue Statesman (Politicus). The myth narrated 
by Plato there describes the life of people on the earth before 
Zeus, under Cronos. God was the governor of the whole world, 
and other gods subject to him ruled over parts of the world and 
were shepherds to men preventing them from violence, war or 
devouring one another. Men lived in accord with nature and 
there was no strife among them. “God was to man what man is 
now to the animals. Under his government there were no 
estates, or private possessions, or families” (Statesman, 272). 

According to Plato, the people of those times were infinitely 
happier than his contemporaries. Yet in the fullness of time, 
when the cosmic cycle was completed, the ruler of the universe 
let go the helm and became a spectator. The inferior deities fol- 


' For one thing, the legend of Atlantis has originated from his dialogue 
Critias. 


120 





lowed suit and gave up their hold abandoning the universe to 
the mercy of fate. After a period of chaos and utter ruin the 
Creator restored order, the tumult ceased and a new cycle 
started. 

At first the case of the new human race was very helpless and 
pitiable. Left without divine care, men found themselves alone 
among wild beasts and had to carry on the struggle for their 
existence without sustenance, arts or knowledge. They were on 
the verge of extinction and that was the time when the gods 
brought them fire, taught them arts and gave them seeds and 
plants. 

Reciting this myth, Plato seeks to convince the readers that 
the order in the state and the patterns of organised human life 
should be modelled on divine archetypes, i. e. the ideal forms of 
government in the Golden Age~or, using philosophical ter- 
minology, on ideas. 

Politics, according to Plato, is the sphere of royal art which 
calls for profound knowledge and ability to rule people. Given 
such knowledge and abilities, the rulers “may govern us either 
with or without law, and whether they are poor or rich, and 
however they govern, provided they govern on some scientific 
principle,—it makes no difference” (Statesman, 293). The only 
true state is the one where governors act according to the rules of 
wisdom and justice and are found to possess the royal science 
which evidently consists in the knowledge of the divine methods 
of government and in the ability to imitate them. 

Taking a view that ‘‘the differences of men and actions, and 
the endless irregular movements of human beings do not admit 
of any universal and simple rule” (294b), Plato gives preference 
to the royal wisdom of the true ruler over the law which 1s only 
“the second best” (Statesman, 300). For this reason Plato rejects 
the need for very detailed legislation in the ideal state and holds 
that the wise legislator enacting for the common good should lay 
down laws “in a general form for the majority” roughly meeting 
the needs of individuals (Statesman, 295). All other states that are 
only imitations of the true form should be governed in accor- 
dance with written laws and traditional customs of the country. 

The principle of the division of government structures into 
different forms is, according to Plato, the degree of their approx- 
imation to the divine cosmic archetype. The best state (royalty) 
ruled by a true king is conceived as the nearest approach to 


12] 











divine government, the inevitable gap resulting only from the 
difference between the mortal monarch and god. After the cos- 
mic upheaval royalty, in Plato’s opinion, is the model for all 
other states which should strive to imitate it. They should be 
governed in accordance with the laws —‘‘copies of the true parti- 
culars of action as far as they admit of being written down from 
the lips of those who have knowledge”’ (Statesman, 300c). 

Besides the ideal government based on the “royal science” 
and true statesmanship, there exist, according to Plato, three 
other forms— monarchy, the government of the few and the gov- 
ernment of the many. Each of these lower forms can be further 
divided on the principle of observance or neglect of the laws: 
thus monarchy falls into royalty and tyranny, the rule of the few 
into aristocracy and oligarchy, and the rule of the many, into 
lawful democracy and lawless democracy. So there are seven 
forms of government, including the true one, which ‘‘must be 
ranked apart from them all’. 

As is evidenced from the above, the principle of legality, 
though recognised by Plato, plays but a secondary part in his 
scheme. Criticising oligarchy, democracy and tyranny in his 
usual manner, Plato observes that democracy is the worst of all 
lawful governments and the best of all lawless ones. Hence, the 
democratic lack of order is preferable in Plato’s eyes to oligarchy 
and tyranny: “If they are all without the restrains of law, 
democracy is the form in which to live is best”’ (Statesman, 303b). 

Plato draws a line of demarcation between the political know- 
ledge which is the distinguishing feature of a true ruler, and the 
contiguous arts~military, judicial and rhetorical. Thus the 
power of the judge, in his opinion, is not royal but only the 
power of a guardian of the laws which ministers to the royal 
power. Plato defines the political art as the ability to weave the 
fabric of the state: the royal science is over all other sciences and, 
having charge of the laws and of all matters affecting the state, 
weaves them all into one. The truly royal science, according to 
Plato, “‘ought not itself to act, but to rule over those who are 
able to act” (Statesman, 305). Plato’s parallel between politics 
and the weaving art was an apt and capacious formula that can 
be deservedly called the ancient equivalent of the modern assi- 
milation of the state to a machine. 

Plato’s last dialogue known as Laws and written in a fairly 
ripe old age is a compendium of the philosopher’s political and 


122 





legal views. Plato offers there a more realistic project of a true 
state which he calls ‘“‘the second best’. 

As distinct from the first ideal state described in Republic, the 
nearest approximation to it is conceived by Plato as a com- 
munity of 5040 citizens, each with his separate allotment of 
land. The landholdings together with dwellings are distributed 
among them by lot and only for use, but not as their property. 
They remain in possession of the state and cannot be sold or oth- 
erwise disposed of outside the family passing by right of succes- 
sion to one of the children. 

All population is divided into four property classes and 
citizens pass from one class to another depending on the change 
in their material condition. A special law is to be enacted setting 
the limits of wealth and poverty. 

Private individuals are not to have any gold or silver. Usury is 
prohibited and all extravagance is ruled out. 

The population of the polis, besides the 5040, includes slaves 
and aliens who are engaged in farming, crafts and commerce 
(usually on a small scale and not aimed at personal gain). 

One of the important assumptions underlying Plato’s project 
of the “second best” state is that “each of the citizens is pro- 
vided, as far as possible, with a sufficient number of suitable 
slaves who can help him in what he has to do” (Laws, 778). 

Advocating equality in the sphere of consumption, Plato pro- 
poses that all necessity produce be divided into three parts. Two 
parts should be consumed by the free members of society and by 
the slaves respectively, and the third part, exchanged for han- 
dicraft goods: ‘Such being the case, let no one of the three por- 
tions be greater than either of the other two;—neither that 
which is assigned to masters of the slaves, nor again that of the 
stranger; but let the distribution to all be equal and alike and let 
every citizen take his two portions and distribute them among 
slaves and freemen, he having power to determine the quantity 
and quality” (Laws, 848c). 

The organisation of everyday life in the second state, like in 
the first one, is governed by the idea of promoting the confor- 
mity of opinion and fostering the spirit of collectivism among the 
citizens. Though Plato concedes the citizens the right to have in- 
dividual] families, he provides for an elaborate law-governed sys- 
tem of education committing children to the charge of numerous 
state officials. Women have equal rights with men, though they 


123 





are denied membership of the highest ruling body. 

Political rights are granted only to the citizens of the state, 
their main concern being to preserve and strengthen the existing 
state system. Citizens have equal rights, but the very principle of 
equality is treated by Plato in a typically aristocratic manner: 
“For to unequals equals become unequal, if they are not har- 
monized by measure” (Laws, 757). 

The state described by Plato in Laws is a hybrid of two forms 
of government, monarchy and democracy. In his opinion, the 
Persians and the Athenians respectively carried the two princi- 
ples to the extreme, whereas a good state partaking of both 
ought to be moderate regarding the questions of freedom and 
obedience. 

The highest governing body in Plato’s state is an Areopagus of 
37 rulers recruited by multistage election. The contingent of 
voters is limited to those who can carry arms or have already 
taken part in combat. The age of the rulers is restricted to within 
50 to 70 and their term of office cannot be longer than 20 years. 
The rulers have ample prerogatives but their main function is to 
be “the guardian of the law’. 

Considerable power is vested in a Council consisting of 360 
elected members (90 from each class). Plato also mentions a 
popular assembly indicating that attendance at its meetings is 
compulsory for citizens of the first and second classes only, and 
those of the third and fourth classes are free to act as they like. 
The laws of the state also provide for election of a great number 
of various civilian and military officials. 

All candidates undergo a scrutiny which is kind of a check on 
their qualifications for office. 

Besides the above governing bodies, Plato proposes to set up a 
special board—the Nocturnal Council consisting of the wisest 
and oldest guardians of the law, top magistrates of the state and 
a certain number of promising young men—and to “hand over 
the city to them” (Laws, 961, 969c). The members of this Noc- 
turnal Council which meets between dawn and sunrise and is 
conceived as the summit of the state and the guarantor of its 
security (“‘a guard set according to law for the salvation of the 
state”) should excel all others, like the philosophers of the ideal 
state, in the knowledge of the cosmos and in political insight, 
share in the whole scheme of education and concern themselves 
in promoting virtue and human excellence. This supreme body 


124 


— 





- 


which is the directing mind of the state apparently brings it 
closer to the ideal proclaimed by Plato in Republic. 

Plato draws a sharp distinction between states where the 
rulers stand above the law, and those where the law is supreme: 
“For that state in which the law is subject and has no authority, 
I perceive to be on the highway to ruin; but I see that the state 
in which the law is above the rulers, and the rulers are the infer- 
iors of the law, is preserved, and has every blessing which the 
Gods can confer” (Laws, 715d). 

It is very significant that Plato regards his second best state as 
representing the latter type, i. e. as based on the law. This inten- 
tion, however, ill accords with the philosopher’s aristocratic 
sympathies, both on the political and intellectual side, and it is 
little wonder that his proposals (and not only in the Laws) show 
an obvious trend towards the cult of an enlightened ruler. Des- 
pite Plato’s keen insight into the nature of law and politics often 
displayed in his projects, his political thought is dominated by 
the deep-seated conviction that ‘“‘a strength of art is superior to 
the law” and that a ruler possessing the royal science is above 
law: “‘For if a man were born so divinely gifted that he could 
naturally apprehend the truth, he would have no need of laws to 
rule over him; for there is no law or order which is above know- 
ledge” (Laws, 875c). 

The unity of philosophical and political perspectives charac- 
teristic of Plato’s political philosophy in general here tricks him, 
as it were, into confusing very different problems. 

The antithesis of knowledge and law invoked by Plato and 
treated in philosophy in abstract terms as the primacy of reason 
over changeful convention assumes in politics a very concrete 
form and, as the fate of Plato’s teacher Socrates has only too 
clearly demonstrated, is usually viewed in terms of crime and 
punishment. Even if this primacy of reason were legalised and 
fixed by state ordinances (Plato, to do him justice, has never car- 
ried his idealism to such an extreme), the philosophical and 
political implications of such an act would be entirely different. 
The strength and weakness of Plato’s conception inspiring and 
disappointing many subsequent generations of philosophers and 
politicians are rooted in the illusion that the products of reason 
understood in the idealistic manner can be directly translated 
into political reality. All such attempts undertaken both by 
Plato and his numerous followers inevitably led to the idealisa- 


125 








tion of politics and politisation of philosophy. 

Plato’s views of the laws, like those of the state derive from his 
basic conception of divine government as the archetype and 
model for imitation. In his Laws he reiterates the old myth of the 
Golden Age and concludes: “Still we must do all that we can to 
imitate the life which is said to have existed in the days of 
Cronos, and, as far as the principle of immortality dwells in us, 
to that we must hearken, both in private and public life, and 
regulate our cities and houses according to law, meaning by the 
very term ‘law’, the distribution of mind”’ (Laws, 713e-714). 

The view of the law as “the distribution of mind”, i. e. the 
embodiment of reason, became a commonplace with all later 
adherents of the rationalistic line in the philosophy of right. The 
specificity of Plato’s conception consists in that the law in his 
eyes represents the rationale of non-existent rather than actual 
relations and is therefore instrumental in restoring, if only par- 
tially and in accordance with the mortals’ ability, the standards 
of divine government. Plato hopes that the laws can help him 
improve contemporary society by reanimating the prehistoric 
forms of life, long since dead, and stemming the rising tide of 
anarchy in the corrupt Athenian state. 

Having little hope of the voluntary acceptance of his laws by 
the population of the imaginary state, Plato proposes to purge 
the country of undesirable elements leaving only the good ones 
(Laws, 735c-736c). The best kind of purgation, according to 
Plato, is painful, like similar cures in medicine, involving death 
or exile, and this is precisely what many of the laws proposed by 
Plato aim at. 

Plato develops his conception of the laws in a polemic with the 
sophists. In contrast with Protagoras who believed man to be the 
measure of all things, Plato holds that the measure of the lawful 
which is the same as the just is god. Levelling his shafts at Thra- 
symachus, Plato draws a line of demarcation between true and 
false laws, the former being only those that are made for the 
good of the state as a whole, but not a clique of usurpers. 

In Plato’s view, the governments involved in political struggle 
for power “are not polities at all, nor are laws which are passed 
for the good of particular classes and not for the good of the 
whole state. States which have such laws are not polities but par- 
ties, and their notions of justice are simply unmeaning”’ (Laws, 
715b). This is, perhaps, the most uncompromising statement 


126 





against the political line of Thrasymachus in the history of 
Greek thought. 

Alongside the purely philosophico-idealistic approach to the 
problems of the state and law, Plato’s last dialogue reveals in 
embryo the new historico-geographic trend which was later con- 
tinued by Aristotle, Niccolo Machiavelli, Jean Bodin and partic- 
ularly by Montesquieu in his L’ Esprit des Lois. In this dialogue 
the past is no longer rolled into an ideal one-dimensional arche- 
type of government and a yardstick of comparison, but is treated 
from a historical perspective as a succession of societies, states, 
morals, customs and laws (from the Deluge to Plato’s time). 

Plato describes here post-diluvian primitive society with its 
tribal system, rule of the elders and obedience to tradition and 
ancient customs, the subsequent unification of several clans into 
a state, the emergence of aristocratic government or royal power 
and the enactment of first laws; the history of Ilion (Troy), 
Argos, Messenia and Lacedaemon (Sparta), the true and untrue 
forms in their systems and legislation; the history of Persia and 
Athens, as well as the negative results of the extremes of 
monarchy and democracy. Plato’s historical outline ends in a 
conclusion that the contemporary legislator should adhere to the 
principle of moderation, limiting the power of the rulers on the 
one hand, and the freedom of the ruled, on the other. 

The geography of the country, its climate, soil, etc. exert an 
influence on the state system and on legislation: “We must not 
fail to observe’, points out Plato, “that there is a difference in 
places, and that some beget better men and others worse; and 
we must legislate accordingly” (Laws, 747d). 

The notion of imitation central to Plato’s entire political doc- 
trine is very indicative of his low regard for man’s intellect and 
creative powers by comparison with the gods. This idea is 
clearly expressed by Plato in his myth where human beings are 
presented as the gods’ puppets who never know if they are in- 
tended to be a mere plaything or created for a more important 
purpose. Their affections are like cords and strings which pull 
them different and opposite ways. There is one among these 
cords, the “golden cord of reason called by us the common law 
of the state” which every man ought to grasp and pull with it 
against all the rest (Laws, 645). 

Human affairs, according to Plato, are hardly worth consider- 
ing in earnest. Since man is made to be the plaything of the 


127 








gods —‘‘and this, truly considered, is the best of him’—he ought 
to live sacrificing, and singing, and dancing in order to propi- 
tiate the gods. Playing all his life, man must observe the rules of 
the game - these rules are called the laws. Plato the legislator 
remains an aesthete demanding that the puppet should be an 
excellent performer and live as long and as well as he can (Laws, 
803). 

Plato’s myth of man as a plaything of the gods somewhat 
detracts from the value of his recommendation to combine com- 
pulsion and persuasion in enforcing the law. He was the first to 
clearly formulate this politico-legal principle and also to adduce 
it as an argument for introducing a preamble to the laws. 

Inspired by the above myth of men-puppets, Plato deems it 
necessary to establish the strictest possible control over their 
whole life, public and private. Indeed, his laws regulate the 
citizens’ daily routine down to the minutest detail leaving no 
moment of day or dark unaccounted for and exercising vigilance 
even to their everyday habits and harmless little trickery. 

Seeking to preserve status quo and inviolability of the laws at 
all cost and enchanted by the phenomenal stability of the Egyp- 
tian state that has resisted change for ten thousand years, Plato 
declares war on all innovations, institutes strict supervision over 
the poets and musicians and comes out against arbitrary alte- 
rations in children’s games. His laws carefully guard the state 
from what may be regarded as harmful influences and provide 
for the greatest possible isolation of its citizens from foreigners. 
Plato even goes as far as completely prohibiting persons under 
forty from travelling abroad and puts a total ban on all trips 
overseas in a private capacity. The exception is only made for 
those who visit a foreign country as a herald, or on an embassy, 
or ona sacred mission, with a view to “‘winning a glory”’ for the 
Platonic state in other countries. Besides, the state may also send 
abroad “‘spectators” (provided they are cleared by the guar- 
dians of the law) who will study foreign laws and usages with a 
view to profiting by other people’s experience. The intercourse 
with foreigners within the state itself is restricted to a minimum 
and supervised with utmost care. 

The firmness of the laws cannot be ensured unless the state has 
a proper judiciary, as “‘a city which has no regular courts of law 
ceases to be a city” (Laws, 768). Yet judicature in Plato’s under- 
standing does not make a separate branch of government or a 


128 











specific function of the state. Outlining his system of courts of 
justice, Plato frankly admits that they “cannot be precisely 
defined either as being or not being offices” (Laws, 768d). 

Every magistrate, according to Plato, must also be judge of 
some things and all citizens must also participate in the 
administration of justice in a general way. Besides various courts 
of arbitration and courts for private suits, Plato proposes to set 
up a court of law in every tribe and also special tribunals for 
public causes which shall examine cases of common interest. 
‘These should be composed of judges elected from every magis- 
tracy and subjected to a scrutiny held in the presence of the elec- 
tors. Plato makes out a case for the active participation of judges 
in legal proceedings, since a silent judge who says no more than 
the litigants will never, according to Plato, be able to decide 
justly. Plato’s laws also provide for defence against criminal 
charges in court proceedings, though he shows a good deal of 
bias towards the advocates who “‘make the better cause appear 
the worse”’. 

Plato sets great store by the knowledge of the laws and 
strongly recommends studying the works of the legislators ‘‘for of 
all kinds of knowledge the knowledge of good laws has the great- 
est power of improving the learner; otherwise there would be no 
meaning in the divine and admirable law possessing a name 
akin to mind (voVs véus)” (Laws, 957c). 

On top of the severe punishments awaiting all those who vio- 
late the laws comes the retribution from the gods and Plato 
darkly reminds the wrongdoers of the inexorable vengeance of 
Dike, the goddess of justice. Yet even this does not seem to satisfy 
Plato and he invokes the immortality of the soul and its primacy 
over everything corporeal in order to bolster up his conception 
of the divine nature of the law. Being congenial to the soul and 
also sharing in the eternal primary causes, the law thus acquires 
an ontological status deriving directly from traditional Greek 
mythology. 

Plato’s philosophico-mythological views take in fact the shape 
of a compulsory religion intended to add the fear of the gods to 
the restraints of the law in order to secure the necessary confor- 
mity of opinion and immunise the “true” state against any per- 
nicious influence. 


129 








The intellectual heritage of Plato has been exercising the 
minds of philosophers, political thinkers, jurists and sociologists 
for over twenty-five centuries. The unique longevity and topica- 
lity of his conceptions are mainly traceable to a remarkable 
combination of the creative genius and imagination of Plato the 
poet with the profound insight into the most fundamental and 
ever new problems of human existence of Plato the philosopher 
and investigator. 

His pupil Aristotle who became Plato’s chief opponent in the 
subsequent history of Greek thought was not only under a 
considerable influence of the Platonic political philosophy, but 
also played an important part in the dissemination of his 
teacher’s ideas. 

Of Greek ancient writers who were in great measure indebted 
to Plato’s ideas (partly in the Aristotelian interpretation), spe- 
cial mention should be made of Polybius the historian. By de- 
veloping and elaborating Plato’s notions of the cyclic progres- 
sion of the forms of the state and his views on the advantages of 
mixed government he has played an important part in popular- 
ising Greek political thought and, in particular, in winning over 
ancient Roman and later West-European writers to Platonic 
philosophy. Of the Roman political thinkers, the most succept- 
ible to Plato’s political theory proved to be Cicero who adopted 
not only his principle of mixture at all government levels, but 
also a number of his natural right conceptions. 

The works of Plato and his followers, particularly Plotinus, 
were in the focus of attention of the early Christian and medie- 
val thinkers. This period was marked by the appearance of 
Augustine’s De Civitate Dei (The City of God) which played an 
important part in the Christianisation of the Platonic and Aris- 
totelian politico-legal views and their interpretation in the spirit 
of Christian theology. 

The political doctrine of Thomism, the leading trend in Ca- 
tholic philosophy that carries back to medieval theologian 
Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274) adopted and gave a new peculiar 
interpretation to the Platonic notions of the forms of govern- 
ment, the prevalence of the soul’s rational principle in the per- 
fect state, the essentially divine source of legislation, etc. No 
wonder — the caste system of Plato’s ideal city could not fail to be 


130 





found congenial to the hierarchical structure of feudal society by 
its ideologists. 

Plato’s idea that each class should mind its own business 
acquired a new progressive ring in the writings of Marsilius of 
Padua who came out against the clergy’s pretension to the right 
of interference in the affairs of other estates. 

In the epoch of the Renaissance the cultured world got direct 
access to Plato’s works which enabled the readers to dispense 
with Augustine’s neo-Platonism, Latin translations and their 
various interpretations. The interest in Plato soared up reflect- 
ing the general desire to shake off the fetters of dogmatised 
Aristotelianism. 

Plato’s eulogy of legitimate monarchy with its blessings con- 
trasted to the curse of tyrannical rule, as well as his advocacy of 
mixed government representing the best features of monarchy, 
aristocracy and democracy met with wide response in the six- 
teenth century under the conditions of growing popular discon- 
tent with absolute monarchy. The ideologists of rising bourgeoi- 
sie who went down in history under the name of monarchoma- 
chists or fighters against monarchs found Plato’s conception 
concordant with their own theory of limited monarchy based on 
class representation and made ample use of his arguments 
against tyranny as the most wicked and corrupt form of 
government. 

Plato’s doctrine of the ideal state undergoes a radical trans- 
formation in the social utopias of Thomas More and Tommaso 
Campanella. The fundamental distinction between the utopian 
socialism of these thinkers and the so-called communism of Plato 
derives, first and foremost, from the difference of their socio-poli- 
tical platforms. Yet casting their essentially new ideals in an old 
mould the founders of utopian socialism borrowed from Plato 
not only the conception of the perfect state, but also the faith in 
its practicability and a number of important theoretical 
propositions. 

The same is true of the utopians of the eighteenth century 
Mably and Morelly whose views, particularly those of true legis- 
lation meeting the demands of nature and largely reflecting the 
mythical social harmony (the Golden Age) at the dawn of 
human history are notable for a strong influence of Plato’s ideas. 
This influence is traceable even in the utopian projects of social 
restructuring put forward by Saint-Simon, Fourier and Owen 


131 
g* 





who owe to Plato some of their schemes and propositions (e. g. 
socia] stratification due to the division of labour, the harmony of 
passions and harmonious society, the place of education, the 
position of woman, etc.). 

The rationalistic trend in the interpretation of Plato’s heritage 
that started under the Renais8ance is characteristic of all early 
bourgeois ideology. 

Plato is the ancient precursor of Spinoza and Hobbes who 
developed and applied the geometrical method in the analysis of 
society and politics. Very significant is also a remarkable paral- 
lelism between Plato’s concept of politics as the royal art of 
weaving together different virtues and antagonistic passions in a 
single smooth and strong fabric of the state and Hobbes’s assimi- 
lation of the state to a complex mechanism knocked together by 
different human passions. Again, there is good reason to believe 
that the idea of one complusory state religion advocated by 
Spinoza, Rousseau, Pufendorf and other political thinkers in 
modern times as different variants of the so-called civic religion 
carries back to Plato’s doctrine of the ideal city. The Polizeistaat 
of Christian Wolff, too, has much in common with Plato’s ubi- 
quitous and omniscient hierarchy with its vigilant nocturnal 
council and untiring guardians of the law. 

Montesquieu’s L’ Esprit des Lois clearly bespeaks the influence 
of Platonic political conceptions. Describing the factors that 
determine the “spirit of the laws” and advancing a theory of in- 
terconditionality of the morals, political system and the laws, 
Montesquieu repeatedly refers to Plato as his authoritative fore- 
runner. Plato’s influence is traceable not only in the understand- 
ing by Montesquieu of different forms of government, but also in 
his conception of their evolution and change. Directly following 
in the wake of Plato, Montesquieu holds that the corruption of 
every form of government starts with the deterioration of its own 
principle. Of course, Plato did not speak of the separation of 
powers, yet his idea of the advantages of mixed government for- 
estalls Montesquieu’s famous theory and underlies his argu- 
ments for the separation and balance of different powers. 

Plato’s celebrated king-philosopher ideal was eagerly adopted 
by the adherents of enlightened absolutism (Voltaire, Diderot, 
and others). The unshakable faith in the “wise laws” character- 
istic of Helvetius, Holbach and Diderot is attributable, in the 
last analysis, to Plato’s influence and attests to his strong grip on 


132 








the minds of the French Enlighteners. 

The community of ideas between Plato and Rousseau reveals 
itself in their common belief in the Golden Age of the human 
race conceived as primitive communism or the natural state 
when people had everything in common, everybody was happy 
and there was no private property. Both of them regard the 
emergence of private property as a factor of major significance 
largely accountable for the general degradation of morals. 

In his political and legal views Rousseau also subscribes to 
Plato’s central idea in the sphere of politics— the primacy of the 
whole over its parts, that is the state as representing common in- 
terest over the class and the individual. The same idea was also 
adopted by Hegel (partly straight from Plato and Aristotle and 
partly from Rousseau drawing a special distinction between the 
universal will and the will of all) who gave it specific interpre- 
tation and developed further in the context of his system of abso- 
lute idealism. 

Plato’s state, according to Hegel, is not an empty and abstract 
ideal, but an ideal expression of the wholeness of Greek morality 
(in the Hegelian interpretation of this concept). As regards the 
crucial question of the relationship between philosophy and 
reality Plato, in Hegel’s opinion, took the right stand giving a 
philosophical expression to the ideal reality of the Greek polis. 

Kant’s notions of the state and politics corresponding to the 
idea of law, i. e. of true republican government, are concordant 
with Plato’s ideal projects and reflect the old claim of philosophy 
to supreme political power. Yet Kant’s ambitions do not go that 
far. In his opinion, it is impossible and not even necessary for the 
king to be a philosopher or for a philosopher to be the king. It 
would be quite sufficient if the monarchs or self-governing peo- 
ples (adhering to the laws based on the principle of equality) do 
not deny their philosophers the right to exist and make their 
views known to the public. Indeed, explains Kant, no one but 
the philosophers can be instrumental, given the conditions of 
publicity, in achieving the true aim of politics- the common 
weal. 

Even more profound was the influence of Plato on Fichte 
whose utopian project of a German bourgeois society (Self-con- 
tained Merchant State, 1800) was largely modelled on the ideas of 
his ancient predecessor (meticulous regulation of all life, division 
by the state of all citizens on the principle of trade and occupa- 


133 





tion, economic exclusiveness and self-reliance, etc). 

Platonic parallelism between the state and man, the faculties 
of the soul and the powers of the state, various biological and 
psychological conceptions of the relationship between the whole 
and its parts are common, with various modifications, to many 
representatives of the organic theory of the state, politics and 
law. 

In the nineteenth-twentieth centuries the revival of the 
natural right doctrine evoked fresh interest in Plato’s political 
views which gained wide currency in a number of its modern 
variants. Characteristic of Catholic theology, for one, is the 
Thomist line notable for the interpretation of the natural right 
conceptions of Plato and Aristotle in the spirit of Christian 
dogmas. 

A serious attempt to give a neo-Kantian interpretation of 
Plato’s theory of the state and law was made by Erich Cassirer at 
the beginning of the twentieth century. Regarding the doctrine 
of natural right (law) as an intermediate link between philoso- 
phy and jurisprudence, Cassirer sees its origin in Plato’s idealism 
at large. The doctrine of natural right, in his opinion, underlies 
all Plato’s views relating to being-in-itself, true being and being 
by nature but not by convention. Proceeding from the neo-Kan- 
tian “pure” idea of law, Cassirer also describes the Platonic state 
as a legal institution which owes its reality not to external neces- 
sity (it would contradict the notion of pure rationality) but, on 
the contrary, is deduced from the conditions of self-conscious- 
ness. 

This understanding of the principle of law as a purely logical 
construct lies at the root of Cassirer’s interpretation of other 
natural right doctrines, including the one advanced by Kant. 
Plato, according to Cassirer, takes no exception to the modern 
notion of freedom as he stands for the rule of reason and not of 
some arbitrary caste in a state. 

At the beginning of the twentieth century Plato’s political 
philosophy in general and his natural right doctrine in particu- 
lar attracted special attention of Pavel Novgorodtsev, a Russian 
historian of political theories who urged his colleagues to give 
more attention to the Socratic-Platonic line in the ancient heri- 
tage, and whose approach reflected the liberal ideology of neo- 
Hegelianism and neo-Kantianism. Taking a further step in the 
same direction, some German historians in the late 1920s (e. g. 


134 





K. Gronau and Werner Jaeger) already hazarded a theory 
about Plato’s revival and turned their eyes to him for guidance 
in practical politics. 

In the 1940s the Greco-Platonic synthesis of liberty and law, 
truth and right, logos and dike was hailed by neo-Kantianist 
Ernst Cassirer as a profound achievement of Greek political 
thought and as a key to the analysis of contemporary problems 
of law and politics. Somewhat earlier German historian Rudolf 
Polmann had come out in defence of Plato’s political philosophy 
against the attacks of Hegel, Eduard Zeller, Otto Gierke and 
other writers who accused Plato of ignoring individual rights 
and freedoms in his conception of law. 

The period after World War IT is characterised by numerous 
attempts of the bourgeois commentators of Plato’s political 
theory to accommodate his views to the needs of the present-day 
ideological struggle. 

Highly critical of Plato’s politico-legal conceptions are such 
bourgeois liberals as Bertrand Russell, Karl Popper, Ernst 
Topitsch, and others (all of them professing positivist views). 
These writers generally try to pass Plato for a champion of tota- 
litarianism and an advocate of the authoritarian state. 

According to Popper, both medieval authoritarianism and 
modern totalitarianism carry back to Plato. Popper includes 
contemporary communism under the head of totalitarianism 
and links Plato to Marx (through Hegel), giving vent to his anti- 
communist feelings towards them both. 

Bertrand Russell describes Plato’s political philosophy as 
“authoritarianism in politics”. He frankly admits that he treats 
Plato “with as little reverence as if he were a contemporary Eng- 
lish or American advocate of totalitarianism” !. 

All attempts to pass off the ancient philosopher as a contem- 
porary democrat or totalitarian are essentially anti-historical. 
Under the specific conditions of his time Plato advocated aris- 
tocratic government and presented his political ideal in philoso- 
phical attire as a perfect city. Taken out of the context of Plato’s 
historical environment, it inevitably turns into an abstraction 


! Bertrand Russell, History of Western Philosophy and Its Connection with Poltti- 
cal and Social Circumstances from the Earliest Times to the Present Day, George Allen 
and Unwin Ltd., London, 1946, p. 125. 


135 











and its individual features acquire the properties of ideal theore- 
tical models and guiding principles applicable in the sphere of 
law and politics at all times. Such an approach, however, is in- 
compatible with the objective assessment of their political and 
theoretical significance. If Plato’s legacy is to have any practical 
value at all, it must be viewed in the historical perspective, 1. e. 
with due regard for the socio-economic, political and epistemo- 
logical conditions of its genesis. 

The attitude of Soviet historians to Plato’s political theory 
deserves special attention, since the general appraisal of his 
views has a direct bearing on the assessment of other politico- 
legal conceptions of antiquity related in one way or another to 
Plato’s teaching (e. g. those of the sophists, Socrates, Aristotle, 
the Stoics, etc.) and, for that matter, on the understanding of the 
axiological approach to the past in general, of its place and sig- 
nificance in historical investigations. 

The label of a reactionary fastened on Plato by a number of 
scholars appears to us completely gratuitous if only for the fact 
that Plato was a staunch opponent and censurer of oligarchic 
coups and oligarchic government in general. This is clearly seen 
both from his general doctrine of the forms of government in 
which oligarchy is treated as a corrupt and untrue form, and 
from the critical stand he took against contemporary political 
practices under oligarchic rule. 

Plato’s feelings were anti-oligarchic no less than anti-democ- 
ratic, and it was not accidental! that he refused to participate not 
only in the affairs of the democratic state, but also in the oligar- 
chic revolution of 404 B. C. in Athens though the leader of the 
Thirty was none other than his own uncle Critias. 

For similar reasons one can hardly accept the view of some 
historians that Plato was a mouthpiece of the reactionary Ath- 
enian slave-owners ~ his criticism of practically all contemporary 
forms of government from the position of an abstract ideal (“the 
rule of the philosophers”) accords ill with this flat unqualified 
formula. Incidentally, from the same position Plato also casti- 
gated timocracy usually exemplified in his writings by the Cre- 
to-Spartan political system — this attitude does not very well tally 
with the “idealisation of Spartan institutions” ascribed to him 
by some commentators. 

True, timocracy in Plato’s scheme of constitutional corrup- 
tion is preferable to oligarchy, democracy and tyranny, yet all 


136 






these forms of government, timocracy including, are perverted 
and untrue in principle. 

The mistaken notions of the reactionary character of Plato’s 
political views are largely a result of the misinterpretation of his 
doctrine of political forms of government in general and the aris- 
tocratic form in particular. The thing is that in the eyes of some 
scholars adherence to aristocratic government, understood at 
that in a somewhat one-sided way, is synonymous with being a 
“reactionary”. This primitive approach fallacious as it is from 
the standpoint of logic is also untenable from the historical angle 
as it leaves out of account the actual theoretical and political 
views of Plato. 

In describing above the political conceptions of Pythagoras, 
Heraclitus and other ancient thinkers we have already pointed 
out the difference between the platforms of the old “aristocracy 
of blood” and the new “aristocracy of spirit”. This difference 
should not be disregarded when one attempts to get an insight 
into Plato’s mind. 

It is very significant that Plato who came of an old noble 
family and was a typical “aristocrat of blood” was led by his 
philosophical, political and legal views to take a stand against 
both hereditary aristocracy and the aristocracy of wealth or oli- 
garchy and to become an advocate of new aristocracy — the aris- 
tocracy of spirit and knowledge. His negative attitude to tyr- 
anny can hardly be accounted for by the fact that in ancient 
Greece tyranny was not infrequently directed against the privi- 
leges of hereditary aristocracy. Plato was not an upholder of 
such privileges and his criticism of tyranny was not prompted by 
personal considerations and self-interest — it was with him a mat- 
ter of principle. 

Plato’s aristocratic government as the best of all possible forms 
is an ideal scheme, a materialisation of the idea of the rule of in- 
tellectual and moral elite which, according to Plato, includes 
only true philosophers. What is more, the virtues of a true philo- 
sopher are not innate but can be acquired and, strictly speaking, 
noble birth is of little consequence. The Platonic theory of aris- 
tocracy and aristocratic government was essentially different 
from the views and notions of old aristocracy regarding their 
natural privileges and claims to power. 

The right of merit as the basis of government was, of course, 
more progressive than the hereditary right of birth, and Plato, as 


137 











well as his other predecessors and particularly Socrates made no 
small contribution to the philosophical substantiation of the new 
principle. It was upheld by many progressive thinkers of subse- 
quent epochs, particularly by the French Enlighteners, who 
fought against the political privileges and pretensions of the con- 
temporary nobility. Its significance has not been lost till nowa- 
days and the echoes of the past political battles are still ringing, 
for instance, in the demands for competent leadership, scientific 
approach to the problems of management, etc. This is an impor- 
tant aspect of Plato’s “‘aristocratism”’ which cannot be left out of 
account in historical studies and which does not dovetail with 
the attribute “reactionary” often attached to his political 
utopia. 

It is also worth noting in this context that any sound axiologi- 
cal analysis of one or another thinker’s conceptions in terms of 
the single-valued “‘progress-reaction” antithesis implies of neces- 
sity a definite scale of socio-political values and can only be un- 
dertaken on the basis of a clear-cut doctrine of historical pro- 
gress. This approach alone will provide the necessary guidelines 
for comparison and ensure the investigator against absolute rela- 
tivism on the one hand, and arbitrariness, on the other. 

For instance, if we view the Platonic conception of the rule of 
philosophers from the historical angle, i. e. from the standpoint 
of the cognition of politico-legal phenomena, we are bound to 
admit that it represents an important milestone in the history of 
the rational interpretation of man’s growing political and legal 
experience. In this approach the very idealisation of the princi- 
ple of political government based on reason and knowledge 
appears as an important and necessary stage in the philosophical 
interpretation of political phenomena. 

On the socio-political and ideological side this principle was 
an important advance on the ideology of old aristocracy. 
Besides, it provided a philosophical substantiation of the right of 
the slaves to equality in the sphere of consumption. Plato clearly 
states in his Laws that no one of the three portions of agricultural 
produce which are to be distributed among the population 
should be greater than either of the other two—“neither that 
which is assigned to masters or to slaves’? (848c), whereas in 
Republic he even makes an attempt to dispense with the division 
of the city population into the freemen and the slaves by intro- 
ducing three classes in accordance with the natural division of 


138 





labour within the polis. The harshness of the laws in Plato’s ideal 
state must not detract from his far-sightedness, nor overshadow 
the humanistic and progressive tendencies (under the conditions 
of ancient slavery!) of his political theory. 

Let us now consider Plato’s aristocratic government with its 
principle of the rule of “those who have knowledge”’ from a 
slightly different perspective comparing it with the theory and 
practice of Athenian democracy. Such a comparison, in our 
opinion, could throw additional light on some controversial 
points regarding Plato’s attitude to democracy, since his criti- 
cism of the democratic form of government and its basic princi- 
ples is adduced by many researchers as important evidence for 
his reactionary views. 

Plato did criticise Athenian democracy. Yet he simul- 
taneously criticised all other forms of government in existence 
(despotism, tyranny, monarchy, aristocracy, timocracy, oli- 
garchy). Plato’s political ideal (the rule of philosophers, the aris- 
tocracy of knowledge) was a product of abstract contemplative 
thought, a utopia essentially nihilistic and critical of all existing 
forms of political organisation and government conceived by 
him only as various degrees of departure from his other-worldly 
image of perfection. It would be naive and tendentious to 
ascribe Plato’s idea] largely or primarily to his anti-democratic 
sentiments — though, of course, his censorious attitude to democ- 
racy (as well as to other forms of non-philosophical government) 
could not leave his ideal completely unaffected. 

Plato, like his teacher Socrates executed by Athenian democ- 
racy, mainly castigated it for lack of competence, recruitment of 
public officials by the lot, etc. The advocacy of the rule of those 
who have knowledge, i. e. the “true philosophers”’ skilled in the 
art of government and endowed with all kinds of virtues, was 
tantamout, in the light of the contemporary democratic practice 
and theory, to an attempt at pushing away the masses from the 
helm of the state. To be sure, from the viewpoint of the free 
demos, the principle of such a rule was unacceptable and, using 
the present-day term, reactionary. Yet in order to understand its 
significance under the specific conditions of Plato’s time, i. e. to 
appraise it in a historical perspective, one is bound to ask this 
question: Could the demos itself be identified with social pro- 
gress, or was its own stand progressive? 

In answering this question one should not overlook the fact 


139 





that the ancient demos consisted of free citizens who lived off the 
forced labour of the slaves and never called in question the legi- 
timacy of the social system which denied the political and all 
other rights to a vast majority of the city’s population. Contem- 
porary democracy took slavery for granted as an institution 
based on natural justice. It was a narrow-minded and self-seek- 
ing democracy envious of somebody else’s rights and exceed- 
ingly jealous of their own privileges. The ancient demos con- 
stantly demanded equality with the upper strata and took 
watchful care of its advantages over the lower classes. It is not 
accidental that “demagogy” has become a word of oppro- 
brium —it owes its scornful ring to the craftiness of democratic 
leaders, usually of privileged families themselves, who skillfully 
manipulated public opinion covering up the greed of the demos 
and simultaneously their own ambition with verbiage of justice 
and equality. 

Is it possible at all to do away with social barriers and privi- 
leges within one, the “free”, class of society ifits freedom rests on 
the slavery of another class? The logic of socio-political progress 
and the lessons of history show that such partial egalitarianism 
in the interests of only one social group runs counter to the fun- 
damental principle of stratification underlying the whole struc- 
ture of a hierarchical society. In a state based on social inequal- 
ity and privileges this principle acquires a universal character 
and determines social relations within all strata. 

Ancient slave-owning democracy was not the rule of the 
majority of the population, but only the rule of the majority of 
free clansmen, i. e. those who belonged to one of the Athenian 
clans and were entitled by right of birth involving no effort on 
their part to the privileges of a free member of the polis com- 
munity. In comparison with this essentially hereditary right to 
political privileges the right of knowledge was far more equali- 
tarian by nature. Its champions rejected the qualifying function 
of social distinctions and proclaimed knowledge the universal 
criterion which should be applicable to all. From the standpoint 
of this criterion neither man’s place in the social scale, nor the 
welfare standards are indicative of his true worth ~he is, first 
and foremost, a being endowed with reason, Homo sapiens, and 
should only be viewed in terms of this universal characteristic. 
The implementation of this rationalistic principle is accom- 
panied in Plato by the construction of an ideal social system dis- 


140 


playing certain features of ““consumer Communism” (absence of 
both private property and family ; community of property, wives 
and children within the two upper classes in Republic; equality of 
all classes in the sphere of consumption in Laws). 

The unrealistic, utopian character of Plato’s projects of the 
perfect state clearly testifies to the impracticability of his princi- 
ple of government (reason instead of noble birth or property 
qualifications) under the existing conditions of slavery. This 
principle demanded, in order to be realised, overstepping the 
bounds of the contemporary social system ~—and this is precisely 
the way history moves onward, both in terms of theory and 
practice, ever transgressing the limits of the existing social forms 
and replacing them by new ones. Plato showed profound insight 
into the nature of social and political unrest and its causes trac- 
ing them to the sway of private property, the antagonism 
between the rich and the poor, and offered his own remedy to 
the ills of contemporary society. It was a new principle of the 
organisation of human life, unknown to ancient slave-owning 
society. 

The significance of Plato’s political doctrine was not lost on 
future generations. Proponents of historical progress advocating 
various theories of social restructuring on new, just principles 
simply could not pass over his ideal state in silence and either 
argued against it or adduced it as an argument in support of 
their own projects. In modern times Plato’s views exerted a con- 
siderable influence on the theories of early utopians who criti- 
cised private property and invented ideal forms of society based 
on the community of property, wives and children, equality in 
the sphere of consumption, etc. 

The historical role of Plato’s utopia as a fountain-head of mar- 
kedly progressive social doctrines of later epochs is an important 
argument against the interpretation of his teaching as reaction- 
ary or retrogressive. On the contrary, one cannat but concede 
consistency to those liberally-minded anti-communist commen- 
tators, champions of the inviolability of private property, who 
have sensed danger in the progressive anti-proprietary tenden- 
cies of Plato’s schemes. Their opposition is natural and accords 
with the socio-political views they profess. On the other hand, 
consistency appears to be sadly lacking in the approach of those 
opponents of private property who criticise Plato’s utopia and 
assess it as reactionary without any qualifications. 


141 











In the analysis of Plato’s socio-political teaching a historian 
must be constantly on his guard against the danger of oversim- 
plification, resisting the temptation to reduce the enormous 
complexity of Plato’s ideas to a single principle, a fixed idea. 
Alexei Losev, speaking of the restorative tendency in Plato’s 
conceptions and a reactionary character of his utopia, at the 
same time does not shut his eyes to the opposite tendency which 
clearly manifests itself in Plato’s teaching: “It is what we call 
moral fibre, an urge to change the surrounding world in accor- 
dance with our convictions. Plato in this respect has always been 
an enemy of complacent Philistines. It is precisely this irresist- 
ible drive towards the ideal and selfless service to the principle 
that has made Plato’s philosophy famous through millennia, 
though its assessments have always varied and it undoubtedly 
deserves censure and condemnation in its concrete form. Plato’s 
moral code has become a historical relic, a curiosity, yet on the 
formal side the value of moral substance advocated by Plato has 
never died.” ! Giving an overall appraisal of Plato’s legacy, the 
author underlines the democratic tendencies of his thought 
clearly manifested in the rejection of dogmatism, untiring search 
for truth, the dialogic form of his discourse, frank admission of 
doubts, hesitancy and absence of ready answers. 

A concrete historical approach to the political theory of Plato 
is also characteristic of Valentin Asmus, a prominent Soviet 
humanist.” Criticising various aspects of Plato’s doctrine of aris- 
tocratic government, the author at the same time does not de- 
scribe it as patently reactionary. His keen sense of historicism 
reveals itself, for instance, in that he treats Plato’s doctrine in its 
specific historical environment without losing sight of its limi- 
tations and traces the subsequent historical development and 
transformations of Plato’s original notions, ideas and values. 
This approach enables the author to avoid superficial and one- 
sided conclusions in the assessment of Plato’s conceptions of free- 
dom, relationship between the state and the individual, the 
socio-political status of different classes, etc. 

Asmus justly observes that the very title of Plato’s dialogue 


1A. F. Losev, The Life and Work of Plato, Moscow, 1969, p. 68 (in 
Russian). 

2 V. F. Asmus, Plato, pp. 136-179; idem. “The State’, in: Plato, Vol. 3, 
Part 1, Moscow, 1971 pp. 579-613 (in Russian). 


142 





Republic reflects a signal feature of the ancient mind, in fact, the 
whole world outlook of the ancients, not of Plato alone: it is the 
exact opposite of individualism in modern West-European 
thought and consists in the conviction that a free member of 
society is inseparable from the state as a whole to which he 
belongs and that this relationship is to be the model for the solu- 
tion of all major philosophical problems. ' 

This notion of universal statehood, as it were, underlies the 
whole doctrine of Plato’s ideal social system: ‘““The subject of 
freedom and of the highest excellence in Plato is not an individ- 
ual, not even a class, but all society, the state as a whole. The uto- 
pia of Plato is not a theory of the individual freedom of citizens, 
but a theory of a fofal freedom-—the freedom of the state in its 
totality, wholeness and indivisibility.” ? 

Analysing Plato’s utopia (the Platonic “communism of con- 
sumption, but not production’’), Asmus justly draws a distinc- 
tion between its two different but interrelated aspects, critical or 
negative and constructive or positive. Due account of both these 
aspects in the historical perspective enables him to get a better 
insight into the nature of Plato’s opposition to the existing forms 
of government and into the true relationship between his ideal 
state and contemporary reality. 

The relationship of Plato’s doctrine of ideal state to the theory 
of the separation of powers deserves special attention. Such a 
theory could only arise on the basis of practice — a real division of 
labour in the sphere of public life and would have been impos- 
sible without an elaborate system of notions reflecting this prac- 
tice. Plato did regard the division of labour as “the formative 
principle of the State” > and this thesis undoubtedly contributed 
to the theoretical substantiation of the need for the separation of 
powers in modern times. Yet Plato himself had no such theory. 
Moreover, the division of labour among different classes denies 
the very idea of the separation of powers. Indeed, the upper 
class, i. e. the ruling philosophers in Plato, are vested with final 
authority on all matters of government and this is exactly what 
the separation of powers is intended to prevent. 

The power of the rulers is in no way restricted by the arrange- 


'V.F. Asmus, ‘The State”, p. 579. 
2 Ibid., p. 608. 
3 Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, p. 346. 


143 





ment whereby they take turns in discharging their legislative, 
executive and judicial functions. This versatility in the exercise 
of their authority is but another evidence for the undivided sway 
they hold in the state, for the unity of state power they embody. 
There is every reason to regard the ruling elite of the Platonic 
state as an uncontrolled autocratic clique wielding unlimited 
power in the state. Idealising and exalting the rule of this clique, 
Plato could not have conceivably subscribed to the doctrine of 
the separation of powers directed against its absolute monopoly. 

The difference in the competence of various state organs 
referred to by Plato, Aristotle and other ancient thinkers and, in 
particular, the allusion to legislative, executive and judicial 
bodies does not by any means signify that they sought to sub- 
stantiate the principle of the separation of powers or proceeded 
from it in the exposition of their doctrines. Plato’s views in this 
respect have been defined above with sufficient clarity. 

As regards Aristotle, his stand requires certain qualification. 
Aristotle was more explicit and consistent than Plato in dis- 
tinguishing between the component parts of the state structure: 
“All constitutions have three elements, concerning which the 
good lawgiver has to regard what is expedient for each constitu- 
tion.... There is (1) one element which deliberates about public 
affairs; secondly (2) that concerned with the magistracies—the 
questions being, what they should be, over what they should 
exercise authority, and what should be the mode of electing to 
them; and thirdly (3) that which has judicial power”’ (Aristotle, 
Politics, IV, 14, 1297b35-1298a). 

Yet Aristotle did not focus his attention on the relations of 
these “‘three elements” with one another (their interdepen- 
dence, counteraction, mutual restraints, etc.) which would only 
be natural for an exponent of the principle of the separation of 
powers, but rather concerned himself with their specific organi- 
sation under different forms of government. Though the above 
“three elements” constitute, according to Aristotle, the founda- 
tion of every form of government and ‘“‘the very distinction 
between the forms results from the different organisation of each 
of the elements”’ (ibid.), Aristotle did not consider the latter in 
terms of the power separation doctrine, i. e. as separate powers 
or relatively independent functions of a single state power, but 
treated them instead as formative components. 

If Aristotle had proceeded from the principle of the separation 


144 


SS See” 


of powers, he would not have confined himself to the statement 
cited above. He would have said that the difference between the 
forms of government is conditioned not only, and not so much 
by the difference in the organisation of each of the elements, but 
first and foremost by their interrelation, the manner in which 
they interact, the form and degree of their participation in the 
exercise by the state of its separate powers. Yet Aristotle never 
said any such things. 

That clearly shows that Aristotle speaks here not of the ele- 
ments of state power, but of the elements of a form of govern- 
ment. He mentions power or authority only in connection with 
the magistracies (offices) and it is very significant that in his doc- 
trine the magistrates are vested not only with executive, but also 
with legislative authority: ‘Speaking generally, those are to be 
called offices to which the duties are assigned of deliberating 
about certain measures and of judging and commanding, espe- 
cially the last; for to command is the especial duty of a magis- 
trate” (ibid., IV, 15, 1299a). This view hardly gives any ground 
for saddling Aristotle with the doctrine of the separation of 
powers. 

If one were to trace this doctrine to its theoretical sources, he 
would probably find more promise in the ancient conception of 
polity (creditable primarily to Aristotle and Polybius) as a 
mixed form of government. The authors of this conception con- 
sidered polity to be advantageous in that it combined different 
principles of “‘unperverted”’ forms conceived in fact as different 
powers of the state. The correct combination and the proper 
balance of these principles could guarantee, in their opinion, a 
fair degree of political stability in the state and provide an opti- 
mal form and a just measure for the participation of different 
social classes (the demos, the wealthy and the aristocrats) in the 
discharge of state functions, that is in government. 

Hence, what the doctrine of the separation of powers seeks to 
attain by dividing the authority of the state among different 
classes and organs, the conception of mixed government 
achieves by integrating the principles of different political forms 
within the framework of polity. To be sure, a certain similarity 
of aims characteristic of the ancient and modern theories in 
question gives no cause for ignoring their essential differences, 
including those of the theoretico-conceptual nature. A historian 
must always be on his guard against the temptation to moder- 








145 
10-113 








nise the past as it inevitably leads to superficiality and errors in 
the assessment of ancient authors’ views. 

Much in the political philosophy of Plato reflecting hoary 
antiquity has become obsolete and trivial, yet it also contains 
food for reflection and cannot be denied great cognitive value. 
Engels, for one, gave a high appraisal of ‘‘Plato’s presentation - 
one which, for his time, was full of genius—of the division of 
labour as the natural basis of the city (which for the Greeks was 
identical with the state)”.! 

To sum up then. Plato opened up new vistas in philosophy 
and introduced a vast complex of politico-legal problems into 
the sphere of scientific inquiry. Many of the solutions he offered 
bear a distinct mark of his creative genius. They went down in 
the history of subsequent political thought, both those having 
epistemological value and those found illusory. The socio-politi- 
cal and ideological orientations of Plato’s doctrines, as well as 
their destinies are very different, yet they make an integral part 
of the cultural legacy of mankind. Without a critical appraisal of 
Plato’s political philosophy one cannot expect to keep one’s 
bearings in the ocean of political teachings and legal doctrines of 
the past and present, nor indeed to work out a sound approach 
to the contemporary political practices. 

The spiritual and intellectual experience of such a giant as 
Plato is always instructive, both or the positive and negative 
sides. Plato’s thought will never lose its topicality as it reflects 
the past experience of humanity. 


5. ARISTOTLE 


Aristotle (384-322 B. C.), the greatest thinker of antiquity, 
has made an enormous contribution to the history of philosophi- 
cal and political thought and is justly considered the originator 
of political science as an independent department of knowledge. 

His literary heritage was held in great esteem by Marx, 
Engels and Lenin.’ 


' Engels, Anti-Diihring, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1975, p. 261. 

2 See: Engels, Anti-Diihring, p. 27; Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. 1, p. 66; 
“Notebooks on Epicurean Philosophy”, in: Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, Col- 
lected Works, Vol. 1, p. 427; “Difference Between the Democritean and Epicur- 
ean Philosophy of Nature”, in: Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, Collected Works, 
Vol. 1, p. 34; V. I. Lenin, “Conspectus of Hegel’s Book Lectures on the History 
of Philosophy”, Collected Works, Vol. 38, p. 285. 


1-46 





Aristotle was born at Stagira, a small town in Thrace on the 
north of the eastern coast of the Aegean Sea and is therefore 
often referred to in historical literature as the Stagirite. His 
father Nichomachus is known to have been a court physician to 
king Amyntas ITI of Macedon for many years. After his death, 
at the age of seventeen Aristotle went to Athens (in 367 B. C.) in 
order to join Plato’s Academy and remained its member, first as 
a pupil, then as a teacher till the death of its founder. In 347 
B. C. Aristotle left Athens and for a number of years lived in 
other Greek cities. In 342 B. C. he accepted the offer of king Phi- 
lip II of Macedon to be tutor of his son Alexander, the 
future great conqueror, and stayed with him till 340 
B.C. 

In 335 B. C. Aristotle returned to Athens, where he founded 
his own philosophical school (the Lyceum), remaining its head 
almost till the end of his life. 

The death of Alexander the Great in 323 B.C. set off a 
general popular uprising against the rule of Macedon and Aris- 
totle, known for his pro-Macedonian views, found himself in a 
precarious position. Like Socrates, he was accused of disloyalty 
to Athens and a charge of impiety was promptly brought up 
against him. Aristotle was compelled to go into voluntary exile 
and ironically explained his hasty departure from the city by a 
wish to save the Athenians from repeatedly sinning against phi- 
losophy. He retreated to his mother’s native township Chalsis on 
the island of Euboea where he had some property, and died 
there a few months later. 

Aristotle was a very prolific writer, but many of his works 
have been irretrievably lost. The surviving works where he dis- 
cussed the problems of law and politics include Politics, The Ath- 
enian Constitution, Ethics and Rhetoric. His politico-legal doctrine 
as a whole is expounded in Polutics. 

Aristotle made an attempt to develop a comprehensive doc- 
trine of politics as a separate science closely linked with ethics. A 
scientific approach to politics presupposes, according to Aristo- 
tle, an elaborate system of ethical notions, i. e. a thorough 
acquaintance with the nature of virtues and morals. 

The objects of political science are the beautiful and the just; 
the same objects are also studied by ethics which treats them as 
virtues. Ethics is an introduction to politics, its propaedeutic. 
Alongside specific ethical problems, Aristotle also investigates in 

147 
10* 








his Ethics into a number of other questions pertaining to law and 
politics. 

In the hierarchy of goals aspired to by different arts and 
sciences the goal of the political science is the highest. Subor- 
dinate to it are the goals of all other practical sciences (politics is 
also conceived as a practical science studying man’s practical 
activity) insofar as it concerns itself with the supreme good of 
man and the state (Ethis, I, 1). 

The highest good, according to Aristotle} consists in content- 
ment or the fullness of life. Indeed, nothing but contentment 
makes man self-sufficient or autarchical and is always the final 
goal or the goal in itself, never a means to another goal. 

Contentment as the highest goal of all human efforts consists 
in activity based on virtue, and it is the attainment of this end 
which is the aim of politics: “We assumed the End of politic to be 
most excellent: now this bestows most care on making the 
members of the community of a certain character; good that is 
and apt to do what is honourable” (Ethics, I, EX, 1099b). 

The discussion of moral virtues and qualities of a ““good man” 
in Ethics serves as an introduction to Politics where Aristotle 
treats of political virtues characteristic of a “‘good citizen” and 
unfolds his doctrine of political relationships in general. 

Aristotle’s concept of virtue rests on the conviction that virtue 
is not an innate quality. Virtues, he says, are acquired by the 
soul and divided into intellectual and moral. “Intellectual vir- 
tue in the main owes both its birth and its growth to teaching 
(for which reason it requires experience and time), while moral 
virtue comes about as a result of habit” (Ethics, H, 1, 1103a). 
Moral virtues are inherent in man’s character and reveal them- 
selves in his actions. ‘They can be acquired in the course of man’s 
life and consolidated by constant exercise. 

Men, according to Aristotle, are not born virtuous or other- 
wise. Contrary to Plato’s thesis that virtues are innate and can- 
not be taught, Aristotle professed a more realistic conception of 
virtue as potentiality which can be actualised by good habits: 
“Virtue, then, is a state of character concerned with choice, 
lying in a mean, i. e. the mean relative to us, this being deter- 
mined by a rational principle, and by that principle by which 
the man of practical wisdom would determine it” (Ethics, II, V1, 
1107a). Man’s moral choice is voluntary and he is free to take 
the path of virtue or vice: “If it is in our power to do and to for- 


148 





bear doing what is creditable or the contrary, and these respecti- 
vely constitute the being good or bad, then the being 
good or vicious characters is in our power” (Ethics, III, V, 
1113b). 

However, deviating from the above conception of free will, 
Aristotle maintains that the aspiration to the true goal is not a 
matter of one’s own choice: ‘“‘One must be born with a power of 
mental vision, so to speak, whereby to judge fairly and choose 
that which is really good” (Ethics, III], V, 1114b). 

Passing to the problem of justice, Aristotle clearly reveals the 
relationship between ethics and politics. Justice is the highest of 
all qualities acquired by the soul (courage, temperance, genero- 
sity, magnanimity, etc.) and falls within the province of ethics 
being a component part of virtue in general. Yet justice also has 
a specific aspect whereby it comes within the scope of politics—it 
is the principle of rectitude and equitable relations among peo- 
ple. By justice in law and politics is understood the highest vir- 
tue, i. e. political justice. 

Aristotle draws a distinction between two main varieties of 
justice — distributive and corrective. The former is concerned 
with the distribution of various benefits in accordance with the 
contribution of each member of a community to the common 
good, and the shares among them in terms of honour, wealth, 
money may be very different. By contrast, the aim of the correc- 
tive justice is to promote equality in exchange of goods belong- 
ing to individuals in accordance with the amount and quality of 
labour contained therein. It covers various transactions and 
deals, damages, punishments, etc. 

Aristotle’s conception of two types of justice in fact echoes 
Plato’s views of two types of equality: in both cases an attempt is 
made to justify inequality in the sphere of socio-political rela- 
tions. The principle of just inequality (in Plato) or unequal jus- 
tice (in Aristotle) is considered an essential condition for proper 
organisation of politico-legal life. 

The principal conclusion that follows from Aristotle’s ethical 
doctrine and is of crucial importance for his political theory con- 
sists in the thesis that political justice is only possible among free 
and socially equal members of a community, and its final aim is 
to ensure their contentment or autarchy. 

Political justice is thus conceived as a principle of the political 
form of authority (as distinct from the non-political authority of 


149 





the master over the slaves and the father over the children) and 
as a political method of controlling relations among people. A 
political community presupposes freedom and equality of its 
members both in the exercise of authority and in subordination. 
A natural corollary to the ethical doctrine expounded by Aristo- 
tle in Ethics is the doctrine of the state structure and its different 
forms, which constitutes the subject-matter of his Politics. 

Outlining his method of scientific investigation into political 
phenomena, the Stagirite points out its three elements: breaking 
up the state as a complex whole into its component parts, 
considering the distinguishing properties of each of them, and 
investigating different state structures and the activity of the 
state in accordance with different combinations of its com- 
ponents. Aristotle underlines that he uses different principles of 
division since the whole naturally falls into different elements 
and different combinations of these elements depending on the 
functions of the whole. 

Aristotle’s views on the structure of the whole and on the rela- 
tions of its elements are dominated by organistic notions. He 
often resorts to direct analogies between the state and the living 
organism, assimilates various elements of society to the soul and 
the body, etc. 

An important feature of Aristotle’s approach to political rea- 
lity is that his analysis abounds in historical parallels, compari- 
sons of the past and contemporary experience and exhibits a 
conscious tendency towards a theoretical generalisation and 
scientific treatment of political practices. As compared with 
Plato, the role of myth in his conceptions is reduced to a 
minimum. 

Aristotle made a great advance on Plato in terms of realism. 
His down-to-earth approach to political problems reveals itself 
both in the methods of his analysis and in the pragmatic treat- 
ment of the object of his investigations (political phenomena). 
Aristotle seeks to comprehend the inner logic and the true mean- 
ing of real political relations, i. e. to get a clear insight into the 
sphere which was to Plato nothing but a sorry spectacle of pup- 
pets vainly trying to imitate the divine archetypes. 

Yet on the whole, despite considerable achievements in the 
rationalisation of political studies and persistent, though not 
always well reasoned, polemic against his teacher, Aristotle 
remains under a considerable influence of the ideal politico-legal 


150 






schemes masterly developed by Plato. In many respects his 
approach is essentially different from that of Plato, but not infre- 
quently Aristotle tacitly follows in the wake of his predecessor or 
greatly exaggerates their differences. 

The problems of the state, law and politics are mainly treated 
by Aristotle in terms of an ideal state conceived as a political 
community of free and equal individuals. 

In his conception and definition of the state Aristotle proceeds 
from ideal parameters of the ancient polis — the city-state. What 
Aristotle calls the state is in fact nothing but a product of Hel- 
lenic culture only, the highest form of the Greeks’ communion. 
The barbarians, both European and Asiatic, are incapable, in 
Aristotle’s opinion, of rising to statehood (Politics, VII, 6, 1, 
1327b). 

Aristotle avers that the state is a natural growth and exists 
very much like the first partnerships, the household and the vil- 
lage. However, the state is the highest form of partnership cover- 
ing all other forms and being their object and end. In political 
society all other partnerships attain their goal (happy life) and 
completion. Man is by nature a political animal and it is only in 
the political community or the state that his true self can be fully 
realised. Not all people, according to Aristotle, have managed to 
reach this advanced stage. The barbarians, for one, have failed 
to rise to the heights of political partnership of free and equal 
citizens owing to their retarded development.. “Barbarian and 
slave are the same in nature,”’ declares Aristotle (Politics, I, 1, 5, 
1252b). 

In Aristotle’s view, the master-slave relations are characteris- 
tic of the household, and not the state. By contrast, political 
authority derives from the relations of freedom and equality and 
is essentially different from the authority of the father over his 
children or the master over his slaves. The community of the 
barbarians is therefore non-political and antecedent to the 
emergence of the state. Politics, political justice and the state 
are, according to Aristotle, below the gods and above the bar- 
barians. Between the gods and the barbarians stands the morally 
developed Hellene — the citizen of the state: “He who by nature 
and not by mere accident is without a state, is either a bad man 
or above humanity” (Politics, I, 1, 1253a). 

Since the nature of man and the different forms of men’s com- 
munion can only attain perfection in a state, “the state is by 


151 











nature clearly prior to the family and to the individual’’ (ibid., 
1253a). 

This thesis about the priority of the state over the individual 
and various forms of communion adopted in later political 
teachings (Rousseau, Hegel, etc.) is understood by Aristotle in 
the sense that the state alone, first, permits the ultimate end of 
human nature and men’s communion to be attained and, 
second, enables the individual, the family, etc. to function as 
component parts of a single whole—a living political organism. 

Hence, in Aristotle’s political theory the primacy of the state 
implying the hierarchy and subordination of goals rests logically 
on his teleological and organistic notions. Historically, however, 
that is from the viewpoint of actual social and ethico-cultural 
progress, the state is preceded by the individual, the family, etc. 

Both for Aristotle and for Plato the state is a single whole and 
a unity ofits components, yet Aristotle comes out against Plato’s 
tendency towards totalitarianism: ‘“This extreme unification of 
the state is clearly not good” (Politics, II, 2, 1261b). The state 
consists of a multitude of elements showing a wide diversity of 
properties within the unity of one structural organisation. A 
lesser degree of the unity of these elements is preferable to a 
greater degree. A tendency towards extreme unification (for in- 
stance, the community of property, wives and children) is 
bound, in Aristotle’s opinion, to destroy the state. 

Proceeding from this premise, Aristotle subjects both projects 
of the ideal state advanced by Plato to well-grounded criticism. 
In his opinion, “in way both the household and the state should 
be a unit, but they should not be so in every way”’ (Politics, II, 2, 
9, 1263b). 

Aristotle makes a firm stand for the rights of an individual, the 
right to private property first and foremost, and comes out in 
defence of an individual family asserting its specificity and inde- 
pendence from the state. His arguments were later widely used 
by numerous opponents of all sorts of socialisation of property, 
family and children. 

Private property, in Aristotle’s opinion, derives in the final 
analysis from man’s nature, his natural love of his own self. 
Already in Ethics Aristotle regards egoism as a very important 
virtue, since a man “‘is specially a friend to himself and so he is 
bound to love himself the most” (Ethics, IX, VIII, 1168b). Such 
egoism, in Aristotle’s view, attests to moral excellence and is 


152 





commendable in contrast with unjust and reprehensible egoism 
commonly held in contempt. The legislator therefore should 
recognise private property as a rational and virtuous principle. 

Aristotle, however, is also censorious of mercenariness, exces- 
sive acquisitiveness, etc. Advocating private property, he at the 
same time contends that it should be used for the common 
interests. 

The community of property, wives and children leads to obli- 
teration of personal responsibility, tends to foster idleness, laxity 
and negligence, and is attended by all sorts of confusion, squab- 
bles and discord, whereas friendly relations are a great boon to 
the state. A confusion of “mine” and “someone else’s” and a 
transition from “this is mine” to “this is ours” is fraught with 
many a predicament in private and public life: “How much bet- 
ter is it to be the real cousin of somebody than to be a son after 
Plato’s fashion!” (Politics, II, 3, 1262a). 

Evil in states, according to Aristotle, springs not from the 
absence of the community of property, but from the moral cor- 
ruption of people. Therefore the remedy proposed by Plato in 
fact amounts to turning “a harmony into unison or a rhythm 
into a single foot” (Politics, II, 2, 1263b). It would only make the 
state worse, if not destroy it altogether. 

The state, according to Aristotle, is a composite body. From 
the standpoint of form, it is a collection of citizens rather than of 
such primary elements as individuals, households, etc. The 
definition of the state constitution or form of government 
depends therefore on who is entitled to the name of citizen, and 
what the essential nature of a citizen is. In Aristotle’s view, a 
citizen of the state is one who has the right to participate in deli- 
berative or judicial office, and the state is a collection of such 
persons sufficiently numerous to secure independence of life 
(Politics, III, 1275b). 

Each form of government has its own definition of citizen and 
its own grounds for granting a set of civil rights to one or another 
group of individuals. A change in the notion of citizen and, con- 
sequently, in the form of government brings about a correspond- 
ing change of government itself. 

The form of government which is also described by Aristotle 
as the political system or the constitution of the state is deter- 
mined by the composition of the ruling body of the state, i. e. by 
the number of those who are vested with supreme power (one, a 


153 





few, many). Besides, he draws a distinction between correct or 
true forms of government and incorrect or corrupted ones (per- 
versions). In the true forms the rulers govern with a view to the 
common interest, whereas in perverted forms they pursue their 
own selfish ends. The three true forms of government are king- 
ship or royalty, aristocracy and polity or constitutional govern- 
ment, the perversions are respectively tyranny, oligarchy and 
democracy (Politics, III, 7, 1279a). 

Each form, in turn, has several varieties depending on the 
combinations of their constituent elements. 

The varieties of royalty or kingship are: 

(1) A hfelong generalship (exemplified by the Spartan consti- 
tution) guided by law. 

(2) Kingships existing among some of the barbarians (heredi- 
tary and based on law, but despotic and of a tyrannical nature). 

(3) Elective tyranny among the ancient Greeks which differs 
from the barbarian monarchies only in that it is not hereditary. 
(An example is the rule of Pittacus, one of the Seven Sages, 
elected by the people of Mytilene to resist external invasion). 
Such monarchies, according to Aristotle, are in the nature of 
tyrannies because they are autocratic, and also of the nature of 
kingships because they are elective and rule over willing 
subjects. 

(4) Hereditary legal kingships over willing subjects in the 
heroic period. 

(5) Absolute monarchy with a single ruler sovereign over all 
matters. 

Conventional monarchy, according to Aristotle, is not the 
best form of government. Arguing against Plato, Aristotle con- 
tends that it is more advantageous to be ruled by the best laws 
than by the best men since the law does not contain the emo- 
tional element and is therefore superior to the human soul in 
which it is innate. Besides, in many cases a crowd judges better 
than any single person whoever he may be. 

Aristotle, however, concedes the right to absolute power to an 
outstanding individual whose virtue, like that of god, may prove 
to exceed the virtue of all others. In that case it would be just for 
such an individual to be king and sovereign over all matters, and 
for the community to obey him, for kingship must of necessity be 
based on the outstanding superiority of one man and is therefore 
the highest of all other constitutions. This, however, is a very 


bod 





rare occurrence. 


Aristocracy, according to Aristotle, is the government of the 
best, that is those who are absolutely superior in virtue to all 
others. This form is more advantageous than monarchy. Under 
perfect aristocracy the virtue of a man and that of a citizen are 
the same, i. e. a man is good in the abstract sense, whereas under 
other aristocratic constitutions those regarded as good are only 
good relative to their constitution. Such secondary kinds of aris- 
tocracy are exemplified by Carthage where the constitution 
takes in view wealth, virtue and the common people, Sparta 
where account is taken only of the latter two, and polities inclin- 
ing towards oligarchy. 

The most correct form of government, in Aristotle’s opinion, 
is polity or constitutional government (the term polity was com- 
monly used in Aristotle’s time to denote the political system in 
general). It is the government of the multitude who exercise 
their authority in common interest. All other constitutions are 
deviations from polity. On the other hand, polity itself is con- 
ceived by Aristotle as a mixture of oligarchy and democracy, 
and the principle of alliance of wealth and freedom which 
obtains in most other constitutions is in fact characteristic of the 
state in general as the framework of political partnership. Of the 
incorrect constitutions tyranny is the worst. Two kinds of tyr- 
anny (kingships existing among the barbarians and elective tyr- 
anny among the ancient Greeks) are akin to monarchy as they 
are based on law and voluntary acceptance by the subjects, but 
the rule under both constitutions is despotic being essentially 
arbitrary and not politica]. The third kind of tyranny or tyranny 
in the fullest degree, being the counterpart of universal kingship, 
exercises irresponsible rule over unwilling subjects with a view to 
its own private interest. 

Aristotle devotes special attention to oligarchy and democ- 
racy. These incorrect forms of government are in many respects 
diametrically opposite, wherefore one has good grounds to 
regard their hybrid or mixture as polity. 

Aristotle stresses that the specific distinctions of oligarchy and 
democracy as forms of government, their constituting principles, 
as it were, are wealth and poverty, and not the number of those 
who rule: “For few or many to have power is an accidental fea- 
ture” (Polttics, 1279b). It should be noted in this context that 
however important the wealth-power antithesis is for dis- 


LO 





tinguishing between oligarchy and democracy, Aristotle has yet 
another reason for relegating the numerical criterion to a 
secondary plan: he prepares grounds for a conception of polity 
as a majority rule which takes the edge off the antagonism 
between the rich and the poor. 

Characterising democracy, Aristotle dwells in detail on the 
class composition of Greek slave-owning society. He views var- 
ious classes and sections of the polis population as necessary 
components of any state irrespective of its constitution, and dis- 
tinguishes, in particular, such classes and estates as the farmers, 
artisans, tradespeople, labourers, the well-to-do, the warriors, 
the judges, the class of public servants (officials). The classes 
engaged in manual labour and contributing to necessary utility 
belong to the “body” of the state (the “first city” in Plato), 
whereas the military class, the judiciary and the deliberative 
class (this latter embodying the function of political intelligence) 
constitute its “soul”’. 

Pointing out that the “soul” of the state like that of a man is 
much more important than the “body”, Aristotle even rebukes 
Plato for allegedly limiting the functions of the state to the 
supply of the necessities of life and ignoring its main purpose — 
to aim at the most supreme of all goods (Politics, TV, 1291a). 
Plato, however, hardly deserves this reproach though Ari- 
stotle’s conception of the social structure of a state is indeed 
more elaborate than that of his former teacher. In point of 
fait, in Platons scheme the activity of the lower classes aimed 
at meeting the material needs of society is also subordinated 
to the higher principle of the state and both the “first city” 
in Plato’s Republic and the “‘body” of the state in Aristotle’s 
Politics represent one and the same sphere of activity which 
in later political theories (eighteenth—nineteenth centuries) 
came to be known as “‘civic society’, i.e. a sphere of pri- 
vate interests distinguished from the state as a_ political 
organisation concerned with public interests. It should be 
noted, however, that Plato and Aristotle focused their atten- 
tion not so much on activity as such (let alone productive 
activity) as on its subjects, i.e. social strata and _ classes. 
The essential elements of the state are the rich and the poor 
“and as the one or the other prevails they form the government” 
(Politecs, TV, 1291b). 

Democracy as the predominance of the poor in government 
also falls into several varieties in accordance with the principles 








governing the distribution of civil rights among different social 
strata and, consequently, determining their participation in the 
affairs of the state. Aristotle distinguishes five such varieties. The 
first is characterised by the equality of the rich and the poor in 
respect of supreme power-— the poor have no more prominence 
than the rich, and neither class is sovereign. Under the second 
kind of democracy the offices are held on low property qualifica- 
tions, i. e. not all free adults are equal in their rights. Describing 
the third and the fourth kinds of democracy, Aristotle calls the 
rule of law and an equal share in office as their distinguishing 
features, but makes no mention of magistrates’ qualifications. 

Under the fifth variety of democracy, all the other regulations 
are the same except that supreme power belongs not to the law, 
but the “multitude” (demos). Aristotle’s attitude to this system 
is openly negative. In his opinion, under a democracy of this 
nature the decrees of the assembly override the law and the 
demos exercising monarchic rule becomes despotic so that the 
whole political system assimilates to the tyrannical form of 
monarchy. As a result, actual power passes into the hands of the 
demagogues who, like the flatterers under monarchy, are held in 
honour —“‘their spirit is the same and both exercise despotic con- 
trol over the better classes, and the decrees voted by the assem- 
bly are like the commands issued in a tyranny. The demagogues 
and the flatterers are the same people and either set has the very 
strongest influence with the respective ruling power— the flat- 
terers with the tyrants and the demagogues with democracies of 
this kind”? (Politics, IV, 1292a). 

In Aristotle’s opinion, “such a democracy is fairly open to the 
objection that it is not a constitution at all; for where laws do not 
govern there is no constitution” (Polztes, TV, 1292a). 

As is evidenced from The Athenian Constitution, under this 
extreme form of democracy Aristotle includes the democracy 
under Pericles and afterwards, regarding Pericles himself as a 
demagogue. He concedes, however, that “as Pericles was leader 
of the people, things went tolerably well with the state; but 
when he was dead there was a great change for the worse”’ ( Athe- 
nian Constitution, 28). 

Of all the forms of democracy Aristotle only speaks commen- 
dably of the constitution based on low property qualifications, 
reconciliation of the rich and the poor, and the rule of law. 
Hence the high appraisal by Aristotle of the reforms of Solon 


157 


who, in Aristotle’s opinion, was the originator of democracy in 
Athens. The subsequent expansion of democracy is regarded by 
Aristotle as the worsening of the state and as moral degradation. 
Besides Solon and ancient rulers, Aristotle speaks highly of 
Nicias, Thucydides and Theramenes. 

Oligarchy which is the government of the rich also has four 
forms. In the first, the property qualification for office is so high 
that the poor have no share in the government. The second is 
also distinguished by a high qualification and, besides, the 
vacancies in the governing body are filled by co-optation. In the 
third, the son succeeds the father in office, whereas in the fourth, 
likewise hereditary, the magistrates are supreme and not the 
law. This latter form, according to Aristotle, is akin to tyranny 
and extreme democracy (Politics, IV, 1292a-1292b). 

Polity or constitutional government as the best form of the 
state combines in itself the most advantageous features of oli- 
garchy and democracy, but is free from their weaknesses and 
extremes. It occupies a middle position and is, so to speak, a 
mixture of both forms. Constitutional government is difficult to 
achieve in practice since the middle element in states seldom 
plays an important part. The political scene is usually 
dominated either by large proprietors or by the multitude, 
therefore the form of government only reflects the interests of the 
party that comes to power-—oligarchy or democracy. 

The difficulties involved in the institution of polity are also 
aggravated, in Aristotle’s view, by the fact that the two leading 
states in Hellas (Athens and Sparta) engraft in their interests 
either democratic, or oligarchic regimes respectively in other 
Hellenic states dependent on them. “For these reasons,” notes 
Aristotle, “the middle form of government has rarely, if ever, 
existed, and among a very few only. One man alone ! of all who 
ever ruled in Hellas was induced to give this middle constitution 
to states” (Politics, IV, 1296a). 

The Aristotelian conception of polity is not confined to a spe- 
cific form of government seldom realised in actual life. It is in 
fact a theoretical scheme of political constitution in general 
which serves in this sense as kind of a model for the existing 
empirical forms of government and a cniterion for determining 


' It is commonly believed that Aristotle implied here Solon, yet some schol- 
ars hold that he meant Alexander the Great. 


158 








the degree of their deviation from the standards of political 
justice. 

Polity is constructed by Aristotle on the basis of his main ethi- 
cal and political maxims. He conceives it as the ‘“‘middle” or 
constitutional form of government where the ‘‘middle” element 
prevails in all spheres: in morals (temperance), wealth (moder- 
ate income) and government (predominance of the middle 
class). “The city which is composed of middle-class citizens is 
necessarily best constituted in respect of the elements of which 
we say the fabric of the state naturally consists” (Politius, IV, 
1295b). Aristotle believed that it was a great boon to the state if 
its citizens possessed a moderate but sufficient substance. 

The numerous middle class in Aristotle’s view averts the split 
of the polis population into factions and allays the rivalries 
between political parties. 

In polity, according to Aristotle, the middle class should pre- 
vail over the extreme elements or at least be stronger than each 
of them separately. Supreme power in the state should be in the 
hands of the majority and not the minority, and the number of 
the supporters of a given constitution among the free population 
should exceed the number of its opponents. 

The legislator should base his orientation on the middle strata 
of society, and this is true not only of polity, but also of oligarchy 
and democracy. 

Under a given set of conditions the best constitution, accord- 
ing to Aristotle, can only be achieved if its three main elements — 
the deliberative body, the magistrates, and the judiciary-— are 
properly formed and function in the best possible manner. Aris- 
totle favours a pattern under which the magistrates have the 
deciding vote on key issues of the government policy, including 
those in the sphere of legislation, whereas the popular assembly 
is only granted a deliberative vote. 

As regards the magistracies and law courts, Aristotle believes 
it imperative that they should be in conformity with the existing 
form of government. This can only be achieved through the 
appropriate combination and balance of various methods and 
procedures employed in their formation and activity (qualifica- 
tions for office, election by vote or appointment by lot, payment 
policy, etc.). 

The final aim of the elaborate system of socio-political levers 
and counterweights proposed by Aristotle is to ensure the high- 


159 














est possible degree of stability for the constitution acceptable un- 
der the existing circumstances and reflecting the interests of the 
dominating social strata of the free population. 

The analysis of the factors assisting in the consolidation of 
such a constitution is complemented in Aristotle by an investiga- 
tion into the causes of party factions and revolutions, a detailed 
study of the nature of the destructive factors operative under any 
form of government and of the means for their neutralisation. 
The Fifth Book of Aristotle’s Politics where this subject is treated 
at length is an echo of the Eighth Book of Plato’s Republic resem- 
bling it not only in the subject matter, but also in the proposed 
solutions to the problems under consideration. 

According to Aristotle, the starting point and main cause of 
factions and revolutions of constitution is inequality. It is the 
desire for equality that is generally the motive for party strife 
and social unrest. Revolutions mainly result from the distur- 
bance of the relative character of equality and distortion of the 
principle of political justice which demands in some case adher- 
ence to numerical equality, and in others, to proportional equal- 
ity, 1. e. equality of worth (ratios). 

Revolutions in constitutions are accompanied by a corres- 
ponding change in the principles of government. Each of these 
principles is relative and justifiable within certain limits only, 
therefore their absolutisation is erroneous. Thus democracy is 
based on the assumption that relative equality entails absolute 
equality, whereas oligarchy proceeds from the opposite principle 
assuming that relative inequality is identical with absolute in- 
equality: “Some think that if they are equal in something they 
are wholly equal, and others claim that if they are unequal in 
something they deserve an unequal share of all things”’ (Politics, 
V, 1301b). An error in the fundamental constitutional principles 
is bound to lead to intestine dissension and revolts. ‘“They [con- 
stitutions] are originally based on a mistake, and, as they begin 
badly, cannot fail to end badly” (Politics, V, 1302a). 

Aristotle draws a distinction between just and unjust revolts. 
A revolt is just if it is started by underprivileged sections of the 
population with the aim of getting equal rights with others. On 
the other hand, one can hardly justify those who enjoying equal 
rights with others stir up faction to get special privileges. Besides, 
Aristotle differentiates between revolutions accomplished by 
force and those resulting from fraud. 


160 





Investigating the factors tending to undermine the stability of 
the state under different forms of government Aristotle offers a 
specific set of safeguards for each particular constitution. 

In his opinion, it is possible both for an oligarchy and a 
democracy to be satisfactory although they have diverged from 
the best structure if only they succeed in overcoming their 
extreme tendencies. 

Of all the means that can be used for securing the stability of 
constitutions the most effective, according to Aristotle, is a sys- 
tem of education suited to the existing order. In Aristotle’s 
opinion, as the end for the whole state is one it is imperative that 
the education also must necessarily be one and the same for all 
and that its superintendence must be public, and not on private 
lines in the way in which each man superintends the education 
of his own children. Substantiating this thesis, Aristotle points 
out: “Neither must we suppose that any one of the citizens 
belongs to himself, for they all belong to the state, and are each 
of them a part of the state” (Politics, VYII, I, 1337a). 

Different constitutions result from the desire of all men for 
good life and happiness. ‘This universal ideal is attainable in va- 
rying degrees under all existing forms of government, but its ful- 
lest possible realisation can only be achieved in the best gov- 
erned state, that is under the constitution affording the greatest 
opportunities for happiness (Politics, VII, 1332a). Advancing his 
project of a state that can be constituted in the best possible 
manner, Aristotle continues the attempts of his predecessors 
(Plato, Phaleas, and others) whose views he first subjects to a 
critical analysis. The best state, according to Aristotle, is but a 
theoretical construction which of necessity lacks the exactness 
and minuteness of reality given by perception (Politics, VII, 7, 
1328a). 

The population of the ideally constituted state should be the 
largest possible with a view to self-sufficiency, yet both the land 
and the inhabitants should be taken in at a single view, “for a 
country which can be easily seen can be easily protected”’ (Polz- 
tics, VII, 7, 1327a). The territory of the state which is conceived 
by Aristotle in terms of ancient polis as the site of the city, should 
be well situated with regard both to the sea and to the country, 
and bear every sort of produce thus enabling the inhabitants “‘to 
live a life of liberal and at the same time temperate leisure” 
(Politics, VII, 7, 1326b). The geographic position of Hellas and 


161 
W113 








the natural character of the Hellenes are also conducive to the 
best possible state: the Hellenic race situated between the inha- 
bitants of Europe with its cold climate who are full of spirit, but 
wanting in intelligence and skill and therefore incapable of rul- 
ing over others, and the natives of Asia who are intelligent and 
inventive, but wanting in spirit and therefore always in a state of 
subjection and slavery, “is likewise intermediate in character, 
being high-spirited and also intelligent. Hence it continues free, 
and is the best-governed of any nation” (Politics, VII, 7, 1327b). 
In point of fact, Aristotle is convinced that the Greeks alone are 
capable of political life as such. 

Speaking of the population, Aristotle underscores that the 
ideal state has a large number of slaves and artisans engaged in 
manual labour. The artisans, though free, are not to be granted 
citizenship, nor again the tradesmen and the teeming popula- 
tion that includes the “sailor crowd” whose participation in 
political life is characteristic of the extreme form of democracy 
(Politics, VII, 6, 1327b). 

The citizens of the most nobly constituted state living off the 
toil of the slaves and artisans and making up the wealthy class 
must not, according to Aristotle, lead the life of mechanics or 
tradesmen (for such a life is ignoble and inimical to virtue), nor 
yet be tillers of the soil (for leisure is needed both for the devel- 
opment of virtue and for active participation in politics). They 
must be warriors, priests and judges safeguarding the law and 
common interest (Politics, VII, 8, 1328b). 

Significantly, a military force is described by Aristotle as an 
indispensable component of a self-sufficient state: ‘““There must 
be arms, for the members of a community have need of them, 
and in their own hands, too, in order to maintain authority both 
against disobedient subjects and against external assailants” 
(Politics, VI, 8, 1328b). 

The whole land of the state must be divided, according to 
Aristotle, into two parts of which one must be public, and the 
other the private property of individuals. Of the public land one 
portion should be assigned to the services of religion, and the 
other to defray the cost of the common meals. As regards the 
land in private ownership, there should be a common use of it by 
friendly consent so that no citizen may be left without subsis- 
tence. In accordance with two kinds of the ownership of land 
there should also be two kinds of slaves: the property of indivi- 


162 





OEE eS eS 


duals and the property of the state employed respectively on the 
private estates and on the common land. In Aristotle’s opinion, 
it is advantageous that all slaves should have their freedom set 
before them as a reward for their services. 

Since the end of individuals and of states is the same, the legis- 
lator of the best state ought to ensure that its citizens have lea- 
sure and peace, “for peace is the end of war, and leasure of toil” 
(Politics, VI, 15, 1334a). 

Proceeding from this conviction, Aristotle subjects to criticism 
the Lacedaemonian (Spartan) and Cretan constitutions aimed 
solely at conquest and war. In his opinion, men should not study 
war with a view to the enslavement of those who do not deserve 
to be enslaved, but first of all they should provide against their 
own enslavement. Though war is generally a means for acquir- 
ing slaves, slavery does not rest on the right of war, but derives 
from the nature of things. Asserting “slavery by nature”, Aristo- 
the declares, in clear defiance of facts, that “‘some are slaves 
everywhere, others nowhere” (Politics, I, 6, 1255a) and that men 
“should seek to be masters only over those who deserve to be 
slaves” (Politics, VU, 14, 1333b). War, according to Aristotle, 
does not legalise slavery —it is merely the art of acquiring slaves, 
something in the nature of hunting (Politics, I, 7, 1255b). 

What strikes one is Aristotle’s arrogant and derogatory man- 
ner of speaking about non-Hellenic peoples, purportedly inca- 
pable of political life and slaves by nature. Exalting the Hellenic 
race, Aristotle declares that it would be able to run the world if 
the Hellenes could be formed into one state (Politics, VII, 7, 
1327b). 

However, Aristotle’s own ideal of the state has nothing to do 
with such unification of all Hellenes, nor with aggressive plans 
for the enslavement of other peoples.! 

Aristotle considered peace a great boon to mankind. The idea 
that the aim of war is peace was first expressed by Plato and 
later adopted by many writers, including Hegel. Very progres- 
sive was Aristotle’s view, cautious though as it may be, that the 
very principle of war could be regarded as contradicting the 
idea of law and justice: “Others, clinging, as they think, simply 
to a principle of justice (for law and custom are a sort of justice), 


' Therefore the opinion of Karlheinz Rode that Aristotle justified aggres- 
sive war with a view to the enslavement of other peoples appears unfounded 
(See Karlheinz Rode, Geschichte der europaischen Rechtsphilosophie, S. 39). 


163 











assume that slavery in accordance with the custom of war is jus- 
tified by law, but at the same moment they deny this. For what 
if the cause of the war be unjust? And again, no one would ever 
say that he is a slave who is unworthy to be a slave’’ (Politics, I, 
6, 1255a). This thesis was later brought into great prominence 
by the opponents of war and adepts of “eternal peace’’, particu- 
larly by Kant and Fichte. 

Law, according to Aristotle, provides standards of political 
relations among people. To live in a state as a political organisa- 
tion is to abide by the law. The law embodies political justice. 
Justice is the bond of men in states, for the observance of the law 
which is the criterion of justice constitutes the principle of order 
in a political society (Politics, 1, 2, 1253a). Hence, the lawful and 
the just coincide. 

Elaborating this conception that carries back to Socrates and 
Plato Aristotle concretises it in the spirit of his own doctrine of 
justice. The law serves the common good of the citizens and in 
this sense is the public weal. The law conceived as political jus- 
tice regulates only the intercourse among free and equal men, as 
well as the political relations deriving from authority and subor- 
dination, and not the despotic relations between the master and 
the slave. 

The law is also described by Aristotle as equality, but this 
equality, in accordance with his interpretation of the principle 
of justice, is not absolute but relative since people are not equal 
in their worth. Therefore the claims of the better to political pri- 
vileges rest also on the law. Indeed, the noble, in Aristotle’s 
view, are citizens in a truer sense than the ignoble (Polztics, IIT, 
13, 1283a). 

On the other hand, equality in the relations of the unequals, 
just as inequality in the relations of the equals, runs counter to 
nature and is incompatible with political justice and the law of 
right. 

Political justice is partly natural and partly legal. By natural 
justice Aristotle understands what everywhere has the same 
force irrespective of whether it is formalised in the legislation of 
one or another state, whereas under the head of legal justice he 
includes the laws made by men and usages resulting from 
general consent (Nicom., Ethics 7, 1134b). 

Besides, Aristotle draws a distinction between written law and 
unwritten law (custom). The latter apparently falls outside the 


164 





scope of natural right and is regarded by Aristotle as the sphere 
of convention or positive prescriptions. 

In Aristotle’s view, justice is inherent both in the law of 
natural right and in human enactments. Taking up the old 
arguments of Socrates and Plato in their polemic against the 
sophists, Aristotle points out that though the notions of justice 
are subject to change, they only vary within certain limits. 
Natural right is a model for the right resulting from convention: 
“The things which are just not by nature but by human enact- 
ment are not everywhere the same, since constitutions also are 
not the same, though there is but one which is everywhere by 
nature the best” (Nicom., Ethiws, 7, 1135a). 

Distinguishing between justice or right on the one hand and 
law on the other, Aristotle points out that law and custom are a 
sort of justice (Politics, I, 6, 1255a 15). That means that a law 
can only be just if it is based on the corresponding right. Any 
attempt to dominate and tyrannise over others, whether they 
will or not, runs counter to the very idea of law: ‘How can that 
which is not even lawful be the business of the statesman or the 
legislator? Unlawful it certainly is to rule without regard to jus- 
tice, for there may be might where there is no right’’ (Politics, 
VU, 2, 1324b). 

Sovereign power in the state, according to Aristotle, is embo- 
died in the law and not in man. The law is reason unaffected by 
human emotions, and “passion perverts the minds of rulers, 
even when they are the best of men” (Poldzcs, HI, 16, 1287a). 

Legislation is a part of politics and the art of a legislator con- 
sists in framing laws corresponding to a given form of govern- 
ment and not in adapting the constitution to the laws. Therefore 
the rule of law and not of man guarantees the stability of the 
existing form of government and the corresponding political 
regime: “We thus arrive at law; for an order of succession im- 
plies law” (Politics, III, 16, 1287a). 

The laws corresponding to the correct forms of government 
will be based on justice and those corresponding to the incorrect 
forms will be unjust. 

Viewing critically such unjust laws, as well as the incorrect 
forms of government, Aristotle at the same time does not call in 
question their legal force: ‘“Whatever seems good to the major- 
ity of those who share in the government has authority”, and 
this should hold good under any constitution (Polzts, IV, 8, 


165 








1294a). In his opinion, the rule of law, however unjust its pre- 
scriptions may be, is absolutely essential for a political com- 
munity under any form of government. 

Being a universal measure, the law cannot possibly provide 
for all cases that may arise in actual life, and this is also true of 
an individual. Yet the universality of the law does not prevent it 
from being an indispensable regulator of political relationships. 
If a particular case is not covered by a universal statement, it is 
necessary to correct the omission—‘‘to say what the legislator 
himself would have said had he been present, and would have 
put into his law if he had known” (Nicom., Ethics, V, 10, 
1137b). 

Such a correction of law where it is defective owing to its uni- 
versal character is called by Aristotle “equity” as distinct from 
the “justice” of the law. The equitable is also just, though “not 
the legally just, but a correction of legal justice”. The equitable 
and the just are therefore identical, “‘and while both are good 
the equitable is superior”. Hence the equitable man, according 
to Aristotle, is no stickler for his rights in a bad sense, i. e. to the 
detriment of his neighbour, but tends to take less than his share 
though he has the law on his side. 

Despite his awareness of the fact that it is impossible to lay 
down a law for all things (because of their individual! peculiari- 
ties, fortuity, changeful character, rareness, etc.) and that a spe- 
cial decree is therefore needed to provide for specific cases, Aris- 
totle comes out for the legal regulation of all main aspects of the 
public, political and private life of individuals thereby advocat- 
ing adherence to the letter of the law. Moreover, Aristotle asserts 
that “what the law does not expressly permit it forbids” 
(Nicom., Ethics, V, 11, 1138a), thus sanctioning the extension of 
legal prescriptions beyond their proper sphere and unequivo- 
cally rejecting the opposite principle ‘what the law does not 
expressly forbid, it permits’. 

In Aristotle’s view, the distinguishing feature of the law as an 
expression of sovereign will is its compulsive force. Yet even the 
best laws will prove useless if the population are not brought up 
in the spirit of the existing constitution and not habituated to the 
state legislation (Nicom., Ethics, X, 9, 1180a). 

The purpose of the laws is to help realise the supreme goal of 
the state which is the public weal and the happiness of all 
citizens. 


166 


Aristotle’s impact on all subsequent philosophical and politi- 
cal thought was enormous and its detailed analysis, if it is pos- 
sible at all, goes far beyond the scope of this book. There was 
hardly any writer of note in the history of classic, medieval and 
modern political theory who could side-step the Aristotelian 
literary heritage in anon-committal way without identifying his 
own stand in relation to the great. thinker’s political and legal 
conceptions. Much of what has been said earlier about the pro- 
found mark left by Plato in the history of our civilisation is fully 
applicable to his great pupil. 

Despite Aristotle’s frequent attacks on Plato, not always well 
grounded and justifiable, the teacher’s and pupil’s views on a 
number of cardinal issues appear to be essentially identical or 
very similar. At any rate, the later authorities on philosophical, 
political and legal problems viewed the differences between 
Plato and Aristotle as far less significant than they appeared to 
the Stagirite himself. In their eyes the doctrines of both thinkers 
constituted a single theoretical complex representing the summit 
of Greek philosophical and political thought.! 

Aristotle’s influence started already during his lifetime when 
he was teaching in Plato’s Academy and then in his own 
Lyceum. It was enhanced owing to his close links with the 
Macedonean court, personal relationships with Alexander the 
Great and with his regent in Greece Antipater, as well as by the 
numerous publications of his philosophico-political works. 
Regrettably, the bulk of them were irretrievably lost and most of 
those that survived belong to the Lyceum period. 

Shortly after Aristotle’s death his theory of constitutional gov- 
ernment or polity was partly translated into life in Athens under 
the rule of his pupil Demetrius Phalereus. 

On the theoretical side, Aristotle’s political doctrine was 
further developed and elaborated by such prominent peripate- 
tics as Decaearchus of Messene and Theophrastus. They focused 


' The term ‘“Platonism” current in special literature embraces both the 
Platonic and Aristotelian legacy when used in a broad historical perspective in 
relation to the impact of Greek politico-philosophical thought on the subse- 
quent intellectual progress of mankind (see, for instance, Johannes Hessen, Pla- 
tonismus und Prophetismus, Miinchen, Basel, 1955, S. 11). Such unqualified “Pla- 
tonisation”’ of Aristotle can often be misleading as it ignores the specificity of the 
Aristotelian philosophical and political doctrines. 


lo7 











their attention on the best form of government under the exist- 
ing conditions (Theophrastus) and on the mixed form of govern- 
ment (Decaearchus). 

Two other famous writers who were strongly influenced by 
the political ideas of Aristotle and subsequently played an im- 
portant part in the history of political thought as expounders of 
the Aristotelian theory were Polybius and Cicero. Polybius’s 
teaching of the forms of government and their successive change 
originated from the theory of Plato and Aristotle and was instru- 
mental in the popularisation of their views. 

Holding the conceptions of Aristotle in high regard, Cicero 
shared most of his views on the advantages of the mixed form of 
government, subscribed to his teaching of the correspondence 
between the laws on the one hand and natural right and rational 
principles on the other, of the identity of the lawful and the just 
and of their general agreement with the nature of things. The 
highly critical attitude of both Plato and Aristotle to party strife 
and to the extremes of democracy, too, was in tune with Cicero’s 
time and appealed to his republican and humanitarian 
sentiments. 

Aristotle’s views on the relation of natural right and positive 
laws, the part played by the law in political life, the realisation 
of the highest ethical end in the state were largely adopted by 
various representatives of stoicism and modified in accordance 
with their cosmopolitan doctrines. 

A number of Aristotelian political ideas were adopted by the 
Church Fathers and modified in the Christian political doctrine. 
Already Augustine, following in the footsteps of Plato and Aris- 
totle, insisted on a difference between the monarch and the tyr- 
ant and advocated true government limited by the law. 

Aristotle’s Polis translated into Latin in the thirteenth cen- 
tury by Wilhelm von Merbeke evoked much interest and 
exercised the minds of numerous commentators, among them 
Thomas Aquinas, Albert the Great, and others. In the four- 
teenth century it was translated into French and commented on 
by Nicholas of Oresme. The fifteenth century saw the first trans- 
lation of Politics from Greek into Latin in Italy. It was made by 
Leonardo Aretino and published in Venice in 1498. 

Besides the monarchy-tyranny antithesis, Thomas Aquinas 
also adopted Aristotle’s conception of the law (the relation of the 
law and the form of government, the rationality and justice of 


168 





the law, etc.) and many other notions of the Aristotelian doc- 
trine of the forms of government. 

Referring to Aristotle as “the Philosopher”, Thomas Aquinas 
and other contemporary commentators held him in very high 
esteem. 

It is very characteristic of the medieval theologians’ attitude 
to Aristotle that even Dante, with his deep reverence for the 
“teacher of those who have knowledge” placed Aristotle in hell 
(together with Socrates, Plato and other great pagans), though 
only in the first circle. In his De Monarchia Dante used a number 
of Aristotelian arguments in support of his ideal of world 
monarchy. He, for one, invoked “the Philosopher’s”’ authority 
to substantiate his views on the difference between the true 
monarchy and the false one (tyranny) and on the realisation of 
true freedom under a correct form of government. 

According to Dante, all the elements of the state (family, vil- 
lage, city), as well as statehood in general come about in a 
natural way. Yet nature endowed mankind with a higher unity 
constituting, in his opinion, the natural-right foundation of the 
world monarchy. A state community correctly organised under 
the rule of a sovereign aims at the realisation of the natural prin- 
ciples of the highest human community (“humana civilitas”) 
which bears a distinct stamp of the Aristotelian polity. 

A number of Aristotle’s ideas (about the social structure of the 
state, the place and functions of different social strata in political 
life, the part played by the law, etc.) were borrowed and reor- 
iented in a peculiar way by Marsiglio of Padua who adduced the 
great philosopher of antiquity in support of his own theory of the 
right of a people to legislative power. The conceptions devel- 
oped by Aristotle in his Politics were thus used by Marsiglio un- 
der very different historical conditions as a means for substan- 
tiating the doctrine of people’s sovereignty anticipating in fact 
the social theory of Rousseau. 

Having got a new lease of life from Dante and Marsiglio of 
Padua, the hoary political doctrine of Aristotle remolded by 
Niccolo Machiavelli, an ideologist of rising bourgeoisie, blos- 
somed out as an original theory of politics freed from the in- 
fluence of ethics and characteristic of the spirit of modern times.! 


! See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, ““The German Ideology”, in: Karl 
Marx, Frederick Engels, Collected Works, Vol. 5, 1976, p. 322. 


169 





Proceeding from a new conception of the state, law and politics, 
Machiavelli used creatively the achievements of his ancient pre- 
decessors, particularly Aristotle, whose Politics had gained exten- 
sive circulation by that time (sixteenth century) and was being 
widely commented on. 

Though Aristotle’s Politics is an independent work having its 
own subject, it is based on ethical principles and in fact merges 
with his Ethics. Society, according to Aristotle, arises out of the 
physical needs of man who is not self-sufficing and has to cooper- 
ate with other men in order to be sure of subsistence. Originat- 
ing in the bare needs of life society continues for the sake of a 
good life. Thus society and the state (conceived by Aristotle as 
one), as well as the science which deals with them, have an ethi- 
cal rather than a merely utilitarian aim. The commonly held 
view of Aristotle as the originator and father of the political 
science is correct in the sense that Aristotle, proceeding from the 
political philosophy of Plato, was the first to single out a certain 
field of human relations and make it the object of an indepen- 
dent study.’ Yet what he regarded as political science was in fact 
a much broader complex including also ethics and economics. 

The trend towards the differentiation of what originally 
appeared as an undivided whole, characteristic of modern times, 
is clearly manifest, for instance, in the economic treatise of 
Nicholas of Oresme who mainly concentrates on the economic 
aspects of Aristotle’s Politics. Machiavelli focuses on the political 
aspects of Aristotle’s teaching and it is not accidental that his in- 
terest centres upon the Aristotelian investigation into the causes 
of social unrest and revolutions, changes of constitutions, sources 
and causes of party strife and faction, i. e. upon the dynamics of 
political life. 

Seeking to comprehend the internal logic of political rela- 
tions, Machiavelli, like Aristotle and other ancient writers, turns 
his eyes to the climatic and environmental factors influencing 
the character of people and forms of their intercourse, the socio- 
political significance of property, wealth and poverty, the 
natural causes of the formation of states, etc. 

The interest in practical politics was not alien to Aristotle who 
regarded his political science as a practical guide. Yet political 
practices were conceived by Aristotle in the idealist manner, 
within the framework of ethical principles. In point of fact, his 
empiricism and realism were subordinate to comprehensive 


170 





idealist ethical models whereby the philosopher sought to com- 
prehend and construct the world of human relations. By con- 
trast, Machiavelli’s approach to political phenomena is free 
from such ethico-ideal “‘interference”’ and “prejudice’’, and this 
was a tremendous advance on the political theory of the Greek 
philosopher. 

The “secular’’ tendency in the Aristotelian political teaching 
was also adopted and made more prominent by Jean Bodin who 
largely follows Aristotle in his analysis of natural and geographic 
factors, the role of proprietary inequality in political revolutions, 
the specificity of state power as compared with other kinds of 
authority, the distinctions of monarchy from tyranny, etc. Inci- 
dentally, on this latter point Aristotle also exerted a considerable 
influence on the monarchomachists. 

A number of political ideas of Aristotle, for instance, about 
the role of geographic and climatic factors, the forms of govern- 
ment, their principles and changes, the correspondence between 
the laws and institutions of a given form of government, etc. 
were developed by Charles Louis de Montesquieu. 

An important change in the approach to the political theory 
of Aristotle and to ancient political thought in general is con- 
nected with the names of Rousseau and Hegel. 

The whole concept of the Aristotelian political science rests on 
the difference and contrast between the political and despotic 
principles of government and rule. In hke manner, Rousseau 
conceives the state based on the principles of the social contract 
as political, civil society contrasting with its antipode and alter- 
native — the despotic form of government. Hence the state of the 
social contract in Rousseau, like the political community in 
Aristotle, is an ideal construction, and the despotic form of gov- 
ernment castigated with equal severity by both writers, is a non- 
political, stateless condition of individuals. 

The problem of the relationship between the state as a whole 
(political organism) and its parts (individual citizens) is treated 
by Rousseau along similar Platonic-Aristotelian lines. He even 
uses similar arguments—the whole is more important than its 
parts, the body cannot do harm to its members, etc. This supra- 
individualistic understanding of the nature of the political whole 
is expressed by Rousseau in the classical formula of universal 
will which is different from the will of all. The universal will in 
the state of social contract is directed towards the attainment of 


171 


the common good, i. e. the political ideal Plato and Aristotle 
were never tired of speaking about in the context of the correct 
or true forms of government. The achievement of this goal both 
in the Platonic-Aristotelian political theory and in Rousseau’s 
doctrine of the universal will, its formation and operation, im- 
peratively demands that all kinds of party faction, strife, dissen- 
sion and internecine war be resolutely excluded from political 
life. Hegel’s attitude to ancient political thought in general and 
to the Platonic-Aristotelian theory in particular clearly reveals 
the influence of Rousseau on one important point: Hegel owes 
to the French philosopher the conception of universal will as 
opposed to the will of all. The universal will in Hegel’s interpre- 
tation is the principle of the modern state, and the state in 
Hegel’s eyes, as well as in the eyes of Plato and Aristotle, is the 
absoluté end, the ethical wholeness of the politically organised 
life of the people. The Hegelian understanding of the state as the 
ethical whole is in fact identical with the Platonic-Aristotelian 
conception of the ethical foundation of the political whole, the 
moral character of man’s life in the state as the highest political 
community, 

Describing the relation of the state whole and its parts, Hegel 
also resorts to the Organistic notions of Plato and Aristotle and 
reiterates, with appropriate modifications, the idea of Aristotle 
that the state is by nature prior to the earlier forms of society 
(family and village), “for it is the end of them”, i. e. it represents 
their entelechy. 

Pointing out the inadequacy of the politico-legal views of 
Plato and Aristotle limited by the historical conditions of their 
epoch, Hegel stressed that their conception of morality did not 
recognise man as a subject of individual rights and liberties and 
did not regard him as a morally self-sufficing person. This prin- 
ciple of subjective freedom was an outgrowth ofa later period. It 
took root, according to Hegel, only thanks to Christianity assert- 
ing the independent value of man as an individual and the 
equality of all people. As regards the Greeks, they rose, in 
Hegel’s opinion, to ethical reality but did not attain the stage of 
morality. In other words, the ancient state representing the in- 
terest of the public repressed personality instead of building 
upon it and deprived man of individual moral freedom. 

Thus Rousseau and Hegel, following different paths and pur- 
suing different aims revived and re-emphasised the ethical 


172 








aspect of the political teaching of Plato and Aristotle which had 
been rejected by Machiavelli inclining in theory and practice 
towards the sophists (particularly Thrasymachus) and justifying 
immorality in politics. 

In yet another way did the Aristotelian political doctrine in- 
fluence Kantian philosophy. Kant proceeds from the actually 
existing gap between theory and practice and, accordingly, 
between morality and politics. Yet these apparently opposite 
spheres are not merely alien, estranged from each other — their 
relations, according to Kant, are characterised by a good deal of 
tension. Kant believes in the theoretical possibility of basing 
politics on moral principles, but assigns its realisation in practice 
to the categorical imperative. Criticising the practical politician 
from the viewpoint of the theoretical politician, Kant uses argu- 
ments very similar to those adduced by Plato and Aristotle in 
their polemic against the sophists. 

Some Western authors, seeking to modernise Aristotle in 
terms of contemporary topical problems, not infrequently 
detached his political teaching from its ancient context and in- 
terpreted a number of his propositions into an anticipation of 
the doctrines of constitutionalism, legal state, separation of 
powers, etc. 

Thus Werner Jaeger, a recognised authority among Western 
historians of antiquity whose work on Aristotle’s Metaphysics 
(1912) is claimed to have marked the dawn of a new era in the 
study of the Aristotelian heritage, has done much to breathe new 
life into the political ideals of Plato and Aristotle. Holding them 
up as models for restructuring contemporary states, Jaeger, 
though not a Hegelian himself, urged the statesmen to learn 
political wisdom from the Greek philosophers and strive to bring 
the power of the state in harmony with its ideal, as it is only un- 
der the conditions of such a harmony that a state can preserve 
the moral health and symmetry of the people’s community and 
withstand the external and internal pressures.! 

In the opinion of Joachim Ritter, the ancient political theory 
of the classical period, particularly the teaching of Aristotle, pro- 
vides eternal standards valid for all states and all societies. This 
everlasting character and perpetuity of the Aristotelian proposi- 


! See Werner Jaeger, Humanistische Reden und Vortrage, Walter de Gruyter & 
Co., Berlin, 1960, S. 102. 


173 





tions derive, according to Ritter, from Aristotle’s conception of 
human nature as the substance of the state, law, political order 
and morality. 

Viewing from this angle the modernisation of the natural 
right doctrine, a topical problem in the contemporary theory of 
law, he proposes to solve it along Aristotelian lines, i. e. by mak- 
ing a start from human nature which is the source and the truth 
of contemporary law. Modifying this renovated Aristotelianism 
after the fashion of Hegel, Joachim Ritter asserts that positive 
law is based on the reason of reality, and not on a transcendent 
idea.! 

The Aristotelian doctrine of law and justice, his criticism of 
Platonic “communism” and arguments for private property and 
against common property has also been readily subscribed to by 
such a prominent Western scholar of the Aristotelian political 
thought as Walter Siegfried, who, in addition, reads the “legal 
state” and kind of a “social compact” into Aristotle’s mind.? 

In contrast with Siegfried, who equates despotic rule and tyr- 
anny stigmatised by Aristotle with a totalitarian state in the 
modern sense, Karl Popper describes Aristotle as an enemy of 
the “open society”, and his teaching, as one of the ancient foun- 
tain-heads (alongside the Heraclitean and Platonic doctrines) of 
medieval and modern totalitarianism, Invoking the ‘‘Aristote- 
lian roots of Hegelianism”’, Popper links ancient political theory 
to modern totalitarianism.? : 

Describing the Aristotelian teaching as totalitarian, Popper in 
fact not only ignores the principle of concrete historical 
approach in the assessment of ancient political doctrines, but 
clearly side-steps those aspects of Aristotle’s political theory 
(e. g. his arguments in support of rational egoism, criticism of 
despotic rule, tyranny and all other forms of government) which 
do not consort with his alleged advocacy of totalitarianism. 

Upholding, like Popper, bourgeois liberalism and sharing his 
positivist views, Ernst Topitsch subjects Aristotle and Plato to 
severe criticism and even goes as far as completely denying any 


' See Joachim Ritter, Metaphysik und Politik. Studien zu Aristoteles und Hegel, 
Suhrkamp Verlag, Frankfurt am Main, 1969, S. 105, 177, 179. 

? See Walter Siegfried, Der Rechtsgedanke bei Aristoteles, Schulthess & Co., 
A. G., Zurich, 1947, S. 47, 51-54, 68, 74-76. 

3 Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, pp. 1-27. 


174 





cognitive value of their theories on the grounds that both 
ancient philosophers based their analysis of politico-legal sub- 
jects on axiological models of thought (technomorphic, socio- 
morphic, etc.) which are rejected by positivism, together with 
all axiological categories in general, as metaphysical and 
unverifiable. 

In the opinion of Topitsch, the theoretical propositions of 
Plato and Aristotle were nothing else than the philosophical 
rationalisation of pristine shamanism and the true, though 
hidden, motive for their theorising was the desire to cast off the 
yoke of reality. Plato and Aristotle, according to Topitsch, first 
saddle man with a hierarchical structure of his soul where the 
ignoble part is subordinated to the mind, and then invoke this 
pattern which is in fact a preconceived model of their perfect 
state, as an argument in support of their political ideal—the 
“authoritarian form of government’. This is nothing but tauto- 
logy, arguing in a circle, in which the conclusion is unwarranta- 
bly assumed in the hypothesis. 

In our opinion, this stultification of Aristotle and Plato results 
from the anti-historicity of Topitsch’s own approach— equally 
axiological, for that matter, since the arguments against the 
authoritarian state and for the liberal-democratic state can arise 
from no other source than a definite scale of values. 

Any progress in the cognition of politico-legal phenomena in- 
volves of necessity a definite axiological orientation based on a 
system of social and ethical values. To be sure, the mere selec- 
tion of such values from among those already appreciated by 
mankind is not yet sufficient to give an impetus to political 
thought. Each real advance in political theory must reveal new 
spiritual and socio-political values and is bound to enrich 
human culture. Aristotle was one of those great thinkers who 
deepened and expanded human knowledge and opened up new 
horizons in the studies of the state, law and _ politics. 








CHAPTER THREE 


HELLENISTIC PERIOD 


(Late Fourth-Second Centuries B. C.) 


1. EPICURUS 


The life of Epicurus (341-270 B. C.) was contemporaneous 
with the period of political disintegration of the Greek world. 
Towards the end of the fourth century B. C. the Greek polises 
one after another lost their independence and succumbed first to 
the Macedoneans and then to the Romans. The unprecedented 
military conquests of Alexander the Great ushered in the epoch 
of Hellenisation of the East and formation of vast Hellenistic 
monarchies. In the middle of the second century B. C. Macedon 
itself fell a prey to Rome and became one of its provinces. 

The decline of Greek political thought characteristic of this 
period clearly manifests itself in the Epicurean and Stoic 
teachings. 

Epicurus was born at Samos in the family of an Athenian 
teacher. Having left his native island, he visited a number of 
Hellenic cities and finally settled at Athens. There he bought a 
house with garden, gathered a group of friends and followers 
and in 307 B. C. opened his school —the famous “‘Garden”’ that 
went down in history as one of the chief philosophical schools of 
the Hellenistic epoch. 

Epicurus was a voluminous writer. His main work Of Nature 
consisted of 37 books. However, the greater part of his literary 
heritage was lost and we possess only a few of his letters, isolated 
fragments of several treatises and some aphorisms. 

Epicurus’s philosophical views were the continuation and 
further development of the Democritean atomistic doctrine 
which he supplemented by his conception of spontaneous, inter- 
nally conditioned swerve or declination of the atoms from the 
rectilinear path. It was an important advance on the rigid and 
fatalistic teaching of Democritus whereby Epicurus accounted 


176 








Rr ERS 


for random collisions of atoms and the emergence of the world in 
terms of chance and necessity, leaving room for the concept of 
freedom and opening a way for a more flexible understanding of 
natural laws. 

Epicurus taught that all knowledge is based on sense percep- 
tions which result from the penetration of the “images” or 
“idols” of things into the organs of the senses. Falsehood and 
error, according to Epicurus, “‘always lie in the addition of 
opinion with regard to (what is waiting) to be confirmed or not 
contradicted, and then is not confirmed (or is contradicted)” 
(Epicurus, The Extant Remains, “Letter to Herodotus”, I, 50, 
Oxford at the Clarendon Press, 1926, p. 29). Propounding the 
idea of innumerable worlds, Epicurus recognised the possibility 
of the existence of worlds similar to ours - with living beings, 
plants, etc. Nature, according to Epicurus, develops in accor- 
dance with its own laws without any interference on the part of 
the gods. Conceding the existence of gods and recognising the 
idea of the ‘‘blessed and immortal nature’, Epicurus gave it a 
purely atheistic interpretation which sharply contrasted with 
the contemporary religious notions. Indeed, he lodged the gods 
in the spaces between worlds and denied them any influence on 
nature or human society. In point of fact, he recognised the gods 
in ethical, rather than physical terms. 

Epicurus writes: ‘‘For gods their are, since the knowledge of 
them is by clear vision. But they are not such as the many 
believe them to be: for indeed they do not consistently represent 
them as they believe them to be. And the impious man is not he 
who denies the gods of the many, but he who attaches to the 
gods the beliefs of the many. For the statements of the many 
about the gods are not conceptions derived from sensation, but 
false suppositions, according to which the greatest misfortunes 
befall the wicked and the greatest blessings (the good) by the gift 
of the gods” (Epicurus, The Extant Remains, ‘“Letter to Menoe- 
ceus”, III, 123-124, pp. 83-85). 

The “philosophical gods” of Epicurus not only hold them- 
selves apart from the world of nature letting things follow their 
natural course, but are also completely indifferent to human 
affairs. Rejecting the idea of divine providence and asserting the 
ethical independence of man, Epicurus contends that it is only 
by cognising nature and reasonably following its dictates that 
man can free himself from fears and superstitions and attain 


177 
12 413 








happiness. “It is vain to ask of the goods what a man is capable 
of supplying for himself’ (Epicurus, The Extant Remains, “‘Frag- 
ments”, LXV, p. 117). 

The moral theory of Epicurus linking his physical conceptions 
with politico-legal notions is the central part of his philosophy. 
In point of fact, his whole teaching is permeated with his ethical 
ideas. The Epicurean ethics centres upon the principle of pleas- 
ure which gives man happiness and relieves him of pain and suf- 
fering. Explaining the essence of his ethical doctrine, Epicurus 
says: ‘‘When therefore we maintain that pleasure is the end, we 
do not mean the pleasures of profligates and those that consist in 
sensuality, as is supposed by some who are either ignorant or dis- 
agree with us or do not understand, but freedom from pain in 
the body and from trouble in the mind” (Epicurus, The Extant 
Remains, “Letter to Menoeceus”, III, 131, p. 89). 

In Epicurus’s eyes pleasure is a good which is not entirely 
identical with bodily enjoyment though it cannot be conceived 
without it. True pleasure is only accessible to a prudent man, 
particularly a sage. [t consists in the understanding that one 
cannot live pleasantly without living prudently and honourably 
and justly, nor again live a life of prudence, honour and justice 
without living pleasantly. 

The study of nature and the scientific explanation of the 
causes and aims of man’s behaviour are absolutely essential for 
the attainment of happiness and play an important part in the 
Epicurean moral philosophy. In practical life, according to Epi- 
curus, it is better to fail in a well-considered choice than to suc- 
ceed in a poor one. In his opinion, unhappiness with wisdom is 
preferable to happiness without it. 

Epicurean ethics as a whole, as well as its principal values, 
i. e. pleasure, freedom and ataraxia (the soul’s tranquillity) is 
essentially individualistic. Happiness is attained by man 
through conscious efforts and comes to him as a reward for 
thinking and acting in accordance with the dictates of nature. 

Epicurus attached great ethical importance to the scientific 
view of the world: without understanding nature and knowing 
which events happen by necessity and which by chance man is 
bound to remain a slave to the fate. Man’s freedom, according 
to Epicurus, consists in his responsibility for all choice and avoi- 
dance, i. e. for the selection of the correct course in life. The 
sphere of man’s freedom is the sphere of his responsibility for his 


178 








own destiny: according to Epicurus, “‘with us lies the chief 
power in determining events, some of which happen by necessity 
and some by chance, and some are within our control”. While 
necessity cannot be called to account, a wise man “sees that 
chance is inconstant, but that which is in our control is subject to 
no master, and to it are naturally attached praise and blame” 
(ibid., “Letter to Menoeceus”, III, 133, p. 91). 

Freedom, in the view of Epicurus, does not coincide with 
necessity: “‘Necessity is an evil, but there is no necessity to live 
under the control of necessity” (ibid, ‘““Fragments”’, IX, p. 107). 
In order to attain freédom, a man must be able to differentiate 
between the sphere of necessity and that of chance and, besides, 
he must learn to satisfy only his natural and necessary needs. A 
wise and free man taking due account of what is necessary does 
not become a slave to necessity. An essential feature of a free 
man is the ability to control his passions and desires and to be 
content with little: ‘““The greatest fruit of self-sufficiency is free- 
dom” (ibid., “Fragments”, LXXVII, p. 119). 

Characteristic of the Epicurean ethical teaching is the advo- 
cacy of political indifference and avoidance of active participa- 
tion in public affairs. ““We must release ourselves from the prison 
of affairs and politics,” he preaches (ibid., “Fragments”, LVIII, 
p. 115). He equally sets his face against ambition and money- 
grubbing because striving after wealth and luxury, no less than 
after fame and position, implies cringing before the mob or the 
rulers. Maintaining the natural end of life, i. e. repose and hap- 
piness, a free man will not willingly aim at public office. 

The Epicurean conception of freedom also implies man’s in- 
dependence from society, the opinion of the “mob”, etc. The 
veneration of a sage is a great boon for the venerators them- 
selves, and not for the sage. It is only by secluding himself from 
society with its petty political intrigues and rivalries that man 
can attain to freedom and the calm of mind and lead a happy 
and cheerful life in the narrow circle of intimate friends holding 
the same views. This indeed was the mode of life cultivated in 
the Epicurean “Garden”. 

The chief aim of the state administration and the purpose of a 
political community consist, according to Epicurus, in providing 
safety for all its members, protecting them from one another and 
ridding from mutual fear. True safety, in his view, can only 
result from a quiet life and the retirement from the world. 


179 
12° 





Within the lramework of a political organisation it is secured to 
some extent by a certain force of expulsion removing trouble- 
some individuals (ibid., IV, “Principal Doctrines”, 143, XIV). 

This understanding of the essence and aim of a political com- 
munity underlies the Epicurean doctrine of the state and law 
which, according to Epicurus, arise from people’s agreement 
about their ‘mutual advantage to restrain men from harming 
one another and save them from being harmed” (ibid., ‘‘Princi- 
pal Doctrines”, 150, XXXI). 

In the interpretation of Epicurus, justice, as well as the 
state and the laws are artificial products of convention 
though they do agree with the prescripts and dictates of 
nature understood correctly. Yet there is no primordial, eternal 
and immutable justice as such which arises naturally and does 
not depend on men’s compact about the advantages of their 
mutual safety. Epicurus explicitly states that “justice never is 
anything in itself, but in the dealings of men with one another in 
any place whatever and at any time it is a kind of compact not to 
harm or be harmed” (ibid., ‘Principal Doctrines’’, 
150,XXXHI). 

In his view, the criterion of justice and injustice is only applic- 
able to the participants in the compact, i. e. men and peoples. 
The very notion of justice is mutable depending on the peculiar- 
ities of one or another country, the circumstances which change 
in the course of time, etc. However, with all its mutability, “in 
its general aspect justice is the same for all, for it is a kind of 
mutual advantage in the dealings of men with one another” 
(ibid., “Principal Doctrines”, 151,XX XVI). 

Every place and every period of time have their own justice, 
i. e. their natural notion of what is just. Yet all the “justices” 
have one thing in common - they all derive from an agreement 
about mutual advantages of the participants in the compact. 
Therefore, if certain actions which were at one time considered 
just because they accorded with the requirements of men’s deal- 
ings with one another come into conflict, due to a change in cir- 
cumstances, with the new natural notions of justice, such actions 
are indeed unjust as they ceased being useful for advantageous 
intercourse among members of a community. The actions of 
men, the activity of authorities and the laws themselves must 
correspond (in a given place, at a given time and under a given 
set of circumstances) to the notions of justice underlying the 


180 






compact of men about their common good. According to Epi- 
curus, “if a man makes a law and it does not turn out to lead to 
advantage in men’s dealings with each other, then it no longer 
has the essential nature of justice” (op. cit, “‘Principal Doc- 
trines”, 152, XXXVII). 

As is evidenced from this relationship with the law, “justice” 
is conceived by Epicurus as natural right changing in substance 
in accordance with place, time and circumstances and reflecting 
the demands of men’s mutually beneficial dealings with one 
another. The leading element of this relationship between 
natural right and the law, the fountain-head of the natural 
notions of justice is nothing else than the changeful practical 
needs of men’s partnership with one another. 

A change in these needs results in a corresponding change in 
the notion of the common good, i. e. of what is regarded as jus- 
tice. Here justice or natural right with changing substance is 
conceived as the criterion of correspondence between the law 
and the changing needs of people on the one hand and the 
changing natural notions of justice, on the other. By these 
changing notions of justice and injustice which correspond to the 
requirements of men’s co-operation with one another Epicurus 
in fact implies what in later political theory came to be known as 
the sense of right. 

Taking a materialist view of politico-legal problems, Epicurus 
regards the content of the mutually beneficial social compact 
and, consequently, the notions of justice, as secondary, and the 
practical needs of people’s dealings with one another, as pri- 
mary. The notions of justice, as well as their change are conceived 
as a result and product of the changing social needs of mankind. 

The laws which are not at variance with the principles of jus- 
tice must be observed by all, since any violation of such laws or 
deviation from the course they prescribe constitutes an act of in- 
justice. In the opinion of Epicurus, “injustice is not an evil in 
itself, but only in consequence of the fear which attaches to the 
apprehension of being unable to escape those appointed to 
punish such actions” (ibid., “Principal Doctrines”, 151, 
XXXIV). 

Considering it of paramount importance to rid man of fears 
which harass his soul, bewilder his mind and make repose and 
happiness unattainable, Epicurus, it will be noticed, argues the 
need to observe the laws from psychological and ethical rather 





181 











than social, political or legal considerations. Indeed, the anxiety 
of a law-breaker is one of those fears the Epicurean ethics, this 
peculiar “fear therapy”, is primarily intended to dispel. It is not 
accidental that Epicurus recommended that men concern them- 
selves with the healing of their lives. 

The psycho-ethical motives of Epicurus for law-abidingness 
also provide a clue to his rather uncommon description of the 
laws as a means for protecting the “wise” (i. e. the morally per- 
fect persons) from the “mob”, as kind of a public guarantee of 
the moral freedom and independence of an individual: ‘““The 
laws exist for the sake of the wise, not that they may not do 
wrong, but that they may not suffer it” (ibid., “Fragments”, 81, 
p. 139). 

The strain of political indifference in Epicurus is not to be un- 
derstood, of course, as complete detachment of his moral philos- 
ophy from social problems. The Epicurean conception of the 
state, law and justice allegedly originating from the social com- 
pact was essentially democratic by its objective socio-political 
tendency, since all the participants in the compact were 
regarded as equal and none possessed any privileges over others. 
Yet Epicurus, a convinced individualist, held a negative view of 
extreme democracy and sharply counterposed the wise man to 
the many. Dissociating himself from the “mob” and its ideals, 
Epicurus wrote: “I was never anxious to please the mob. For 
what pleased them, I did not know, and what I did know, was 
far removed from their comprehension”’ (ibid., ““Fragments’’, 
43, p. 131). Generally speaking, his moral code accorded the 
most or rather disagreed the least with a moderate form of 
democracy based on the rule of law and providing the greatest 
possible degree of individual freedom. 

The teaching of Epicurus had a strong appeal to certain sec- 
tions of contemporary society and won numerous adherents not 
only in Greece, but also in Rome. The most famous of them was 
the Roman poet and materialist philosopher Titus Lucretius 
Carus (c. 99-55 B. C.) who expounded the atomistic views of 
Epicurus in his poem De Rerum Natura. Epicureanism left a pro- 
found imprint on the intellectual history of humanity. The ethi- 
cal individualism and utilitarianism of Epicurus exerted a 
notable influence on later moral doctrines whereas his concep- 
tion of social compact as the source of the state and law gave a 
powerful impetus to the development of political theory. 


182 


2. THE STOICS 





The founder of Stoicism was Zeno (336-264 B. C.) of Citium, a 
half-Greek and half-Phoenician colony in Cyprus. Having set- 
tled in Athens, he opened his school] and started giving lectures 
in a roofed gallery known as Stoa pozkile or ‘“‘painted porch” 
(whence the name of the school) adorned with frescoes and fre- 
quented by poets. 

The history of Stoicism is traditionally divided into three per- 
iods: Early Stoicism, Middle Stoicism, and Late or Roman 
Stoicism. The main representatives of the Early Stoa were, 
besides Zeno himself, Cleanthes (331-232 B. C.) and Chrysippus 
(277-208 B. C.). The Middle Stoa was represented by Panaetius 
(185-110 B. C.) and Posidonius (135-51 B. C.), and the Late 
(Roman) Stoa, by Marcus Seneca (3-65 A. D.), Epictetus 
(50-130 A. D.) and Marcus Aurelius (121-180 A. D.). 

The Stoics divided their philosophical system into three main 
parts: logic, physics, and ethics. The problems of the state, law 
and politics figure in each of them, but receive special attention 
under the head of ethics. Cleanthes divided philosophy into six 
departments distinguishing politics as an object of independent 
studies alongside dialectic, rhetoric, ethics, physics and theology 
or the teaching of gods. In a more detailed classification of the 
above departments rhetoric as a part of logic was further divided 
by the Stoics into deliberative, forensic and solemn. 

In their physical theory the Stoics posited two principles in 
the universe — the active and the passive. ‘“The passive principle, 
then, is a substance without quality, i. e. matter, whereas the 
active is the reason inherent in this substance, that is God. For 
he is everlasting and is the artificer of each several thing 
throughout the whole extent of matter” (Diogenes Laertius, 
Lives of Eminent Philosophers. Zeno, V11, 134). Similar views were 
propounded by Zeno, Cleanthes, Chrysippus, Archedemus, 
Posidonius, and others. They held that god, reason, fate, Zeus, 
etc. are but different names of one and the same thing. 

From the standpoint of ethical and political philosophy much 
importance attaches to the notion of “cosmos” developed in the 
Stoic physics. The ‘‘cosmos”’, according to the Stoics, is first and 
foremost god which is conceived as the creator of the world 
order. Yet the ‘‘cosmos”’ is simultaneously the totality of the 
heaven and the earth and all the creatures abounding there, 


183 








that is the gods and men and everything created for their sake. 

The universe as a whole is governed by necessity or fate which 
determines all celestial and terrestrial phenomena and binds all 
things in a single system of cause-effect relationships. Conceived 
as some kind of unity of divine providence and reason (logos) on 
the one hand, and natural necessity, on the other, fate, accord- 
ing to Chrysippus, rules everything. Nothing in the world occurs 
without a cause, and, consequently, everything is necessary. 
Being more consistent than the Epicureans in their determinism, 
the Stoics in fact carry it to the extreme of fatalism. Fate in their 
eyes is an endless succession of causes and consequences or the 
logos governing the universe. 

Fate as the ruling and dominating principle (hegemonikon) is 
simultaneously the logos of the universe or the law of all being in 
the universe controlled by providence. Fate in Stoicism emerges 
as natural or universal law which is divine by nature and is in 
fact identical with god. Zeno taught that natural law is divine 
by nature and wields the power to enjoin the right and forbid 
the wrong. 

In accordance with the ethical doctrine of Stoicism, the 
human soul is a part of nature and the universe as a whole. 
Hence the main ethical precept of Stoicism-—to live in agree- 
ment with nature, which means to follow the dictates of reason 
or natural (universal) law of the universe, to lead an honest, vir- 
tuous life. Chrysippus said that the true end of life is to live in 
conformity with one’s own nature and with the universal nature 
doing nothing prohibited by the universal law, i. e. the logos 
pervading all things. This logos, according to Chrysippus, was 
also innate in Zeus, the organiser and creator of all things. 

Bringing his actions in conformity with the ruling fate, with 
the reason and will of the Demiurge, the wise man attains happi- 
ness and the fullness of life. He is guided by reason, and not pas- 
sion (pathos). Rooting out one’s passions with the help of reason 
and attaining entire freedom from the emotions (apathy) is 
absolutely indispensable for virtuous life, since passion, accord- 
ing to Zeno, is a disease, a disturbance of the soul incompatible 
with common sense and running counter to nature. Therefore 
under the head of virtues or the good the Stoics included, along- 
side justice, courage and temperance, also prudence or the vir- 
tue of reason concerned primarily with the good. The evil, 
according to the Stoics, was their opposites— injustice, cowar- 


184 





=e. 
— — a 





dice, lack of restraint and imprudence. 

“Apathy” in Stoicism is not ordinary indifference or lack of 
will. It only implies indifference to things which, however much 
they may be valued in life, are empty and trifling in terms of 
universal reason, i. e. are not in conformity with the eternal logos 
of the cosmos. Indeed, pleasure is transitory and tiresome, fame 
is devoid of judgement and sinks into oblivion, man becomes 
ashes or a skeleton, and only a name remains after him, or not a 
name even. ‘‘Apathy” is conceived by the Stoics as the rational 
attitude coincident with the universal reason and at the same 
time as a drive towards activity prompted by that reason. 

Will as rational urge is the opposite of desire and emerges in 
Stoic ethics as duty. On the evidence of Diogenes Laertius, Zeno 
was the first to use the word “‘duty” deriving it from “due”, i. e. 
understanding it as the action of natural objects. Of the actions 
resulting from desire some are in conformity with duty, others 
are against duty, and still others are indifferent. Things accord- 
ing with duty are those inspired by reason, i. e. showing piety 
towards one’s parents, brothers and fatherland, being complai- 
sant with one’s friends. Contrary to duty is what is not prompted 
by reason. The wise man, according to the Stoics, is entirely free 
from emotions. His resignation to fate is nothing but the expres- 
sion of his understanding of the laws and logos of the universe. 
He avoids public affairs only to the extent to which they may 
run counter to his understanding of his duty. However, in con- 
trast with Epicurus who maintained that the sage must not take 
part in politics unless he is compelled to, Chrysippus taught 
“that the wise man will take part in politics, if nothing hinders 
him ... since thus he will restrain vice and promote virtue”’ (Dio- 
genes Laertius, VII, 121). “Not yet will the wise man live in soli- 
tude; for he is naturally made for society and action” (ibid., 
VII, 123). 

The moral theory of Stoicism was formed under a strong in- 
fluence of the Cynic school founded by Socrates’s pupil Antis- 
thenes. The Stoics held that the wise man ought to lead the life 
of a Cynic as the mode of thinking and acting of the Cynics was 
the shortest way to virtue. Freedom is only accessible to a sage, a 
virtuous man, and all the others are slaves as they are deprived 
of the possibility of acting independently. Slavery is contrasted 
with despotism which is also evil for, according to the moral doc- 
trine of Stoicism, the despot is guided in his actions not by rea- 


185 
13113 








son, but by passions and desires. The ruler, according to the 
Stoics, must distinguish between the good and the bad, but 
vicious men are incapable of doing so. Only the sages, a scat- 
tered few, and not the vast multitude of men, mostly fools, pos- 
sess the powers to rule, are versed in judicature and endowed 
with the gift of eloquence. 

Such Stoic notions of the sages as true rulers were but a modi- 
fication of the Platonic conception of the rule of philosophers. 
Civil society, according to the Stoics, is based on the natural 
bonds of men, their attraction to one another. Hence, the state is 
conceived by the Stoics as a natural coalescence and not as an 
artificial formation based on a social compact. 

The Stoic doctrine of the natural origin of human society and 
socio-political life was in large measure shared by Cicero who 
expounded the views of the Stoics on the state and law. In the 
opinion of Cicero, people tend to get together, deliberate and 
unite owing to their gregarious nature. He quotes the Stoics as 
saying that the universe is governed by the will of the gods and 
that it is something in the nature of a common city and a com- 
munity of people and the gods and that each man is a part of this 
universe wherefore the public weal should be placed higher than 
the good of an individual. 

The Stoics held the view that justice in the intercourse of men 
in society derived from nothing else than the natural bonds 
among people, i. e. the conformity of their relations with the un- 
iversal (natural) law of the cosmos. The natural law was thus 
conceived by them as the embodiment of universal justice which 
played the part of the model for relations among people in the 
political community (state) and for the laws they enacted. 

Proceeding from the idea of the universal character of the 
natural law (and, consequently, justice by nature), Zeno and 
Chrysippus, as well as their Greek and Roman followers 
advanced a cosmopolitan doctrine of the state and contended 
that all men were citizens of a single world state both by their 
nature and by the law of the universe as a whole. ““My nature,” 
says the Stoic Emperor Aurelius, “is rational and social, and my 
city and my country, so far as I am Antoninus, is Rome, but so 
far as I am a man, it is the world.” 

Commenting on the cosmopolitan views of the Stoics, Plu- 
tarch describes as uncommon the political conception of Zeno, 
the founder of Stoicism, who considered all men to be his fellow- 


bb 








citizens and life to be one just as the universe is a unitary whole, 
instead of stressing the difference between various countries, 
cities, laws and customs. In the Stoic doctrine humanity 
emerges, according to Plutarch, as kind of a herd grazing on 
common pastures in accordance with the universal law. 

The very emphasis placed by the Stoics on the universality of 
the natural law and world state, their all-embracing character 
and indisputable power sapped the authority of the individual 
and particular polis governments, laws, customs and usages. 
Very indicative in this respect is their criticism, after the fashion 
of Plato and Diogenes the Cynic, of the family and advocacy of 
the community of wives. Besides the family, the Stoics also 
attacked such social, political and cultural institutions as law 
courts, temples, schools, commerce, money, etc. 

This cynic fervour of Stoicism, directed against cultural pro- 
gress, enlightenment and being essentially conservative and 
even reactionary was graphic evidence of the crisis of contem- 
porary slave-owning society and its values (social, political, legal 
and spiritual). 

From the standpoint of Stoic ethics based on the notions of 
natural law, slavery as a phenomenon of social life and as a 
socio-political institution has no justification because it runs 
counter to the universal logos and contradicts the conception of 
world citizenship. This idea propounded by Zeno in his Republic 
also underlies, though in a less explicit form, the typically Stoic 
contrast between freedom and slavery which is treated in ethical 
and spiritual rather than socio-political and legal terms. In the 
view of the Stoics, a wise (virtuous) man is free even in shackles 
(the famous Stoic philosopher Epictetus, it will be remembered, 
was a slave), whereas an evil man is always a slave whatever he 
may be. Truly free men are only sages and kings. In contrast to 
the despots (and evil men in general) they know what is good 
and what is bad in both divine and human affairs, wherefore the 
approval by the Stoics of royal government. According to 
ancient sources, Chrysippus held that royal powers were unlim- 
ited and monarchy could only be stable with the sages. Accord- 
ing to Diogenes Laertius, Zeno advocated the idea of mixed 
government and said that the best form of government was a 
mixture of democracy, kingship, and aristocracy (Diogenes 
Laertius, Lives of Eminent People. Keno, VII, 131). 

Proceeding from the idea of the orderly cosmos and the 


187 








natural order of society as the expression of absolute reason and 
purpose, the Stoics stood for strict observance of the human laws 
that were in accord with the law of nature. According to Zeno 
and Chrysippus, all sins are equal in terms of world justice. 
Other Stoics, e. g. Heracledes of Tarsus and Athenodorus, 
denied the equality of sins and advocated the idea of a differen- 
tiated approach to misdemeanours. On the whole, however, all 
the Stoics were singularly stern and unyielding on the questions 
of crime and punishment, their asperity arising from a very 
rigorous and exalted conception of man’s duty~— to live up to the 
tasks which god imposed upon him by placing him in the 
world. 

Virtuous men, the Stoics held, are austere for they do not in- 
dulge in the pleasures of life, nor transgress the limits of the rea- 
sonable sanctioned by the natural law. And they expect similar 
attitude on the part of others— the law of duty commands that 
every man should play his part in the world and quit it with dig- 
nity. The ideal sage and wise ruler must have no passions at all, 
as they are but disturbances of the mind and as a disease, ought 
not to be tolerated for a moment. “‘At the same time they are not 
pitiful and make no allowance for anyone, they never relax the 
penalties fixed by the law, since indulgence and pity and even 
equitable consideration are marks of a weak mind, which affects 
kindness in place of chastizing. Nor do they deem punishments 
too severe” (Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers. 
Keno, VII, 123). 

These and other prescripts of similar nature in fact sanctified 
the existing laws and objectively served to preserve slave-owning 
society with all its institutions. Though Stoicism apparently 
abounded in radical propositions and carried a considerable 
revolutionary potential, its exponents aimed their critical fer- 
vour towards the moral reformation of man and did not concern 
themselves with social and political reforms. What is more, their 
ethical ideal of the sage, the “‘virtuous man”, mainly appealed 
to the upper strata of society, its privileged, wealthy and edu- 
cated sections, and was too rigorous and stern for an ordinary 
man to follow. 

The conformism of Stoic philosophy, its patently innocuous 
socio-political character clearly manifested itself in the teaching 
of the Roman Stoics— Lucius Annaeus Seneca and Marcus Aurelius. 
The former held the highest offices in Imperial Rome and was 


188 





Nero’s tutor. When Nero was proclaimed Emperor, Seneca 
became the actual ruler of the Empire, but his political intrigues 
ended in suicide by order of his cruel and vindictive pupil. As 
regards Marcus Aurelius, Stoicism did not prevent him from 
being an Emperor and professing at the same time the doctrine 
of a ‘commonwealth based on equity and freedom of speech, 
and of a monarchy cherishing above all the liberty of the sub- 
ject” (Meditations, I, 14). 

In his only work Meditations written in Greek Marcus Aurelius 
expounds a doctrine of the world city and man as a citizen of the 
world. His reasoning runs thus: “If mind is common to us all, 
then also the reason, whereby we are reasoning beings, is com- 
mon. If this be so, then also the reason which enjoins what is to 
be done or left undone is common. If this be so, law also is com- 
mon; if this be so, we are citizens; if this be so, we are partakers 
in one constitution; if this be so, the Universe is a kind of Com- 
monwealth. For in what other common government can we say 
that the whole race of men partakes?” (Meditations, V, 30). 

The mind of the Whole, according to Marcus Aurelius, is 
social and demands intercourse among men. This, however, 
should not be chaotic, but conform to the existing rational order 
of the world. Hence the need for a universal hierarchy based on 
authority and subordination, and for general consensus among 
men, the most perfect of all beings, which is only attainable 
through the agency of Stoic philosophy. 

The most consistent exposition of the Stoic idea of the spiri- 
tual freedom of all people irrespective of their social position 
belongs to Seneca. The object and sphere of slavery, in his 
opinion, can only be his body, the sensible part of his being, but 
not his rational soul. Seneca writes: “It is a mistake for anyone 
to believe that the condition of slavery penetrates into the whole 
being of a man. The better part of him is exempt. Only the body 
is at the mercy and disposition of a master, but the mind is its 
own master.” ! 

The slaves, according to Seneca, are human beings like all 
other men and have similar mental faculties. Only the body of 


! Seneca, Works in Ten Volumes, Vol. III, Aforal Essays, in Three 
Volumes, Vol. III, ‘De Beneficiis”, III, 20, Harvard University Press, Cam- 
bridge, Mass., William Heinemann, Ltd., London, 1975, p. 165. 


189 





the slave can be sold and bought, not his free soul. Without 
rejecting slavery as a socio-political institution, Seneca at the 
same time sets himself against it on ethical grounds and comes 
out in defence of the human dignity of the slave. Championing a 
liberal attitude towards the slaves, he invokes the equal helpless- 
ness of the free men and the slaves in face of omnipotent fate as 
yet another argument for equality of all people: ‘“They are 
slaves, people declare. Nay, rather they are men. ‘Slaves!’. No, 
comrades. ‘Slaves’. No, they are our fellow-slaves, if one reflects 
that Fortune has equal rights over slaves and free men alike”’ 
(ibid., Vol. IV, “Ad Lucilium Epistulae Morales’, 47, 1). 

Characteristically, conceding the natural bondage of all man- 
kind to fate, Seneca castigates, after a typically Stoic fashion, 
man’s voluntary servitude and surrender of his human dignity to 
base instincts: ‘“Show me a man who is not a slave, one is a slave 
to lust, another to greed, another to ambition, and all men are 
slaves to fear... No servitude is more disgraceful than that which 
is self-imposed” (Seneca in Ten Volumes, Vol. IV, Ad Lucilium 
Epistulae Morales, XLVII. 17, 1979, p. 311). 

Sharing the views of his Greek counterparts, Seneca declares 
that god (which, in his opinion, can also be rightfully called 
Creative Reason, Fate, Providence, Nature or the World) is the 
ultimate cause of everything, the first of all the causes on which 
the others depend. The chain of events is determined by the 
eternal circulation of Fate. Following its preordained course, 
Fate sways all destinies and rules the universe asserting its jus- 
tice. People, in Seneca’s opinion, are unable to change the exist- 
ing world order which includes their own relations and must 
submit to the will of Fate with proud resignation accepting the 
laws of nature. 

Upholding the Stoic idea of the inseparable unity of the 
natural and human worlds, Seneca declares: “All that you 
behold, that which comprises both god and man, is one—we are 
the parts of one great body. Nature produced us related to one 
another, since she created us from the same source and to the 
same end” (ibid., XCV, 52, in Three Volumes, Vol. III, 1971). 
The highest good lies in reason which assimilates man to god 
and is nothing else than a portion of the divine spirit set in a 
human body. Besides reason, nature has also bestowed upon 
man the benefit of fellowship which accounts for the unity of the 
human race. Reason and fellowship gave people dominion over 


19 





animals, extended their sovereignty to the elements and enabled 
them to enjoy the advantages of communal life. 

In Seneca’s natural-right conception the all-powerful and 
divine ‘‘law of Fate” performs the function of natural law which 
governs all human institutions, the state and the laws inclusive, 
and is understood both as a fact of nature (the world order and 
the causal chain of events) and the imperative of reason. Reason 
as a fact and a norm of nature is also materialised in human 
society as a part of the world whole. The correspondence 
between the human relationships and the divine element arises 
from the universality of reason: human reason is but a part of 
divine reason. 

The universe, according to Seneca, is a natural state with its 
natural law; their recognition follows of necessity from the 
demands of reason. The members of this state in accordance 
with the law of nature are all people irrespective of whether they 
realise it or not. As regards separate communities of people, they 
are accidental! by nature and pertain only to a limited number of 
men, not to the whole human race. According to Seneca, we 
must have in our mind’s eye two states: one including the gods 
and the men without any frontiers, its limits being only related 
to the movement of the sun, and the other where we happen to 
abide. This second one may be Athenian or Carthaginian or 
connected with some other city and includes only a part of the 
world’s population. Some people may serve simultaneously both 
the large and the small state, others may serve only the large, 
and still others only the small one. 

The large state, according to Seneca, is more important in 
ethical terms and its value is unconditional. Indeed, true reason 
and, consequently, correct understanding of the law of Fate 
(natural law, divine spirit) consists in recognising the supreme 
power of the universal law and in relegating chance (e. g. the 
fortuity of one’s birth and citizenship of some “‘small”’ state) to a 
secondary plan. This ethical maxim is equally applicable, 
according to Seneca, both to individuals and to their communi- 
ties (states). 

The ideas of Greek Stoicism, alongside the political philoso- 
phy of Socrates and Plato, also exerted a powerful influence on 
the famous Roman orator, politician and thinker Marcus Tulwus 
Cicero (106-43 B. C.). 

Developing the natural right theory of his predecessors, 


19] 





Cicero declares reason and the law of nature to be the founda- 
tion of the state and its laws: “Those creatures who have 
received the gift of reason from nature have also received right 
reason, and therefore they have also received the gift of Law, 
which is right reason applied to command and prohibition. And 
if they have received Law, they have received Justice also. Now 
all men have received reason, therefore all men have received 
Justice. Consequently Socrates was right when he cursed, as he 
often did, the man who first separated utility from Justice; for 
this separation, he complained, is the source of all mischief.” ! 

The law resting on reason and on the just right of Nature 
expresses the common interest of all participants in a legal com- 
munity, 1. e. citizens, and of the totality of such participants, 
i. e. the people. In this sense the state (respublica) emerges simul- 
taneously as the cause of the people (res publica) and as a legal 
community. 

Discussing the forms of government, Cicero echoes the theory 
of the Greek philosophers about the advantages of a mixed form 
of government. Yet he also speaks about the benefits of 
monarchy, the ‘‘saviour of the state”, etc., thereby showing a 
keen insight into the general political trend of his time and com- 
ing forward as an advocate of the rising Roman state and new 
constitutional forms it needed. 

The politico-legal substantiation of the right of Rome to 
world domination and the theoretical grounds for the sover- 
eignty of the princeps were provided by the Roman jurists who 
were under a considerable influence of the ideas of Stoicism, 
particularly in Cicero’s interpretation. 

One of the most important achievements of Roman legal 
thought was jurisprudence as the science of law and a system of 
laws. In the first-third centuries A. D. Roman jurists developed 
an elaborate complex of legal concepts both in the general 
theory of law and in its separate fields. Their theoretical con- 
structs provided a basis for the development of jurisprudence in 
the Middle Ages and in modern times. 

The Stoics’ idea of the spiritual freedom of men and of their 


' Cicero in Twenty-Eight Volumes, Vol. XVI, “Laws”, The Loeb Classical 
Library, William Heinemann, Ltd., London, Harvard University Press, Cam- 
bridge, Mass., I, XII, 33. 


192 





universal equality receives a new interpretation, radical and 
non-conformist, in the works of early Christian writers. Chris- 
tianity emerged at the beginning of our era and, according to 
Engels, ‘“‘was originally a movement of oppressed people: it first 
appeared as the religion of slaves and freed men, of poor people 
deprived of all rights, of peoples subjugated or dispersed by 
Rome”! Having originated among the Jews in the east of the 
Roman Empire, Christianity soon spread to other countries and 
later turned into a world religion. Beginning from the fourth 
century A. D. many countries began to recognize it as the offi- 
cial religion of the state. 

The early Christians upheld the Stoic idea of the universal 
equality of people reshaped in accordance with new social con- 
ditions. Striving for its realisation, they came out as resolute 
opponents of the existing political system and advanced radical 
social theories. However, canonised later by the church bu- 
reaucracy, the Christian doctrine turned into a convenient tool 
for the ideological justification of the relations of socio-political 
inequality. 

Christianity had a tremendous impact on the entire history of 
European culture and its influence is traceable in many political 
and legal conceptions of the later epochs up to our time. 


3. POLYBIUS 


Polybius (c. 210-c. 128 B. C.), a prominent Greek historian, 
politician and thinker of the Hellenistic age was born at Megalo- 
polis. His father Lycortas was a distinguished statesman and is 
known to have held an electoral magistracy of strategus (general) 
of the Achaean League. 

The League arose in the fourth century B. C. as a confede- 
ration of twelve cities of the northern Peloponnesus. By the mid- 
dle of the third century B. C. it had been joined by Megalopolis, 
Argolis, Thigalius, Lepreus, Thliuntus, and a number of other 
cities of the central Peloponnesus, whereas at the beginning of 
the second century B. C. the confederation embraced the whole 


' Frederick Engels, “On the History of Early Christianity”, in: Marx, 
Engels, On Religion, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1975, p. 275. 


193 








of the peninsula, including Lacedaemon and Messene. The 
allied city-states enjoyed equal rights and a considerable degree 
of independence. The membership of the central Assembly 
extended to all citizens of the united states who had reached the 
legal age of 30. The chief aim of the League was to uphold the 
independence of its members and protect them against the 
expansionist tendencies of neighbouring states which included, 
in different periods, Sparta, Macedon, and then Rome. 

Polybius whole-heartedly supported the aims of the Achaean 
League and championed the independence of Greek polises and 
the whole of Hellas, but he had no illusions about the real state 
of affairs. Taking a sober view of the correlation of forces, Poly- 
bius declared for open support of Rome and acceptance of its 
domination over Greek cities as the best alternative for the Hel- 
lenic world. In 148 B. C. Macedon was reduced to a Roman 
province, and in 146 the Romans subdued the action of the 
members of the Achaean League and a number of other Greek 
polises against the Roman rule. The rebellious polises were in- 
cluded in the Macedonian province of the Roman republic, 
whereas those cities that had not participated in the anti-Roman 
action retained a certain degree of their independence as the 
allies of Rome. 

Even before this, in 168 B. C. after the defeat of Macedon in 
the battle of Pydna during the third Macedonian War the 
Romans made the Achaeans, their allies in this war, deport to 
Rome 1000 eminent citizens as hostages. Polybius happened to 
be one of them. 

At Rome Polybius attracted the attention and sympathy of 
those quarters of the Roman nobility which advocated a liberal 
attitude towards the people of conquered territories in general 
and Hellas in particular. The most prominent champions of 
such a policy were the Scipios, an distinguished family, who 
actively opposed the tough line of Marcus Porcius Cato and his 
adherents. At Rome Polybius had the good luck to win the 
favour and friendship of the Scipios. He became the tutor of 
Cornelius Scipio (the future conqueror of Hannibal who 
asserted Rome’s supremacy in Spain, Africa and the Eastern 
Mediterranean) and through his family’s influence made a 
reputation as a reliable and loyal friend of Rome. 

Using the good disposition and trust of the Romans, Polybius 
assumed the role of a mediator between Rome and Greece and 


194 








did very much to pacify the conqueror and save whatever 
remained of the independence of Greek polises included in the 
Macedonian province under the rule of a Roman proconsul. To 
the good fortune of the Greeks, this magistracy was held at the 
time by Lucius Mummius Achaicus whose philhellenic sym- 
pathies won him a reputation for political mildness and 
generosity. 

In the period of reconciliation Polybius did his best to secure 
favourable peace terms for his countrymen and scale down ten- 
sions in Greko-Roman relations. Enjoying the confidence of 
both the victors and the vanquished, he was a very convenient 
go-between in a political settlement and the Romans agreed to 
grant the petition of the Achaean states to send them Polybius 
that he might give them new laws and supervise the establish- 
ment of a new order. 

The activity of Polybius playing simultaneously the role of a 
friend of Rome and a defender of Hellas proved to be very suc- 
cessful and he acquitted himself of his delicate mission with 
honour. On the evidence of Plutarch, Polybius made a very im- 
portant contribution to the establishment of a new constitution 
in Hellas under the Roman rule. After six-month toil ten 
Roman officials vested with authority to introduce new laws in 
Greece returned to Italy, whereas Polybius was authorised to 
make the rounds of Greek cities and settle arising disputes. 
‘‘After a certain time,” writes Plutarch, “he succeeded in mak- 
ing people accept the constitution granted to them, and saw to it 
that no difficulty on any subject arose either in public or in pri- 
vate due to the laws.”! 

According to Pausanias the geographer, the Achaeans consid- 
ered Polybius the saviour of Hellas who had quenched the wrath 
of the Romans against Greece. Their gratitude expressed itselfin 
the erection of numerous statues in his honour. 

One of the inscriptions on them, for instance, reads thus: 
“Greece would never have come to grief, had she obeyed Poly- 
bius in all things, and having come to grief, she found succour 
through him alone.” 


' From Plutarch, “Philopoemen 21”, in Polybius, The Histories, Book 
XXXIX, 4,4-63, William Heinemann, Ltd., London, G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 
New York, MCMXXVII, Vol. 6, p. 449. 


195 





The historical conceptions of Polybius, including his politico- 
legal views are expounded in The Histories in 40 books on which 
his fame chiefly rests. The narration centres upon the period 
from 220 to 168 B. C., i. e. the 53 years during which Rome 
made itself master of the whole Mediterranean. Polybius devotes 
much attention to politico-legal subjects in general and to the 
advantages of Roman state institutions in particular. Thus his 
general history emerges essentially as a political history of Rome 
and the peoples subjugated by it, and as an analysis of the role of 
the state system and politico-legal institutions in historical devel- 
opment. Significantly, Polybius himself called his work ‘‘a politi- 
cal history” (VI, 5, 2). 

Stressing his general preference for a comprehensive view of 
history as a characteristic feature of his method, Polybius notes 
that there was no universal history before him. All previous 
writers only concerned themselves with separate wars and cer- 
tain events making no efforts to comprehend and investigate 
them from a broader perspective as parts of the general pattern 
of the world genesis. Whereas Herodotus is justly regarded as the 
“father of history’, Polybius deserves to be called the “father of 
universal history”. It should be noted, however, that the 
“world” of Polybius is confined to the countries of the Mediter- 
ranean, therefore his ‘‘universal history”’ is in fact the history of 
the Mediterraneah region. 

For all the limitations of the historical approach of Polybius 
his great advance on the earlier writers consists in an attempt to 
treat events in the context of a single law-governed historical 
process. His conception of the organic character of history de- 
rives in fact from the traditional Greek notions of fate personi- 
fied in goddess Tyche and interpreted by the Stoics along 
rationalistic lines as the universal law and reason. Polybius allots 
to fate the role of a directive power which sways all destinies in 
the universe including the political relations among human 
beings. 

In the context of universal history fate in Polybius emerges as 
historical destiny, as the source, substance, law and necessity of a 
single process of political developments. Proceeding from his 
conception, Polybius views the rise of Rome to world dominion 
as a manifestation of the universal power of fate. In other words, 
the ascent of Rome in the historical period under consideration 
is represented by him as preordained by fate and therefore inevi- 


196 





table for the rest of mankind: ‘“‘Fortune has guided almost all the 
affairs of the world in one direction and has forced them to in- 
cline towards one and the same end” (Polybius, The Histories, 
Book [.4.1-7, Vol. I, pp. 9-11). This end, according to Polybius, 
is Rome’s supremacy over the world, the greatest and most 
beneficial act of fate, the unprecedented manifestation of its 
power. Hence the pro-Roman stand of the historian him- 
self. 

Analysing historical events, Polybius attached special impor- 
tance to novel phenomena and contended that fate constantly 
invents many things and thus shows its power over men’s des- 
tinies. The emphasis on novelty which is central to a really his- 
torical approach was an important achievement of Polybius. His 
understanding of history as a necessary law-governed process on 
the one hand, and as a movement towards something new, not 
known before, was a notable contribution to the inception and 
development of the historical world view. Very indicative in this 
respect was his assessment of the history of Rome as a new page 
of universal history. 

World history, according to Polybius, begins with the estab- 
lishment of Roman supremacy over the world, and this peculiar- 
ity of Roman history accounts for the need to treat it in global 
terms, that is to adopt a new method of historical research and a 
new outlook on the world. Expounding his view, Polybius 
writes: “How they attained to universal empire and what 
particular circumstances obstructed their grand design, or again 
how and at what time circumstances contributed to its execution 
is difficult to discern without a general history. Nor for the same 
reason it is easy otherwise to perceive the greatness of their 
achievements and the value of their system of polity” (Polybius, 
The Histories, Book VIII, I, 6-2.8.6-7). 

It would not be correct, however, to exaggerate the indepen- 
dence of Polybius’s thought from the traditional cyclic notions in 
the treatment of historical phenomena. Thus describing the 
change of constitutions as a succession of events that follow a 
cyclic pattern Polybius exhibits a strong influence of the political 
conceptions of Plato and Aristotle. His general approach to his- 
torical events, too, is notable for statemindedness, also traceable 
to Plato, which clearly manifests itself in the conviction that one 
or another form of government plays a decisive part in all 
human relations. In his opinion, “the chief cause of success or 


197 





the reverse in all matters is the form of a state’s constitution, for 
springing from this, as from a fountain-head, all designs and 
plans of action not only originate, but reach their consumma- 
tion” (Polybius, The Histories, Book VI.2.5.-3.2.9-10). 

The emergence of the state and the subsequent change of con- 
stitutions are described by Polybius (who cites Plato and some of 
his other predecessors in support of his views) as a natural 
growth governed by the “law of nature” (VI.4, 9, 13; VI, 5, 
1-10). He distinguishes six main forms of government which suc- 
ceed one another in perpetual circulation and are ranked in the 
order of their emergence and change: kingship (royal power), 
tyranny, aristocracy, oligarchy, democracy and ochlocracy 
(mob rule). Polybius underscores the naturalness of the origin of 
each form of government and points out that it is only by com- 
prehending the very process of the inception of this or that form 
that one can understand its further evolution— growth, heyday, 
decline and transition to another form. Each form of govern- 
ment following the general course of nature carries in itself its 
own life and death. The morphology of statehood (a teaching of 
the forms of government) put forward by Polybius thus emerges 
as a variety of the organistic conception of the state. 

Polybius considers his view of the natural succession of gov- 
ernment forms to be particularly true in respect of the Roman 
state “since from the outset its formation and growth have been 
due to natural causes” (VI, 4. 12-5.7, 13), and this idea indeed 
runs through all his Azstories notable for conceptual consistency. 
The idea of the universal (world) character of the history of 
Rome is supplemented and substantiated by Polybius on the 
side of ‘‘political history’’ by his interpretation of the Roman 
state as a model and classical example of the natural evolution of 
government forms. As a result, the idea of a “political history” 
exemplified in Polybius by the history of Rome forms the core, 
the pivot of his “universal history”. 

By way of introduction to his teaching about the forms of gov- 
ernment Polybius touches upon the problem of the origin of the 
state in general. In his opinion, a community of human beings 
springs from their weakness common to both men and animals: 
“It being a matter of course that they too should herd together 
with those of their kind owing to their natural weakness ~— it is a 
natural consequence that the man who excels in bodily strength 
and in courage will lead and rule over the rest’ (VI, 


198 








4,.12-5.7.5-8). Hence, nature itself commands that the master 
and ruler of the mob should be the one who exceeds all others in 
physical strength and mental audacity. Physical strength is the 
sole limit to the ruler’s power. In due course feelings of sociabi- 
lity and companionship in such gatherings of men strike root 
and gradually take the place of brute force — this is the first stage 
of the formation of kingship, the first developed form of govern- 
ment. During this natural process the ethical notions of good 
and evil, right and wrong begin to arise in man alongside the 
idea of duty ‘“‘which is the beginning and end of justice” (VI, 6. 
5-12.7-18). In this context it deserves mention that Polybius’s 
notion of “duty” as central to the moral theory clearly betrays 
the Stoic influence on his political doctrine. Besides, drawing a 
distinction between monarchy and kingship, he underscores that 
not every monarchy is a kingship but “only that which is volun- 
tarily accepted by the subjects and where they are governed 
rather by an appeal to their reason than by fear and force” 
(VI, 4). 

The monarch originally owing his power to truculence and 
strength gradually and as a matter of course becomes a king 
since his subjects, according to Polybius, yield obedience to him 
no longer because they fear his force, but rather because their 
judgement approves him. Under kingship, rewards and penal- 
ties are apportioned according to desert and noble conduct is 
admired and imitated whilst baseness is held in contempt. The 
king’s subjects join in maintaining his rule even if he is quite 
enfeebled by age, “ferocity and force having yielded the supre- 
macy to reason” (VI, 6.5-12.12). 

In time, however, royal powers become hereditary, the kings 
abandon their simplicity and paternal solicitude for the com- 
mon interest and give themselves up to vice and over-indul- 
gence. As a result, envy, offence, hatred and passionate resent- 
ment among the subjects spring up and the kingship changes 
into a tyranny (VI, 7.7-8.6.8). This situation and this form of 
government, according to Polybius, mark the beginning of the 
decline of state power. 

Stirring up enmity among people, the tyrants become the 
object of endless conspiracies, and the first steps towards their 
overthrow are taken by the noblest and most courageous men as 
such men are least able to endure the insolence of the tyrant. 
Supported by the people, they abolish tyrannical rule and insti- 


199 














tute an aristocracy. This form of government is characterised by 
Polybius as the rule of the few which is established with the peo- 
ple’s consent and under which “the government is in the hands 
of a selected body of the justest and wisest men” (VI, 4.2-12.3). 

At first the aristocratic rulers regard the common good as 
their first concern, but when the offices in the state become here- 
ditary and the position of authority passes into the hands of 
those “having no experience of misfortune and none at all of 
civil equality and liberty of speech” (VI, 7.7-8.6.4), aristocracy 
degenerates into oligarchy. It is distinguished by the abuse of 
power, lawlessness, greed of gain and unscrupulous money- 
grubbing, indulgence in wine and gluttony. 

The revolt of the people against the oligarchs results in their 
murder or banishment. Still remembering with terror the injus- 
tice they have suffered from their former rulers, the people 
establish a democracy and assume the responsibility for the con- 
duct of affairs. Democracy, according to Polybius, is a form of 
government under which sovereign power is vested in the dec- 
rees of the majority, the law and traditional reverence for the 
gods reign supreme, the parents and the elders are accorded due 
respect and obedience. 

Those who institute democracy set great store by equality and 
freedom of speech, but new generations accustomed to these 
boons and taking them as a matter of course, value them no 
longer and begin to aspire to offices and pre-eminence. Seeking 
to gain popularity and lusting for power, the wealthy citizens 
corrupt the masses in every possible way, and the mob avid for 
sops and accustomed to feeding at the expense of others finds an 
enterprising adventurer (demagogue) as its leader and with- 
draws from public affairs. As a result, the populace “stirred to 
fury and swayed by passion in all their counsels will no longer 
consent to obey or even to be the equals of the ruling caste, but 
will demand the lion’s share for themselves. When this happens, 
the state will change its name to the finest sounding of all, free- 
dom and democracy, but will change its nature to the worst 
thing of all, mob-rule” (VI, 57.5-58.2.9-10). Describing ochloc- 
racy as a rule of terror and violence, Pclybius underscores that it 
is not only the worst, but also the last stage in the cycle of politi- 
cal revolution. The mob “massacre, banish and plunder until 
they degenerate again into perfect savages and find once more a 
master and monarch” (VI, 9.7-10.2.9). Such is, according to 


200 








ee 





| Polybius, the succession of political forms, “the course appointed 

| by nature in which constitutions change, disappear, and finally 
return to the point from which they started” (VI, 9.7-10.2.10). 

Proceeding from his general conception of the cyclic character 

of political development which he presents in the form of a socio- 
psychological analysis of the natural change of constitutions, 
Polybius draws several conclusions. ‘The most important of them 

is that each simple form of government is characterised by a con- 

| siderable degree of instability which springs from its very princi- 
ple inevitably turning into its opposite. Each constitution, 
according to Polybius, has an inherent vice and in the course of 
| time changes into its perverted form. In kingship, it is despotism, 
in aristocracy —oligarchy, and in democracy — the savage rule of 

I violence. Hence, “it is evident that we must regard as the best 
constitution a combination of all these three varieties” (VI, 

3.3-4.1.7), i. e. kingship, aristocracy, and democracy. 

| In the view of Polybius who is strongly influenced at this point 
by Aristotle’s ideas, the main advantage of such a mixed form of 
government consists in its stability and immunity from corrup- 
tion. The first statesman who understood this was, according to 
Polybius, famous lLacedaemonian § lawgiver Lycurgus: 
“Lycurgus, foreseeing this, did not make his constitution simple 
and uniform, but united in it all the good and distinctive fea- 
tures of the best governments, so that none of the principles 
should grow unduly and be perverted into its allied evil, but 
that, the force of each being neutralised by that of the others, 
neither of them should prevail and outbalance another but that 
the constitution should remain for long in a state of equilibrium 
like a well-trimmed boat” (VI, 10.2-10.7). 

! Explaining the advantages of the mixed form of government 
established by Lycurgus and based on a combination of different 
constitutional principles, Polybius points out that in this form 
the powers of the monarch, people and the elders restrict and 
balance one another. As a result of such integration of the royal, 

aristocratic and democratic principles the government, accord- 

ing to Polybius, acquires stability and becomes corruption-resis- 
tant. 
This classic conception of a mixed constitution resulting from 

a combination of different principles of government is in fact 

aimed at achieving the same effect as the theory of the sepa- 

ration of powers in modern times. Despite all historical, socio-po- 


— 


201 
14113 





litical and theoretical distinctions between them, the idea of a 
“‘mixed”’ government and the theory of the separation of powers 
have one important feature in common~—in both the powers 
vested in the representative organs of different forms are not dis- 
solved, so to speak, in a single body, the central element of the 
whole system, but are distributed among different components 
of the state neutralising and limiting one another. 

The’ perfect form of mixed government established by 
Lycurgus enabled the Spartans, according to Polybius, to enjoy 
freedom for a long time. Speaking of his own period, Polybius 
contends that of all the contemporary constitutions that of the 
Romans is the best. Analysing the powers of the three elements 
of the Roman state, those of the consuls, the senate and the 
masses representing respectively the royal, aristocratic and 
democratic principles, Polybius says: “If one fixed one’s eyes on 
the power of the consuls, the constitution seemed completely 
monarchical and royal, ifon that of the senate it seemed again to 
be aristocratic, and when one looked at the power of the masses, 
it seemed clearly to be a democracy” (VI, 11.11-12.8.12). 

Having described the operation of the Roman. state 
machinery and the exercise by each power of its authority, Poly- 
bius surveys the customary political practices and methods 
whereby separate powers can hinder or, on the contrary, help 
one another in the performance of their functions. Possible 
claims of one power to a role greater than it is assigned by the 
constitution are countered by other powers, the result being the 
stability and strength of the state. Having a low regard for the 
democratic constitutions of Thebes and Athens, Polybius con- 
tends that they rose to fame only for a short while as if by a whim 
of fate and at once began to decline without acquiring stable 
equilibrium. The Athenian people, in his opinion, can be com- 
pared to a ship without the helmsman. In contrast to many of 
his predecessors (Plato, Xenophon, Callisthenes and others) 
Polybius holds that the Cretan state was essentially different 
from Lacedaemon and that by its constitution it was a democ- 
racy rather than an aristocracy. In his view, the constitution of 
the Carthaginian state was also of a mixed type but by the time 
Hannibal started war against Rome Carthage had already 
passed its peak of glory and was on the decline, whereas Rome 
(and its state system) was in the heyday of power: ‘“Conse- 
quently the multitude at Carthage had already acquired the 


202 





chief voice in deliberations, while at Rome the senate still 
retained this, and hence, as in one case the masses deliberated 
and in the other the most eminent men, the Roman decisions on 
public affairs were superior” (VI.5I.1-52.1). 

From the comparative analysis of the Roman and Cartha- 
ginian constitutions Polybius draws a general conclusion that of 
two states at war with each other the final victory is gained by 
the one that has a better system of government. In particular, 
the advantage of Rome over Carthage consisted in that the 
former’s constitution represented a more propitious stage of the 
evolutionary cycle. 

Comparing Rome with Sparta, Polybius comes to a different 
conclusion. Here he underscores that the Lacedaemonian sys- 
tem of government and the legislation of Lycurgus are only sui- 
table for a good defence by the Spartans of their freedom and 
possessions, and not for conquest of foreign lands. Contrariwise, 
Rome is suited better than any other country for waging wars of 
aggression and establishing its domination over other peo- 
ples. 

Considering the fear of the gods to be an important factor that 
makes for the unity of Rome, Polybius writes: “I believe that it 
is the very thing which among other peoples is an object of 
reproach, I mean superstition, which maintains the cohesion of 
the Roman State” (VI, 56.2-13.7). Of course, he adds echoing 
the sophists, if the state only consisted of wise men, no false 
beliefs would be needed, but in order to handle the mob one 
must not dispel them: ‘For this reason I think, not that the 
ancients acted rashly and at haphazard in introducing among 
the people notions concerning the gods and beliefs in the terrors 
of hell, but that the moderns are most rash and foolish in banish- 
ing such beliefs” (VI, 56.2-13.12). 

The customs and laws, according to Polybius, are the two 
main pillars of every state. He extols good customs and laws 
which make “‘private lives righteous and well ordered and the 
general character of the state gentle and just” (VI, 46.6-47.3.2) 
and underlines the interconnection and interdependence of 
good customs and laws, good morals and correct forms of 
government. 

Polybius’s Histories, his state-oriented conceptions of “political 
history”, cyclic change of state constitutions and mixed govern- 
ment were held in high esteem by posterity and enjoyed great 


203 
4+ 








popularity not only with the subsequent Greek and Roman 
writers, but also with the political thinkers and statesmen of the 
Middle Ages and modern times. Polybius’s views of the mixed 
form of government figured prominently in various designs of 
the “perfect state” and were later used as a basis for the theory 
of the separation of powers advanced in the seventeenth-eigh- 
teenth centuries in the period of the bourgeois revolutions. 





Conclusion 


The knowledge of history, including the history of political 
thought is a necessary, though, of course, not the only requisite 
for a correct understanding of modern life and its problems. His- 
tory is more than a tale of the past, dead and buried — it is also a 
well of experience and wisdom, the sum total and simul- 
taneously the fountain-head of a new development, something 
eternally significant and instructive, inseparably linked with 
contemporaneity in the perpetual progress of mankind. 

The world-historical significance of the intellectual heritage 
of Ancient Greece which also includes its political theories and 
conceptions lies, if anything, in the pioneering character of 
Greek thought upturning virgin soil in many fields of human 
knowledge. The discoveries of Greek thinkers cannot be ranked 
as mere contributions to the history of philosophy and political 
theory. Owing to their creative genius, remarkable insight and 
brilliant intuition, they laid the foundation of science at large 
and formulated basic principles and conceptions in numerous 
spheres of theory and practice. 

Having arisen in a society divided into the freemen and the 
slaves, the ancient politico-legal thought took shape and devel- 
oped as the ideology of the freemen. The concept of freedom was 
central to all political thought and practice of the ancient 
Greeks and represented their basic value and chief concern. Tc 
be sure, the ancients’ freedom was not universal being denied to 
the majority of the population—the slaves. These were also 
excluded from the sphere of politics understood as legal relations 
of citizens, i. e. full members of the polis with respect to the com- 
mon interest, and could not be subjects of public rights and 
duties. In the eyes of the ancient Greeks, politics and all kinds of 


205 








practical and intellectual activity relating to it belonged under 
the head of freedom and were only for the freemen to tackle, 
whereas the slaves’ lot was mainly to do physical work and pro- 
vide the necessities of life. All relations of production, as well as 
family relations, were regarded as lying beyond the limits of 
freedom and, consequently, as falling outside the province of 
politics. The master-slave and householder-family relations 
based on the principles of authority and subordination were 
viewed as non-political. This conception lies at the root of the 
traditional antithesis between the Hellenic polis life and the 
“barbarian” rule, i. e. between freedom and tyranny, charac- 
teristic of ancient political thought. The notion of politics as the 
relations of freedom and as the way of life of freemen also under- 
lies the understanding of the law as the true expression of free- 
dom and as the standard of political justice regulating the rela- 
tions of free and equal citizens. Safeguarding the common 
interest of the polis and the private interests of all its members, 
the law as the norm of political justice rests on divine justice and 
on the dictates of nature (‘‘natural law’’). 

The upshot of the traditional view of the polis as the necess- 
ary (divine, natural, rational) institution is the conception of the 
necessary character of such attributes of polis life as politics, law 
and freedom. They are not regarded as random empirical 
phenomena brought about by the power of chance, but as the 
realisation of the dictates of nature, as natural law incarnate, 
and this conception is central to most of the political teachings of 
Ancient Greece. Now, in order to conceive of a phenomenon as 
occurring by necessity and having a necessary character, one has 
to reveal the laws of its emergence and subsequent development, 
and that is precisely the reason why ancient political thought 
focused on the origin and general tendencies of political and 
legal institutions. 

The formation of the philosophic, logico-rationa] and then 
scientific (in embryo) approaches to the surrounding world 
brought about a radical change in the reflection of reality in 
man’s consciousness and laid the foundation for a theoretical 
analysis of social problems. The original mythological notions 
(Homer and Hesiod) gradually gave way to the philosophical 
approach (the “sages’’, Pythagoras, Heraclitus, Democritus), 
the rationalistic interpretation of the existing customs and beliefs 
(the sophists), logico-conceptional analysis (Socrates and Plato) 


206 





and, finally, to the rudimentary forms of the empirico-scientific 
(Aristotle) and historico-political (Polybius) investigation of the 
state and law. 

In the epoch of Hellenism when the Greek polises lost their 
independence and the old values were undergoing a process of 
reappraisal, the absolute goodness of the polis and its collective 
life as an ethical unitary whole was called in question from the 
position of individualistic ethics, the spiritual freedom and inde- 
pendence of an individual (Epicureanism, Stoicism). From the 
same position the former division of all people into the freemen 
and the slaves was rejected and the conception of freedom as a 
socio-political phenomenon gave way to the great principle of 
universal freedom and equality of people in accordance with the 
divine laws of nature. 

Christianity that first appeared on the scene as the religion of 
slaves and oppressed people made this principle its banner and 
gave it wide currency. 

Substantial advances, both in the theoretical and practical 
fields, were made by Greek thought on the Roman soil. Speak- 
ing of Epicureanism, Stoicism and Scepticism, Marx described 
them as “the prototypes of the Roman mind, the shape in which 
Greece wandered to Rome”! 

The political theories and legal views of ancient Greeks 
exerted a tremendous influence on Roman writers; particularly 
strong was the impact of their natural right conceptions, the 
doctrines of politics and political justice, the teachings of the 
forms of government, of the “mixed constitution”, etc. The Stoic 
conception of a free individual became the foundation of the 
construct of juridical person (bearer of legal rights and duties) 
developed by the Roman jurists, whereas the idea of the interde- 
pendence of politics and the law characteristic of Greek political 
thought found its expression in legal terms in Cicero’s concep- 
tion of the state as a public law community. The notions, ideas 
and conceptions developed by Greek political thinkers were 
adopted, directly or through Roman writers, by later gene- 
rations and are rightly reckoned among the great treasures of 
mankind’s cultural heritage. 


' Karl Marx, “Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Philos- 
ophy of Nature”, in: Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, Collected Works, Vol. 1, 
p. 35. 


207 











The thinkers of all subsequent historical periods invariably 
turned their eyes to the ancient Greeks for spiritual guidance, 
drew on their intellectual experience and used their theoretical 
achievements interpreted in accordance with new social condi- 
tions for the solution of new problems. 

In our time, like in olden days, the history of Greek philoso- 
phical and political thought remains an inexhaustible well of 
ideas and arguments used by the representatives of various poli- 
tical schools and trends in ideological battles in order to substan- 
tiate their own views and to flout the views of their opponents. 

Political theories and legal conceptions of ancient Greek 
thinkers, particularly those of Pythagoras, Heraclitus, Solon, 
Democritus, Protagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, the 
Stoics and Polybius have always drawn the later writers’ atten- 
tion and not infrequently turned into the battle-fields of endless 
ideological and theoretical wars over the problems of the state, 
law, power, politics, freedom, justice, legislation that are forever 
topical for mankind. 

To be sure, the twenty odd centuries that separate us from 
the ancient Greeks witnessed many a change in the general 
assessment of Greek political thought— the approach to classic 
theories and conceptions varied with the objectives of ideologi- 
cal struggle between different social groups and classes, with the 
forms it assumed, the arguments used, the issues advanced to the 
foreground, etc. Yet on the whole the cardinal problems of 
human society raised by the Greek thinkers have never lost their 
theoretical and political significance. Moreover, present-day 
political writers devote increasing attention to the ideas and 
notions of the classics and we have good cause to assert that the 
interest of contemporary science in ancient tradition tends to 
grow. 

Correct understanding and assessment of the political and 
legal conceptions of Ancient Greece — and, for that matter, of the 
past in general—is only possible on the basis of a historical 
approach. The principle of historicity safeguards an investigator 
against onesidedness in the appraisal of various doctrines, 
enables him to trace the links between the conceptions of 
Ancient Greece and modern theories with the highest possible 
degree of accuracy, reveals the evolution of one or another clas- 
sic theory both in the historical perspective and retrospectively 
and brings to light the specific laws underlying the development 


208 





of political theory and legal notions. 

The historical approach provides a key to the politico-legal 
theory of Ancient Greece with all its specific features determined 
by the unique socio-historical conditions of the Hellenic world 
and is instrumental in the objective assessment of its role in later 
periods and in our time. As a method of theoretical investigation 
into political and legal doctrines of Ancient Greece, historicity 
implies the irreversibility and uniqueness of ideological pheno- 
mena and presupposes a general recognition of the fact that the 
original views and constructs of one or another Greek political 
thinker are bound to acquire a new meaning and new conno- 
tations in every new historical situation, in the context of a dif- 
ferent socio-political reality. 

The classical teachings of the past and, in particular, the 
major politico-legal conceptions of Ancient Greece are subjected 
to ever new reassessments and reinterpretations which constitute 
an important form of the assimilation of mankind’s cultural her- 
itage by new generations and normally identify all truly great 
intellectual values. Such involvement of the past theories in the 
political and intellectual life of every new epoch testifies to their 
undying topicality and their reappraisal becomes an effective 
method not only of presenting the old problems in the new his- 
torical and intellectual context, but also of treating the new 
problems and situations in the light of the well-known ideas 
of a universally recognised ‘‘classical’’ thinker. 

In the dialectical unity of the past and the present new things 
are not, contrary to the popular saying, nothing but thoroughly 
forgotten old ones—they are always something, contemporary. 
Every new interpretation of old teachings implies of necessity a 
new outlook on the past and a new knowledge of the present. 
The progress of knowledge, including the knowledge of politico- 
legal phenomena, is therefore not a mere continuation and 
extension of the spiritual links between different historical pe- 
riods or a simple quantitative growth of the volume of informa- 
tion available to us, it is also a qualitative change, a renovation. 

Another important aspect to the problem of continuity in the 
sphere of ideas consists in the mediate character of their connec- 
tion. Indeed, just as political and legal theories are linked with 
practice not directly, but through the agency of unique histori- 
cal events and acute ideological struggle, so the theories them- 
selves can only be related to one another through the agency of 


209 








the sum total of the theoretical knowledge gained and formu- 
lated by mankind in the process of the historical development of 
its philosophical thought in general and political theory in 
particular. 

As the reader may have noticed, investigation of the intellec- 
tual heritage of the past, including the political doctrines and 
legal concepts of Ancient Greece can greatly benefit from what 
may at first appear as rather an artificial diflerentiation between 
the historical and theoretical aspects of one or another teaching 
in interest. Being but an analytical method, such a differentia- 
tion is of great cognitive value insofar as it not only provides a 
framework for scientific investigation, but also lays down a foun- 
dation for correct axiological approach. Indeed, on the side of 
historical specificity the investigator of a political teaching 
should focus his attention on the concrete socio-political views of 
its originator, his concepts of society, the state, law, politics, jus- 
tice, etc., on the relation between these views and the ideology of 
definite classes and social groups, on the thinker’s political sym- 
pathies and antipathies, the social interests and trends he 
expressed, etc., whereas the theoretical aspects of the teaching in 
question orient the analyst on disclosing its philosophical, episte- 
mological and methodological principles, revealing the argu- 
ments the thinker adduced in support of his specific historically- 
conditioned political and legal propositions, the main theoreti- 
cal concepts, thought models and constructs he developed or 
elaborated in order to substantiate his views, etc. 

Equal attention of the investigator to both sides, the historical 
and theoretical, of classic politico-legal doctrines not only pro- 
vides a basis for their correct and well-reasoned assessment, but 
is also a necessary requisite for disclosing their logical pith, the 
relations with other doctrines (precedent, contemporary and 
subsequent), the processes of the integration and differentiation 
of various conceptions, their struggle, synthesis and continuity, 
novel features in their historical evolution and links with con- 
temporary theories. 

The dialectical unity and interconnection of the historical 
and theoretical aspects of a political or legal doctrine does not 
rule out but, on the contrary, presupposes their relative inde- 
pendence, and this enables the theoretical categories, ideas, for- 
mulas and constructs of one or another ancient thinker to be 
extricated, as it were, from their historical specifics and added to 


210 





the theoretico-methodological armoury of the developing politi- 
cal science. The expansion and improvement of its conceptual 
apparatus, the enrichment of its theoretical vocabulary and 
methodology are convincing testimony to the progress of scienti- 
fic knowledge, the continuity of ideas and close ties between his- 
tory and contemporaneity. 

The progressive accumulation of politico-legal knowledge 
reflecting the growing complexity of social relations serves as a 
powerful stimulant for ever more profound investigation into the 
so-called eternal problems, such as the relationship between 
ethics and politics, the citizen and the state, freedom and subor- 
dination, power and coercion, right and the law, the forms of 
government and political regimes, etc. The pioneering efforts of 
the ancient Greeks in the formulation and study of these prob- 
lems can scarcely be exaggerated. 

Today like in former times the political theory of Ancient 
Greece continues exercising the minds of historians and political 
thinkers. It preserves its tremendous cognitive, ideological and 
methodological value as the historical foundation of all subse- 
quent political and legal teachings, as the inexhaustible foun- 
tain-head of ideas, conceptions and methods of theoretical in- 
quiry and, for this reason, as an important field of contemporary 
ideological struggle for the cultural heritage of mankind. The in- 
visible ties of history binding together the past and the present 
will keep the political spirit of the ancient Greeks alive and the 
achievements of their genius topical as long as our civilisation 
endures. 





REQUEST TO READERS 


Progress Publishers would be glad to have your 
opinion of this book, its translation and design and 
any suggestions you may have for future publications. 


Please send all your comments to 17, Zubovsky 
Boulevard, Moscow, USSR. 





Progress Publishers 
put out recently 


FROLOV, I., Man-—Science-Humanism: a New Syn- 
thesis (Humankind at the Threshold of the 2]st 
Century Series) 


This book considers one of the most topical 
world problems: the place and role of Man 
today in his relationship with science and technol- 
ogy. It demonstrates the scientific understanding 
of the social essence and biological existence of Man, 
the humanisation of science, and the formation 
of a new type of science of the future relying 
on humanist ideals. The author analyses the 
“eternal” problems of mankind, which have 
acquired particular urgency in the age of the 
scientific and technological revolution- those of the 
meaning of life, of death and immortality. The 
book shows that the incipient synthesis of Man, 
science and humanism will find its consummation 
in the new culture of communist civilisation. 

The book is intended for the general reader. 





Progress Publishers 
put out recently 


OIZERMAN, T., BOGOMOLOV, A., Principles 
of the Theory of the Historical Process: in Philosophy 


This book, written by T. Oizerman, Full Mem- 
ber of the USSR Academy of Sciences, and 
A. Bogomolov, Corresponding Member of the 
USSR Academy of Sciences, theoretically sum- 
marises the history of world philosophy. It analyses 
different definitions of philosophy, changes in 
its subject-matter in the course of development, 
and its place and significance in the historically 
successive systems of knowledge about nature 
and society. The authors show the basic features 
and uniformities of the development of philosophy 
and study the continuity, progress, and contradic- 
toriness of philosophical development and the for- 
mation of the prerequisites that made possible 
the Marxist revolution in philosophy. 

The book is intended for philosophers and 
the gencral reader. 





Progress Publishers 
put out recently 


MSHVENIERADZE, V., Political Reality and 
Political Consciousness (‘“‘The Critical Studies of Bour- 
geois Ideology and Revisionism” Series 


The author, D. Sc. (Philos.), a former Soviet 
representative in UNESCO, gives a critical ana- 
lysis of modern bourgeois political science. He 
dwells in detail on the formation and functioning 
of political consciousness in capitalist countries, 
notably in the USA. He examines the most 
widespread in the West bourgeois political con- 
ceptions, their subject-matter, structure and rela- 
tions between politics and political science. 

The book is intended for philosophers, socio- 
logists, historians and public figures. 








“Law and custom are a sort of justice.” 
(Aristotle) 


w& 


“For of all kinds of knowledge the know- 
ledge of good jaws has the greatest power of 
improving the learner.’ (Plato) 


& 


“The laws exist for the sake of the wise, not 
that they may not do wrong, but that they 
may not suffer it.’ (Epicurus) 


& 


“Now the chief cause of success or the 
reverse in all matters is the form of a state’s 
constitution.” (Polybius) 





